WASHINGTON—We may never know how Thomas Jefferson coined the phrase "pursuit of happiness." The HAPPY Act's origin is more clear.

"The staff was hounding me for a name," says Rep. Thaddeus McCotter, who had a bill to make pet-care expenses tax-deductible. Then a 1972 Rolling Stones hit, "Happy," popped up on his iPod, he says, and soon the Humanity and Pets Partnering through the Years Act was born.

Research suggests that pet owners are "happier and healthier" than those without companion animals, Mr. McCotter explains.

Mr. McCotter, a Michigan Republican, isn't the only acronym addict on Capitol Hill. In recent years, Congress has been flooded with a Scrabble board of legislative titles including the DISCLOSE Act, the HIRE Act and the ASPIRE Act, all of which take too much space to spell out here. In December, President Barack Obama signed the Help HAITI (Haitian Adoptees Immediately to Integrate) Act, but he was helpless as his Democrats saw their DREAM (Development, Relief and Education for Alien Minors) Act go down the drain.

Donald Ritchie, the Senate historian, says lawmakers rely on rhetorical tricks to give their legislation an edge.

"It's a matter of scrambling for attention, given the fact that there are thousands of bills proposed and only 3% will pass," he says.

Yet some veteran lawmakers say they're tired of the name games.

"It's an abuse of the English language," says Rep. Barney Frank (D., Mass.). "The meaning of the words is distorted, and the grammar is often twisted out of shape" to make the title fit.

As chairman of the House Financial Services Committee, Mr. Frank banned members from introducing acronyms. Titles "ought to be neutral," rather than "an argument for the bill," he says.

Nine years ago, Mr. Frank made the same point on the House floor, complaining that "high-flying acronyms" had distorted debate over a measure lessening judicial oversight of domestic wiretaps.

"It is the PATRIOT bill, it is the USA bill, it is the Stand Up and Sing 'The Star-Spangled Banner' bill," he said.

Mr. Frank got some unexpected support in November, when former President George W. Bush disclosed that his "one regret about the PATRIOT Act is its name." In his memoir, "Decision Points," Mr. Bush writes that the title implied that opponents of the Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act were unpatriotic.

"I should have pushed Congress to change the name of the bill before I signed it," Mr. Bush writes. It "was initially called the Antiterrorism Act," but "Congress got clever and renamed it."

"I never dreamed it would be so controversial," says Chris Cylke, creator of the acronym.

Mr. Cylke, now a lobbyist with the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, was a 23-year-old aide when House Judiciary Committee Chairman F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R., Wis.) challenged his staff to improve the name. 

"I had all these words in my brain, and it just clicked," Mr. Cylke says. He says he intended the name to reflect the national mood, not "stifle criticism."

Besides, he adds, his high school's sports teams were named the Patriots, so the law's title also was "an inside joke."

For its first two centuries, Congress preferred uninflected titles for its work product, whether passing the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882, or the Civil Rights Act of 1964. 

Since then, however, lawmakers came to see legislative names as a form of creative expression. The turning point may have come in 1970, with the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act. The acronym spells the name of Edward G. Robinson's character in the 1931 gangster picture, "Little Caesar."

"I can't confirm or deny" any intentional reference to Johnny Rico, says Notre Dame law professor G. Robert Blakey, who drafted the legislation as an aide to Sen. John McClellan (D., Ark.). He adds: "The only thing I can tell you is that I'm a film buff."

But where lawmakers once inserted an occasional in-joke, nowadays they obsess over "the most catchy, popular, emotional title they can come up with," says Rep. John Duncan Jr. (R., Tenn.). Even when they can't coin an acronym, legislators use loaded language that raises the stakes for voting no, he says.

"Take the Farm Bill. They changed the name to the Farm Security Act," he says. "Since 9/11, nobody wants to vote against anything with the word 'security' in it."

Mr. Duncan also complains about the proliferation of laws named after crime, accident and disease victims. 

"It's just not a good way to do legislation, to exploit some terrible thing that has been done to some child," he says of statutes like the AMBER Alert Act, which refers both to an abducted child and America's Missing-Broadcast Emergency Response (and is itself part of the Prosecutorial Remedies and Other Tools to End the Exploitation of Children Today, or PROTECT, Act).

Among legislatures, Congress is pretty much alone in its embrace of "outlandish" bill titles, says Brian Christopher Jones, a doctoral student at Scotland's University of Stirling who is writing a dissertation on statutory naming.

At the British Parliament, most legislation is titled by nonpartisan civil servants rather than politicians. Thus, Mr. Jones observes, Parliament's 2008 finance industry bailout came via the Banking (Special Provisions) Act, while Congress called its version the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act. 

Within the U.S., several state legislatures have strict rules for titling legislation. Colorado limits names to 40 characters. 

But even the best acronym can't guarantee success, as Rep. McCotter discovered. A bipartisan majority frowned on his HAPPY Act, refusing to insert a pet-care deduction into the $858 billion Tax Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization and Job Creation Act of 2010 it sent to President Obama in December.

 Write to  Jess Bravin at jess.bravin@wsj.com 