After a rocky start, the corporate earnings season has kicked into high gear and investors increasingly like what they see.

The big question, one that addled folks coming into the reporting season: How long can these good times last? Based on rising optimism about the coming quarters, perhaps a bit longer.

Unlike the past two quarters, the current quarter of earnings reports got off slowly. Alcoa, which traditionally is one of the first big companies to report, didn't impress, and its shares stumbled.

Then several nonearnings issues dominated the market as companies continued to report results. Standard & Poor's reduced its outlook on U.S. debt to "negative" from "stable," sparking a broad selloff. And unrest in the Middle East kept driving oil prices higher, raising questions about consumer buying power. If it costs more to fill the tank, less money is spent elsewhere.

Those issues, along with the steep decline in the dollar, the surge in fear assets (notably gold and silver) and the still unresolved budget debate in Washington remain problematic. Tack on the end of the Federal Reserve's quantitative easing bond-purchase program, scheduled for June, and investors have plenty of issues to fret about.

But much of that has moved to the background, even if Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke's first-ever press conference momentarily rattled the markets.

Instead, strong earnings news, especially from high-profile companies like Intel, Delta Air Lines, Ford Motor and 3M, have reignited the bullish mood in the stock market. By the middle of last week, the Dow Jones Industrial Average was trading at its highest level since May 2008. Smaller stocks were doing even better, with the Russell 2000 index flirting with a record.

Early earnings results have helped investors shake off news of the S&P downgrade of credit outlook for the U.S. government, says Brian Belski, strategist at Oppenheimer. "The net result was a pronounced flip-flop of opinions from investors -- the type of reactionary trading that has more to do with emotions than fundamentals, in our view. We expect similar periods of volatility in the future, especially through the end of earnings season."

According to David Bianco at Bank of America Merill Lynch, about three-quarters the S&P's 500-stock index companies reporting so far have had better revenue than expected, the highest level of so-called positive revenue surprises since the profit recovery began in 2010. In addition, far fewer companies are reporting worse-than-expected profits this quarter than in previous quarters.

At the midway point in earnings season, Morgan Stanley reports that S&P 500 earnings are 7.4% ahead of expectations, "with all 10 sectors tracking above consensus estimates."

Still, despite the overall positive sheen to earnings season, a number of high-profile negative earnings surprises have jolted investors. Google missed badly, and its shares fell. Broadcom, which makes semiconductors for the hot mobile-phone industry, said demand was weaker than expected. Its shares fell more than 13%. Highfliers Netflix and Akamai also failed to impress, and their shares got clocked.

The overall strength of earnings, however, has prompted generally optimistic analysts to get more excited about the coming quarters. Yardeni Research reports that forward earnings estimates rose for nine of the 10 S&P 500 sectors, with the consumer-discretionary, consumer-staples, health-care and information-technology sectors at record highs.

All that happiness has spurred some to worry that investors are overlooking the negative impact of rising oil prices. Morgan Stanley notes that investors have embraced higher crude prices by driving energy shares sharply higher, but, at the same time, they have overlooked the impact of higher energy prices on consumer-discretionary stocks. Anemic auto sales would support that view.

Moreover, Morgan Stanley believes that 2012 outlooks (yes, people are already looking that far ahead) have gotten too rose-colored, especially since analysts now believe that margins will increase in 2012 even though revenue gains are expected to peter out. Morgan Stanley says it has a "high conviction" that divergence can't persist.

For the market, 2012 still feels some time away. Strong earnings, especially coming in a quarter when the U.S. gross domestic product increased a scant 1.8%, have investors upbeat, despite a smorgasbord of unsettling news ranging from Washington to the Middle East.

"Stock investors have been able to tune out all the bad news so far this year and drive stock prices up to new highs for the year," says Ed Yardeni, head of Yardeni Research. "They've done so on better-than-expected [fourth-quarter] corporate earnings during January and now another strong earnings season during April."