WASHINGTON—Rep. Gabrielle Giffords's absence from Congress means that her district will not have a vote on the House floor while she is recovering from a serious gunshot wound. But her office is continuing to provide services to her constituents.

Even if she is incapacitated and absent for a long period of time, the Arizona Democrat will continue in office until her term ends, if she chooses.

Both the House and Senate have accommodated extended absences for lawmakers who are ill or injured.

In the Senate, Democrat Tim Johnson of South Dakota suffered a brain hemorrhage in December 2006, and was absent from the Senate for about eight months. He was re-elected in 2008.

The House and Senate have the authority to declare seats vacant, but neither has done so in the case of a sitting member. In 1981, the House vacated the seat of an incapacitated person, when Rep. Gladys N. Spellman, a Democrat from Maryland, could not be sworn in because she had gone into a coma after her 1980 re-election. 

If Ms. Giffords resigns her seat more than six months before the next general election, Arizona's governor would schedule a special party-primary election and special general election to choose a successor. In the interim, the clerk of the House would oversee the district's office and constituent services.

Ms. Giffords is hospitalized with a bullet wound to the head that she suffered in the Tucson, Ariz., shooting rampage, which left six people dead. No one knows how long her recovery will take, although her doctors say she is making striking progress.

When a House member is absent, no one can replace the lawmaker in casting a vote on the House floor. Congressional staff can carry out routine functions of the office, such as helping constituents deal with federal agencies or receiving voters' comments on legislative issues before Congress.

An aide to House Democratic leaders said that in Ms. Giffords's case, "all constituent service matters and mail, phone call and email issues are being handled adequately at the moment by her staff." The staff of other House members is also helping out.

 Write to  Janet Hook at janet.hook@wsj.com 

