 Euro-zone governments will increase the lending capacity of their bailout fund and make it more flexible but governments won't put up any more than the €440 billion ($602.4 million) in guarantees that they agreed to when they created the fund in May, European Economics Commissioner Olli Rehn said in an interview at the World Economic Forum.  

U.K. Prime Minister David Cameron and Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne will Friday mount a robust defense of the government's aggressive fiscal tightening and will refute criticism that the austerity measures are putting the economic recovery at risk. 

Global monetary imbalances could still cause another disaster for the world economy if they aren't addressed, French President Nicolas Sarkozy warned in an address to the World Economic Forum. Sarkozy also warned against the continued accumulation of massive foreign exchange reserves on the one side and "vast" amounts of sovereign debt on the other. 

Mexican President Felipe Calderón warned of the dangers of currency manipulation by emerging economies, saying his government had no plans to join the growing trend. In an interview with The Wall Street Journal at a meeting of the World Economic Forum, he also pledged he wouldn't draw back from a crackdown on drug traffickers that has sharply raised the country's murder rate. 

 Spain's government is close to winning broad support from opposition parties and unions for a pension-system overhaul aimed at putting public finances on a more stable footing and shoring up investor confidence in the country's ailing economy. 

Manufacturers in the 17 countries that use the euro are more optimistic about their prospects, but that sentiment isn't shared by consumers, service providers and retailers. The European Commission said its overall economic sentiment indicator for the euro zone fell slightly in January from December in the first decline since May.

 German inflation accelerated in January, hitting its highest rate in over two years, adding to evidence that rising energy and commodity prices are pushing euro-zone inflation further above the European Central Bank's target. 

Meanwhile, a top European Central Bank official warned rising costs of imported goods into the euro bloc, coupled with higher food and commodity prices, can't be dismissed by central bankers, stoking fears that the ECB may raise interest rates later this year.

 U.K. consumer confidence collapsed at the start of 2011, raising fresh doubts about the sustainability of the economic recovery. Polling firm GfK NOP said its headline measure of consumer confidence fell to reach its lowest level in 22 months. 

Separately, the Confederation of British Industry said retail sales growth slowed in January, and is expected to continue to decelerate. Its monthly measure of sales volume fell to its weakest reading in three months. 

 U.K. police arrested five men in connection with an online collective known as "Anonymous," which authorities and computer specialists say are behind recent attacks on companies and organizations that had tangled with document leaking website WikiLeaks. London's Metropolitan Police Service said that it had arrested the men, who are between 15 and 26 years old, in dawn raids at their homes. 

 Ukrainian prosecutors opened a second criminal case against opposition leader Yulia Tymoshenko, raising the pressure on the former prime minister, who claims their investigation is politically driven. The state prosecutor's office accused Tymoshenko of abuse of office in causing losses of $8.5 million to the Treasury during the procurement of vehicles for use as ambulances in 2009.  

 Demand for long-lasting goods unexpectedly fell 2.5% to a seasonally adjusted $191.04 billion last month on a sharp drop in aircraft orders, the Commerce Department said. 

Meanwhile, the number of U.S. workers filing new claims for unemployment benefits unexpectedly surged last week, but the data were probably distorted by bad weather.

 One of the most important findings in a blue-ribbon panel report on the 2008 financial crisis is that more steps could have been taken to help prevent the meltdown, the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission Chairman said.  

 The U.S. will need to make a "significant adjustment" to its fiscal policies if the government intends to meet the goal of halving the deficit by 2013, the International Monetary Fund said.  

Congressional debate on the proposed U.S.-South Korea free-trade deal could begin as soon as March now that the final, legal language of the agreement is set, people familiar with the process said. The agreement, which includes supplemental legal language on auto tariffs, will be released to the public next month. 

Senate leaders announced a package of rule changes that seek to reduce the stalemate and gridlock that has characterized the chamber in recent years. But lawmakers failed to agree on a limitation to the use of the filibuster—the right of any senator to hold up any legislation the Senate is considering.

New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg strongly endorsed President Barack Obama's push for expanded high-speed rail in the Northeast corridor during a congressional hearing at the city's Grand Central Terminal rail station, describing it as a boon for the region and the nation.

 Ratings firm Standard & Poor's downgraded Japan's sovereign debt rating by one notch to AA- from AA, saying that it expects the country's fiscal deficits to remain high and noting there is a lack of a "coherent strategy" by the government to tackle the issues. 

China announced details of a long-awaited property tax in Chongqing and Shanghai—two of its largest urban centers—but the move intended to crack down on speculation and curb rising prices that are fuelling public anger was relatively mild.

India's central bank will not take any new steps to ease a prolonged cash crunch in the banking system, which included more bond buybacks to inject liquidity, the bank's governor Duvvuri Subbarao, said. 

In Pakistan, a U.S. consular official shot dead two armed men as they tried to rob him in a crowded street in the city of Lahore, triggering a public protest. A pedestrian also was killed when hit by another car that came to rescue the diplomat as he was being chased by a crowd. Police later detained the American, who wasn't identified by name. 

In Iraq, the death toll from a car bomb near a Shiite funeral in Baghdad rose to 48, officials said, as Iraqi troops clashed with protesters who were infuriated by the security lapse. At least 121 people were wounded in the explosion.

 Thousands of Yemenis inspired by the wave of activism spreading across the Middle East marched through the capital of Sana'a demanding the removal of their longtime president, in one of the largest protests seen in this autocratic nation in years. 

Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak's ruling party said it is ready to open a dialogue with the youths who have staged three days of antigovernment protests.

 Nobel Peace Prize laureate and pro-democracy reformer Mohammed ElBaradei returned to Egypt, a moment that promised to provide a jolt to anti-government protests that extended for a third day in Cairo and other cities across Egypt. 

The Central Bank of Egypt left its key interest rates unchanged for the 11th consecutive time, citing subdued inflationary pressures. The lending rate was held at 9.75%, the deposit rate at 8.25% and the discount rate at 8.5%—the same rates for the last 16 months. 

Egyptian stocks plunged nearly 11% Thursday after falling 6.1% in the previous session, and the Egyptian pound hit a six-year low against the U.S. dollar, with investors spooked by escalating political tensions. 

A prominent Ugandan gay-rights activist whose picture was published by an antigay newspaper next to the words "Hang Them" was bludgeoned to death after receiving multiple threats, officials said. 

Former South African President Nelson Mandela's night in the hospital has reignited speculation about his health, illustrating his pull over the country. The 92-year-old anti-apartheid activist was admitted Wednesday to a Johannesburg hospital. 

Prime Minister Julia Gillard staked the popularity of her minority administration on a new, year-long 1.8 billion Australian dollar (US$1.79 billion) income tax to help fund reconstruction in flood-devastated Queensland state without tipping the government budget further into deficit.