 Q: I recently got a Verizon iPhone—it's my first new phone in about eight years, if you can believe that. What apps do I absolutely need? 

A: Welcome to the future, you crazy Luddite! You are officially a mobile digital citizen—you can now check your email on the beach! You will be able to settle bar arguments with the power of the Google! But more importantly, as you grow more intimate with your newfangled device, as it becomes a William Gibson-esque appendage, you will wonder how we pre-iPhone, postindustrial humans didn't go extinct from the weight of ennui we were forced to bear on a daily basis—lines, commutes, business meetings, bad dates, dinners with the family. The true value of the iPhone isn't being continuously plugged into the Internet. It's that it makes the most boring moments in life mildly enthralling.

Or, at least, filled with digital bubble wrap. Your first download: one of the original mindless games for the iPhone, "BubbleFree." You know that odd satisfaction of bursting plastic blisters? You can do that forever with this app. Score points for how many you can pop in 45 seconds. It's addictive, but only for about four minutes at a time, so don't worry about staying up all night trying to beat your high score.

For something more challenging, there is "Osmos," a meditative game where you control a kind of cellular organism whose aim is to grow by absorbing other orb-like objects. It's like playing with a space-age petri dish while listening to Brian Eno. If you were to go back in time and ask someone in the '60s what videogames would resemble in the year 2000, this would be it.

You've probably discovered the YouTube application at this point, but if you are looking for slightly less home-brewed programming, try the "Adult Swim" app. It delivers short bursts of programs like "Robot Chicken" and the classic gonzo cartoon talk show, "Space Ghost: Coast to Coast." You're more "Antiques Roadshow" than "Aqua Teen Hunger Force"? Then get the PBS app.

However, even after "NOVA," you may feel as though your brain is melting. Then it's time to fire up the old-timey board game standbys, Trivial Pursuit and Scrabble, both of which have engrossing solo modes so you can continue to avoid all human contact: It's not fun for the family, but just for you and you alone!

I know what you're thinking: No "Angry Birds"? Do yourself a favor. Stay away from it like you would a party at Charlie Sheen's—it will leave you with a dull feeling of regret and wondering where the past 48 hours went. And there's no app to cure that.

 --Have a tech quandary? Email: thefixer@wsj.com  

—Kevin Sintumuang