SINGAPORE—Singapore Telecommunications Ltd. said Monday that board member  Simon Israel will succeed  Chumpol NaLamlieng as the telecommunications company's chairman after its annual general meeting July 29. 

Mr. Israel will step down as executive director and president of state investment firm Temasek Holdings Pte. Ltd. on July 1. Temasek owns a 54% stake in SingTel, and Mr. Israel, who is also a director of other companies linked to the sovereign wealth fund, will continue to serve as a director at the biggest telecommunications firm in Southeast Asia by number of subscribers. 

His retirement from Temasek was announced on March 16, and his scheduled departure comes less than a year after he was appointed as one of the presidents of the sovereign wealth fund, which has a portfolio of 186 billion Singapore dollars (US$150 billion), concentrated principally in Singapore, Asia and emerging economies. 

Mr. Israel joined Temasek's board in August 2005 and became a key member of the firm's leadership in 2006 as an executive director. Before joining Temasek, he was chairman of Danone Asia Pacific, and a member of the executive committee of Groupe Danone SA. 

Mr. Israel serves as a director on the boards of various Temasek-linked companies, including CapitaLand Ltd., SingTel and Neptune Orient Lines Ltd. He is also the chairman of Asia Pacific Breweries Ltd. 

His appointment comes after another top Temasek executive was named as the next top official of Neptune Orient Lines, the Singapore-listed container shipper in which the state investment firm owns a 66% stake. 

  Ng Yat Chung, Singapore's former army chief, will replace  Ron Widdows as the shipping firm's group president and chief executive next year. Mr. Ng will initially be appointed as an executive director at NOL s of May 1. He will work closely with Mr. Widdows before assuming full responsibilities on Jan. 1, 2012, NOL said on April 25. 

SingTel's outgoing chairman Mr. NaLamlieng, 64 years old, a Thai national who has been the company's chairman since 2003, will step down after SingTel's annual general meeting in July, the company said in a statement Monday. 

In addition,  Graham John Bradley and  Nicky Tan will be stepping down as nonexecutive and independent directors after SingTel's annual meeting, the statement said. 

SingTel also announced the appointment of  Low Check Kian as a nonexecutive and independent director. 

The statement didn't give any reasons for the changes. 

 Write to  Gaurav Raghuvanshi at gaurav.raghuvanshi@dowjones.com 