 Obama's approval ratings climbed in a new survey. A Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll found that 53% of Americans approved of his performance as president, up eight points from December. The rising numbers come amid signs of optimism about the economy, though high unemployment could prove a pitfall for Obama. 

Surges in presidential popularity are common after such tragedies as the Arizona shooting, a pollster said. 

 Obama and Hu played up common U.S.-China interests after talks on such areas of tension as currency and human rights. The Obamas later honored Hu at a state dinner.  

 The GOP-led House voted 245-189 to repeal the health-care law. The law will remain in place, though, since the Senate won't take up the measure. 

 A federal grand jury indicted Loughner for attempting to kill Rep. Giffords and two aides. Giffords is expected to move to a rehabilitation center as early as Friday.  

 Tunisian and Swiss officials moved to track and freeze the assets of Tunisia's former president and his family. 

 Karzai delayed the opening of Afghanistan's Parliament to give a court more time to probe fraud allegations. 

 A report on the murder of Wall Street Journal reporter Daniel Pearl found faults in the prosecution and probe.  

 Duvalier plans to remain in Haiti even though authorities want him to leave, a lawyer for the ex-dictator said. 

 A backpack bomb on the route of a Martin Luther King Day parade in Spokane, Wash., was "lethal," the FBI said. 

 A Philadelphia doctor who ran a women's clinic was accused of killing seven babies who were delivered alive. 

 Britain unveiled a plan to revamp the National Health Service, shifting more spending decisions to doctors. 

 Safety officials blamed failures by Massey for triggering a mine blast that killed 29. 

 Investigators searched for causes of a deadly natural-gas blast in Philadelphia. 

Police arrested two more students in the shooting at a school near Los Angeles.

 The death toll in Brazil from floods and mudslides near Rio could approach 1,000.  

 Bedbugs are evolving rapidly to withstand pesticides, a genetic survey found. 