BRUSSELS—European leaders agreed in the wee hours Saturday on a program of long-term economic overhauls to the 17-member euro zone, and authorized a beefing-up of the bloc's bailout fund for troubled countries.

But the meeting here was marked by several bitter disputes. Ireland, which sought better terms on the €67.5 billion ($93.8 billion) bailout it received last year, was rebuffed after refusing to contemplate raising its low corporate tax rate.

European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet pleaded with France and Germany to permit the bailout fund to buy some of the bonds of weak countries that the central bank has been accumulating during the crisis; he too was rebuffed.

The leaders formally agreed, as expected, to increase the amount the EU's current, temporary bailout facilities can lend, to a total of €500 billion. They also agreed to create a new, permanent fund of the same size in 2013, when the temporary fund expires. 

The meeting, which began Friday evening, was a stepping stone to a final deal that the leaders have promised will be concluded by March 25. Time is short. Tensions mounted in Greece after a weak budget report Friday and in Portugal after markets frowned on a bid for further fiscal cuts.

The leaders approved two other changes. First, the bailout funds will be able to buy bonds directly from euro-zone countries, presumably during regular debt auctions. Now, the fund can only make loans. Second, the bailout fund itself will be financed by at least some capital contributions from countries, instead of the current system of guarantees.

The first change will give the funds somewhat more flexibility, though the details of how purchases would work weren't spelled out.

The second implies that weaker countries, whose guarantees aren't as valuable as those of Triple-A-rated nations such as Germany, France and the Netherlands, may have to put up actual cash.

The leaders also agreed that bailout loans should carry lower interest rates, and they agreed that Greece's rate should be cut by one percentage point. Athens, which received a bailout last spring, had asked for two.

But in a dramatic dispute, the Irish were told they couldn't have a cut of one percentage point unless they raised their corporate tax rate.

Ireland's newly seated prime minister, Enda Kenny, said after the meeting that he told the others he "couldn't contemplate" a change to the tax rate. The Irish say their low corporate taxes—the rate is 12.5%--are central to luring foreign business to their soil and powering any economic recovery. Other countries chafe at this, particularly while writing Ireland billions in bailout checks.

"It wasn't possible to reach a deal for Ireland this evening," Mr. Kenny said.

Another major fight developed at the summit between German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President Nicolas Sarkozy on the one hand and Mr. Trichet on the other, a senior EU official said. 

Mr. Trichet wanted the bailout fund to be able to buy existing government bonds—because the ECB holds €77 billion of sovereign bonds it wants to offload. 

But the German and French leaders insisted that the bailout funds only be allowed to buy bonds directly from governments. Their view won the day.

Buying existing bonds could sharply enlarge the size of the bailout funds, one reason why lending countries don't want it to happen. 

Herman Van Rompuy, the EU president, said buying existing bonds wasn't seen as "a core business" of the funds.

Ms. Merkel justified the decision to buy bonds directly from governments, saying: "I don't think it has such a huge impact."

Mr. Trichet said the decisions made at the summit "go in the right direction." 

The economic overhauls, originally dubbed a "pact for competitiveness" and renamed a "pact for the euro," stem from a proposal made by Germany and France more than a month ago. But the version approved Friday during a lengthy dinner is vaguer than the original, and tough provisions have been softened or removed.

—Riva Froymovich, Costas Paris and Patrick McGroarty contributed to this article.

 Write to  Charles Forelle at charles.forelle@wsj.com 