Hong Kong is still the freest economy in the world, but it faces increasingly stiff competition for that title. Which is why the business community is waiting to see whether Chief Executive Donald Tsang will honor his promise to cut the corporate tax rate to 15% from 16.5%.

Yesterday, The Wall Street Journal and the Heritage Foundation released the 17th annual Index of Economic Freedom, which has put Hong Kong at the top of the league tables every year. However, the world, and in particular Hong Kong's Asian peers, have been liberalizing, so that Hong Kong is no longer the clear leader it once was. Consider that in the 1980s, Singapore's corporate tax rate was 40%; today companies in the Lion City pay 17% of profits, just half a percentage point more than in Hong Kong.

When Mr. Tsang was running for re-election in 2007, he committed to trim the top marginal rate of both the salary and profits taxes back to their previous lows of 15%. He fulfilled the salary tax promise, but has only given back one percentage point to companies. While helping entrepreneurs may not be as popular as other measures, Hong Kong's ability to nurture start-ups and attract highly mobile multinationals is critical to its status as a regional business hub.

Hong Kong hardly needs the money. The government budget surplus is expected to hit $9 billion this year and the fiscal reserve fund should pass $77 billion—33% of GDP, or two years' worth of government spending. Then there's the $307 billion Exchange Fund, which is supposed to back up the Hong Kong dollar currency board but already totals more than double the monetary base. Government holding so much of its citizens' wealth is hardly consistent with economic freedom.

It's not even clear whether lower corporate taxes would decrease revenues by much. If businesses move to Hong Kong and grow, a smaller bite of a bigger profits pie could equal more money in the public coffers. As economist Alan Reynolds has noted, Hong Kong is already proof of this: The U.S. corporate tax rate is roughly double that of Hong Kong, but Washington collects less as a percentage of GDP.

To be fair, this is partly a result of various loopholes. Hong Kong deserves credit for maintaining a simple and transparent system with a low marginal rate, which provides better incentives for investment in the longer term. Nevertheless, Singapore and other countries woo multinationals with special tax treatment, and Hong Kong must take this into consideration rather than resting on its laurels as the lowest tax jurisdiction around.

The Index of Economic Freedom is proof that Mr. Tsang and his colleagues are preserving Hong Kong's free market tradition, but his successors may not be so enlightened. For instance, Executive Council Convenor Leung Chun-ying, a probable chief executive candidate in 2012, has been burnishing his left-wing credentials of late by attacking the idea of a corporate tax cut. "Remember, you only have to pay profits tax if your business is earning money," he says, as if this is an argument that the existing tax rate is correct. One could equally say that a government only collects profit tax if there are healthy, profit-making companies.

But to needle Mr. Tsang a bit, he has been guilty of the same backward thinking. He qualified his 2007 pledge to cut taxes, saying he would only do so if the economy was performing well. This gives the false impression that low taxes are a reward for growth, rather than a key part of the environment that fosters growth. The best legacy Mr. Tsang could leave for Hong Kong would be making that case as he cuts taxes in his final two budgets.