 Bellevue Hospital Center in New York City was misspelled as Bellview in a column on chronic headaches in Personal Journal on Tuesday.

 The number of nuclear reactors in earthquake zones was undercounted in a Disaster in Japan article Saturday. Thirty-four reactors, or 8% of the world's total, are in high-hazard earthquake areas. Of those, 24 are in Japan and six in Taiwan, and 17 within a mile of a coastline. Areas that have at least moderate quake activity are home to 90 reactors, about 20% of the total. 

The article incorrectly said that 14 reactors, or 3% of the world's total, are in high-hazard areas; that 10 of those reactors are in Japan and Taiwan; and that 10 are within a mile of a coastline. The article also incorrectly said that 48 reactors, or 11% of the total, are in areas that have at least moderate earthquake activity. The map that accompanied the article correctly showed the location of the world's nuclear plants, but repeated the incorrect information from the article regarding the number of reactors in high-hazard areas and near coastlines.

An earlier version of an interactive graphic that accompanied the article incorrectly categorized some reactors. The corrected version is here.

 Ayumi Suzuki, a 27-year-old employee at a Tokyo hotel, said Friday she exchanged 200,000 yen for $2,400. A Business & Finance article Saturday about currency markets in Japan incorrectly gave the currency conversion as $240.

  Deutsche Telekom AG was misspelled as Deutsche Telecom in a Marketplace article on Tuesday about  AT&T Inc.
T


-0.87
%




's deal to buy T-Mobile USA and in a World Stock Markets roundup in the Money & Investing section. 

  Sprint Nextel Corp.
S


-2.50
%




 shares are listed on the New York Stock Exchange. A Marketplace article Tuesday about how the company might be affected by a merger of AT&T and T-Mobile USA incorrectly said its shares traded on the Nasdaq Stock Market.

 Klein Tools canvas bags are manufactured in Fort Smith, Ark. An article about car-trunk equipment in Saturday's Off Duty section incorrectly said the bags are made in Fort Smith, Ariz. 