  On a winter afternoon Robert Hall, owner of the special-effects makeup house Almost Human, is supervising the fabrication of a neck wound for a scene in a new project. While one of his cohorts squeezes a meaty piece of silicone between his fingers, another slathers it in a viscous red liquid poured from a Karo Syrup bottle. Earlier in the day Mr. Hall and company had perforated the silicone by rubbing it over hard Styrofoam pellets harvested from a gutted beanbag chair. "It gives us a honeycomb texture that can really create a great reservoir for blood," says a grinning Mr. Hall, adding that he can't wait to see how this looks on camera.

In the 15 years since Mr. Hall founded Almost Human, it has become one of the film business's hottest boutique FX firms. The field is dominated by such giants as Amalgamated Dynamics Inc. ("Spiderman 3") and KNB EFX ("Predators"), but smaller outfits do much of the best work. The emaciated "patient zero" in the picture "Quarantine," the merciless cyborgs on Fox TV's "Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles" and the mutilated victims on the elevator ride from hell in M. Night Shymalan's "Devil"—all were created by Almost Human. Other credits include two seasons of "Buffy the Vampire Slayer" and several seasons of "Angel."

No matter how different each assignment, Mr. Hall's goal is almost always the same—to combine do-it-yourself inventiveness with sophisticated digital wizardry. "Because graphics are now so good," he says, "viewers are desensitized. If they see a cool death in a film, they go, 'Oh, it's CGI' or 'Oh, it's a rubber head.' What I'm trying to do is bridge the gap between the newest technology and practical effects so viewers won't have any idea how something was done."

Occupying a 5,000-square-foot facility near Hollywood, Mr. Hall's shop contains separate departments for sculpting and molding, hair and makeup, life-casting and finishing and computer design. In busy periods he employs 20 workers. "I hire everyone," he says, "from painters and sculptors to digital compositors, rock-and-roll makeup artists, and guys who just like to pump blood and slit throats." 

With spiky dark hair, an earring in each ear and tattoos on both arms, the 37-year-old Mr. Hall looks as if he could have stepped out of one of his jobs. His wardrobe runs to jeans and t-shirts touting heavy metal bands. Yet he exudes calm professionalism. Work orders start coming in at nine each morning. A movie company wants 10 dead bodies to push off a building. A commercial production house needs an animatronic bear. A TV series is seeking robots. 

Almost Human's artists typically do preliminary designs on Macs equipped with Photoshop and ZBrush software, although occasionally Mr. Hall sketches them freehand. The next step almost always involves casting an actor's body in silicone or alginate and then molding a figure from fiberglass or plaster. For the final stage the team is back at the computers. An arachnid-like get-up may be startling, but a digital effect that makes it seem as if its human occupant can bend his legs forward at the knees will bring it to vivid and terrifying life.

Some projects are tougher than others. On one occasion, the producers of "Terminator" asked Almost Human to craft a robotic endoskeleton at a far lower cost and in much less time than those made for the original feature films. "Our CGI guy downloaded a file of a 3-D model, which we then sent out to be rapid-prototyped," says Mr. Hall, referring to a machine process. "They delivered 2,000 parts made from foam and resin. After re-sculpting, sanding and finishing, we did the molds and casting. Then we chrome-plated and did the assembly. We got it done in two weeks."

Chimerical as many of Almost Human's creations appear, Mr. Hall rarely takes his ideas from science fiction or movies. "I'm inspired by life," he says. "If I'm on a bus and see an old woman, I'll look at the cracks in her face and think of how they evolved." 

Mr. Hall grew up in a trailer park in the north Alabama town of Cullman, "a tiny pocket of dry-country Bible Beltism." In defiance of local mores, he listened to KISS and Metallica ("I was a total headbanger") or sat in theaters watching "Friday the 13th" and "A Nightmare on Elm Street." His favorite thing was to hang out in the makeup department at Wal-Mart. By the age of nine Mr. Hall was doing friends' Halloween costumes, and by high school he was constructing ambitious monsters. He tells the story of his alienated youth in "Lightning Bug," a bittersweet low-budget feature he directed in 2005. 

Mr. Hall wanted to head to Hollywood after high school but had to take a job first. "I was a de-boner at a Tyson chicken plant in Blountsville, Ala.," he says. Working the night shift stripping skin and fat from chicken breasts coming down a conveyor belt, he received a good education for a career in special effects. "I got to see all the stuff that's inside a body." 

After a year, Mr. Hall hired onto the production staff for "Body Snatchers," a horror movie filmed in Alabama. The experience gave him the confidence to move to L.A., where he got a job with B-movie director Roger Corman. 

More and more, Mr. Hall is directing his own work. His latest, coming this fall, is "ChromeSkull: Laid to Rest 2" a sequel to "Laid to Rest," a 2009 gore fest that attracted a cult audience. 

Outside jobs, however, still pay the bills. Almost Human recently completed the effects for "Area 51," a feature by director Oren Peli. The film, like Mr. Peli's "Paranormal Activity" (on which Mr. Hall also worked), was shot in a hyper-realistic style. "I can't say what we did," says Mr. Hall. "Paramount is a stickler about non-disclosure agreements. Let's just say we created things that aren't necessarily of this world."

• Even with all the new technology, "you can buy everything you need to make authentic movie blood at the grocery store," says Mr. Hall. The ingredients: Karo Syrup, red food coloring, caramel food coloring and water. "That's how 90% of the blood you see on screen is made."

• For human flesh, Mr. Hall prefers translucent materials such as silicone and gelatin. "We buy gelatin in bulk," he says, "but on location we could use Knox Gelatin. We'd just need to add glycerin and Sorbitol to get it to set right."

• Mr. Hall's company, Almost Human, once created a fat suit for a dog used in a Kellogg's Fruit Harvest Cereal commercial. Fashioned from upholstery foam layered with synthetic fur, the suit, which was meant to show the results of an unhealthy diet, was so realistic that the ASPCA expressed concern that an actual dog had been overfed. "I had to explain it was a special effect," says Mr. Hall, whose less-than-ferocious Yorkie-Maltese mixes, Reaper and Slayer, are fixtures at his shop.

• Creating the coiffure for a movie corpse requires time and authentic human hair imported from China or Italy. "We cut a threading hole into a silicone head with a needle then take each strand of hair and punch it down," says Mr. Hall. "It takes about 100 hours to punch one fake head."

 • Bad movie decapitations make Mr. Hall crazy. In life, he says, "rarely does a head go flying. It's hard to cut through all the muscle, cartilage and bone." To get it right on camera, Mr. Hall crafts silicone necks layered with realistic muscles, blood reservoirs and rolled-up latex or vinyl tendons known in the FX trade as "nernies." That way, he says, "you can create the proper resistance." 