TUCSON, Ariz.—Federal investigators found the words "Die Cops" and "Die Bitch" scrawled on a letter from U.S. congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords's office in the home of the shooting suspect, a sheriff's department official said Tuesday night.

Captain Chris Nanos of the Pima County Sheriff's Department was briefed on the findings of a search of the suspect's ranch-style house where he lives with his parents. Capt. Nanos said that the suspect, Jared Lee Loughner, had also referenced an assassination in handwritten notes on the letter.

The letter, which dated from 2007, was a form document sent by Ms. Giffords's staff to thank Mr. Loughner for attending one of her events. "He obviously kept the letter for a long time," Capt. Nanos said.

More details also surfaced Wednesday on Mr. Loughner's whereabouts in the hours before the attack Saturday. The Arizona Game and Fish Department confirmed that Mr. Loughner ran a red light and was stopped by a wildlife officer several hours before the shooting. The officer checked Mr. Loughner's driver's licence and registration and found no outstanding warrants, a Pima County official said.

 Families of Tucson Victims Speak 

 News Hub: Tucson Suspect Trial, Sanity In Question 

 Palin Rejects Criticism over AZ Shooting 



Mr. Loughner has been charged with two counts of murder, two counts of attempted murder and a count of attempted assassination of a member of Congress in connection with a shooting at a Safeway supermarket here Saturday. 

Ms. Giffords, who is believed to have been the shooter's target, was gravely injured at the event for constituents but is expected to survive after successful brain surgery. Six people were killed and 13 others were injured. More charges are expected.

Capt. Nanos also confirmed reports that local authorities had visited the Loughners' house on previous occasions—but such visits took place many years ago and were for minor incidents, two of them involving Mr. Loughner's parents. 

At one time around 1996, the police responded to a noise complaint; it turned out to be the suspect's father, Randy Loughner, playing with a "sporty Camaro," the official said.

Years later, in 2002, officers came because the suspect's mother, Amy Loughner, reported that the sticker in her license plate had been stolen, Capt. Nanos said.

The only time the police visited because of the suspect was around 2006 or 2007, when the suspect called the authorities to report a case of identity theft. "Someone had used his name on MySpace or Facebook," Capt. Nanos said. 

One of Mr. Loughner's run-ins with authorities was because of the possession of a marijuana pipe. In 2007, the year he would have graduated from high school, Mr. Loughner was arrested in Pima County and charged with possession of drugs and drug paraphernalia, according to court records. His case was dismissed.

One other episode involved Mr. Loughner's having allegedly arrived drunk at his high school, Capt. Nanos said.

"There was nothing to indicate that he was a danger to anybody," he said.

Jason Ogan, a spokesman for the Pima County Sheriff's Department, said that the department was reviewing the visits. He said that reports on them may be available on Wednesday.

 Write to  Angel Gonzalez at angel.gonzalez@dowjones.com and Andrew Morse at andrew.morse@wsj.com 