In "Barney's Version," the film that earned him a Golden Globe award on Sunday, Paul Giamatti appears in virtually every scene as the gruff, funny, self-destructive Canadian television producer Barney Panofsky. It's a contrast to the smaller, supporting roles on which Mr. Giamatti largely built his career. "When you play the smaller things, you have to have it crafted a little more when you pop in," he explained. "In the larger roles, you have to let go a little more and go with the flow." 

Based on a novel by the late writer Mordecai Richler—an institution in his native Montreal, where the story is set—"Barney's Version" spans four decades and three marriages in the life of its title character, the kind of impulsive, reckless guy who meets his third wife at his second wedding. Mr. Giamatti, 43, a Brooklyn Heights resident, recently spoke with the Journal about the role. 



 A lot of films are shot in Canada, but this one actually feels Canadian. 

It's literally Canadian. There's no sense in which they're trying to make it a Canadian movie that appears to be American. I'd never been to Montreal and they don't make a lot of American movies in Montreal. They do in Toronto and Vancouver. Montreal is a completely unique place, this truly bilingual culture. I'd never been anywhere like that before. 



 As Barney, you age, gain weight, drink and smoke cigars. Have you ever wanted a role that requires you to get really buff?  

That might be nice, to get really buff. I don't think I've ever done something where people were like, "Will you be willing to lose weight?" I'd be happy to do it, yeah. I don't know if it's ever going to occur to anybody. 



 You're playing Ben Bernanke in the forthcoming HBO film "Too Big to Fail." Is your portrait of the Federal Reserve Chairman flattering? 

It's not unflattering to Bernanke. Those are funny, those ripped-from-the-headlines docudramas. They're tricky to pull off. Part of the interest is humanizing these people and showing the behind-the-scenes stuff. It ends up giving them a human dimension that I was reluctant to ascribe to all those guys. 



 Has playing leading roles changed your responsibilities on-set? 

It's a very different thing than doing the supporting stuff. One of the trickier elements is you have to be a bit of a team leader guy, getting everybody up and energized, because when people flag they look to you. You're providing a lot of the juice. That can be oddly demanding. 



 Could you have played a big lead role early in your film career? 

I don't know. I played some pretty big parts on stage when I was younger. I have no idea how I would have reacted to that. It would have been hard. I'm glad I didn't have to—I can say that. It's a pretty big demand to make of a young person. I'm always amazed at the people who do that. 



 You'll be getting more press with your Golden Globes victory. Do you read articles about yourself? 

Less so than I used to. I thought it was cool when I was younger. Now I think I'm a little tired of myself. 