Former Florida Governor Charlie Crist's decision to throw in his lot with the state's trial lawyers after leaving Tallahassee was a surprise to some, but apparently not to Mr. Crist. During his final days in office before joining the personal injury law firm of Morgan & Morgan, he doled out important slots on the state's judicial nominating commissions to a panoply of plaintiffs lawyers, many of whom had donated to his campaign.

Altogether, his list of new commission members included 17 plaintiffs lawyers, including Morgan & Morgan's Zander Clem ($4,800 to Crist for Senate) and Joseph Linnehan ($2,400 to Crist for Senate). The latter appointment, which Mr. Crist made in December, came just one week before the governor announced his plan to take a job at Morgan & Morgan.

Though the nominations to the commissions were due in July, Mr. Crist didn't begin to make his selections until September, when Marco Rubio had opened up a significant lead over Mr. Crist in the U.S. Senate race, leading many to believe Mr. Crist was headed back to the private sector. The timing of the events has led some Florida court-watchers to question whether the appointments were a violation of the Florida Ethics Code.

As Mr. Crist's successor, Governor Rick Scott, is quickly learning, when judicial nominating commissions get the last word in choosing slates of judicial candidates, the preferences of their members have a powerful influence on the state court system. In the case of a vacancy on the state's Fourth Circuit, a commission led by trial lawyer Greg Barnhart sent up four nominees, including Circuit Judge Elizabeth Maas, a liberal favorite. When Mr. Scott requested a second batch of nominees, the commission refused.

Mr. Crist has called his new firm's name partner John Morgan "a dear friend" who "has been with me for a long time, in the political sense." If Mr. Crist was hired as a rainmaker, he's off to a good start.

To read more stories like this one, please subscribe to Political Diary. 