SAN'A, Yemen—Yemeni security forces killed at least one person in a raid on a square where thousands of pro-democracy protesters have been camped out for a month, the Associated Press reported, citing doctors and eyewitnesses. 

According to the report, witnesses said the security troops used live fire and tear gas in the pre-dawn raid Saturday on the central square in the capital, Sanaa. TV footage showed protesters apparently overcome by tear gas lying on the ground, it said. 

The raid came hours after antigovernment activists mounted the largest demonstration in the capital to date Friday, one day after President Ali Abdullah Saleh offered political concessions that failed to placate protesters.

More than 100,000 men, women and children took to the streets to insist Mr. Saleh step down—the one demand the president declines to accept.

In what had been dubbed the "Friday of no return," crowds massed in front of San'a University to pray and then to chant against Mr. Saleh. A wall of sound echoed along the roads as protesters screamed, "Get out! Get out, Ali," referring to the president. The university has been the focal point of recent anti-Saleh sit-ins, and more ground was taken by the masses on Friday.

"We are not leaving," said one protester, who was draped in the Yemeni flag. "We will never leave until the regime falls." 

Pushing police back, the protesters have overrun major streets, quickly setting up tents to fortify their position. What started as a small protest outside the university over a month ago has spread for more than a mile up the road and into side streets. Whole blocks have been engulfed by thousands of people, many of whom have set up camp and sleep there.

Friday is the week's holy day in the Islamic calendar, so demonstrations are usually larger as people aren't working. But on this Friday more protesters rallied than any previous Friday. A smaller pro-government protest was held elsewhere in the city.

Abdul-Wahab al-Dilmy, a famous Yemeni cleric, told protesters over a megaphone that although the army has shot at protesters, there should be no retaliation. On Tuesday night, two protesters were killed when a group of men tried to get a tent into the protest and but were stopped by the army, who stay on the outskirts of the sit-in. An argument arose and some soldiers panicked, firing bullets and tear gas into the crowd, witnesses said.

Tuesday's fatalities brought the death count to 30, according to Amnesty International.

In protests in other parts of the country Friday, three antigovernment protesters were wounded, one critically, in the southern town of Sheikh Uthman, according to witnesses. Thousands of protesters marched through the streets after Friday prayers, when police used tear gas and opened fire to disperse the masses, witnesses said.

Friday's demonstration came a day after Mr. Saleh proposed giving more power to Parliament by amending the constitution, the third time he has offered major political concessions this year. 

Mr. Saleh's proposal was ambiguous and it wasn't clear how much power he would be willing to relinquish. He promised to form a national committee to draft a new constitution that would focus on the separation of the executive and legislative branches. In a statement, the ruling party promised to decentralize power by "devolving full financial and administrative authorities to local governing bodies."

Both leaders of the political opposition and protesters promptly rejected the offer, demanding the president leave office. Mr. Saleh has disregarded parliamentary decisions in the past and gone back on public promises many times, including when he said he wouldn't run in 2006 elections.

Mr. Saleh has been a key U.S. ally against terrorism, and Washington has expressed concern about Mr. Saleh's wavering grip on power. The American Embassy in San'a continues to urge protesters to engage in dialogue with the government, but demonstrators have refused any talks.

In a statement released Thursday, European Union High Representative of Foreign Affairs and Security Policy Catherine Aston said Mr. Saleh's announcement was a "step forward" and called on all parties "to engage without delay in an open and constructive dialogue to respond to the demands of the people."

There are fears among the international community that if Mr. Saleh were to be overthrown a power vacuum would create instability in an already fragile state, already fighting an active branch of al Qaeda, al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula.

But opposition leaders and protesters rebuff such claims as an insult to the Yemeni people. "We want Saleh to step down. After that we will elect a leader," said a protester who asked to be quoted as Mr. Mahmud. "We don't know who, but there are 23 million Yemenis. Why doesn't the U.S. think there is anyone qualified to rule?" he added.