AMSTERDAM—It's easy to forget that when it comes to European football dynasties, Ajax Amsterdam can hold its own with almost anyone. 

The 111-year-old club's record of four European Cups is bettered by only AC Milan, Real Madrid and Liverpool, while its 29 domestic championships comfortably outstrips Manchester United, Bayern Munich or Barcelona.

During its most successful period in the 1970s, when the club won the European Cup three times in a row, Ajax was the most stylish and effective team around thanks to a dazzling style of play known as Total Football.

"Ajax is something special," says Sjaak Swart, a former Ajax winger and a member of the three-time European champions. "It's about technique, attacking football, pace and it's attractive for the fans." 

But lately, it's been anything but. Ajax hasn't won the Eredivisie championship for six years and hasn't lifted the European Cup since 1995. This season, the club was humbled in the Champions League group stage and exited the Europa League at the hands of Spartak Moscow.

As Ajax prepares to play host to FC Twente on Sunday in a game that will decide the Dutch championship, there is a growing feeling that this club, which was once the best in the world, isn't even the best team in the Netherlands. Ajax lost the Dutch Cup final to Twente last Sunday and trails the reigning champion by a point heading into the final round of matches.

In short, Ajax is a club in decline and one man has had enough.

"This isn't Ajax anymore," said Johan Cruyff, the club's greatest player, in a weekly column in De Telegraaf newspaper following Ajax's Champions League defeat to Real Madrid last November. 

This outburst was hardly the first piece of criticism from Cruyff, the most illustrious player in the club's storied history and a notoriously critical judge of current Ajax teams. But the timing of this latest barb, combined with an increasing sense that the club has done a lousy job of honoring the traditions of the past, led to a period of infighting that remains unresolved.

Martin Jol, the head coach, left the club shortly afterwards, while the club's chief executive and supervisory board resigned last month amid a row over Cruyff's plans to restructure the club's youth academy.

Cruyff declined to be interviewed for this article, but is expected to oversee a complete overhaul of the club, installing former Ajax stars such as Dennis Bergkamp and Wim Jonk as assistant coaches and initiating a shake-up of the famed youth system, which once produced some of Europe's finest players but has failed to do so of late.

"It's about bringing together a team of people that can work together and can present the Ajax style of playing and the Ajax culture," says Swart. 

As the pioneer of the pinball-passing gameplan currently practiced by the world's best club team, FC Barcelona, there is reason to believe Cruyff can help restore some former glories to his boyhood club.

Ajax's decline surely has something to do with a bunch of high-priced failures in the transfer market, a failure to develop young talent and chronic instability in the dugout—Frank de Boer, the current head coach, is the club's seventh manager in the past five years.

"This has been a period in which Ajax didn't make use of the talent in its youth academy and focused on buying players too much," said Swart.

But even when Cruyff's is installed in the club's board, which is expected next month, some fans, coaches and former players fear changes to the European football landscape in the last two decades mean Ajax will never return to the top of the European game.

For starters, the financial disparity between clubs from Europe's big five leagues—England, Spain, Italy, Germany and France—and the rest has grown significantly since Ajax's last Champions League success in 1995 following an explosion in the value of TV rights.

In 2010, Ajax made just over €5 million ($8.2 million) from the sale of its broadcast rights, while Real Madrid made €161 million. Even Tottenham Hotspur earned €53 million in 2010, which helps to explain why Rafael Van der Vaart, a graduate of the Ajax academy, can be seen playing for Spurs in the Champions League these days.

In addition, Ajax has struggled to adapt to the new world order imposed on European football by the so-called Bosman ruling, a landmark legal case named after small-time Belgian midfielder Jean-Marc Bosman which ruled that footballers had the same rights as other workers in the European Union, including the right to free agency at the end of contracts and the right to work for any employer.

Until then, most football leagues had quotas on the number of non-nationals each team could sign or field. "In the past we had about eight local players and three foreign players," says Swart. "That's completely changed."

Free agency, or the threat of it, facilitated the movement of players, while the removal of national quotas made foreign players more desirable for Europe's biggest teams. In 1996, Edgar Davids became the first major star to switch clubs using the Bosman ruling when he left Ajax for AC Milan. Patrick Kluivert, the team's star striker, followed a year later. 

Within four years of Ajax winning the European Cup in 1995, every member of the starting lineup had left. It's a situation the club is still struggling to come to terms with. "These days, you start a team, but if after three years your younger players leave, you can never build a team," said De Boer, the Ajax head coach. "That's our problem."

Still, many in this city are optimistic that with Cruyff's input and a return to Ajax's traditional values of developing homegrown talent, the club can mend its reputation—starting with Sunday's game against Twente. 

"If we stick to the Ajax philosophy and give youth players a chance to play in the first team, and depending on a talented generation, certainly things are possible," De Boer said explaining he still has the ambition to win national and international trophies with Ajax. "You most certainly keep believing in your dreams, and we certainly do."