This seems a good time to ask: Is it the president's job to make the country feel better? 

The question springs from two quite disparate sources. A new jobs report Friday showed an economy still not quite in full recovery, having both spawned and been slowed by a class of long-term unemployed Americans whose plight forms a social as well as an economic problem.

Then, of course, Rep. Gabrielle Giffords and 19 others were shot in Tucson, Ariz., Saturday, their only offense having been to show up for an utterly routine political event. It's the first time a sitting member of Congress has been shot in 32 years—and that earlier shooting took place on a distant continent. Saturday's attack instantly became not just a tragedy but a metaphor for a slide in the civility of political discourse.

Ultimately, Americans seem likely to see the shooting for what it appears to be, an irrational act by an irrational young man, the deeper meaning of which is limited. Still, the very act, like the employment picture, inevitably feeds a feeling among Americans that something isn't quite right in the land. And that feeling, more than any individual incident, is something a president is uniquely able to address.

The ability of any one person to alter such feelings is surely limited. On the economic front, words are no substitute for jobs, and false optimism is as likely to engender cynicism as to buoy spirits. And it's difficult for a leader who is the subject of much political discourse to appear to speak about it dispassionately and objectively. 

Still, that is a challenge President Barack Obama explicitly took on in the 2008 campaign, when he talked of lifting the tenor of partisan debate in Washington. 

There is a tendency now to think of Mr. Obama as a divisive figure, but history and poll numbers suggest he's hardly unusual in that regard. He seems no more polarizing than was George W. Bush, who was regularly called a morally suspect liar by his enemies; or Bill Clinton, who was impeached; or Ronald Reagan, who was caricatured as a dim-witted war monger. 

Mr. Obama remains generally well-liked by most of his countrymen, polls tell us. And a public figure who has been the object of much invective may be precisely the person best able to rise above it and convince Americans that they needn't descend into warring political factions.

In fact, there are two Washington figures whose jobs explicitly make them—or should make them—national rather than partisan leaders. One is the speaker of the House, who is speaker of the whole House of Representatives, not just his party's members. The other is the president, who similarly is leader of the land and not just his party. 

House Speaker John Boehner and President Obama both have shown in their temperate remarks since the Arizona shooting that they understand this. The president was wise over the weekend to do nothing to suggest he was seeking to score any political points of his own. The moment seems to call more for a conversation than a lecture, and the best response from the president as well as the speaker—and perhaps one for them to make jointly—may be to show they can lead a civilized discussion about civility.

In the long run, the president's more important and more difficult task may be to make Americans feel optimistic about their economic future, and combat a gnawing feeling that the country has somehow slipped a notch and lost that magic that makes life better for each successive generation.

This is far tougher to do than it sounds. A president who sounds too optimistic while millions of Americans are suffering will seem out of touch and without credibility. A president who sounds too gloomy feeds a psychological slump that, in turn, deepens the uncertainty and fear that cause consumers to retreat and push the real economy downward.

"That's been a challenge for us throughout," acknowledges David Axelrod, Mr. Obama's chief political adviser. "You want to report the progress but also acknowledge that we have a ways to go."

President Reagan figured out how to make Americans feel good about their futures even while unemployment was at levels similar to today's. Replicating that feat is the challenge facing President Obama. The economy added 1.1 million jobs in 2010, and that's the good news. Yet more than eight million were lost the previous two years, and many Americans seem to fear the nation is losing some grand competition with China, while creating a permanent contingent of unemployed or under-employed.

Whether Mr. Obama can make Americans feel the pluses outweigh the minuses will be important, to him and the nation, even after memories of a horrible Saturday in Arizona fade.

 Write to  Gerald F. Seib at jerry.seib@wsj.com 