 Houston 

During the last 40 years, Vija Celmins has become one of the most admired contemporary artists for her rigorous series of paintings, drawings and prints depicting enveloping seas, skies and desert grounds. Yet when the Menil Collection offered her the truly exceptional opportunity to select the subject for an exhibition of her work, she surprised by choosing a set of less-known early works that differ radically from her later ones. The 18 paintings and sculptures now gathered at the Menil prove how revealing that choice was about Ms. Celmins's career and the art of the 1960s.

 The Menil Collection, Texas  Through Feb. 20 

Unlike the large-scale arrays of the later work, these pieces from 1964-66 mainly depict single objects and show each at an instant of destruction. Simultaneously, they establish Ms. Celmins as one of the artists whose work first called attention to Los Angeles as a major art center and mark her as an outsider at the moment she began to define the aesthetic approach she would pursue for decades to come.

Ms. Celmins arrived in Los Angeles in 1962 to begin an MFA at UCLA, where she put aside her fascination with the psychological display and painterly gestures of Abstract Expressionism to render the mundane objects of her studio (a glowing hotplate, for example) in a meticulously impersonal style. Unlike so much Pop Art on both coasts, her paintings showcased neither the spotless perfection of the newly bought nor the blazing colors of Madison Avenue or Southern California. Her modestly sized canvases wrapped battered things in layers of deep, somber grays.

Her thesis show in 1965 was pivotal. It included a new body of work—many of the paintings and sculptures now reassembled at the Menil. These pieces retain the small-scale, dark tonality and singular focus of Ms. Celmins's immediately preceding work, but they replace domestic utensils with objects of radically different uses and associations—guns, trucks and a rhinoceros, but primarily ships and planes from World War II. The clunky portable in "TV" (1964) is a life-size image of the one Ms. Celmins watched in the studio, yet the picture on the screen is retrospective rather than contemporary: a World War II-era bomber fragments and plunges to earth sheathed in smoke.

For Ms. Celmins, this event was not merely a picture glimpsed on a television or in a magazine. Born in Riga, Latvia, in 1938, her childhood was defined by the shifting battle lines of World War II, as the Soviets occupied the Baltics, the Nazis overran the region while invading the Soviet Union, and the Soviets counterattacked during their last campaign into Germany. It was only when her family finally arrived in the U.S. as refugees and settled in Indiana, Ms. Celmins said in a 1992 interview, that 10-year-old Vija realized "living in fear wasn't normal."

Her paintings cut through the lighthearted consumerism and flip coolness of so much contemporary work to stare with barely controlled intensity at disasters like those she vividly remembered. Although already distanced from contemporary life, the war images seemed newly resonant as racial violence spread across the U.S. in the mid-'60s. In "Time Magazine Cover" (1965), Ms. Celmins made a rare, direct response by painting the cover of the issue on the Watts riots. Remarkably for a 26-year-old artist beginning her career, her paintings transform Pop's material of deadpan objects into an art of deep personal and historical meaning. Yet they do this by keeping the tightest of reins, without any recourse to explicit expression.

Ms. Celmins searched through old books and magazines to collect photographs as sources for the series of paintings she devoted to wartime disasters of the air and sea. The black-and-white photos not only served as aides- memoire but preserve a distance from the event that offers a space for contemplation and manipulation.

In each of these paintings, Ms. Celmins rendered a single plane or ship floating in a narrow field. Despite the fact that each machine is shown in a process of dissolution (a blazing fire or splitting structure), each painting fixes the duration of the event as a moment. That moment is focused not only on the actual event but also on the process of making the painting and the examination that accompanies it. Measuring approximately 16 inches by 26 inches, the compositions belie their modest size with a density of pigment and brushwork that causes each to carry the visual weight of a much larger canvas. At the Menil, they are hung in the museum's famously subtle light with the ample surrounding space they require to be understood as richly painted fields rather than photographic documents.

In "Flying Fortress" (1966), we witness a shattered behemoth, its tail tearing away from the fuselage seconds before crashing to earth. Yet, the painted image conveys an impression radically different from this event or its photographic record. This transformation is produced by Ms. Celmins's working of the image. Centered on a canvas proportioned to the silhouette of the plane and surrounded with open space, the Fortress seems suspended peacefully in the sky. This sense of wholeness and stability is primarily a creation of the color and surface of the painting. Subtly varied tones of gray render air, metal and glass as an integrated field rather than separate substances. Even the lightly toned line zig-zagging across the tail seems a matter of light before it finally registers as a fatal fracture. Ms. Celmins's short, densely packed strokes build a physical surface of pigment that both suggests an infinity of space from near to far and joins with the grays to hold the surface in a compressed field. It is this visual compression that gives the paintings such presence on the wall.

Soon after her thesis exhibition, Ms. Celmins put aside these iconic images to address subjects of a seemingly opposite nature—uncentralized, barely differentiated images of the sea, sky and earth. As if to repudiate her previous work, she also put down her brushes and used graphic or print techniques for approximately 15 years before returning to oil in 1983. Despite these differences, the wartime paintings of 1964-66 are far better understood as the beginning of her professional career rather than as the end of her student years. Her seas no longer held sinking ships or her skies shattered planes, yet the dialogue of hand and mind, of pigmented surface, and illusionistic space continues through the decades.

 Mr. FitzGerald teaches the history of modern art at Trinity College. 