 (Note: We'll be on assignment Wednesday and Thursday, returning Friday.) 

Something still bothers us about the "birther" kerfuffle: Why the compulsion on the left to turn it into a racial matter? In response to our column last Thursday, we received this email from a reader who leans hard to the left, and whom we won't name to spare him embarrassment:

We have been writing against birtherism for years. We think its adherents are mendacious, paranoid and foolish. Presumably our correspondent does not disagree, yet to his mind it is worse to say so than to say nothing if one does not also assert that they are racist. 

Barack Obama is at least the third consecutive president to be the subject of paranoid conspiracy theories, and it strikes us as odd that anyone who lived through the Clinton and Bush years would automatically assume it must be because he's black. The false claim that Obama was born outside the U.S. does not reflect any common racial stereotype. Nor, for that matter, do the rumors that he is Muslim. The vast majority of American blacks are natural born and Christian.

Still, we wouldn't say we "deny" that the birthers are racist. Some of them may be. Our position is simply that it is wrong to throw around such accusations without evidence.

Yet prominent liberals have been doing just that. Last week in an interview with NPR, David Remnick, editor of The New Yorker and author of the Obama hagiography "The Bridge," had this to say about Donald Trump's birtherian antics:

"No one ever thinks they're a racist"--including, it is safe to surmise, David Remnick. For him, white guilt is directed outward; he is certain that other people are racist. His "evidence" is the assertion that they have "feelings" that are "half buried" and "latent." Could we get The New Yorker's storied fact-checking department to confirm that, please?

Baselessly accusing their political foes of racism is a way in which today's liberals attempt to incite fear and loathing of "the other." As we argued last year, this serves a political purpose in that it helps persuade blacks not to consider voting Republican. But it serves a psychological purpose as well. It reinforces white liberals' sense of their own superiority.

Yet that sense of superiority is not as secure as it once was. Here is Remnick's most telling quote from that interview: "Really, I'm not in the habit of screaming racist at every turn. I don't think you [interviewer Michele Norris] are and I don't think most people are."

It used to be that people expressing politically incorrect views about race felt compelled to preface their statements with a defensive denial: "I'm not a racist, but . . ." The editor of The New Yorker, speaking to an NPR audience, now has a similar compulsion to deny that he is "in the habit of screaming racist."

The tables have turned. Now it is the left that is on the defensive over "racism." Their outdated attitudes about race put them in the absurd position of arguing that the most powerful man in the world is a victim of oppression because of the color of his skin. Men like David Remnick turn out to be the ones who aren't ready for a black president.

  He'd Rather Be Somewhere Else   A Puffington Host post by a self-described journalist (dated last Thursday, which is to say before Osama bin Laden's death became the top story) bemoans the news media's interest in triviality:

It's an unremarkable bit of sanctimony, and we don't even necessarily disagree (especially about the royal wedding), but what makes this priceless is the byline: Dan Rather! Yes, the guy who blew up his career by airing a trivial story based on obviously fraudulent documents is lecturing us about what's important in the news.

A CNN.com commentary by Tavis Smiley is revealing in another way. Smiley faults the media for helping feed the birther story--again, not an unreasonable point to make. But look where he takes it:

In Smiley's view, the job of the media is to reinforce a political orthodoxy and prevent dissenting opinions from being taken seriously. And by the way, he has a show on taxpayer-funded PBS, the closest thing America has to state-run TV.

 Boston Papers Go Birther 

  Shorter Keith Burgess-Jackson   Taranto was right, and I hope he doesn't make the same mistake again.

  Hey, Your Honor! Put Your Robe On!   "Appeals Court Hears Arguments in Obama Birth suit"--headline, FoxNews.com, May 2

 Two Papers in One! 

  What's the Opposite of a Tea Party?   Remember the "Town Hells" of summer 2009, where Democratic congressmen were confronted by constituents angry over ObamaCare? The Dems dismissed it as "AstroTurf" at the time. Then last month they were hoping Republican representatives would get the same treatment after the House approved Rep. Paul Ryan's budget.

It doesn't seem to have worked out. USA Today reports what happened when at the last stop on Ryan's "listening tour" of his Wisconsin district:

The paper notes that while there were a few dissenters, "constituents--especially older ones--were largely supportive."

This doesn't necessarily mean Republicans have won over the public. After all, in contrast to ObamaCare in 2009, when the Democrats were in complete control, the Ryan budget has no prospect of being enacted for at least another 1½ years. Still, the placid town-hall meetings give Republicans reason for cautious optimism.

One of them gives us reason for great enjoyment. Blogger Dan Cleary has video of Rep. Sean Duffy, a newly elected Republican also from Wisconsin, discussing the budget. A constituent says of the Ryan budget: "A Nobel Prize-winning economist labeled it a fraud." After a pause, he names the economist: 

"Paul Krugman."

The whole room bursts into laughter. And he didn't even say "former Enron adviser"!

Meanwhile, a reader calls our attention to this joke from Seth Meyers of "Saturday Night Live," delivered at the White House Correspondents Association dinner: "On the subject of budgets, I would be remiss not to mention Paul Ryan. Paul Ryan introduced a budget plan that would overhaul Medicare and make deep cuts to other social and health-care programs, because he believes the American people have said loud and clear: 'Stop using my tax dollars to take care of me!' "

It's funny that Meyers thinks this is funny, because it's actually true. Most Americans would rather take care of ourselves than be taken care of by government,.

  Maybe They Should Issue Them to the Officers Too   "The Pentagon this month put out a rush order solicitation, spotted by our colleague Walter Pincus, for '27,500 ballistic undergarments' for $2 million, noting that 'ballistic underwear is currently being used by British forces' in Afghanistan "and they have significantly less injuries" to their privates as a result."--Washington Post, April 28

  Other Than That, the Story Was Accurate   "In a story April 27 about fleas, The Associated Press erroneously reported that one flea bite can kill a dog or cat if the pet is allergic to flea saliva. One bite can cause severe dermatitis, not kill the animal."--Associated Press, April 28

  Metaphor Alert   "If the field is so lackluster that a buffoon like Trump can vault to the top of the polls, then maybe a whole new roster of sober presidential wannabes is needed. But though the comments in [the] same Times story from such pundits as Charles Krauthammer (who termed the field "split and weak") and our own Peter Wehner (who lamented the "lack of fizz" that created a vacuum that the clownish Trump is filling) cannot be disputed, there is no need for Republicans to push the panic button."--Jonathan Tobin, Commentary website, May 1

  Out on a Limb   "US Official: New Tape May Be Last From bin Laden"--headline, KSRO-AM website (Santa Rosa, Calif.), May 2

 He Must've Put On Some Weight 

  ObamaCare Claims a Casualty   "Bin Laden Killed in U.S. Operation"--headline, JewishPolicyCenter.org, May 2

 Life Imitates the Onion--I 

 Life Imitates the Onion--II 

  With DNC in Mind, City Bans Carrying Urine, Feces   "Officials Work to Stop Stenches"--headline, Washington Post, April 29

  Acceptable Answers Are 'Yes, He Has No Shame' and 'No, He Has No Shame'   "Does Jimmy Carter Have No Shame?"--headline, BigPeace.com, April 29

  Shortest Books Ever Written   "What You Need to Know About E.J. Dionne"--headline, Commentary website, May 2

  'Resolved: 15 Minutes Can Save You 15% or More'   "Small Lizard Sparks Big Debate in NM, Texas"--headline, Associated Press, April 28

  They've Got a Law for Everything   "Man Arrested After Being Found Standing Over Goat, Wearing Women's Underwear"--headline, Charleston (W.Va.) Daily Mail, May 3

  Hey, Kids! What Time Is It?   "A Good Time to Be a Hamasnik"--headline, Ricochet.com, April 28

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

 Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  Lung Found in Haystack--Now That Would Be News   "Needle Found in Ex-South Korea President's Lung"--headline, Reuters, May 3

  Look Out Below!   "Corn Falls as Weather May Allow Some Planting"--headline, Associated Press, May 2

 Too Much Information 

 Everything Seemingly Is Spinning Out of Control 

 News You Can Use 

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  Libertarians Against Joy   What a sourpuss Reason's Radley Balko is. "Osama Won" declares the headline of his post at the libertarian magazine's website. He argues that the 9/11 attacks "fundamentally altered who we are," a claim that has been a cliché for at least 9½ years, and he gives a long list of particulars. 

Some of them we even agree with, such as airport-security overkill. But we notice two conspicuous omissions from Balko's list: the death and destruction wrought by terrorist attacks themselves, and the legitimate fear of terrorism. It's an example of how ideology can promote a blinkered worldview.

This bit, though, is the worst part:

What's the point of having libertarians if they're going to boss us around and tell us how we're supposed to feel? Liberals do a more than adequate job of that.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Andrew Pietila, John Sanders, Harry Forbes, John Winklareth, John Nernoff, Hillel Markowitz, Joe Perez, Joyce Watkins, Shawn DeMers, Lee Hollaar, John Williamson, Michele Schiesser, William Golden, Mordecai Bobrowsky, Bruce Goldman, Doug Black, Daniel Ginensky, Kevin Binversie, Gregory Baruch, Ed Grinberg, Ed Lasky, John Bobek, David Hammond, David Hallstrom, Sydney Parlow, Charlie Fox, Lew Olowski, Peter Huntsman, Mark Kellner, Jim Fraivillig, Charlie Gaylord, Greg Chalekian, Zack Russ, Nick Kasoff and Randall Woodman. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)