 Kouros Gallery  23 E. 73rd St., (212) 288-5888  Through Jan. 29 

In Kouros Gallery's concurrent solo surveys of two native New York artists, the painter, sculptor and printmaker Stanley Boxer (1926-2000) and the painter and illustrator Guy Danella (1928-2006), we move, through nearly two dozen pictures spanning half a century, from Impressionism, Cubism and biomorphic abstraction to Abstract Expressionism; from Symbolist- and Surrealist-inspired figuration to Color Field painting.

Mr. Boxer, the more prolific and varied of the two, is represented only by paintings and collages, which does a disservice to his range. I prefer the purity of his spare, classical, abstract sculptures in marble, wood and steel—influenced by David Smith, Jean Arp and Constantin Brancusi—to his late mixed-media paintings, which dominate here. 

These iridescent and mystical pictures combine glitter, pigment, bits of broken crockery, fabric, paper and sand into dense, phosphorescent fields of free-floating form and atmosphere. Yet their fussed-over surfaces and lack of internal structure can make them more akin to natural phenomena than paintings. 

But the mini-retrospective also includes Mr. Boxer's strong, washy, Cubist "Bathers" (1947); the Impressionistic "Still Life" (1951), resembling a Claude Monet landscape; the gorgeous, enigmatic Cubist-derived abstraction "Interior Still Life With A Red" (1960); and the biomorphic "Willowsnowpond" (1972), which fuses sky, water, flora and snake.

Mr. Danella began his painting career creating Paul Klee-inspired abstractions, including the small, substantial figurative gouache "Nail Biter" (1955) and the ambitious, tessellating "magic square" painting "Sunday Afternoon" (1951). In mostly yellows, "Sunday Afternoon" holds the plane nearly everywhere except in its smattering of black rectangles. Later, Mr. Danella moved into the mystical and macabre. Kouros has a number of these moody, captivating late works. In the landscape "Sister Confessor" (1999), a gaggle of nuns (some flying) convene for supplication and confession at a window hollowed out of a tree.

 In the courtyard of "Blessed Sacrament School" (1995), nuns, angels and children surround a gigantic lion that cradles a chalice of wine or blood. Despite this show's shortcomings, its inspired pairing of two distinctly talented artists illuminates the breadth of American Modernism.

 Causey Contemporary  92 Wythe Ave., Brooklyn, (718) 218-8939  Through Jan. 31 

Eastern exoticism has inspired Western artists for centuries. And the influence of Asia, from the painterly pictograms of Chinese calligraphy to the cartoonish high jinks of Takashi Murakami, is increasingly prevalent in American art. 

Abstract painter Elise Freda works in encaustic and straddles a world somewhere between East and West. Her flat, hard-edged, single-color rectangles cite European Modernism, and her gestural brushstrokes nod to Asian calligraphy. 

Meditating on her surroundings—the Catskills' fields, light, mountains and sky—Ms. Freda infuses suggestions of natural elements (the movement of wind through branches; the color of fall foliage; a moonlit night) into her pared-down palette and calligraphic strokes. 

In most of Ms. Freda's 29 pictures (all from 2010) there is discordance among the severe geometries, layered wax grounds and expressionistic strokes. But occasionally—as in the fleeting black and white "Night Light," the rustling orange "Tilled Field," the delicate winter sunset "Western Sky" and the bold, muscular dance of blood and fire that is "Red Sky at Night"—Ms. Freda, internalizing and synthesizing a range of influences, achieves brevity, poetry.

 Katharina Rich Perlow Gallery  980 Madison Ave., Third Floor, (212) 644-7171  Through Feb. 10 

In the 1970s, Brooklyn native George McNeil abandoned abstraction for Neo-Expressionist figuration. He wasn't alone. 

But Mr. McNeil—invoking graffiti, CBGB's and Studio 54—had enough painterly chops to be more than merely fashionable. 

This show of five paintings, suggesting a crosspollination among James Ensor, Edvard Munch, George Grosz, Jean-Michel Basquiat, Georges Rouault and Willem de Kooning, demonstrates that Mr. McNeil, who cut his teeth as an Abstract Expressionist, could will, break or bend his figures—sometimes seemingly chew them—into knotted, nearly abstract submission. 

In these oils and mixed-media works, depicting nudes, dancers, holidays and fever dreams—and which at times resemble scenes of ritual sacrifice—he thinks like an abstractionist and moves like a contortionist. 

The central female in "Dingbat Disco" (1982)—boogieing down, her face distorted between frontal and profile views—looks skinned to the bloody bone. Her head is made of sand; her hair is collaged out of twine and cracked mud; an apparition is her dance partner. Crude, veering at times more toward the childish than the childlike, Mr. McNeil's paintings play fast and loose. If his drawing were stronger, more precise—if contours gave more volume to his figures—these pictures could be as dynamic as the era they depict.

—Mr. Esplund writes about art for the Journal.