Through the nonprofit Publicolor, Deven Parekh is helping brighten up New York City schools with a fresh coat of paint and, in turn, giving some students a fresh start in school.

Mr. Parekh, 41 years old, is a managing director of New York-based Insight Venture Partners, a private-equity and venture-capital firm. He serves as board chairman of Publicolor and most recently gave a gift of $35,000 in honor of the organization's 15th anniversary.

Publicolor goes into city schools and provides a fresh coat of colorful paint to liven up drab interiors. With the help of the nonprofit's volunteers and staff members, students participate in the redesign process and do the painting. Through the Publicolor program, students develop excitement, pride and sense of ownership in their surroundings that, in turn, motivate them to be better students, Mr. Parekh says.

"The renovation and the painting of the school has significant impact on absenteeism because people feel proud of their school," he says. "I view the painting as step one to get the kids passionate about their school. Then once you do that, there's a lot you can do with them."

After the painting project ends, the program offers ongoing support to the participants through club activities, including mentoring, life-skills workshops, career training and reading and writing immersion. Those students go on to other schools and help train other student painters.

As students get older, they participate in college preparatory classes, SAT preparation and college tours. Last year, all of the graduating Publicolor students went on to college and the organization provided some gap scholarships to students. About two-thirds of all Publicolor college students use their professional painting skills to earn extra money.

"We're really able to change the course and trajectory of kids' lives," says Mr. Parekh.

Mr. Parekh has been involved with the program for about five years, first learning about the organization at an Aspen Institute breakfast where he was, by chance, seated next to Publicolor's founder and president, Ruth Lande Shuman.

Now, Mr. Parekh's son is involved. His 11-year-old had a birthday painting party in January where the boy's friends painted with students and Publicolor staff. In lieu of giving birthday gifts, guests were asked to donate to the organization. Mr. Parekh regularly volunteers to paint on weekends and jokes that you don't have to be a skilled painter to participate because Publicolor has a touch-up crew.

"It ended up working great because kids like to paint," says Mr. Parekh. "So it was fun, but they also got to see that they're doing something more than just getting gifts."