Of the world's ample types of miscreant—the hypocrite, the lecher, the glutton, the miser, the charlatan and many others—my preference is overwhelmingly for the charlatan. More than any of the rest, the charlatan calls upon art: the art, primarily, of deception. Sometimes this art, practiced with sufficient imagination and energy, lapses into self-deception; the charlatan becomes a fantasist, and one has a beguiling character to contemplate. 

And so had Hugh Trevor-Roper, the English historian, when, one day in 1973, he was called upon to authenticate the flamboyantly scabrous memoirs of an English Sinologist named Sir Edmund Backhouse (1873-1944). (Ten years later, alas, he authenticated diaries purported to have been written by Hitler that were quickly revealed to be forgeries.) 

The Backhouse memoirs, Trevor-Roper would note, constituted "one of the most fascinating (and outrageous) documents I have ever read." In it, Backhouse claimed to have been the lover of, among others, Paul Verlaine, Aubrey Beardsley, Lord Rosebery, various Ottoman eunuchs, Russian princes and princesses and, for a topper, Cixi, the Dowager Empress of the Manchu Dynasty, a woman of fierce appetites and murderous instincts whom he claimed to completely satisfy as a lover when she was 69. Nice work if you can get it. But did Backhouse really get it?

Trevor-Roper had his doubts. He spoke with everyone still alive who knew Backhouse, dug into documents and papers, and everywhere he searched he came up with information that rendered Backhouse's extravagant claims more and more dubious. People who knew Backhouse described him variously as "gelatinous," "deranged" and "the most remarkable scoundrel ever known in the Far East, which is saying a lot." Trevor-Roper realized he was onto a subject for a fascinating book, one that, it turned out, would prove a masterpiece. 

Edmund Backhouse, born of a middle-class English Quaker family, had an extraordinary gift for acquiring foreign languages. He claimed to have speaking knowledge of no fewer than 42 of them, which, like everything else about him, is probably untrue. But the one language he indubitably did have, and which served as the fulcrum for his astonishing career, was Chinese. 

At the age of 26, Backhouse turned up in China. Before he was through he would sign on as an agent for a major English shipping firm, promising to sell battleships to the Chinese; a secret agent of the British Legation, presumed to be negotiating the sale and delivery of some 200,000 rifles and machine-guns from Chinese to English hands during World War I; the middleman in a deal between a large American printing firm that was to sell and print hundreds of thousands of banknotes for the Chinese; the donor of a vast library of rare Chinese books to the Bodleian Library in Oxford; and the co-author, with an English journalist named J.O.P. Bland, of two books about the imperial Manchu court. None but the Bland collaboration came off, and the highly regarded books the two men wrote together were later discovered to be at least partially specious. 

Trevor-Roper's life of Backhouse, "Hermit of Peking" (first published in England in 1976 as "A Hidden Life"), is a masterly account of how Backhouse was able to play these high-stakes games and of why he needed to do so. What makes the book a masterpiece is not merely its author's sleuthing skills, which are at the Sherlock Holmesian level, but that Trevor-Roper also possessed one of the most polished prose styles of the past century—a style he put at the service of his unforgettable portrait of a magnificent charlatan. He writes about Backhouse as Edward Gibbon might about a mad Roman emperor or an errant pope. Majestic sentences, generously seasoned with comic touches, abound.

A student of aberrant personality—Trevor-Roper wrote the international best seller "The Last Days of Hitler" (1947)—he peels away the layers of deceit that allowed Backhouse to dupe a number of highly intelligent men, and discovers subtle psychological patterns behind his behavior. Backhouse's capers were not primarily for profit or even for sport. He did all he did, as Trevor-Roper subtly shows, because, compelled by Walter Mitty-esque fantasies, he could do no other. 

Backhouse was able to persuade powerful men that he had connections that could bring them what they desired. He presented himself, as we now say, as a man who could make it happen. His promises, no matter how grandiose, could never be quite disbelieved; his wildest schemes always had the air of plausibility. "That silver tongue," Trevor-Roper writes, "could charm away a mountain of concrete fact and give temporary credibility to the strangest of fantasies." 

Trevor-Roper lucidly sorts out Backhouse's elaborate machinations, commenting upon them with a delicious irony. After recounting Backhouse's sexual inventions in his memoirs, for example, he writes: "We read on, and, with some relief, find ourselves in the cleaner air of mere conspiracy and murder." Ferreting out the pattern of Backhouse's behavior, Trevor-Roper notes: "Economic disappointment engendered psychological disorder, imaginary illness, self-pity—the customary syndrome." He artfully establishes Backhouse as a social type, the 1890s homosexual aesthete, with psychological kinks added. While limning his portrait, Trevor-Roper, almost by the way, provides a marvelous picture of the English imperialist power brokers in China, one of the most impressive of whom was G.E. Morrison, the Times of London's chief correspondent in Peking. In that day the Times man had power equivalent to, if not greater than, an ambassador. 

Looming behind "The Hermit of Peking" is A.J.A. Symons's masterly portrait of Frederick Rolfe, another fraud with folie de grandeur, in "The Quest for Corvo," which Trevor-Roper recognizes in his final pages as haunting his own book. The two charlatans—Rolfe, with his hauteur, baroque literary skill and priestly pretensions, and Backhouse, with his cool cunning, linguistic talent and high-blown pipe-dreams—had much in common, but nothing so important as that each found his perfect chronicler. The result is that two highly colored and richly plumed birds—exotic minor characters of the kind who too often slip the net of history—will live forever because their odd lives provided the fodder for literary masterpieces. 

—Mr. Epstein's newest book, "Gossip, the Untrivial Pursuit" (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt), will be published later this year.