Few would argue that Ismael Leyva's sliver glass skyscraper at 785 Eighth Ave. fits in with its neighbors. Soaring 43 stories, the building ruptures the grim composure of a low-rise block that, with its boarded-up windows and live adult videos, evokes pre-Giuliani Times Square.

That's another way of saying, sometimes contextualism is overrated. Many architects almost zealously stress the importance of buildings complementing their neighbors. 

But in this case, the glass tower, whose serrated edge of angular, blue-tinted balconies tears diagonally across its eastern facade, serves not to complement its neighbors so much as to underscore their shoddiness. The glass shard of a building makes the dingy three-and five-story buildings next door seem dingier, and the seamy building boasting adult videos and scantily-clad mannequins even seamier.

The tower's impact derives in good part from the unnaturally small size of its base. The building rises on a plot of land that stretches only 24 feet along Eighth Avenue, widening to a mere 40 feet toward the back. Mr. Leyva, a Mexico-born architect, says it was certainly the skinniest lot he'd ever built on. Indeed so waifish is the building that last year, while it was still under construction, the Skyscraper Museum featured it in a program titled, "Slenderness: New York Hong Kong."

The building's only significant flaw is the enormous concrete wall that comprises its northern facade. But that's not the architect's fault.

"My client could not acquire the corner building, so we don't have legal ventilation," says Mr. Levya, referring to the developer, a partnership of Esplanade Capital LLC and Times Square Development. "So we have no choice but to have a blank wall."

To ameliorate the effect. Mr. Levya rendered the wall two-toned. That helps. On the flip side of the property, Mr. Levya was able to do the exact opposite, cantilevering the building over the neighboring structure to increase the living space of the condos inside.

The ground floor, now empty, will feature retail, with the buildings' occupants entering through a lobby on 48th Street, between Eighth and Ninth avenues.

Soon, Mr. Levya predicts, the block front will take on the characteristics of his building, rather than the other way around.

"These existing buildings will be demolished and new buildings are going to come up," Mr. Leyva says. "All these small six-story and five-story buildings are going to eventually disappear." 