Euro-zone government debt hasn't been the drag on markets this year that it so often was in 2010, in part because investors have decided that the 17-nation euro bloc won't fall apart.

But the focus on financial problems within the 17-nation bloc could be about to make an unwelcome return, troubling investors beyond the arcane worlds of sovereign ratings and credit default swaps. 

Earlier this week, euro-zone finance ministers agreed to a permanent rescue facility to bail out member states whose debt troubles leave them shunned by bond markets. The European Stability Mechanism will be able to put €500 billion, or about $710 billion, of guarantees behind future governments that need financial help. This amount should reassure investors; analysts say it could be enough to cover Spain, should the bloc's fourth-largest economy need help.

Investors appear not to like it, however, because it would force them to share some pain when state finances buckle, unlike with the ad hoc rescue deals put in place for Ireland and Greece. Higher yield premiums for debt of some of the bloc's more financially stressed countries indicate the depth of their distaste at the prospect of change, even if it is still years away.

Moreover, national leaders and the European Parliament still have to approve it, and even if that goes smoothly, the mechanism won't take over until the interim European Financial Stability Facility expires in two years. 

In just the last few days, ministers have been given a harsh glimpse of how long the road to 2013 is. 

When rumors swirled Tuesday that Allied Irish Banks was planning to miss a coupon payment on its debt, the premium investors demand to hold Ireland's two-year bonds hit a euro-era high because the government guarantees billions of euros of the bank's debt. The bank issued a statement saying it would make the payment, but not before the yield premium over benchmark German paper hit 8.42 percentage points. Wednesday, the gap was barely smaller, at 8.33 percentage points.

Investors on Wednesday were braced for a possible collapse of the Portuguese government after opposition parties withdrew their support for another round of austerity policies aimed at averting a financial bailout.

Avoiding the fate of Greece, which already has been bailed out, looks difficult for Portugal given that its 10-year bonds yield around 7.6%. Compare that with the 3.2% that Germany pays and that analysts deem financing costs of above 7% unsustainable in the long term.

There could well be new worries long before 2013. Gary Jenkins, strategist at London's Evolution Securities, thinks Greece will need more help before 2013 in any case. He noted Athens faces bond paybacks of €33 billion in 2012, but will only get €24 billion from its agreed-upon rescue funded by the International Monetary Fund and European Union. It may need a hand to make up the shortfall.

Lena Komileva, global head of G10 strategy at Brown Brother Harriman, said the ESM will reduce the risk of contagion to the broader euro zone from future debt shocks, but it leaves the issue of longer-term solvency where it is now: a problem for national governments, as it arguably should always be. That, in turn does little to heal the divide between the euro zone's safe core and its burdened periphery.

That divide is looking terribly wide in European bond markets already.