WASHINGTON—White House adviser Elizabeth Warren is ramping up meetings with the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau's most vocal Capitol Hill skeptics, according to a calendar her office made public this week. 

The visits come as key House Republican leaders have attacked the consumer-watchdog agency, which Congress created last summer over objections of several conservatives who argued the bureau would hurt financial markets. 

Members of the GOP-controlled House Financial Services Committee promise tough oversight of the agency and are likely to soon ask Ms. Warren to testify, an event that could hint at how the agency plans to weather GOP attacks. 

Meanwhile, business groups are urging Republicans to curb the bureau's powers and boost scrutiny. 

Ms. Warren's December meeting calendar shows that shortly after Republicans' midterm election wins, the Harvard law professor President Barack Obama put in charge of setting up the agency began holding more meetings with conservative House Republicans. 

On the morning of Dec. 8, Ms. Warren went to several congressional offices to meet with a slew of lawmakers, including Rep. Scott Garrett, the New Jersey Republican who is a key member of the House Financial Services and Budget committees. Mr. Garrett has offered amendments to kill the agency. 

Ms. Warren also met with Tea Party Caucus member Rep. Michael Burgess (R., Texas). Mr. Burgess has argued that the new bureau could hurt bank profitability. 

Other conservatives on her calendar include Rep. Tom Coburn, a fellow Oklahoman, and she recently visited Rep. Randy Neugebauer, the Texas Republican who last week raised questions about the bureau's operations. 

Ms. Warren also trekked over to the Cannon House Office Building to meet another Texas Republican member of the financial-services panel—Rep. Jeb Hensarling. Mr. Hensarling has called the bureau a "consumer credit rationing agency" that could limit consumers' choices. 

Ms. Warren's visits with Republicans have increased in recent weeks, but they started in the fall. 

In September, she met with Alabama Republicans Richard Shelby, a key member of the Senate Banking Committee, and Spencer Bachus, now the House Financial Services Committee chairman. 

Also that month, she met with Rep. Jo Ann Emerson (R., Mo.), now chairman of a House Appropriations financial-services subcommittee. Ms. Emerson had criticized Mr. Obama's decision to put Ms. Warren in charge of setting up the agency. 

"The appointment of an interim czar will not promote widespread confidence among Americans that their leaders in Washington are taking meaningful actions to improve the economy," she and Rep. Jerry Lewis (R., Calif.) wrote in a Sept. 21 letter. 

The real question is whether these meetings will convert skeptics into fans. 

So far, that doesn't seem to be the case. Mr. Neugebauer found Ms. Warren charming, but his criticisms remain sharp. In a recent letter, he called the agency a "fatally flawed plan" and raised questions about the agency's budget and powers. 

As for Democrats, Ms. Warren has met at least twice with Rep. Barney Frank, a key architect of the financial-regulatory overhaul that created the bureau, and she spoke to Melissa Bean, a Democrat who was defeated in her race for Illinois's 8th congressional district. 

Ms. Bean was at the center of blogosphere buzz in November amid rumors that she was a potential candidate to serve as the bureau's permanent chief. Ms. Warren last month also met with Iowa Attorney General Tom Miller, also highlighted as a possible candidate for the bureau's top job. 

Ms. Warren's calendar also shows routine meetings with bankers and state attorneys general, which she fit in last month between holiday parties and hiring interviews. (Of course the most interesting part of the interviews—-the job candidates' names—are blacked out.) 

Ms. Warren met with  Bank of America Corp.
BAC


2.86
%




 Chief Executive  Brian Moynihan on Dec. 8, before heading off to Capitol Hill. Later that month, she spoke to  U.S. Bancorp Chief Executive  Richard Davis. 

She also fit in another talk with  American Express Co.
AXP


0.03
%




 Chief Executive  Kenneth Chenault on Dec. 9. Ms. Warren had visited American Express's customer-service unit in Plantation, Fla., in late November. 

She had a "follow-up" conversation with Mr. Chenault on Dec. 9. She also talked to Mr. Chenault in September. Weeks later he flew to Washington for a visit. "He's flying here for us," her calendar notes. 

An American Express spokeswoman did not return a call for comment. 

 Write to  Maya Jackson Randall at Maya.Jackson-Randall@dowjones.com 