Rep. Gabrielle Giffords, shot in the head at point-blank range, showed encouraging responses following emergency brain surgery, doctors said Sunday.

A centrist Democrat fresh off a slim victory for a third congressional term, Ms. Giffords was in critical condition a day after a shooting spree at a Tucson, Arizona, constituent event. 

Six others were killed, but following surgery Ms. Giffords was able to respond nonverbally when asked to squeeze a hand or show two fingers, encouraging signs, doctors said. 

She is now being monitored closely at an intensive care unit where her recovery is in the initial stages.

"This is about as good as it is going to get," said Dr. Peter Rhee, a trauma surgeon, addressing the outcome of her trauma treatment.

The rampage came just days after Ms. Giffords, 40 years old and Arizona's first Jewish congresswoman, joined a new Congress as one of a handful of swing-district Democrats who survived the 2010 Republican wave. 

A Democrat in a Republican-leaning district, she won her third term in November by fewer than 4,000 votes after winning by a wide margin in 2008.

Born and raised in Tucson, she was considering a New York career in investment banking when her father asked her to return to help run the family automotive tire business, El Campo Tire Inc. Her father was ill, and needed her help, said Tom Zoellner, a longtime friend.

"Her first month at El Campo she was quite surprised when she learned she was going to have to change tires," Mr. Zoellner said.

 As she got more interested in Tucson community affairs, Ms. Giffords, who is known as Gabby, also switched political parties and became a Democrat, he said.

She is married to astronaut Mark Kelly, a Navy captain scheduled to command a space shuttle flight next spring, and is the stepmother to two girls from his previous marriage, ages 13 and 15. 

Her eclectic set of interests includes, besides the retail tire industry, collecting Southwestern art, and riding horses and motorcycles (a hobby she picked up in high school, when she had a Vespa scooter).

Friends say she is relentlessly positive and upbeat, even in the face of the tough politics. 

Rep. Debbie Wasserman-Schultz (D., Fla.), one of her closest friends in Congress, said she "always manages to throw in a nice comment" when fellow Democrats are complaining about Republicans. "She's really mindful of the importance of reflecting the balance that has to be struck in her district," Ms. Wasserman-Schultz said.

She first ran for the state House in 2000 and went onto become the youngest member of the state Senate. Ms. Giffords came to Congress four years ago as part of a new generation of Democrats from Republican-leaning districts. 



She has kept her district, Democrats say, in part by paying attention to constituent concerns and holding events like the "Congress on Your Corner" event where Saturday's assault took place.

She's known for niceties like sending thank you notes, and her office has a tracking system to be sure they are sent out. Last year she hosted a screening of a high school friend's independent film, a gesture that moved her friend, Nicholas Spark. "She's just always been one of the bright shining stars in my constellation," he said.

Ms. Giffords is a supporter of gun rights and a conservative on some fiscal issues and a member of the Blue Dog Coalition, a faction of conservative House Democrats. 

She voted in 2009 against a $14 billion bailout for U.S. automakers and against a vehicle trade-in program known as "cash for clunkers." 

In 2010 she voted with Democrats on party-line votes only 60% of the time, according to a Congressional Quarterly study. Last week Ms. Giffords was one of 19 Democrats who refused to vote for Nancy Pelosi as speaker.

She has stuck with her party on other issues, voting for President Barack Obama's 2009 economic stimulus plan and to repeal the "don't ask, don't tell" policy barring gays from serving openly in the military. She supported the Democratic health care overhaul.

"She knew that voting for the health care bill could well be an end to her political career," Mr. Zoellener said. After the bill passed the House, Ms. Giffords' Tucson office was vandalized.

Ms. Giffords represents southeastern Arizona, where illegal immigration is a flashpoint. The district includes part of Tucson and large stretches of ranch lands stretching to the Mexican border, where anger at illegal immigration runs strong.

She has pushed for strong border enforcement but been a vocal critic of her state's popular but controversial new immigration law, calling the measure divisive and ineffective.

Prominent political shootings involving members of Congress.

Colleagues say she delves deeply into issues she cares about, such as solar energy, and is more likely to spend a free evening studying policy than socializing. 

"She's a proud wonk," said C.J. Karamargin, her communications director.

Republicans put high priority on her defeat in 2010, and her race drew considerable money and advertising from conservative groups and the national Republican Party. 

 Write to  Laura Meckler at laura.meckler@wsj.com 