As the material required to make its toilet paper and napkins grows increasingly scarce, paper-product maker SCA is expanding its ties with suppliers.

The company, which has $14.5 billion of annual sales, uses fiber from recycled paper to make the napkins, toilet paper and hand towels it sells to offices, restaurants and schools in the U.S. But it faces tighter supply, in part because of less paper waste but also because of competition for the fiber from Chinese paper companies.

So SCA is putting more money into a program that advises recycling centers and provides funding to upgrade equipment. The company hopes the steps will allow it to get about 50% of its recovered-fiber supply from recycling centers in the program later this year, up from 30% now. This year SCA also plans to add recycling centers in more cities.

Pressure on materials and components is a problem many industries are facing, from apparel makers grappling with rising cotton prices to smartphone makers hungry for touchscreens. Some, like SCA, face increased competition due to demand in emerging markets. Others, including telecom manufacturers, have faced component shortages as suppliers disappeared in the recession or didn't ramp up production fast enough. And weather problems have hurt supplies of certain crops, including cotton and wheat.

In response, a range of manufacturers have been forming closer relationships with suppliers in order to ensure a steady flow of goods. For instance, Telecommunications-equipment maker  Alcatel-Lucent
ALU


0.00
%




 deployed its staffers to help suppliers identify ways to increase and accelerate the output of components.heavy-machinery maker  Caterpillar Inc.
CAT


0.98
%




 has worked with suppliers to ensure that they have the resources to boost output when needed and, in some cases, to help them get financing.

SCA began its program by forming relationships with a handful of recycling-center owners located near its U.S. manufacturing facilities, including those in Atlanta, Chicago and Birmingham, Ala.

The company provides the recycling centers with financial backing to buy upgraded equipment and offers consultation on operations and marketing. In return, the recycling centers sell recovered fiber exclusively to SCA. (The recycling centers may sell varieties of recovered paper that SCA doesn't need to other manufacturers.)

Last fall, SCA increased its investment in a Chicago recycling plant so that it could bring in additional equipment that compresses the paper into bales. SCA is putting together a "multicity arrangement" with other recycling centers, declining to specify where. "We're organically growing existing partnerships and adding new ones," says  David Knight, director of fiber procurement for SCA's Americas division, which contributes $2.1 billion of the Stockholm-based parent's annual sales.

For SCA, close ties with recycling-center owners has meant it can encourage investment in sophisticated equipment upgrades that enable recyclers to process more "dirty" paper, or materials that are more difficult to recycle such as books, envelopes with plastic windows and paper with heavy graphics.

"With supply going down, we have to go deeper and dirtier into the waste stream to get more," says Mr. Knight. "Forming these relationships allows us to do that."

The recovered paper that SCA needs for its white napkins, toilet paper and hand towels demands a higher grade of office paper than the sort that typical recycling plants process. Since there are plenty of willing buyers on the open market for lower grades of recovered fiber, few recycling plants have an incentive to take the necessary steps to meet SCA's specifications, such as sorting out brown cardboard.But with SCA as the designated buyer, locked in with contracts typically lasting several years, recyclers have been willing to make needed upgrades.

  Adam Glasgow, vice president of recycling for Waste Pro USA, worked with SCA's Mr. Knight to overhaul the sorting process involved in collecting paper waste from large office complexes in the Southeast, which boosted supply.

Mr. Glasgow had ideas on how to change recycling programs on an office-by-office basis, including reducing the amount of sorting required of employees and moving recycling dumpsters to more convenient locations for office cleaning crews. Mr. Knight, well versed in the specifications of SCA's paper components, approved certain types of paper for processing that normally wouldn't be allowed on the open market.

"These changes meant an office building that would typically recycle just 10% of their waste now recycles 50%," says Mr. Glasgow.

To be sure, making guarantees to suppliers has drawbacks. During the recession, for instance, demand for SCA's paper products fell, but the company continued to purchase its suppliers' fiber to ensure they would stay in business, Mr. Knight says.

Still, SCA executives say that its ties with suppliers ultimately were beneficial. As other recycling centers went out of business, SCA's partners picked up new corporate accounts, which has increased their output.

 Write to  Ellen Byron at ellen.byron@wsj.com 