Made from a framework of wood and a covering of animal hair felt, the yurt—or more curtly, the ger, according to the Mongols who invented it—was essential gear for nomads and khans on the Steppes. Light, collapsible and durable, the dome-shaped tents insulated their occupants against fierce winds and winters and could be carried along on pack animals. 

For modern nomads, yurts serve a much less essential—but no less appealing—purpose, offering travelers the cozy feel of a tent with many of the comforts and conveniences of a hotel. Yurts can be raised in the middle of the most un-peopled of places, awe-inspiring, edge-of-the-earth destinations that traditional resorts can't reach. Yurt lodgers can hike in a Patagonian ice field or take a camel ride through the remote Gobi-Altai foothills, and still end the day with a hot shower, a toasty fireplace, star-view skylights and a warm (and dry) bed. Sometimes there are even wooden floors and delectables in the fridge. 

Hundreds of yurting excursions now exist around the world. Here are seven idyllic locales that are well worth the trek—no pack mule or camel required. 

—Stinson Carter

 Halfmoon Bay, B.C., Canada 

Located on a craggy seaside cliff on British Columbia's Sunshine Coast, this tent resort has a romantic Swiss Family Robinson feel. The luxurious stilt houses have private balconies, heated slate floors, spa tubs, propane fireplaces and full private baths. The property features a four-star restaurant and bar, and you can stash nibbles in your mini-fridge. Outdoor activities include traversing the resort's raised-on-stilts nature trail; exploring the northwest forest by horseback or bicycle; ocean canoeing and sailing; and swimming in the outdoor heated pool. From $297 per night (open year-round), rockwatersecretcoveresort.com 

 Patagonia, Chile 

This five-star yurt resort is situated in Torres del Paine National Park, overlooking pristine Lake Toro. The 18 yurts feature king- or twin-size beds, skylights, handmade furniture, private terraces and Wi-Fi access. Grab a fishing rod, nosh on Chilean barbecue or head out for some puma watching. From $1,780 per person for three days, all-inclusive (open through April), patagoniacamp.com 

 Ardèche, Rhône-Alpes, France 

Perched in the mountains close to the Ardèche River, this upscale camp is near a site famous for its 30,000-year-old cave paintings. Made of oak, ash and canvas, rooms are decorated in French shabby-chic style. The bathrooms and kitchen tent are shared, but the decks are private. Hike and climb nearby limestone gorges, or canoe or swim in the river below. From $589 per week, with a 10% zero-emission discount if you show up by bike or on foot (opens May 1), canvaschic.com 

 Big Sur, Calif. 

Thirty miles south of Big Sur, off the Pacific Coast-hugging Highway 1, this camp is more like a country club. Each unit has a queen-size bed and futon, hot-and-cold sink and pinewood floors. When you're not lounging on your private redwood deck, indulge in massages inside a tree house or have a tipple at the redwood cocktail bar equipped with local vintages. From $160 per night, breakfast included (open year-round), treebonesresort.com 

 Andalucia, Spain 

Two hours from Gibraltar, nestled amid olive groves and cork oak forest, the "hotel" is a collection of themed yurts with wood-plank floors. Depending on the theme—including "Jaipur" and "Safari"—rooms may be decorated with Indian or Moroccan textiles and furnishings. Local activity highlights include touring caves with ancient wall paintings, bird watching, hiking and horseback riding in the Andalucian countryside. The grounds are a 30-minute drive from Ronda, home to one of Spain's oldest bullfighting rings. From $168 per night, breakfast included (opens April 30), yurthotel.com 

 Lake Clear, N.Y. 

Six hours from Manhattan, this yurt camp is situated on its own island in a secluded lake surrounded by mountains. (The hand-built retreat is accessible only by boat.) The 24-foot-wide tent has a domed skylight, queen-size bed, fold-out sofa, electricity, refrigerator-freezer and Wi-Fi access. You're free to use the canoe, fire pit or trail maps. From $200 per night, three-night minimum (opens in May), adkguideboat.com/adirondack-vacation-rentals/tent-camping.html 

 The Gobi, Mongolia 

In the shadows of the Gobi-Altai Mountains, this Mongolian ger camp and spa is 90 minutes by car from Dalanzadgad. These more traditional tents are handmade with wood lattice and animal hair felt. Inside you'll find wood-burning stoves, hand-painted furnishings and locally made toiletries. (The deluxe gers have private bathrooms.) There's also an on-site spa (with massage therapists), a bar and a restaurant featuring locally raised meats and organic fare. From $125 per person, meals included (open April through Oct.), threecamellodge.com 