BEIJING—Images of a Chinese stealth fighter prototype in flight suggest that China has moved to the next stage of testing an aircraft that appears designed to rival the American F-22 and challenge U.S. air superiority in the Asia-Pacific region, aviation experts say.

Tuesday's flight means China is likely now testing the J-20's flight software, engines and aerodynamics, following weeks of runway tests at the Chengdu Aircraft Design Institute. The aviation experts say there is a limit to what more they can tell about the J-20's capabilities—especially its radar-evading technology—from the low-resolution images, which mostly appear to have been shot from the edge of the institute's airfield. It wasn't clear how high the J-20 flew or how fast.

However, several leading experts have concluded from the plane's shape and relatively large size that it was designed eventually to fly fast and far enough, and carry enough fuel and weapons to challenge the F-22, currently the world's only fully operational stealth fighter.

They said China probably wouldn't be able to make the aircraft fully operational until the end of the decade: It appears to be testing at least two prototypes, which will likely be adapted many times before being put into large-scale production.

China appears to be testing two engines—one Chinese and one Russian—and is likely to have to rely on Russian engines for several years, principally because its own engines don't have enough thrust to allow the plane to cruise for long periods at supersonic speeds as an F-22 can.

But if China eventually succeeds, and deploys several hundred of the aircraft, that would have serious strategic implications for the U.S., which cut funding for the F-22 in 2009, and plans to rely largely on the smaller and slower F-35 to maintain air superiority in the Asia- Pacific region.

China's success could also have repercussions for several Asian countries, including Japan, which have territorial disputes or other security issues with China, and are either being encouraged to buy the F-35 or are banking on the U.S. maintaining air superiority in the region.

Japan plans to buy a dozen next-generation fighters within the next five years, as it modernizes its defense strategy and shifts its defense focus toward China, and away from Russia. The F-35 is a top contender. South Korea and Singapore are also considering buying the F-35, and Australia has already committed to purchasing it.

A bitter bilateral spat with China following a ship collision in disputed waters in the East China Sea in September only fueled the sentiment that Japan needed such a change. 

China's J-20 looks like a larger version of the F-22, suggesting that it is designed to be based deep within Chinese territory but still carry enough fuel to establish air superiority over Taiwan, the East and South China seas and even into the Western Pacific.

The J-20 would allow China to expand the operational range of its fighters to 1,500 kilometers, said  Hong Yuan, general secretary of the Center for Arms Control and Nonproliferation Studies at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences.

"Especially in the current complicated situation around China, the unveiling of the new aircraft not only demonstrates China's determination to achieve regional air superiority, but also reflects a guarantee of the technology and equipment to realize this determination," he said.

Mr. Hong said the J-20's size suggested that it was designed to carry more weapons than the F-22, possibly including antisatellite missiles, and would challenge U.S. air superiority in the region regardless of whether F-22 production was re-started.

  Carlo Kopp, head of Capability Analysis at Air Power Australia, an independent defense think tank, said the J-20's size and shape suggested it was designed to be able to fly up to 1,500 miles and back without refueling. "

It's too early to draw conclusions about its stealth capability, but we can say it looks like the F-22 and potentially has—when fully developed—that kind of performance," he said.

"They've technically got the prototype to a level where they are confident enough to start testing its flight systems and aerodynamics."

  Andrei Chang, the Hong Kong-based editor of Kanwa Defense, also said China was likely now testing its flight-control software and aerodynamics, as well as its engines. He said one prototype was likely fitted with a Russian AL-31FN engine, and the other with a Chinese WS-10A.

"This is absolutely designed to be used to compete with the F-22....They want to be able to control the air space in the surrounding area," he said.

"This is an earthquake which has especially shaken Japan, South Korea and Southeast Asian countries. I'm sure Japan and others will push the U.S. to restart the F-22 production line."

—Yuka Hayashi in Tokyo contributed to this article.