The European commercial property market is finally hauling itself out of recession. Investors are finding pockets of opportunity across the continent, and as banks shed their non-performing property portfolios and liquidity becomes more freely available, many are whiffing the rich scent of good value. But the specter of bad loans still haunts the sector and every opportunity is shrouded in a heavy mist of risk. 

Read the full Real Estate report.

The first tentative signs of a potential revival in commercial property came on a brisk winter morning in mid-January, when two of the U.K.'s largest property developers got together to stage a rare photo-shoot. Traditionally seen as fierce rivals,  Land Securities Group,
LAND


0.38
%




 the U.K.'s biggest listed property company, and the Canary Wharf Group, the developer behind the financial district in London's Docklands, appeared in front of the press for a "breaking of the ground" ceremony. The event was organized to commemorate the joint construction of a new 37-storey skyscraper – nicknamed the 'Walkie Talkie' – on Fenchurch Street, in the City of London. 

The announcement was a sign of a remarkable turnaround in U.K. commercial real estate. Only a couple of years ago the market was frozen: Prices in the U.K. alone had plummeted 44.2% between July 2007 and July 2009, according to Investment Property Databank, a data provider. In turn, investment volumes collapsed, as nervous vendors shut up shop. According to  CB Richard Ellis Group,
CBG


-0.30
%




 investment volumes in Europe as a whole fell from the record high of €256 billion ($350 billion) in 2007 to a mere €73 billion in 2009. 

"Two years ago we were looking down the edge of a cliff," recalls  Robert Noel, managing director of the London portfolio at Land Securities. "We are now buying into a recovery and there is not enough office supply to meet the demand."

The market is certainly offering decent returns again: U.K. commercial property delivered 14.5% during 2010, the strongest for four years, according to IPD.Deloitte Drivers Jonas forecasts the sector will deliver a further 8% in 2011.

Investment activity is stirring too. Last year, European deal volumes rose by more than 40% to €105 billion.  Jones Lang LaSalle,
JLL


-0.60
%




 predicts that 2011 will see a further 25% to 35% increase. 

But recovery has been cautious and last year's sovereign debt crisis set back confidence considerably.

"The market had been picking up, partly thanks to banks lending again," says  Eric Sasson, who heads up the European operations at The Carlyle Group, the private equity firm. "But the Greece crisis put a hold to that. Having just got out of the freezing zone, banks went cold again – and some deals got delayed."

Concerns over the European markets have also kept international investors away. While the U.K. has attracted many big-ticket sovereign wealth funds and quasi-national pension funds from Asia and the Middle East over the past 12 months, the rest of Europe has been dominated by domestic institutions and property companies. 

"There was a massive globalized real estate market in 2007," says  Pierre Vaquier, chief executive of AXA Real Estate Investment Managers. "But then afterwards there was a 'flight to home' – as people wanted to go where they understand best."

Signs of a true recovery have therefore been seen in just a few core cities – markets that sovereign wealth funds and institutions know and understand: Primarily London, Paris and the five main German cities. For the first three quarters of 2010, investment volumes in the U.K., Germany and France accounted for two-thirds of all investment turnover in Europe, according to Jones Lang LaSalle.

These trophy hunters have also generally limited their interest to so-called prime properties – office blocks, shopping centers or industrial warehouses that are built to the highest specification and let to the strongest tenants. 

But as these deals push up the values of prime properties in the core cities, the search for higher yield has led to investors increasing their risk appetite. "Capital will remain discerning, but the definition of what is prime will broaden slightly," says  Richard Bloxam, a director of European retail capital markets at Jones Lang LaSalle.

"In 2009, institutional investors would be looking for two-year old buildings with minimum 10-year leases; now those same investors are prepared to look at slightly older buildings with shorter leases."

And their geographic reach is also starting to broaden. "18 months to two years ago, it was just the U.K. that was attracting international investment; but the U.K. is getting expensive to some of those buyers," says  Giles Wilcox, head of European cross border investment at property firm  Savills.
SVS


0.10
%






Mr. Wilcox says that while there is still obviously interest in the U.K – as well as France and Germany – two other interesting places for investors are Sweden and Poland, countries that have withstood the economic downturn better than other European states.

"Sweden is interesting and is on most pan-European investors' shopping list," he says. "It has one of the highest global gross domestic product growth rates and its occupational market was affected to a lesser extent than many of the core countries."

Poland, meanwhile, has benefited from being the only member of the European Union to avoid outright recession. "It is a large dynamic market where international investor interest is very focused on retail in Warsaw and the major secondary cities," Mr. Wilcox says. "There is also an appetite for quality offices."

Even Ukraine has its fans.  Markus Meijer, chief executive of Meyer Bergman, says that he has invested in the U.K., Poland and in Kiev. "Ukraine's main economic drivers are steel and agriculture – and we expect both to accelerate in 2011," he says. "Kiev will also get a boost with the European Soccer Championships in 2012. The only thing that is holding Ukraine back is liquidity." 

But for most European investors, the big investment opportunities will not come from any geographic location. Instead, it will come from the banks that have been beset by problem loans inherited since the financial crisis. 

"The elephant in the room is the level of loan maturities," says  Peter Damesick, CBRE's chief economist for Europe the Middle East and Africa. "There is a mountain of refinancing that needs to be done – around €960 billion of European property debt will mature over the next 10 years, and around half of that is due by the end of 2013."

As a result, banks are expected to put more distressed properties and buildings with non-performing loans onto the market to cut back on their balance sheets.

Mr. Damesick adds: "We do not see this producing a wave of distressed selling as banks cannot afford to take too many losses on property loans over too short a time period. The debt workout will be a long, slow grind."

But private equity firms and vulture funds are undoubtedly scouring the books of financial institutions like the Royal Bank of Scotland, and Lloyds Banking Group, two U.K. banks that are looking to reduce their property exposure and dispose of legacy loans. Eyes are also focused on the National Asset Management Agency, the government body that holds Irish banks' troubled property loans.

  Marc Mogull, senior partner of Benson Elliot Capital Management, a U.K. private equity firm, says that deals will become more attractive as problem assets come to the market. 

"As we approached the peak, if you understood real estate, it didn't make financial sense. Since the crisis, we've been faced with a paucity of suitable opportunities. There haven't been that many distressed sellers." But times are set to change, he says. "I'm a big believer that there is going to be a wave of problems in the next year or two. Buying opportunities in the months from now will be a lot better than those a year or two ago."

 Mr. Lazarus is deputy online editor at Financial News in London. He can be reached at darren.lazarus@dowjones.com.  