NEW DELHI -- State-run Indian Oil Corp. is suffering a revenue loss of 1.59 billion rupees ($35 million) per day because it's selling diesel and cooking fuels at state set prices and expects to post a gross revenue loss of 406 billion rupees for the full year ending March 31 as a result.

On Sunday, state-run fuel retailers raised gasoline prices by 2.50 rupees a liter but are unable to raise the price of diesel, kerosene and cooking gas in line with increasing crude oil prices because of the state guidelines.

Indian Oil is losing 7.65 rupees per liter of diesel, 19.6 rupees per liter of kerosene and 366.28 rupees per cooking gas cylinder sale in the capital New Delhi, India's largest listed company by sales said in a statement issued late Sunday.

"Based on current price levels in the international oil market, the desired increase in the retail selling prices of gasoline in a market like New Delhi should have been 3.72 rupees per liter. However, Indian Oil has chosen to soften the impact on the customer by increasing the price by 2.50 rupees per liter only and not passing on the balance required increase of 1.22 rupees per liter," Indian Oil Chairman  BM Bansal said in a statement. 

This was the eighth time since June 25 that Indian Oil has raised gasoline prices. The company owns eight of the 20 refineries in India and also controls almost half of the retail fuel outlets.

India's federal government caps diesel and cooking fuel prices to control inflation. The wholesale price index, which is India's standard inflation measure, rose 8.43% in December from a year earlier, quicker than November's provisional 7.48% rise.

The government partly compensates retailers for their losses through cash subsidies. State-run oil explorers also bear a part of the losses by offering discounts on crude sales.

With a view to help refiners trim their losses, the government lifted controls over gasoline on June 25. The retailers have increased gasoline prices eight times since then in line with increasing global crude oil prices, but there hasn't been a corresponding increase in the price of diesel and cooking fuels.

The company said although the desired increase in gasoline prices was 3.72 rupees per liter, it decided to soften the impact of price hike on consumers by not passing on the entire amount.

 Write to  Rakesh Sharma at rakesh.sharma@dowjones.com 