Tom Lee and Matthew Acheson are Red Hook-based artists working in a genre that is due for a major update: puppetry. The word may still call to mind "The Muppet Show," but Messrs. Lee and Acheson hope to change that.

Beginning Tuesday, their innovative style can be seen on the tiny stage of Central Park's Swedish Cottage Marionette Theatre, on the west side of the park at about 81st Street. Their show, "The Secret History of the Swedish Cottage," is the result of a commission for a new work by the City Parks Foundation, and it disposes with old fairy tales and shelves the marionettes.

Instead, "Secret History" (running through June) tells the story of the cottage and its imaginary helpers: a devoted cadre of gnomes. In this tale designed for children, the building does quite a bit of traveling—up into space, deep under water and from Philadelphia to New York in 1877 (the latter an actual fact). All the while, the theater is protected by the gnomes, the show's central puppets.

I have to confess that the charms of puppetry had, for the most part, eluded me. But this month, Culture City is on a mission to experience unfamiliar arts, so it was time for a re-think. I had never set foot inside the Swedish Cottage, and besides, this commission marks a major new artistic step for the venue.

"All our previous productions have been based on existing material," said the City Parks Foundation's executive director, David Rivel. "This is the first play we've done from original material. We wanted to push the artistic envelope a little."

Messrs. Lee and Acheson, who have been involved in some of the most forward-looking theater involving puppets, were an appropriate choice to lead the production. Aside from their individual work, they are the co-directors of the St. Ann's Warehouse Puppet Lab, and are currently working on the World War I-era drama "War Horse" (with puppets created by South Africa's Handspring Puppet Company) for a Lincoln Center Theater premiere in March. Mr. Lee will perform as one of the horses, and Mr. Acheson is directing rehearsals.

Although this pair has rarely created work for children, they had plenty of concepts on which to draw for "The Secret History of the Swedish Cottage." "Puppetry is such a broad form, with so many different philosophies," said Mr. Lee. A number of those philosophies underlie the structure of the show, in which none of the puppets have "speaking" lines. "It comes out of a visual story-telling language," said Mr. Lee, who likened the show to Victorian toy theater.

"We want the puppets to do what they do best. Puppets move. People talk," added Mr. Acheson.

The story is rooted in the history of the cottage, which was imported to America in 1876 as Sweden's contribution to the Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia. Fredrick Law Olmsted had it transferred to Central Park the following year. Initially used as a children's nature center and a entomological lab, in 1939 the cottage became the headquarters of the Parks Department's Traveling Marionette Theatre. 

"Secret History" weaves together fact and fiction, interspersed with short films in the style of news reels. The idea of incorporating some nonsense is meant to keep the audience actively asking: Was that real, or a joke? "It's up to the viewers. It keeps the audience as active as the puppeteers," said Mr. Acheson. He emphasized the value of the commitment that lo-fi puppetry and scenery requires from the audience. "You have to do half the work to say to yourself 'Yes, that piece of wood is crying.'"

As for the choice of gnomes, it was the venue that helped inspire the creators. "In the Swedish culture, gnomes are a big park of the folk culture. They are silent caretakers," said Mr. Lee. "We thought it would be fitting that the cottage would have these spirit-y things around it."

It took just one gnome moment in particular to win me over. In the story, when the cottage arrives in Manhattan a lonely gnome appears downstage and sits outside on a park bench. He takes off his cone hat and starts playing the blues through it like a saxophone. 

Does it work for kids? It definitely elicited a swell of laughter and clapping from a group of students (aged 7-11) who were in the audience. Afterward, in a lively Q&A session led by the theater's artistic director, Bruce Cannon, the children shared their favorite moments and asked questions of the four puppeteers, who came out from behind the stage.

Among the best questions and comments: "Why didn't the gnomes talk?" "Did the cottage really go to outer space?" "My favorite part was when the octopus and the whale fell in love." "I liked it when they did the disco."

Yes, there's a lot in this story, and the multiplicity of reactions seemed to fulfill the creators' intent. "We want it to be playful and joyful," Mr. Acheson said. "Intelligent yet wacky." 