Jazz Ministry at St. Peters

619 Lexington Ave., (212) 935-2200

Sunday

Gil Evans (1912-88) was the most accomplished arranger-conductor of the modern jazz era, and, quite possibly the central figure in all of orchestral jazz after Duke Ellington. Yet where Ellington had a strong public presence and primarily arranged his own compositions, Evans did his most of his best work with other people's tunes and under other people's names - most importantly Miles Davis. Scholar and conductor Ryan Truesdale has gathered roughly 50 largely unheard works by Evans from over a four-decade period, and is arranging to record them for a special centennial album to be released on the maestro's 100th next year. As a preview, he's leading the 20-piece Eastman Chamber Ensemble in a birthday celebration at St Peter's. I haven't heard this music, of course, but if it's anything like "Sketches of Spain" or "Bilboa Song," it's guaranteed to blow your mind.

Kurt Weill constructed "Bilbao Song" (for his 1929 musical comedy "Happy End") out of two distinct, inapposite melodies: a fast, choppy foxtrot and a slow, romantic quasi-bolero. Generally, the fast section is only performed in theatrically oriented contexts; most pop and jazz performers concentrate on the "love" theme. When Evans orchestrated "Bilbao" in 1960 for his album "Out of the Cool," he seems to have made the commendable move of reading the lyrics and studying the song's place in the narrative: A gang of immigrant gangsters reminiscences about a mythic dancehall back in the old country. Their dialogue and interactions take place in the fast sections, while the slow melody depicts their nostalgic reverie. 

Evans's treatment, one of the masterpieces of his 50-year career, seems to actually illustrate the processes of memory. After a startling, dissonant introduction, the melody is first stated by bassist Ron Carter. Evans then slowly but strikingly fills in the sounds around the bass, with almost astonishingly vivid tonal colors. You get the feeling of walking into a giant, cavernous structure—more like a cathedral than a saloon—and also of directly entering someone's thought process, traveling into someone's head.

The ironic thing is that this amazing chart may have never been performed in public by Evans, or even played at all apart from the "Out of the Cool" session—which is true of most of his best music. The ground-breaking 1949 "Birth of the Cool" nonet famously only played one gig. Miles Davis never performed the now-classic large-canvas charts that Evans wrote for him outside of the Columbia studio, except for part of a famous 1961 Carnegie Hall Concert. When Evans finally launched his own band, around the time he turned 60 (which toured the world and played a long Monday-night residency at the old Sweet Basil), the music was much looser and more spontaneous—and it seemed skewed, somehow, toward both rock 'n' roll rhythms and the new avant-garde. So even when he had his own band, Evans was too busy writing new music to reprise his own classics of the 1960s and earlier.

In recent seasons, Evans's legacy has approached that of Ellington in terms of overall awareness—there have been nearly as many Evans-inspired concerts in New York, for instance, as Ellington events. (This Sunday's celebration at St. Peter's will also include a panel discussion by three Evans compatriots, including the veteran vocalist Helen Merrill, who is scheduled to perform at a Jazz Vespers service.) Ellington, famously, was not only much more extroverted in his public profile, he was also incredibly prolific. Evans, on the other hand, left behind such a small amount of music that it's up to researchers such as Mr. Truesdale to comb the catacombs and see what scraps they can dredge up. Fortunately, Evans's music never disappoints—his leftovers are better than almost anyone else's main course.

Dizzy's Club Coca-Cola

Broadway at 60th Street, (212) 258-9595

Through Sunday

People use the term "slick" as if it were something other than a positive thing, but in the singing of Ann Hampton Callaway, slickness, along with amazing time and wonderful chops, is a virtue. She demonstrates that the purpose of swinging, for instance, isn't merely to show off one's rhythmic skills but to engage an audience, and her ballads (like the neglected Gershwiniana "Isn't It a Pity") are no less captivating. The humor arrives not only in her, but in witty arrangements like a funked-up, hip-hopping treatment of "Ain't Misbehavin'" in which Fats Waller becomes Fat-C Wat-C. While "How High the Moon" featured some ingenious original vocalese lyrics in the style of Jon Hendricks, it's in her scat choruses that Ms. Hampton Callaway shows that she'd be better named Ann Torme Fitzgerald.

Dizzy's Club Coca-Cola (after hours)

Broadway at 60th Street, (212) 258-9595

Through Sunday

March is Women's Month (which, as Ann Hampton Callaway joked at Dizzy's, implies that the other 11 are reserved for men), and in addition to the Lady Got Chops festival, Dizzy's is also spotlighting female headliners in both the main event and the late, late show. Jennifer Leitham, who first impressed me mightily in the years in which she toured with the late Mel Torme (she was John Leitham then) is an extremely compelling diva of the upright acoustic bass. She is one of the few practitioners of her instrument, of any gender, genre, or generation, who can completely command my attention with what is, essentially, an entire set of bass solos. Traditionally, the bass is an essentially but secondary instrument in jazz, but Ms. Leitham makes her trio mates pianist Deanna Witkowski and drummer Sherrie Maricle seem like mere sidemen. Next week, trumpeter Carol Morgan takes over the late spot, so here's to the ladies. 

Various venues 

Through March 30

This commendable series is produced Guerilla Girls style in a variety of mostly downtown "alternative" venues, including the Zinc Bar and the 5C Cultural Center, which is an ostentatious name for a welcoming and homey acoustic spot on the corner of 5th Street. While not neglecting the ideal of female solidarity (the veteran MaryAnn McSweeney was featured on bass), saxophonist Claire Daly devoted her set to furthering her quarter-century long collaboration with the prolific composer-pianist Joel Forrester. Having experienced the two of them in a variety of settings, including the long-standing quartet People Like Us, it's increasingly clear that the combination is sparked by his compositional ideas and her warmth and personality – not to mention fluidity – on the big baritone sax. His tunes lay on the ear like classic bebop hits that you somehow missed, and nobody puts them over more compellingly than Ms. Daly.

Rose Theater 

Broadway at 60th Street, (212) 258-9800

Friday-Saturday

In jazz, somehow, the act of trying to support one's family is often tantamount to "selling out." Yet Charlie Parker's projects with string sections and other kinds of large orchestras covered a wide gamut of approaches. Some of it was admittedly "commercial," and actually served the purpose of getting Bird on the hit parade (and what's wrong with that?), but other tunes, like Neil Hefti's "Repetition" and Gerry Mulligan's "Rocker" constitute some of the most challenging and satisfying music ever written for the modern jazz giant. Jazz at Lincoln Center honors those breakthrough sessions by positing two reliable Parker deputies, Wess Anderson and Charles McPherson, in front of an ensemble of string players from the Philharmonic Orchestra of the Americas, plus trumpeter Ryan Kisor as a secondary soloist. (Somehow, however, I don't think that they're going to recreate the very bizarre "Bird with Voices" date.)