It's not uncommon these days for middle-age urbanites to take their nest egg (if they still have a nest egg), move to the country and start farming—populating their lives with goats and sheep and grass-fed cattle.  Laura Ellis did the opposite: After spending much of her adult life as a Vermont farmer, she moved to Manhattan a few years ago to work as a portrait painter. Actually, she paints animal portraits, mostly dogs.

I first met her in the '70s at Middlebury College, where she fell into the general category of what we reverently used to call "mountain girls." These were young woman of extreme health, good looks and great hair—rugged, slightly intimidating individualists who, if memory serves, could be spotted crossing campus wearing peasant skirts and cowboy boots. 

Even though she recently reminded me that we took poetry classes together, my main recollection of her was from an ad for a local photography studio that ran in the college yearbook throughout our four years, and that featured Laura and her exceptional, waist-length copper-colored hair. 

When we reconnected at a Middlebury Christmas party a couple of years ago, she informed me, being perhaps slightly under the influence of holiday cheer, that her self-confident college persona had been a ruse—that she was insecure, alienated and frankly didn't know how to have a good time. That made me feel slightly better—not that I'd wanted her to suffer—because while blessed with neither good looks nor great hair, I certainly knew how to have a good time. Indeed, I can confidently state that while I took only mediocre advantage of Middlebury's academic offerings, I squeezed every last ounce of good time from my education. 

Fortunately, Laura appears recently to be making up for the error of her young-adult ways. In her 50s she ditched farm life, got divorced and, as I said, moved to the city, embarking on her successful career as a dog painter—she's currently doing a commission for the Orvis company, as well as for private clients. She also got remarried, to a gentleman in private equity. 

Perhaps the best part (this being a Mother's Day story, if marginally after the fact) is that her daughter Emilie Lee, also a painter, is living in the city, too. The women mounted a show of their work Saturday afternoon at an artists' open house in the Union Square building where Ms. Ellis has her studio. To cap it off, her younger daughter just moved to the city, working in marketing for an organic-skin-care company. "Willa has only been here a month and has a full-time job," her mother announced proudly. 

Ms. Lee, after living the itinerant life of a rock climber and a model for outdoor-gear companies since she graduated from college—and living out of dumpsters, her mother volunteered (but more about that in a moment)—recently moved to Brooklyn and is studying painting at the Grand Central Academy of Art. I can report without exaggeration, based on a recent visit, that she's a landscape painter of great promise.

But I was frankly most interested in Ms. Ellis's workplace—41 Union Square West, just south of the  Starbucks
SBUX


-0.61
%




 on the corner of 17th Street—which she credits almost as much for making New York hospitable as her new husband or daughters' proximity.

"You never feel alone," agreed  Diana Willis, a painter with a neighboring studio who dropped by as Ms. Ellis and Ms. Lee were hanging their work—Ms. Ellis's sensitive portraits of yellow labs on the east wall, Emilie's landscape and figure studies on the west wall. "You always have someone to commiserate with."

This being New York, the artists got into a discussion not about the relative merits of Velasquez vs. Goya, but about rent. "I moved out with a group of people to Long Island City," reported Ms. Willis. "Some are still there."

Why isn't she? "It was Long Island City," she said, as if no further explanation was required.

"I love it," Ms. Lee chimed in, apparently referring to the boroughs outside Manhattan. "I live in Greenpoint. I live in a loft with a bunch of artists."

"She's artistic," Ms. Willis said to her mother, "like you."

"When she was 3 years old she won a coloring contest," Ms. Ellis boasted. 

A woman in the hall on her way to the elevator shouted: "Good luck everybody!" 

"That's another neighbor," Ms. Ellis explained. "She paints lampshades. She's at the D&D Building," the design showroom. "And there's an amazing film maker who makes films on the  Dalai Lama on the 10th floor."

Not every tenant is a painter, of course.  Lisa York is situated between Ms. Ellis and Ms Willis. The sign on her door describes her business as "Ultra-private Pilates in a serene setting."

"They're nice," Ms. York said of all the artists. "And I love northern light. Even though I'm not an artist per se, I like the light."

Did I mention Ms. Ellis's dog Penny, a Papillon? She was there in the flesh, not hanging on the wall. "This is my agent," Ms. Ellis explained. "Sit....Beg....Wash your face....People stop me on the street and say, 'What a cute thing!' One thing leads to another. Which is how I get commissions. Not that that's why I have her."

Ms. Lee's figure studies are as elegant and feel as confident as an Ingres. I also loved a small Vermont landscape that reminded me of college. She said she's baffled by much of contemporary art: "It's all about shock. You get to the point where people aren't shocked anymore.

"A lot of contemporary art seems to be about the inner struggle of the artist," she said. "It's not about the execution. The way I approach art it's not about me at all. It's just trying to be faithful to nature."

But about that dumpster: "I spent 10 years pursuing climbing and a life in the mountains and lived in a school bus for a while powered with vegetable oil," she said. "And eating out of dumpsters. It went really well. Trader Joe's was the best. They individually wrap everything. If one egg breaks they throw out the whole box."

While I was there, a gentleman who had found Ms. Lee on Facebook and collects the art of her teachers dropped by and purchased one of her figure drawings (she would go on to sell four more works Saturday). Afterwards, he told her she was underpriced, and reminded her to buy those red dots artists place beside sold paintings.

"Yes!" she shouted as soon as he was out the door but still well within earshot. 

— ralph.gardner@wsj.com 