SEOUL—South Korean conglomerate Hyundai Motor Group signed a final agreement to acquire a controlling stake in  Hyundai Engineering & Construction Co., effectively bringing an end to a drawn-out sale process. 

Korea Exchange Bank, a lead creditor of Hyundai E&C, said Tuesday that the sale will close early next month, after Hyundai Motor makes its final payment. The bank didn't disclose the final price, but the automotive conglomerate's three key affiliates—Hyundai Motor Co., Hyundai Mobis Co. and Kia Motors Corp.—disclosed in regulatory filings that they will collectively acquire the 34.88% stake in the builder for 4.96 trillion won ($4.43 billion). 

The deal allows Hyundai Motor Chairman  Chung Mong-koo to reclaim a piece of family lore after a feud over the construction company. Hyundai Group, led by Mr. Chung's sister-in-law  Hyun Jeong-eun, had outbid Hyundai Motor with a 5.51 trillion won bid, only to see its deal with Hyundai E&C's creditors collapse in December over questions about how the offer was being financed. 

Hyundai Motor in January was named a preferred bidder for the stake, held by nine creditors-turned-shareholders of the construction firm. Hyundai Motor initially had bid 5.1 trillion won for the shares but lowered the price after conducting due diligence, reflecting such factors as asset depreciation and debt. According to a previous agreement, each side had the option of adjusting its bid by as much as 3%.

Hyundai E&C is the founding piece of Hyundai Group, once South Korea's largest conglomerate. But the group lost affiliates in the wake of the 1997-98 Asian financial crisis, hurt by a business model that relied heavily on debt and focused on sales growth rather than profit.

The construction company was taken over by the creditors in 2001 after arranging a bailout package. Hyundai Motor was one of the businesses separated from Hyundai Group, but now the two conglomerates share no ties other than their heritage.

 Write to  Se Young Lee at vincent.lee@dowjones.com 