'The Unfazed" (Partisan) continues Dolorean's tradition of very fine song-centric folk-rock albums. In a just world, the release would bring the group the kind of widespread fan support and critical acclaim it has been denied thus far. After 10 years together, commercial success still eludes it.

The quintet goes about making its music the old-fashioned way: Al James writes the songs, then the band works out the arrangements. There's none of this jamming until something comes up and then slapping a melody and lyrics onto a backing track.

"I usually have an idea or a line that feels like an original thought," said Mr. James by phone last week during a break from his day job as an advertising copywriter. "Usually these lines become an entryway into a song. Then I'll grab a guitar and figure out a melody."

"The Unfazed" has an immediacy lacking on Dolorean's earlier albums. It rings with confidence under Mr. James's twangy, matter-of-fact vocals, with echoes of Austin-style Americana, early Jeff Tweedy and Wilco, and Neil Young with Ben Keith. Jay Clarke on keys, Jon Neufeld on guitar and, on a few tracks, guest Kate O'Brien Clarke on violin enhance Mr. James's tales of rocky love.

Listen to clips of songs from 'The Unfazed'

We easily enter the world the songs convey. On the title track, we're along for a night's journey during which the narrator's hopes wither; the band drops out when Mr. James sings "Unfazed by debts I'll never pay / Unfazed by blond hair turning gray / Unfazed by dreams left behind." The story of a contentious couple, "Thinskinned" concludes with "I can't believe it would be better if I was hard as nails and you were tough as leather." Tasteful work by drummer Benny Nugent, who has a nice way with a turn-around fill, and bassist James Adair ensures there's ample space for Mr. James to make his points.

Mr. James, now a 33-year-old resident of Silverton, Ore., picked up the guitar for the first time as a student at Willamette University. Though he had listened to Willie Nelson and Simon & Garfunkel albums with his parents, and later fell under the sway of Seattle's grunge scene, it was Wilco's "Being There" that showed him the way.

"Some of those songs were so simple. It was cool to hear somebody like Jeff Tweedy do it. I thought, 'Man, I can do that.'"

Of course, it takes time and dedication to develop the skills to write simply, as Mr. James found out. Falling in with Mr. Clarke and the rest of Dolorean was a turning point. "They were way beyond me musically," he said. "But they recognized some raw creativity in me."

The band stumbled after 2007's "You Can't Win," its third album. "I'm really proud of it," Mr. James said. "The hard part was nobody paid attention. It wasn't another step in our progression. It was frustrating because I thought we did a lot of things right."

To rethink its approach to the business side, Dolorean went on hiatus for a while, then returned to the studio to cut Mr. James's latest songs. Perhaps still stung by the lack of commercial success of "You Can't Win," the musicians meandered while recording. "Our energy was low," Mr. James recalled. "We finished half the record, but realized we could do it better." Starting over, they found the sound and vigor that resulted in "Unfazed."

Mr. James said there's nothing like having completed songs and tight arrangements before entering the studio. He spoke of "a lack of presence" in today's popular music. "I don't know if it has to do with the way we listen to music now or the way it's recorded, but it sounds veiled and hazy. There's a sweet spot when you know the song and the arrangements. You can take some risks then—a different piano line or something."

Money is tight and the band can't afford a national tour in the U.S. It's in Europe now through mid-February; the band has a reliable following overseas. "They feel we're uniquely American," Mr. James said. When Dolorean returns home, it will do some shows on the West Coast, then in March play the South by Southwest Festival.

"It's an uphill battle," Mr. James said. "I'm not saying 'Woe is me.' That's the way it happens. It's been 10 years and we're still building. Artistically and creatively, we're a success."

 Mr. Fusilli is the Journal's rock and pop music critic. Email him at jfusilli@wsj.com or follow him on Twitter: @wsjrock.  