LinkedIn Corp., which runs a professional networking site, set terms for its initial public offering that value the company at more than $3 billion as it looks to capitalize on investor appetite for a new crop of Internet start-ups.

The company, which is used by members to recruit and hunt for jobs, is the first of what is expected to be several IPOs of American social-networking offerings, with Groupon Inc. expected later this year and Facebook Inc. possibly as early as next year. Neither company has filed plans for an IPO yet.

LinkedIn said Monday it plans to sell 7.84 million shares at an estimated price range of $32 to $35 apiece, raising as much as $274 million. The price range values the entire company between $3 billion and $3.3 billion. The shares will trade on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol LNKD. 

It is one of three high-profile technology companies that are scheduled to begin trading this month. Russian Internet search engine Yandex N.V. and chip maker Freescale Semiconductor Holdings also Monday set price terms for IPOs. Yandex is seeking to raise $1.15 billion, while Freescale is aiming for $1.04 billion. 

The three companies set their IPO price ranges and share sizes on Monday, a final step before they launch their road shows to market their stocks. LinkedIn is scheduled to begin trading May 19, Yandex on May 24, and Freescale will follow on May 26. 

Yandex's offering is the biggest, set at 52.2 million shares at a price between $20 and $22. Yandex is the largest Internet company by revenue and generated 64% of all search traffic in Russia in 2010, one of the few countries not dominated by  Google Inc. 

Its revenue increased steadily throughout the global economic downturn, rising 43% to $440 million in 2010, compared with 2009, and up 65% to $137 million in the first quarter of 2011. 

LinkedIn, Mountain View, Calif., with more than 100 million members, generates revenue by selling its hiring and marketing software offline, and from members who subscribe to its premium services. 

LinkedIn showed strong membership and revenue growth throughout the economic downturn, and posted a 2010 profit of $15.4 million following operating losses from 2007 until 2009. The company said it doesn't expect to be profitable in 2011 because it is making investments in technology infrastructure and international expansion, among other areas.

Freescale, based in Austin, Texas, said Monday it plans to sell 43.5 million shares at a price between $22 and $24. Freescale provides embedded chips for the automotive, consumer, industrial and networking industries. It was spun off from the former Motorola Inc. in 2004 and later went public. 

It was taken private in a $17.6 billion leveraged buyout in 2006 that left the company with a heavy debt load. Freescale subsequently closed plants and laid off workers as business slowed. 

But Freescale has been posting better quarterly results of late as the semiconductor industry rebounds. For the three months that ended April 1, sales jumped 17% from the previous year, while its quarterly loss narrowed. 

  Morgan Stanley,
MS


-0.05
%




 Deutsche Bank AG and  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS


0.31
%




 are managing Yandex's offering. Morgan Stanley, BofA Merrill Lynch and J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. are managing LinkedIn's offering, while  Citigroup Inc.
C


1.14
%




 and Deutsche Bank are managing Freescale's. 

—Melodie Warner contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Lynn Cowan at lynn.cowan@dowjones.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications  A previous version of this article omitted J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. as an underwriter for LinkedIn Corp.'s IPO.