The prices of U.S. imports climbed last year, driven mainly by higher food and energy costs.

Import prices rose 4.8% in 2010, after increasing 8.6% in 2009, the Labor Department said Wednesday. Excluding energy, imports were up 3% last year—the largest calendar-year increase since 2007. While U.S. inflation remains tame overall, rising prices for commodities such as oil hold the potential to filter into higher prices for finished goods.

So far, that spillover remains limited. A separate report released Wednesday by the Federal Reserve, a summary of economic conditions in its 12 districts, noted that manufacturers in both the Philadelphia and Kansas City fed districts said they aim to push through more price increases this year. Manufacturers in the Boston, Cleveland and San Francisco districts also noted concern over rising commodities prices. Companies in the Chicago district predicted their future price increases would be "limited and gradual." 

See economic conditions in your area.

The Fed report, known as the beige book, said economic activity across the U.S. continued to "expand moderately" at the end of 2010.

Inflation has largely been subdued during the economic recovery, with producers hesitant to raise prices amid weak consumer demand. But as prices for raw materials rise—industrial-materials prices were up 12% last year—that cuts into producers' profit margins. 

"Manufacturers haven't had the ability to pass these price increases along to the consumer quite yet," said Sam Bullard, a Wells Fargo Securities economist.

The Fed's beige book said, "Most District reports cited comments by both retailers and manufacturers that costs were rising, but indicated that competitive pressures had led to only modest pass-through into final prices." 

Outside food and gas purchases, prices for finished goods barely budged last year. Auto prices rose 1.1% and capital goods ticked up just 0.2%. Prices for consumer goods declined 0.3%. A report by the Labor Department Friday on consumer prices will give a clearer look at price changes for everyday household items. 

High unemployment and muted core inflation, which strips out food and energy prices, have inspired the Federal Reserve to try to ramp up economic growth. Its program to purchase $600 billion in U.S. Treasury debt has drawn criticism from some analysts and policymakers who say it could spur inflation. 

Export prices increased 6.5% last year, the largest calendar-year jump on record. The Labor Department began recording those price changes in 1983. Prices for exports rose 3.4% in 2009. Much of the increase came from rising prices for cotton, industrial materials and supplies. 

The beige book showed most districts said the job market was strengthening. Businesses in the St. Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas City, and San Francisco districts said they planned to increase hiring in expectation of better business conditions this year. 

Real estate remained a weak point in the Fed's report, as high unemployment, excess housing supply and financing constraints hindered residential construction. 