LONDON—U.K. Prime Minister David Cameron's chief media adviser resigned Friday amid pressure stemming from lawsuits and investigations into reporting tactics deployed at the tabloid newspaper he once edited.

Andy Coulson's resignation is a blow to Mr. Cameron, who has stood by him despite several years of damaging headlines about his work at News of the World. 

"Unfortunately, continued coverage of events connected to my old job at the News of the World has made it difficult for me to give the 110% needed in this role," Mr. Coulson said in a statement. 

The multiyear saga involves the paper's use several years ago of private investigators to obtain personal information about celebrities, politicians and other public figures, most notably through breaking into mobile-phone voice mailboxes, a practice known as phone-hacking.

News of the World's royal correspondent and a private investigator employed by the Sunday tabloid were jailed in 2007 after a two-year investigation found them guilty of hacking into the phone messages of some members of the royal family.

Mr. Coulson, who stepped down as the paper's editor in January 2007, has always denied that the hacking went beyond the reporter involved, Clive Goodman. Mr. Coulson has repeatedly said that he was unaware that such practices were used in his newsroom. 

Mr. Coulson re-emerged later in 2007 as a key strategist for Mr. Cameron, who was then opposition leader, even while periodically fending off allegations, extensively pursued in the U.K. media, that he knew more about the phone hacking that he had said. 

When Mr. Cameron assumed office as prime minister in May, he brought on Mr. Coulson as his communications director.

Politicians from the opposition Labour Party have also kept the pressure on Mr. Coulson and the government, and accused the police of not conducting a thorough investigation into accusations of widespread phone hacking by several publications and lawmakers.

"I stand by what I've said about those events but when the spokesman needs a spokesman, it's time to move on," said Mr. Coulson, in his resignation statement on Friday. 

A spokeswoman for News of the World's owner,  News Corp., declined to comment on Mr. Coulson's statements and other recent developments Friday. News Corp. officials have insisted that there was no "culture of wrongdoing" in the tabloid's newsroom. News Corp. also owns The Wall Street Journal. 

The defense articulated by Mr. Coulson and News Corp. has come under pressure in recent weeks, as civil lawsuits filed by public figures whose phones were hacked have begun to unearth more information.

For example, actress Sienna Miller is suing News of the World's parent company, News Group Newspapers, in a U.K. court for breach of privacy related to phone hacking. The News of the World recently suspended an editor, Ian Edmondson, following what it said were "serious allegations" about his conduct that surfaced in that suit. Mr. Edmondson couldn't be reached for comment. 

The U.K.'s prosecution service said it will review evidence held by police about the allegations. 

Through it all, Mr. Cameron has steadfastly defended Mr. Coulson, and he did so again on Friday, saying he was "very sorry" that Mr. Coulson was leaving. 

Mr. Coulson had told Mr. Cameron he would resign on Wednesday, according to a person familiar with the matter.

Mr. Coulson, though, hadn't been popular across all parts of Mr. Cameron's Conservative Party, with some lawmakers blaming the media adviser for helping to throw away a commanding lead in opinion polls ahead of last May's election. The Conservatives were forced to bring the Liberal Democrats into a coalition after not winning a parliamentary majority. 

Labour lawmakers took advantage of the news on Friday. "Cameron's judgment is the real issue, he should never have taken Coulson on," former Labour Minister Chris Bryant said.

—Cassell Bryan Low contributed to this article.

 Write to  Alistair MacDonald at alistair.macdonald@wsj.com 