DETROIT— Chrysler Group LLC pulled the wraps off its new Chrysler 300 on Monday at the Detroit auto show, the last of 16 models Chief Executive  Sergio Marchionne promised to revamp by the end of 2010 as part of his plan to jump-start sales at the auto maker.

Just a year ago at the Detroit show Mr. Marchionne spent countless hours defending his plan, which some observers thought was improbably ambitious given how long car remodelings usually take. He also was peppered with questions about how Chrysler would meet his goals of paying back Chrysler's federally backed bailout loans, turn a net profit and go public by the end of the year. 

On Monday, a far more confident Chrysler was on display. The company rolled three of the new 300 sedans onto a stage before hundreds of journalists accompanied by a booming track from Detroit rapper Eminem. 

Mr. Marchionne said later at a press briefing that he is looking for the big new sedan to "remake" the image of the Chrysler brand. "It is the flagship of our house," he said.

To cap Chrysler's changes,  Fiat
F


1.16
%




 SpA, where Mr. Marchionne also serves as CEO, on Monday raised its stake in Chrysler to 25% from 20% after meeting a U.S.-government milestone of building a fuel-efficient Fiat engine at a U.S. plant. Fiat was given the 20% stake after Chrysler's filed for bankruptcy protection in 2009. 

Chrysler's rebound—although still tentative—is a significant turn of events. Two years ago, Chrysler and  General Motors Co.
GM


0.28
%




 were hanging on only after getting multibillion-dollar government bailouts. 

Today, U.S. makers are staging a dramatic comeback.  Ford Motor Co.
F


1.16
%




, which sidestepped a bankruptcy and bailout, has completed its turnaround. Its sales are rising, its name brand is one of the strongest in the industry and 2010 is all but certain to be one of the company's most profitable in its 107-year history.

GM is following a similar track. It too will report several billion dollars in profits for 2010. It returned to the stock market in November and is seeing improved sales even though it is now offering vehicles only under four brand names instead of eight. Some analysts expect GM's stock, trading at about $39 a share, to hit $50 within the next 12 months. 

Detroit's recovery won't be complete, however, until Chrysler turns the corner. Like GM, Chrysler exited bankruptcy with its annual operating costs reduced by billions of dollars, while billions more in health care obligations for retired workers were shifted to a trust fund controlled by the United Auto Workers union. The fund owns about 63.5% of Chrysler's stock.

Chrysler's Fiat partnership should help Chrysler cut development costs and share in greater economies of scale—important since Chrysler has almost no plants outside North America. 

In addition to making the new four-cylinder engine developed by Fiat, Chrysler plans to launch several small Chrysler-brand cars based on Fiat models starting in 2012. 

Mr. Marchionne also hopes to use Fiat to expand sales of Chrysler vehicles outside North America. The company is preparing to make some Chrysler models, including the Jeep Grand Cherokee, in Fiat plants in Europe.

But Chrysler still has a ways to go. The company is making money on an operating basis but is expected to report a net loss for 2010. 

One problem is sagging sales to consumers. The company met Mr. Marchionne's goal of selling 1.1 million cars and trucks in the U.S. last year, a rise of 17%. But the increase was largely driven by higher sales to fleets like rental-car companies, not individual consumers. Fleet sales usually are less profitable than sales to individual buyers.

Chrysler needs to repair its reputation with consumers, which has been dinged by quality concerns and a reputation for using cheap finishes inside its vehicles. 

In a recent survey, Consumer Reports magazine asked car owners which makes they were most likely to choose the next time they buy a car. Two percent named the Chrysler brand; 3% named Dodge. In contrast, Ford was named by 18% and GM's Chevrolet by 13%. Only a single Chrysler vehicle, the Ram 1400 pickup truck, made the magazine's recommended list in 2010.

Until the Fiat-based models arrive, Chrysler's lineup is skewed toward gas-guzzling trucks, sport-utility vehicles and minivans. That could be a problem as gas prices head above $3 a gallon.

This year is pivotal. Mr. Marchionne's timetable calls for Chrysler to begin reporting bottom-line profits in 2011, and for an operating profit of $1.6 billion to $2.4 billion. To reach those goals, he's counting on a big jump in sales—to 1.6 million vehicles in the U.S. That would be a 45% rise from 2010, compared to the 10% to 12% analysts expect.

To drive sales, Chrysler is launching the 16 models that were either completely redesigned or given major midlife makeovers, at a cost of $1.1 billion, according to Mr. Marchionne. 

Among them are the Dodge Avenger midsized sedan; Town & Country and Grand Caravan minivans; the Jeep Patriot and Compass; and Dodge Journey crossover. All are on display this week at the Detroit show.

These models were given plusher interiors using higher-quality materials, such as soft-touch plastics instead of the hard plastic for which Chrysler has been criticized. They received flashier-looking head lamps and tail lights, and more fuel-efficient engines and transmissions.

But the 2011 versions of the 300 and sister Dodge Charger are a bigger bet. Remodeled at a cost of about $1 billion they are priced higher than smaller models such as the Avenger and Journey. To help improve quality, Chrysler spent more than $30 million on equipment for the Brampton, Ontario, plant where they are made, and its 2,900 workers have gone through 30,000 hours in training on new production methods.

But with more consumers focusing on fuel economy and the economy still ailing, U.S. sales of large sedans have suffered. Fewer than 340,000 were sold in 2010 by all makers—down by more than half from their peak in 2006. 

Chrysler "may have new products but the real challenge will be selling them while also cutting back on incentives," said Jesse Toprak, a vice president at research firm TrueCar, Inc.

 Write to  Jeff Bennett at jeff.bennett@dowjones.com 