To gin up sales for her 2009 essay collection "Bad Mother," Ayelet Waldman rewarded those who preordered the book with such lagniappes as a donation to a scholarship fund or a copy of a novel by her husband, Michael Chabon. "I think all of that got 'Bad Mother' on the New York Times best-seller list," Ms. Waldman said.

Eager for lightning to strike twice, she began working the Facebook rolls before last summer's publication of her novel "Red Hook Road." Those who preordered (or sent an email explaining their lack of interest in preordering) were entered into a drawing to win an iPod loaded with music thematic to the book. 

"Some author—I don't remember who—had a drawing for iPads, and I was thinking 'that's someone with more money than me,'" said Ms. Waldman, acknowledging that, in fact, her publisher, Doubleday, had donated the iPods she used in her reader raffle.

"I find the process of self-promotion excruciating," said Ms. Waldman, who, frankly, seems approximately as shy as a Kardashian. "I'm sure there are plenty of people who think 'she's so tacky.' And I say: 'I have four children to feed. I wish I had the luxury of not being tacky.'"

Excruciating it may be. Nonetheless, authors are becoming more and more involved in the nitty-gritty of moving the merch. "It's no longer a top-down media culture," said Paul Bogaards, a spokesman for the Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. "There is still value and import in having authors appear in traditional media venues like the 'Today' show or The Wall Street Journal," he continued. "But what's changed is that they no longer need the intermediary to reach the reader." 

Web-savvy authors point to the myriad opportunities provided by social networking sites. (Bruce DeSilva, for example, posted a slideshow on his Facebook page of famous people reading his debut crime novel, "Rogue Island.") They point, as well, to publishers' ever more skimpy advertising budgets and the contraction of marketing and publicity departments, making it all the more essential for them to step into the void. And they have taken due note of the daunting noise—and numbers—in the marketplace. According to Penny Sansevieri, an adjunct professor at New York University and CEO of Author Marketing, a publicity firm, there are 1,500 books published daily in the U.S., including self-published titles. "To get noticed," she said, "you have to throw more at people than just your book."

Sometimes, you have to throw sex toys. Because a scene in her new novel "The Best Laid Plans" is set at Babeland, a sort of FAO Schwarz for adults, Lynn Schnurnberger chose it as the site for her publication party this Friday. "It's hard to get attention for bookstore readings because it's just 'same old, same old,'" she said. "I write chick lit, and this is the first book party I've ever had that my husband's friends are interested in coming to." 

Admittedly more tame, but frequently effective, are ploys like twofers and giveaways. Authors of genre fiction, like crime or romance novels, may, at a bargain rate, buy up similarly themed books that their publisher has decided to take out of print. Then, via Twitter, blog or email blast, they'll offer their new book at the retail price and throw in the remaindered book for a dollar, selling the pair for a round figure like $20. 

Last year, to show support for a less-established colleague she admired, best-selling chick-lit author Emily Giffin used her blog to offer a signed copy of one of her own books to anyone who, over a 24-hour period, bought a copy of the novel "Pieces of Happily Ever After" by Irene Zutell and provided a receipt. "It made Irene's book a best seller on the Amazon and Barnes & Noble sites," claimed Ms. Zutell's agent, Andrea Barzvi.

Meanwhile, to heighten interest in her most recent novel, "212," crime writer Alafair Burke sent a signed bookplate and a logo key chain to fans who preordered. 

The expense incurred by giveaways is often money well spent. Such freebies generate reader goodwill and provide an author with more Facebook friends as well as a larger email list (useful for publicizing the next book and giving the author's agent a bargaining chip when negotiating a new contract with a publisher). Most important, they may goose preorders. Particularly for up-and-coming authors, advance purchases "get the attention of publishers, which may get them to put more muscle behind the book," said Anne-Lise Spitzer, the creative marketing director for Knopf. 

Several authors have turned their work into performances pieces, figuring that the attendant media attention will lead to more book sales. Tina Sloan, a star of the late soap opera "The Guiding Light," determined that the best way to sell her memoir/self-help guide "Changing Shoes," published this past September, "was to dramatize it," Ms. Sloan said. Over the past few months, she's performed the show in Atlanta, Cincinnati, Pittsburgh and New York, with future engagements scheduled in Jupiter Island and Stuart, Fla., as well as Newport, R.I. "I sell the book in the back of the theater," she said. 

After the 2008 publication of the humor anthology "Things I've Learned From Women Who've Dumped Me," its editor, Ben Karlin, cobbled together a show based on the collection and booked it into a New York theater for a few nights. Copies of the book were on sale on site. During the recent New York marathon, Christopher McDougall, author of the 2009 best seller "Born to Run," an ode to barefoot loping, assembled a cabaret show based on his book with an opera singer performing an aria devised from a passage of the text. 

He also takes his show on the road. "Everybody thinks that digital and electronic media is the way to go, but I think their messages are getting lost in the noise. I found that slapping the shoe leather is what worked," said Mr. McDougall, who routinely throws cases of "Born to Run" into his car and drives to races, running clinics and athletic-retailers' conventions. "You may sell only five copies at a location, but one book will always get into the hands of an evangelist who will tell 50 people," he said. The figures bear him out. The book, which had a first printing of 15,000, is still in hardcover and has sold nearly 450,000 copies. 

Authors who take the everything-including-the-kitchen-sink approach to marketing "run the risk of wasting time on unproductive or minimally productive schemes, time they could more profitably spend writing their next book," said Jennifer Joel, an agent at ICM. "But given a choice between authors who spend no time on promotion and authors who spend too much time, I'll take the author who spends too much time anytime."

 Ms. Kaufman writes about culture and the arts for the Journal.  