The unemployment rate fell to its lowest point in 19 months in December, but the 103,000 jobs created fell well short of the tally needed to bring about a sustained recovery in the labor market. 

Although the jobless rate dropped substantially to 9.4% in December from 9.8% a month earlier, the Labor Department said Friday, employers increased payrolls by only 103,000. Economists say that is barely enough to keep up with natural growth in the labor force. Much faster employment and enduring job gains—on the order of 200,000 jobs a month—are needed for lasting improvement.

The decline in the jobless rate, paradoxically, was partly a sign of economic weakness—many people have given up on finding jobs, and thus were not counted as unemployed. Some 8.4 million jobs were shed during the recession, and in 2010 just 1.1 million were added. 

At December's pace, it would take 70 months—or until late 2016—to make up for the rest of the jobs lost.

Over the past few months, rising stock prices, retail sales, and manufacturing output have signaled that the economy is gaining steam. That hasn't translated yet into widespread hiring.

Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke, in testimony Friday before the Senate Budget Committee, said there is evidence of self-sustaining recoveries in business and consumer spending. "Overall, the pace of economic recovery seems likely to be moderately stronger in 2011 than it was in 2010," he said. 

The Fed has been trying to boost growth through super-low interest rates. Mr. Bernanke gave no indication that he is wavering from the controversial November decision to purchase $600 billion of U.S. Treasury debt as part of an effort to hold down long-term interest rates. 

The program is justified, he said, because unemployment is likely to stay above 8% for the next two years and inflation will remain subdued. 

Aside from December's payroll increase, the prior two months of job gains were somewhat stronger than previously reported. They were revised up to show a total of 70,000 more jobs were added. The economy added an average of 94,000 jobs a month last year.

"If we continue at this pace, we're not going to see sustained declines in the unemployment rate," Mr. Bernanke said. 

U.S. unemployment since shortly after World War II.

Separately, consumer credit increased at a 0.7% seasonally adjusted annual rate in November to $2.4 trillion, the Federal Reserve said Friday. Nonrevolving credit, loans for items such as cars and tuition, fueled the increase; home mortgages aren't included. Revolving credit, mainly credit-card use, declined. 

The Obama administration offered a measured assessment of the employment news. White House economist Austan Goolsbee said there was little likelihood of dramatic fiscal boosts to the economy going forward, which some economists argue can boost growth. But he said the December job numbers didn't reflect any stimulative effect from the tax package that passed Congress just weeks ago.

President Barack Obama, speaking at a manufacturing facility in Maryland, said the December report shows "the pace of hiring is beginning to pick up." 

The sharp drop in the unemployment rate could be short-lived. The Labor Department reported that 260,000 Americans stopped looking for work last month, leading to the decline in the jobless rate. Workers tend to drop out of the labor force when jobs look scarce, and re-enter when the market improves. 

One measure of employment in Labor's household survey showed a much larger gain—297,000 jobs—in December employment. 

But economists tend to play down this measure because of its monthly volatility. Instead, they use the so-called establishment survey, which collects data from employers instead of households. That measure reflected the 103,000 rise in payrolls. 

The private sector was largely behind December's job creation: Private payrolls rose by 113,000. Education, health services, and the leisure and hospitality industries reported the strongest growth. The retail sector also ramped up slightly. 

Zappos Fulfillment Centers Inc., which fills orders for online clothing retailer Zappos, was among those staffing up. The center added 1,365 seasonal employees in December, said Melissa Leary, recruiting supervisor.

"We had a real unexpected increase in business," Ms. Leary said. Still, the company is keeping just 70 seasonal workers on full time.

Even the manufacturing sector, which has recovered better than the rest of the economy, has been slow to increase its work force. Last month, the sector added just 10,000 jobs.

Industries that are lagging the recovery are still shedding employees. Construction, a notable weak spot, cut 16,000 jobs last month. 

Governments also cut jobs last month as they struggled to balance budgets amid weak revenue and declining stimulus dollars. Local governments reported the deepest cuts: 20,000 workers. 

In Spokane, Wash., a roughly $14 million budget hole led the city to eliminate 50 positions through retirements, attrition and two layoffs. "It's been a tough year," said Marlene Feist, the city's communications director. 

Overall, about 14.5 million Americans were unemployed. Another 6.5 million wanted to work but had given up looking and therefore weren't counted as unemployed.

Oral Mellinger, 55, is among the more than 6.4 million Americans known as the long-term unemployed—those who have been out of work for at least 27 weeks. 

Mr. Mellinger, of York, Pa., lost his job as a structural steel painter last February and has had no luck finding work. 

"There are jobs around if I want to make less than what I'm making on unemployment, but that would put me in a worse spot," he said. His wife, Sandy, has been out of work for three years and exhausted her jobless benefits. Unable to afford the taxes, the couple lost their home last fall and are now living in a trailer for $600 a month.

Those private-sector workers lucky enough to be employed in December experienced a flat workweek but a slight increase in pay: Average hourly earnings rose 0.1% to $22.78.

—Justin Lahart and Jon Hilsenrath contributed to this article.

 Write to  Sara Murray at sara.murray@wsj.com 