CAIRO—Christians blamed Saturday's deadly sectarian clashes at two churches near Cairo on Egypt's ultraconservative Salafis, a radical Islamist ideology whose growing influence is worrying both secularists and the country's Christian minority.

Residents of the low-income neighborhood of Imbaba said hundreds of Muslim men armed with small weapons and guns attacked the churches. The attackers, many wearing the long gowns and beards characteristic of Salafi Muslims, torched the Coptic Church of the Virgin Mary and set fire to two apparently Christian-owned homes behind another church in the neighborhood, witnesses said. 

The Egyptian army arrested 190 people suspected of involvement in the clashes, which killed at least 12 people and injured 210.

Saturday's attacks mark the latest incident in a worsening rash of sectarian violence between Egypt's Muslims and its Christian minority since street protests ousted Egypt's former president in February. The rise in sectarianism has appeared in parallel with an increasingly vocal Salafi movement—a fundamentalist Islamic ideology that tends to view non-Muslims as less deserving of full civil rights in an idealized Muslim society.

On some level, the violence is an effort to intimidate Christians whose protection by the regime of former President Hosni Mubarak was perceived by many as preferential treatment, said  Hossam Bahgat, director of the Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights, a human-rights group that has been monitoring sectarian violence in Egypt. 

"Muslims are convinced that Copts were too powerful under Mubarak, and are motivated by the desire to teach Christians a lesson right now," Mr. Bahgat said. Hard-line Muslims want to show Christians "that they need the protection of Muslims, that the West is not going to protect them and that they no longer have any of the privileges that these extremists believe the Copts enjoyed under Mubarak," Mr. Bahgat said.

Egypt's democratic revolution is allowing the deep ranks of Egypt's Islamists to stretch their legs in public, after generations in the shadows. For the first time in Egyptian history, voters in parliamentary elections scheduled for September will be able to choose from a diverse menu of Islamist political options that may include several Salafi political parties. 

The Egyptian revolution gave Salafis a "chance and now we're taking advantage of this chance and seizing it," said Kamal Habib, a self-described "modern Salafi" and former jihadist who spent most of the 1980s in prison for his membership in Al Jamaa Al Islamiya, a militant group that launched attacks on the Egyptian government and foreign tourists throughout the 1990s before renouncing violence in 2003. 

He is planning to launch a new political party called Peace and Development that will seek to "found a modern country based on Islamic values."

Mr. Habib expects Islamists, including the Muslim Brotherhood and other parties, to win about one-third of the seats in parliamentary elections scheduled for September. Salafi supporters in Egypt "could possibly be in the millions," he said.

"They are probably more than the Muslim Brotherhood members," said Mr. Habib.

Salafi Muslims maintained a relatively low profile before the revolution, but they have been implicated in a series of attacks against Christians in the past several months.

A bomb attack on a church in Alexandria killed 23 people on New Year's Eve. Angry mobs attacked and burned a church outside Cairo in March. Last month, mostly Muslim rioters in the Upper Egyptian governorate of Qena called for the dismissal of their government-appointed Christian governor, who many said wasn't fit to govern over Muslims.

Such incidents are posing a significant challenge for the military leadership that assumed power after Mr. Mubarak, a Muslim, stepped down. Hundreds of military personnel flooded Imbaba soon after the attacks began. But as in previous sectarian clashes, soldiers fired into the air to frighten away rioters but did little to halt the violence, witnesses said.

"The military council didn't prosecute the people who burned down the church in Sol," said Ramon Shehatta, referring to a previous church-burning in a Cairo suburb in early March. Mr. Shehatta was standing in the burnt-out interior of the Church of the Holy Virgin, where hundreds of Christians had gathered for a tearful mass on Sunday afternoon. "That allowed them to come and burn this church. This won't end. The Christians' hearts are on fire. They will not be quiet."

By Sunday evening, thousands of mostly Christians carried signs and crosses in front of the downtown headquarters of Egyptian state television to protest the attacks. 

"We will mop the floor with them!" the crowd chanted. 

Prominent Salafi sheiks condemned the attacks on Sunday and denied their movement, which has no formal structure or hierarchy, was involved. The more moderate Muslim Brotherhood, the most powerful Islamist political group in Egypt, also condemned the violence. 

Whereas the Muslim Brotherhood is a discrete political and religious institution with a formal leadership structure, Salafism is a catchall term that describes those Muslims who believe that only the Prophet Muhammad, his contemporary companions and the two generations of believers who followed them practiced Islam in its purest form.

Despite sharing a few common political goals, such as the desire to see Sharia law incorporated into the Egyptian legal system, the Salafists' fundamentalist outlook is distinct from the Brotherhood's merely conservative ideology. 

Track events day by day in the region.

See the level of unrest, plus the economic and politic status of some countries across North Africa and the Middle East.

Popular demonstrations in Tunisia toppled a president and spread to countries across the region. See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

Strict Salafis consider more moderate Islamists, such as the Brotherhood, as "innovators" whose practice of the faith includes new or foreign concepts that were introduced into the religion long after the Prophet's death.

Egyptian migrant workers who lived and worked in the Gulf region during the 1980s introduced Salafism to Egypt. They returned to Egypt flush with cash and convinced of a more fundamentalist ideology. Conservative religious satellite-television stations funded by Saudi Arabia and other Gulf states remain popular in Egypt.

Saturday's violence appeared to have been sparked by the sudden televised appearance on Saturday morning of Camilia Shehata, the wife of a Coptic Christian priest in Upper Egypt whose disappearance last summer led to rumors that the church had kidnapped her after she tried to convert to Islam. 

Her disappearance sparked weekly protests in front of Coptic churches in Alexandria, with Salafi demonstrators demanding the church release Ms. Shehata.

Egypt's Coptic Church has denied kidnapping converts to Islam, but the claims of fundamentalist Muslim protesters grew increasingly angry because of the church's refusal to explain Ms. Shehata's whereabouts or show her to the public.

Ms. Shehata was seen for the first time on Saturday morning when she appeared alongside her husband on the Christian satellite channel Al Haya.

"I am a Christian and I will always be a Christian," Ms. Shehata told a news presenter over video from an undisclosed location. When asked if she had ever considered Islam as a "heavenly religion," Ms. Shehata replied sternly: "It's impossible for me to think that way, not even 1%."

While different witnesses recalled varying accounts of the events that led up to the clash, the conflict appeared to originate from a rumor that church officials had kidnapped yet another young woman named Abeer who, depending on who is telling the story, was either a Muslim woman who had converted to Christianity or a Christian woman who converted to Islam in order to marry a Muslim man.

Twitter conversations dated to Saturday afternoon rallied Salafis to the scene.

"There is a Muslim sister kidnapped by the church in Imbaba on Luxor Street. Go down now," said twitter user "Masrislam", who marked the tweet with the hashtag #Anasalafi (or "I am Salafi," in Arabic). 

Those who saw the violence said conservative Muslims began to congregate outside a church in the densely packed slum at around 4 p.m.

Ramy Talaat Helmy, a Christian resident of Imbaba who said he spoke with some of the gathered Salafis before the situation took a violent turn, said the men had been told to look for Abeer in a "house behind a church on Luxor Street in Imbaba."

"He said 'the voice of the cross will not rise above the voice of the Quran,' " said Mr. Helmy. "They said they didn't even know which church it was in Imbaba."

Armed with such unspecific instructions, the men began searching the neighborhood around Saint Mina Church. As Christians congregated to defend the neighborhood and prevent the Muslims from entering the church, the confrontation escalated. Salafis torched two nearby homes before setting upon the nearby Coptic Church of the Virgin Mary, which had been left largely unguarded. The attackers used motolov cocktails to char the first four floors of the five-story church.

For their part, Salafi Muslim leaders said the events on Saturday began when Salafi sheiks tried to enter the Saint Mina church to persuade church leaders to release Abeer. As the Muslim leaders left the church, Christian bystanders began to pelt them with rocks and empty bottles.

"The church is dealing with the situation like it used to deal with situations under the former regime: by not allowing people freedom of religion and doing outrageous things like incarcerating people," said Mr. Habib. Salafis tried to stop the violence on Saturday, which he said was instigated by local Christian residents.