Unlike many of his fellow Founding Fathers, George Washington never wrote an autobiography, preferring to let future historians quarry his copious and carefully preserved correspondence. His sole effort at memoir emerged from notes he wrote clarifying points for a proposed biography by a former aide and trusted friend, David Humphreys. These "Remarks" were written in 1787-88, when Washington was in his mid-50s and pondering the daunting prospect of becoming the first president of the American republic. Despite all that had happened during a remarkable life, not least his command of the army responsible for winning independence from Britain, Washington chose to reminisce about the five years when he had labored as a loyal subject of the British Empire to thwart French designs on the Ohio Valley.

In late 1753, the 21-year-old Washington had volunteered for a diplomatic mission deep within the hostile wilderness. He was inspired by the example of his dead half-brother, Lawrence, who had used a brief stint in the British Army as a stepping stone to political power and marriage into Virginia's elite. Washington's mission was a failure, but it demonstrated his courage, determination and stamina. He would shortly need such qualities when his thirst for honor and distinction helped ignite a global war. Sent, in 1754, with a small force to secure the Forks of the Ohio (present-day Pittsburgh), Washington ambushed a French party intending to warn him off under the command of Joseph Coulon de Villiers de Jumonville. That sharp encounter triggered the French and Indian War, which itself spurred much wider hostilities between Britain and France known as the Seven Years' War. 

David A. Clary's "George Washington's First War" presents a detailed narrative of the "Jumonville Massacre" and the rest of Washington's service. The clashes were small-scale affairs, sometimes involving just scores of combatants. Yet, as the "Remarks" make clear, they were marked by carnage, hardship and danger that Washington never forgot.

Mr. Clary shows how these episodes constituted crucial training for the ambitious but callow Washington, allowing him to test his abilities—and make mistakes. The blunders came thick and fast. Washington, Mr. Clary argues, lacked the maturity to balance the heavy responsibilities heaped on him by superiors who should have known better. Mr. Clary's treatment of Washington's early military career is unsympathetic and his verdicts harsher than those reached in Ron Chernow's new biography. 

 By David A. Clary  Simon & Schuster, 351 pages, $27

Mr. Clary's Washington is a "parochial Virginian," too blinkered to see the broader strategic picture. In 1754, after the savage little skirmish that sparked Anglo-French hostilities, Washington, we're told, was guilty of "puerile" boasting. Weeks later he suffered a humiliating defeat at Fort Necessity in western Pennsylvania because, hungry to hog any glory, he rashly refused to await reinforcements. Following the slaughter of Maj. Gen. Edward Braddock's army on the Monongahela in 1755, Washington lost no opportunity to broadcast his undoubted bravery. As colonel of the Virginia Regiment, he abandoned his men for lengthy spells—leaving them to defend the exposed Shenandoah Valley against Shawnee raiders while he pursued a fruitless quest for a British officer's commission.

These charges, and others, can be substantiated, although Mr. Clary's hostile stance sometimes takes him beyond the evidence. Washington was certainly a strict disciplinarian, but he did not wantonly impose "many instances of death by hanging or firing squad." In July 1757, for example, a court martial sentenced 14 deserters to death, but only two men, both of them serial offenders, were actually executed.

For all his military disappointments, and the errors he made, Washington was right to stamp his martial credentials. His role as a stalwart, if sometimes controversial, champion of Virginia won him the confidence of the colony's power brokers. Washington's wartime record underpinned both his triumphant election to the House of Burgesses in 1758 and his brisk, successful courtship of the wealthy Martha Custis. By the time Col. Washington resigned his commission in December of that year, at age 26, he was a celebrity. This reputation endured as Britain's American colonies drifted toward rebellion, making him a front-runner to command the Continental Army in 1775.

Mr. Clary delivers vivid and gritty accounts of the pivotal moments in Washington's military apprenticeship. His prose is robust and unflinchingly direct. Discussing Washington's "crush" on Sally Fairfax (the wife of his friend and neighbor), for instance, he first rejects any idea that they had an affair, noting Washington's high ethical standards and the tight-knit Virginia society that would have registered any fling, but he then speculates that the teenager would have preferred to slake his passion by "the ancient option of self-treatment" and that "for a member of the slaveholding class, sexual release was as close as the nearest slave cabin." Such attempts to render Washington "human" are unnecessary. 

While built upon wide research, "George Washington's First War's" scholarly potential is compromised by the author's decision to anchor his archival work upon the online edition of Washington's papers at the Library of Congress. That freely available collection is a wonderful resource, but any in-depth study of Washington's early years must also take full account of the comprehensive edition of his papers being published by the University Press of Virginia. This edition provides exhaustive editorial notes that place each document in context, and it provides the original texts of Washington's letters, not just the "Letterbook" copies made decades later, after he had tidied up his youthful prose, deleting or adding in the process.

Such distinctions matter. Citing a "smarmy" letter that Washington wrote in 1757, bemoaning his lot to the commander in chief, Lord Loudoun, Mr. Clary highlights some especially outspoken, self-pitying and "whining" comments. Yet they did not appear in the letter that Washington actually sent to Loudoun; they were later added to the revised version. Perhaps Washington was a better leader and worse editor than Mr. Clary imagines.

 Mr. Brumwell is the author of "White Devil: A True Story of War, Savagery, and Vengeance in Colonial America."  