Hong Kong legislator Regina Ip launched a political party, the latest move in a political comeback for a politician who had resigned from her post as security secretary in 2003 after controversy surrounding antisedition legislation.

The launch of the party, of which she is chairwoman, signals a more prominent role in Hong Kong politics for Ms. Ip and suggests she may be positioning herself for a possible run for the territory's top post in 2012.

"At the moment I do not want to run for other offices," Ms. Ip said, though she added, "I am happy to continue to participate in local politics, as long as my health and energy permits me, and I am a high-energy person."

Joining Ms. Ip as deputy chairmen are former Liberal Party member Michael Tien and Louis Shih, former chairman of the pro-democracy organization SynergyNet.

"I have my own unique ideas about democratic development and restructuring Hong Kong's economy," Ms. Ip, 60 years old, said shortly after the inauguration ceremony Sunday. "I'm one of the few former bureaucrats who has managed to cross the line to an elected politician, and that is not easy."

Her party's platform supports universal suffrage and economic diversification.

Hong Kong's chief executive and most of its Legislative Council aren't directly elected by the people, although Article 45 of Hong Kong's Basic Law states that the ultimate goal is for the chief executive to be elected by universal suffrage.

Before China took control of the former British colony in 1997, Beijing promised direct elections for Hong Kong's legislature and top leader, but didn't provide a timetable and has delayed the transition several times. In recent years, Beijing has suggested that direct elections for the chief executive could take place in 2017, while full direct elections for the legislature could happen in 2020.

Ms. Ip served a rocky tenure as security secretary from 1998 until 2003, stepping down during then-Chief Executive Tung Chee-hwa's second term. She spearheaded the move to codify the contentious post-colonial National Security Bill, known as Article 23, through Hong Kong's legislature.

Ms. Ip was an outspoken supporter of the bill that was drafted, while critics denounced the legislation for its erosion of freedom of speech and its alignment with Beijing. Public concern over the bill culminated in a mass demonstration on July 1, 2003. Following the protests, Ms. Ip resigned from office on July 16, 2003, citing personal reasons, while the introduction of Article 23 was postponed indefinitely.

Despite her plummeting popularity, Ms. Ip returned to Hong Kong politics after a hiatus studying for a master's degree at Stanford University. Upon her return, she shifted her view in favor of universal suffrage—saying her "studies at Stanford have helped me to understand modern democracy a lot better"—and formed the Savantas Policy Institute think tank.

In September 2007, she announced her intent to run for Legislative Council and said she had made a mistake supporting the Article 23 bill. "I am now a different Regina Ip from the one before," she said in a speech that confirmed her intention to run for Legislative Council at the time. She lost the election but won a Legislative Council seat the following year in the Hong Kong Island constituency.

 Write to  Cathy Yan at cathy.yan@wsj.com 