TOKYO—Some people in Tokyo were warned that a major earthquake was about to hit before they felt a tremor. 

As the 8.9-magnitude earthquake struck Japan's northeastern coast, the world's first early warning system—developed by the country's meteorological agency—detected the quake's shock wave near the seismic center and sent off the warning message, which appeared on national television and radio as well as cellphone screens.

In Tokyo, because of its distance from northern Japan, the warning message reached people before the quake actually jolted the capital. 

When an earthquake occurs, seismometers near its source detect the first shock wave, which is usually mild and harmless. This wave is followed by another wave that travels more slowly and is much stronger and potentially destructive.

The agency's computer system analyzes the first, faster-traveling wave and quickly estimates how powerful the second wave will be; if it is likely to be very powerful, the system immediately issues a warning message. 

The message comes on TV and radio, and many Japanese cellphones can receive and display the message. Some power and gas facilities as well as railway and industrial systems automatically halt their operations the moment they receive the warning message.

In places relatively far from the seismic center, people can receive the warning up to half a minute or so before the quake reaches those areas.

Japan is the only country that has such an early warning system, according to the meteorological agency. The agency developed the system with help from scientists and launched it in December 2007.

The system is designed to send out the warning only if the intensity of the quake is lower 5 or stronger on the Japanese scale. (The scale has three levels for each number, so there's lower 5, 5 and upper 5.) Friday's quake was 7 on that scale, and the system sent out the warning message 8.6 seconds after it detected the very first shock wave.

A warning message also apparently went out for Chiba and Ibaraki prefectures, which shortly afterward had a magnitude 6 aftershock. 

"Until today, the early warning system had never been used in such a major earthquake," said the meteorological agency's spokesman. The agency has yet to find out when its warning reached people in northern Japan not too far from the seismic center, and whether it helped at all. 

In areas near the source where people feel the quake shortly after it occurs, the warning message often arrives too late.

 Write to  Juro Osawa at juro.osawa@dowjones.com 