The head of U.S. forces in the Pacific said late Thursday that about 450 radiological and disaster-management experts are ready to assist in Japan's nuclear crisis but are awaiting an assessment from an advance team.

Admiral Robert Willard said in a late briefing, based on East Coast time in the U.S., he is "cautiously optimistic" about Japanese efforts to cool spent nuclear fuel and contain damage at the damaged Fukushima Daiichi nuclear-power plant, but he added that the Japanese government is only beginning to come to grips with the crisis.

"In some cases, they are only able to assess our offers [of assistance] because, at the end of the day, it has to be integrated into the many other efforts that are ongoing by many agencies in Japan," he said.

"The Japanese Self- Defense Forces have only begun in earnest an effort in support of that, and my operations are in support of them," Adm. Willard said. 

Japan's top government spokesman has said Tokyo is willing to accept U.S. help and is discussing the matter with Washington.

"We are coordinating with the U.S. government as to what the U.S. can provide and what people really need," Yukio Edano said. "We have repeatedly asked for specific support, and indeed, they are responding to that."

The U.S. military has flown surveillance aircraft, including a Global Hawk drone and a U2 spy plane, to assess the damage to the Fukushima Daiichi plant, where workers are struggling to contain the damage from last week's magnitude-9.0 earthquake.

U.S. officials have signaled increasing concern during the week about the quality and timeliness of information about conditions around the plant and have enhanced their capability to get independent information about radiation levels and damage at the facility. The top U.S. nuclear-power regulator, Gregory Jaczko, said Thursday it could take weeks to contain radiation leaking from the crippled facility. 

On Thursday, the U.S. announced the voluntary evacuation of its citizens and military dependents from Japan. The U.S. military has imposed a 50-mile "no go" zone around the stricken reactors, much wider than the evacuation zone originally imposed by the Japanese government. Adm. Willard said U.S. military forces, if necessary, could work inside that area if supporting Japanese Defense Forces. 

"We will make excursions in that area as necessary, recognizing that the plume that is of such concern is blowing out to sea the vast majority of the time," Adm. Willard said.

U.S personnel on the ground had monitoring equipment and in some cases carried personal dosimeters to measure radiation exposure, Adm. Willard added. 

Questions remain, however, about how the nuclear response may hamper other relief efforts. 

According a U.S. Marine Corps statement, a Japanese-led convoy accompanying a Marine task force was due to arrive at Yamagata Airport, a hub of relief operations. Military teams based out of Yamagata Airport and Camp Sendai continued to survey disaster-hit areas and hand out relief supplies.

At present, more than 750 U.S. Marines, sailors, and civilians based on Okinawa are deployed in support of the humanitarian assistance operation, dubbed Operation Tomodachi; thousands more U.S. military personnel are positioned offshore. 

—The Associated Press contributed to this article.