NAJAF, Iraq – In his first public speech to supporters following his return to Iraq this week after more than three years in Iran, firebrand cleric Moqtada al-Sadr sounded a conciliatory note toward the new Iraqi government while insisting that U.S. troops should depart on schedule by year-end.

"Listen up, we're all with the government if it served the Iraqi people and if it did not serve the Iraqi people there are other means – strictly political – that must be pursued to reform the government," Mr. Sadr told a few thousand of his supporters who had gathered on Saturday outside his home here in this holy Shiite shrine city south of Baghdad.

Mr. Sadr, whose political movement is an integral part of the new Iraqi government, was draped in black as he stood on a makeshift stage erected outside his home. 

Several cordons of armed men, some in gray suits, encircled the cleric as his mostly male supporters struggled to catch a glimpse of the speaker. Many trekked from impoverished neighborhoods in Baghdad and other predominantly Shiite areas in the center and south of the country just to hear him speak underscoring the sway he still exerts on some segments of the population.

"Give the new government a chance to prove that it's in the service of the people," said Mr. Sadr. "Iraqi people have had enough of poverty."

Mr. Sadr's movement scored big gains in the inconclusive March elections last year and played an instrumental role in helping Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki secure a second term last month at the helm of an unwieldy coalition government including the country's main competing political factions. 

His so-called Sadrist movement controls eight ministries.

After the provision of services, the government's next priority is to ensure the some-50,000 U.S. soldiers leave Iraq, said Mr. Sadr.

"Iraq has had enough occupation and slavery; the occupier must depart," he said.

"We heard a promise from the Iraqi government that it will work on driving the occupier out and we are waiting for it to fulfill its promises," said Mr. Sadr.

In an interview with The Wall Street Journal last month Mr. Maliki said all U.S. troops must leave by the end of 2011 as outlined in the security agreement signed between Baghdad and Washington at the end of 2008.

Mr. Maliki said any presence for U.S. forces in Iraq beyond that date would require a new agreement approved by the government and Parliament, an unlikely prospect given strong opposition from many among the prime minister's own Shiite constituency, as well as the influence of both Mr. Sadr and neighboring Iran, which backs Mr. Sadr and other anti-American forces inside Iraq.

"We have not forgotten the occupier; we are still resisting the occupier by all means, military and cultural," said Mr. Sadr as he urged his supporters at several instances throughout the speech to chant anti-American slogans.

"Let's annoy the American occupier, so one more time: No, no occupier," said Mr. Sadr.

"Let's make him even angrier: Yes, yes to resistance."

Mr. Sadr affirmed that his movement retains a military wing which he said was dedicated to fighting the U.S. military and ensuring that all American troops leave Iraq as scheduled. 

"We do not kill an Iraqi, we do not lay a hand on an Iraqi, we target only the occupier," said Mr. Sadr while making it very clear to his supporters that only he had the authority to make decisions regarding the movement's armed wing.

"Resistance does not mean everyone bears arms," he said.

Mr. Sadr has sought to shed his rabble-rouser image over the years to fashion a disciplined movement akin to Lebanon's Iran-backed Hezbollah working on several tracks – political, military and cultural.

Many segments of his former Mahdi Army militia, which fought pitched battles with U.S. troops at the start of the war and was later implicated in running death squads during the Sunni-Shiite sectarian conflict, have now been rebranded into a new organization called the Promised Day Brigades.

Mr. Sadr continues to grapple with several groups that had splintered from the Mahdi Army in the past and are now backed by Iran most notably the League of the Righteous.

U.S. military commanders say all these groups including Mr. Sadr's militia were responsible for recent rocket attacks against the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad and other American installations around the country.

 Write to  Sam Dagher at sam.dagher@wsj.com 