Jyothy Laboratories Ltd's shareholders reacted with dismay at its bid to acquire Henkel India Ltd. Jyothy Laboratories' shares fell by 12% to 203 rupees on Thursday, while Henkel India's price rose 5%, as a bidding war for  Henkel AG
HENKY


0.30
%




 and Co.'s 51% stake in the local unit looms ahead.

Jyothy has paid about 600 million rupees, at 35 rupees a share, for a sub-15% stake in Henkel India. It has not overpaid, as the price is a 27% discount to Thursday's market price. At this price, it would pay about 2 billion rupees for Henkel India's 51% stake. A 20% mandatory open offer, at the current market price, will increase the total deal size to nearly 3.7 billion rupees. This could go higher if Henkel India gets more than 35 rupees a share for its stake.

Funding is not an issue for Jyothy. It has more than 2.9 billion rupees in cash and investments, most of which would be available for this acquisition. The debt it will have to raise for the balance portion will not strain its balance sheet, as it has a net worth of 7 billion rupees. If Henkel sells its stake for a significant premium over 35 rupees a share, which appears unlikely, this could change.

What does Jyothy Laboratories get from this deal? 

It claims synergies in both companies' operations. Both are present in home and personal care, fabric care, dish care, and household cleaning products. Henkel India is a multi-product company, but its 2009 annual report shows that detergents alone accounted for more than half of sales, and soaps contribute about one-fifth to sales. Both categories face severe competition in the market. The market leaders are investing in their brands to grow market share, and are keeping prices low even when input costs are rising. That has made life difficult for the smaller firms as margins have fallen.

Initially, Henkel India 's losses will affect Jyothy Laboratories' financials.

Dabur India Ltd's acquisition of Balsara Hygiene Products Ltd is a good example of how a loss-making business can be turned into a sizeable and profitable one. But a crucial difference is that the market for consumer packaged goods was not as hyper-competitive then as it is now. Jyothy Laboratories' integration efforts and ability to build scale are crucial. If the two firms merge, the accumulated losses of Henkel India will come handy to save on taxes. 

But this is in the longer run, before which some financial pain is likely. 

Jyothy Laboratories also runs the risk of being caught in a bidding war that may increase its acquisition cost. That may explain the Street's nervous reaction to the announcement.