ZURICH –  ABB Ltd. Wednesday said it had won a contract worth $900 million to help build an electricity highway more than 1,700 kilometers long in India, reflecting the unabated demand for power in emerging markets that has been a boon to the Swiss electrical-engineering giant during the economic crisis. 

ABB, which has been a pioneer in building long-distance power links and already has won major contracts in China and Brazil over the past few years, said the link will provide electricity from hydro-power stations in northeastern India to some 90 million people in the region around the city of Agra, which is located south of New Delhi. 

The project, whose total size is estimated at about $1.1 billion, was awarded by the Power Grid Corp. of India Ltd. Besides ABB, Indian government-owned Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd. will also participate in the project, which uses ABB's cutting-edge, long-distance power technology that may have been the key trigger in ABB's success to outbid rivals, analysts said. 

"The transmission link sets a new standard in ultrahigh-voltage power transmission and underlines ABB's global leadership in ultrahigh-voltage direct current technology," said  Peter Leupp, head of ABB's power-systems division. "We are pleased to continue supporting India in the development of its power infrastructure." 

In contrast to conventional power links, ABB's ultrahigh-voltage direct current technology allows electricity to be transported over long distances without substantial electricity loss. While the technology was developed several decades ago, demand for long-distance power lines was limited in the past. It picked up only a few years ago as energy consumption soared in emerging markets. 

Although India's per-capita electricity consumption still is one of the lowest in the world, its demand for electricity is growing rapidly, and growth rates are expected to remain above average. To meet this demand, economists say India needs to install additional power-generating capacity. More projects that connect remote areas that are rich with hydro or solar power with energy-guzzling business centers are expected to be built in the future, analysts say. 

One such key megaproject could be the so-called Desertec project, which attempts to tap solar power in the Sahara desert for consumption in Europe. Similar projects are under way in the Middle East. 

ABB has been benefiting from the strong demand in emerging markets over the past few years, helping the engineering concern fend off a slump in economic activity in industrialized regions such as the U.S. and Europe. Although competition in emerging markets has heated up of late, large orders from emerging markets continue to trickle in. Earlier this year ABB won a $16 million power contract in Brazil, a $20 million power products order in Ukraine, a $27 million power order in Oman and a $15 million contract in Mongolia.  

 Write to  Goran Mijuk at goran.mijuk@dowjones.com 