 A legal battle involving security measures typically reserved for classified government secrets has been brewing in an unlikely spot: the sprawling consumer litigation over Toyota's sudden acceleration incidents.  



Delta Air Lines said it has dropped plans to add flights this year and instead will cut capacity by 2% from 2010 levels as it digests rising fuel costs and the impact of the crisis in Japan. 



A Boeing and Lockheed Martin joint venture—which dominates rocket manufacturing in the U.S.—has chosen a fledgling Southern California space-tourism company, XCOR Aerospace, to help develop lower-cost booster engines. 



 A German federal judge ruled against Deutsche Bank in an interest-rate swaps case, a verdict that is likely to change how German banks market complicated derivatives products to their clients.  



 Northern Rock, the "good bank" created out of nationalized U.K. lender Northern Rock, is planning the first issue of bonds backed by Northern Rock mortgages since the beginning of the financial crisis in 2007. 



 Looming stress tests on four troubled Irish lenders will attempt to reach a definite count of the losses lurking in their loan books but could still fail to restore confidence in Ireland's broken banking system.  



Alpha Bank, Greece's third-largest lender by assets, posted a 94% gain in fourth-quarter net profit to €10.1 million ($14.4 million) from a year-earlier result hit by an extraordinary tax charge, as rising provisions and slightly weaker income weighed on earnings. 



Punch Taverns, one of the U.K.'s largest pub groups, said it will dramatically shrink its struggling tenanted operations and spin off its better-performing managed-pubs division into a separate listed company before the end of the summer in a bid to overhaul the group and restructure its heavy debt. 



Executives from U.S. oil major Chevron and Russian state oil producer Rosneft will meet later this week to discuss "certain issues" that have emerged over their joint Black Sea project. 



Swiss watch exports rose nearly 21% in real terms and nearly 18% in nominal terms from a year earlier in February to 1.4 billion Swiss francs ($1.55 billion).



 Man Group said it sold back its 25.5% stake in BlueCrest Capital Management for $633 million, making a profit of around $250 million on the investment it made in 2003.  

 ING Groep Chief Executive Jan Hommen said he will give up his €1.25 million ($1.78 million) bonus for 2010, in a bid to allay public anger over his reward for steering the bailed-out Dutch company back into a profit last year.  



 French dairy Groupe Lactalis said it had raised its stake in Parmalat to 29%, setting the stage for a fight for control of the Italian peer.  

Intesa Sanpaolo, Italy's biggest retail bank, is trying to rally other domestic companies and investors to the cause of blocking Lactalis from taking control of Parmalat.



BILT Paper, an Indian producer of writing and printing paper, has become the latest Indian company to announce its intention to list on the main market of the London Stock Exchange, where it plans to raise $330 million. 

 The European Union's likely antitrust probe of the potential merger between Deutsche Börse and NYSE Euronext exchanges won't be simple and could go into an in-depth phase of analysis, European Competition Commissioner Joaquín Almunia said. 



The London Stock Exchange Group is planning to lead the creation of a so-called International Board, in what it believes is a first-of-its-kind network that would allow blue chip stocks in up to six countries to be traded during London trading time, senior LSE executive Tony Weeresinghe said. 



Mediaset said its 2010 net profit rose 29% to €352.2 million ($501 million), as advertising spending returned and grew at a solid pace in its Italian and Spanish markets. 

Mediaset, owned by the family of Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, proposed to raise its annual dividend to €0.35 ($0.50) per share on 2010 results, from €0.22 a share a year earlier. 



 Prices for rare-earth metals from China continue to soar despite the prospect of short-term market disruption from the disasters in Japan, the No. 1 global importer.  



India's Karnataka state will hand over 1,500 acres (607 hectares) in the next 30 days to ArcelorMittal for the construction of a $6 billion steel plant, the southern state's chief minister, B.S. Yeddyurappa, said. ArcelorMittal plans to set up a steel plant in the Bellary district with a capacity of six million metric tons a year. 



 France's Sanofi-Aventis and U.S.-based Merck & Co. said they have ended plans to combine their animal-health businesses owing to the complexity of the transaction and regulations.  



Global retail giant Metro cautioned that the Japanese earthquake and tsunami, as well as political unrest in North Africa and the Middle East, could weaken the global economic environment and hurt its earnings momentum.



Euroset Holding, Russia's largest mobile-phone retailer, plans to float on the London Stock Exchange, defying the poor market conditions that have seen other offerings pulled in recent weeks. 



Microsoft wants the European Union to harmonize rules governing cloud computing, where data is stored remotely, in order to give the bloc of 27 countries a competitive advantage, the group's Brussels-based counsel said in an interview. 



A U.S. federal judge rejected Google's settlement with authors and publishers that would allow it to make millions of books available online, saying it would give the Internet giant the ability to "exploit" books without the permission of copyright owners.

The appeals-court judge denied the 2008 settlement among Google, authors and publishers "without prejudice," meaning they could submit a revised pact that would better protect copyright owners.



Research In Motion will launch its PlayBook tablet in North America on April 19, pricing its three models from $499 to $699. It will be the latest rival to the sector leader, Apple's iPad. 



Advantest, whose mainstay product is a tester for dynamic random access memory chips, sealed a $900 million deal to buy Verigy after the board of the U.S. microchip testing equipment maker changed its mind and decided to back a takeover offer from the Japanese company, scrapping plans of its own to buy peer LTX-Credence. 



Microsoft sued Barnes & Noble and the makers of Barnes & Noble's Nook electronic book device, escalating a series of patent battles over gadgets based on Google's Android operating system. 



Apple sued Amazon.com over its use of the phrase "App Store," accusing the online retailer of trademark infringement. In a complaint filed in U.S. federal court, Apple asked for an injunction stopping Amazon from using the name as well as unspecified damages. 



 U.K. communications regulator Ofcom outlined plans for the single biggest auction of mobile spectrum in the country, with limits on how much each mobile operator can buy to ensure healthy competition.  



China Telecom reported a slower-than-expected 9.3% increase in full-year net profit to 15.76 billion yuan ($2.40 billion), on a further decline in its fixed-line business and as its mobile business faced tougher competition. 