On the fifth floor of Merrill Lynch & Co.'s headquarters at the World Financial Center in lower Manhattan, a small team of traders who bought and sold securities with the firm's own money for two years were close enough to see the computer screens of traders taking orders from clients and overhear their phone calls.

The Securities and Exchange Commission said Tuesday that the proprietary-trading desk, which traded electronic messages with its nearby counterparts, was illegally spoon-fed information about what Merrill's clients were doing, and then copied an unspecified number of trades between 2003 and 2005. Merrill also encouraged market-making traders to generate and share "trading ideas" with the proprietary-trading desk, according to the SEC.

Merrill, acquired by Bank of America Corp. in 2009, agreed to pay $10 million to settle the accusations, which also included charging institutional investors undisclosed trading fees. Merrill neither admitted nor denied wrongdoing.

 Excerpt from Merrill Lynch's "code of ethics": 

 Employees "may not discuss the business affairs of any client with any other person, except on a strict need-to know basis." 

 Source: SEC 

Such enforcement cases are rare, and the Merrill settlement is likely to fuel longstanding suspicions among many investors that Wall Street firms tap the continuous flow of orders from customers for their own benefit. Securities firms are lobbying U.S. regulators over the wording of the "Volcker rule," part of last year's Dodd-Frank financial law that is expected to force banks to wind down or sell their proprietary-trading desks.

In a statement, Bank of America said the "matter involved issues from 2002 to 2007 at Merrill Lynch." The proprietary-trading desk, which had one to three employees and authority to trade more than $1 billion of Merrill's capital, was shut down in 2005 "for business reasons" after the SEC began investigating, according to people familiar with the situation.

The employees involved in the trading no longer work at Bank of America, these people said.

Bank of America said Merrill has "adopted a number of policy changes to ensure separation of proprietary and other trading and to address the SEC's concerns."

Merrill Lynch also voluntarily implemented enhanced training and supervision to improve the principal-trading processes at the securities firm.

The SEC accused Merrill of numerous regulatory breakdowns, ranging from supervision failures to cheating customers. 

"One of our goals in a case like this is to make sure that the problems we find are fixed going forward," said  Scott Friestad, an associate director in the SEC's enforcement division. The Merrill case is "one of the few times that the [SEC] has ever charged a large Wall Street firm with misconduct involving the activities of a proprietary-trading desk."

The traders involved in the matter weren't identified in documents released by the SEC. People familiar with the situation said the proprietary traders, who worked on what Merrill called its Equity Strategy Desk, were led by  Robert H. May. Mr. May was among four traders from Bank of America hired last week by boutique-trading firm First New York Securities Inc.

Mr. May couldn't be reached to comment.  Neil Bloomgarden, who reported to Mr. May, now works at  Morgan Stanley.
MS


0.38
%




 He and the firm declined to comment.

Bank of America hasn't announced plans to shut down or sell its remaining proprietary-trading desk.

As a result of the investigation, though, the company has physically separated such traders from the rest of the trading floor. Merrill also separates client orders from other trades to eliminate any mingling with positions taken by market makers who buy and sell on behalf of clients.

The SEC cited four examples in which Merrill traders on the proprietary-trading desk bought or sold shares within minutes of a similar order for a customer, according to the agency. Customers of Merrill were assured by the firm that information about their orders would be kept confidential, and the company's code of ethics requires employees to "not discuss the business affairs of any client with any other person, except on a strict need-to-know-basis," the SEC said Tuesday. The number of trades detailed by the SEC was small.

In September 2003, an unidentified institutional client placed an order to sell about 40,000 shares of  Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd.
TEVA


-0.41
%




, according to the SEC filing. Three minutes later, a market-making trader "sent an instant message to an ESD trader informing him about the trade," the filing said. The proprietary trader then sold 10,000 shares in the company for Merrill's own account.

"[I] always like to do what the smart guys are doing," one Merrill proprietary trader wrote in an electronic message, according to the SEC filing.

 The SEC said the misuse of customer-order information occurred in "these and other instances." The exact number wasn't disclosed.

The alleged abuses are different from front-running, in which trades are placed ahead of those from customers. But placing orders only minutes after clients could have helped Merrill access stock prices that didn't fully reflect the market's reaction to buy-and-sell orders from institutional investors.

The company had agreed to charge customers commissions only for certain deals, but Merrill sometimes charged undisclosed markups and markdowns by filling orders at worse prices than it had paid to execute them, according to the SEC. These fees were charged by Merrill to some of its wealthiest clients between 2002 and 2007, according to the SEC. 

Merrill's decision to invest billions of dollars of its own money in mortgage-backed bonds contributed to its near collapse in 2008. Bank of America acquired Merrill for $19 billion in January 2009.