That the Dutch have a knack for plants should come as no surprise to anyone who has admired a tulip or visited cities in the Netherlands where even the most urban apartment dwellers have a table in the sunlight for a prized collection of carefully nurtured bulbs. It is that combination of natural inclination and urban know-how wedded to calculated bravado that has made the Dutch landscape firm West 8 so in demand. Their reputation in the U.S. is now growing faster than kudzu with the Governors Island master plan, the new Lincoln Park in front of Frank Gehry's New World Symphony Orchestra Academy in Miami Beach (opening on Jan. 25) and the recently awarded commission to develop a 40-year master plan for the 1,077-acre Longwood Gardens, a horticultural showcase in Kennett Square, Pa. From civilizing an ungainly greenway atop a newly buried tangle of freeways for the riverbanks of Madrid to transforming Governors Island in New York Harbor from a ghostly military base into a destination playground, West 8 is the firm to go to for complex urban landscape projects.

Adriaan Geuze, 51, founding partner and design director of West 8—based in Rotterdam with satellite offices in Belgium, New York and Toronto—has described drawing his inspiration from "the poetic beauty of the artless and the mundane." His approach to landscape has translated into a fearless use of shapes, scales both intimate and urban and radical twists, as seen in the wavy boardwalk on Toronto's Central Waterfront that brings to mind the destabilizing dynamic of a magician whipping a tablecloth off a fully set table. 

The firm came to renown with its bold redevelopment of two docks in Amsterdam, stacking them tightly with 2,500 housing units all varied in terms of style, outdoor space and roof gardens. Their international reputation continues to grow: In April, an installation of red bridges popping up above a sea of swaying trees will be the centerpiece at the 2011 Xi'an International Horticultural Exhibition in China; next year, the Jubilee Gardens on the Thames will debut at the 2012 London Olympics. 

A key player in the emerging field of landscape urbanism, Mr. Geuze is nurturing landscape design's role as a powerful force in shaping our world sustainably and with sensitivity. Here, he answered a few questions about how his landscape ideas take root.



 I believe every public park needs seasons, illusions to another world and a very strong identity.

 Historically in Europe, parks were very important within the city, while in the average American city, parks were not cultivated as part of the urban tissue. But at this moment, America is in the blossom years of landscape architecture. 

 In the European mind, American landscapes are about the wilderness and the culture of the car—that's the American landscape. You don't have that in Europe: the deserts, the California coastline, the petrified forests. These are amazing.

 We hoped to give SoundScape [in Miami Beach] a sense that it is a place where people can meet. One of the simple tools to do that was to deliver shade where people could sit in daytime to enjoy ocean breezes. At night, the park will have gigantic outdoor video projections on the wall of the New World Symphony. People will sit there like in a forest at sunset when the orange of the sun illuminates everything in a surreal way.

 Parks are like poetry and music. They basically have no reason to exist—that is also what is so special about them. They are places where you can dream about a non-realistic, non-time-related world.

 The Dutch tulip is famous for not having a smell. My grandma had a garden of roses, typical English tea roses, something like 35 cultivars. And so for me personally and deep in my unconscious DNA, the smell of roses is by far the best.

 I  always bring gifts of flowers. Always. But I have a hysterical reaction to mixtures of flowers. When I buy bouquets, I buy only one type and one color. And since in Holland flowers are so cheap, we don't buy three dozen but six dozen. I don't give presents of 20 when I can get 60. 

 My home in Rotterdam has only a very small front garden with a swing, a hut built by my son and the smallest imaginable plot. But our house in the north of Spain is my secret place. It's on a hillside with three levels and three gardens. One is all mulberry, entirely natural, a work of Zen. In the next garden, there is a hexagon-shaped wall made of concrete with pockets filled with stones that I gather. It is only 20% filled now; it will be a lifetime's work. At the highest point there is an herb garden where I grow artichokes and vegetables and all kinds of tomatoes. In Spain there is a different tomato for every pasta, salad or sauce. These are the gardens for me.

 Corrections and Amplifications:  An earlier version of this article incorrectly referred to SoundScape in Miami Beach as Lincoln Park.