ATHENS—Greece staged a successful Treasury bill auction Tuesday, partly dispelling worries over the country's ability to meet its debt obligations amid market speculation that Greece will need to restructure its debt, a scenario European Central Bank officials denied on Tuesday. 

The auction also showed investors are still willing to lend Greece short-term money at a rate slightly below what the country pays for its official loans under a €110 billion ($157.87 billion) bailout from the European Union and International Monetary Fund last year. 

"We are happy to access short-term capital at a cost below the level of the official support," said  Petros Christodoulou, head of Greece's Public Debt Management Agency. He said foreigners took up 34.2% of the allocation. 

Greece sold €1.63 billion in T-bills, including a 30% non-competitive tranche above the €1.25 billion offer size, at a uniform yield of 4.88%, compared with 4.80% at the previous tender April 12. The bid-to-cover ratio, which shows how demand compares with the amount sold, was 3.58, compared with 3.81 previously. 

But analysts said Greece's regular monthly T-bill auctions cover only a small portion of the country's total borrowing requirements, underscoring the view that the nation needs further external help to meet its financial needs in the next two years. 

"As the outstanding amount of Greek T-bills is around €10 billion, this source of funding is not the major factor for the country," said  Jan von Gerich, chief analyst at Nordea in Helsinki. 

"Instead, it looks quite clear that Greece needs another support package, since a return to bond markets, as envisaged in the original €110 billion Greek bailout package, is not going to happen," he said. 

Greece expects that a June audit of its budgets will show that a new financial-aid package of nearly €60 billion will be needed to cover its financial needs stretching into 2013, a senior Greek government official said Tuesday. 

The official, who has knowledge of Greece's talks with the EU and IMF, said the issue will be discussed at a regularly scheduled meeting of EU finance ministers Monday and Tuesday next week. 

The report helped buoy otherwise beleaguered sentiment on the Greek debt markets one day after ratings agency Standard and Poor's Inc. cut its credit rating on Greek sovereign debt and rival ratings agency Moody's Investors Service Inc. warned it might do the same. 

Greek yield spreads over German bunds tightened following the report, and Greece's risk insurance premium, as reflected by credit default swaps spreads, declined. 

Analysts said the short-term maturity of the T-bills in Tuesday's auction, also helped. The bills expire in November, meaning they would mature before the current bailout package expires. 

"Investors are still buying the bills, as they mature in 2011, when there is still sufficient funding coming from the European Union and International Monetary Fund, hence investors are almost certain of getting their money back," said  Jens Peter Sorensen, chief analyst at Danske Markets in Copenhagen. 

  David Schnautz, a strategist at Commerzbank in London, said the below 5% rate should be viewed as a success for the debt agency after the "recent raft of horrible news". 

—Costas Paris in Athens and Terence Roth in London contributed to this article. 