TUCSON, Ariz.—Like others, Kathy Goff found an unexpected role in the wake of the Jan. 8 shooting rampage—hers, the accidental curator of the city's biggest memorial.

Soon after the attack that left six dead and 13 wounded, her bosses at the University Medical Center asked Ms. Goff to retrieve the cards addressed to families of victims at the hospital, where U.S. Rep.  Gabrielle Giffords and others were treated. 

So each day at 5 p.m., Ms. Goff would join the throng of mourners, reporters and passers-by gathered on the hospital's front lawn. As the memorial grew, so did the job, requiring Ms. Goff and her staff to spend four hours or more each day.

Visitors arrived day and night. The lawn sprouted a wide bed of bouquets, balloons and get-well cards. People shuffled through slowly, leaving matted pathways. They left thousands of messages written on everything from paper plates and poster board to tiles and rocks. 

Parents stumbled over explanations. "Are those the people in the hospital?" asked one little girl in front of a poster with photos of the five adults and one child killed in the shooting. Her mother hesitated. "No...they're...those are the people who...they're not with us any more."

Ms. Goff, trained as a nurse, had to learn her new duties on the job. What, for instance, to do with spent candles? Or piles of wilting flowers? What about the giant, and now slightly dirty, stuffed white puppy? She tried searching Google under "memorial" and "vigil" for tips, but found it was one of the few subjects not broached by the search giant.

On one of her evening rounds last week, Ms. Goff slipped off her black pumps and tiptoed in stocking feet among the offerings to straighten fallen pictures. "It's a good thing I have decent balance," she said, standing on one foot and stretching to push a poster upright with her fingertips.

"What do I do? What do I do?" Ms. Goff said after finding a row of hand-made quilt patches dedicated to the slain. She was torn between preserving the patches and leaving them for others to see. She later asked security officers to remove them late that night.

The most fragile messages—those damaged by dew or easily wind blown—went into her green canvas bag. Ms. Goff's staff will catalogue and scan the messages before posting them online. Some will go to victims' families.

Visitors have sometimes been a challenge. While Ms. Goff was harvesting note cards one evening, a woman wearing an Oscar the Grouch T-shirt asked, "Are you one of those people taking things away? People are getting really upset that stuff is disappearing."

Ms. Goff gently explained that she worked for the hospital and was trying to preserve the site. "People are attached," Ms. Goff said later. "I understand."

On Friday, Ms. Giffords was the last shooting victim discharged from the hospital. She was flown to Houston to begin rehabilitation at a specialized facility there. Meanwhile, visitors continued to stream to the temporary memorial, which the hospital plans one day to replace with a permanent one. 

As the sun set one evening during Ms. Goff's duties, the vigil glowed with hundreds of candles. A trumpeter played the National Anthem. 

As much time as she has spent here, Ms. Goff is not immune to the emotions that have fed this garden of grief. Standing over a giant stuffed penguin, Ms. Goff sniffled as she read one note. It was written in child's handwriting on red construction paper: "We need you Gabby."

 Write to  Tamara Audi at tammy.audi@wsj.com 