U.S. and Pakistani governments sent conflicting signals about their increasingly rocky ties Tuesday, as each sought to minimize mounting domestic backlashes two days after Navy commandos killed Osama bin Laden on Pakistani soil.

The White House on Tuesday affirmed its partnership with Pakistan, moving to contain tensions it fears will jeopardize billions of dollars of American aid to Islamabad and a relationship with a Pakistani government still seen as vital in the fight against al Qaeda and the Taliban in neighboring Afghanistan.

Washington's official embrace of Islamabad came as leading U.S. lawmakers said Congress will review, and potentially suspend, $1.5 billion in annual assistance to Pakistan. That could happen, they say, if its government can't explain how the man who headed the group that launched attacks on the U.S. on Sept. 11, 2001, managed to live unmolested, apparently for years, just 40 miles from Pakistan's capital. 

 1950s-60s U.S. sees Pakistan as counterweight to Soviet-tilting India.

 1979-1989 U.S. channels billions of dollars in covert aid through Pakistan's military to help Mujahedeen fight Soviets in Afghanistan.

 1990 After Soviet war ends, President George H.W. Bush declines to certify Pakistan free of nuclear weapons, leading to U.S. sanctions. U.S. military and civilian aid collapses, angering Pakistanis.

 Sept. 11, 2001 Attacks on U.S. renew Pakistan's strategic importance. U.S. boosts civilian and military aid.

 2003 Pakistan, under President Pervez Musharraf, aids in arrest of senior al Qaeda leader and 9/11 architect Khaled Sheikh Mohammed.

 2004 U.S. begins unmanned drone strikes on militants in Pakistan's tribal regions.

 2006 U.S. begins strategic tilt toward India, Pakistan's rival, with a bilateral civilian nuclear deal.

 2009 Congress agrees to five-year, $7.5 billion civilian aid program to help rebuild Pakistan. President Barack Obama calls for more pressure on Pakistan to arrest senior Taliban leaders believed to be in Pakistan.

 August 2009 U.S. drone strike kills Pakistan Taliban leader Baitullah Mehsud, followed by suicide attacks across Pakistan.

 December 2009 Haqqani network, sheltering in mountainous northwest Pakistan, kills seven CIA agents in eastern Afghanistan.

 2010 U.S. drone strikes in Pakistan number more than 100, more than in any previous year. Pakistan later complains the strikes kill civilians and make it harder to defeat Taliban.

 July 2010 Secretary of State Hillary Clinton says she believes Osama bin Laden is still in Pakistan, urges the government to capture him.

 January 2011 U.S. CIA contractor Raymond Davis kills two armed men in Lahore. Diplomatic scuffle is resolved only when U.S. agrees to pay victims' families. Pakistan threatens to force out more CIA agents.

 May 2011 U.S. special forces raid complex 40 miles from Islamabad, killing bin Laden.

U.S. officials have posed similar questions. "Either they're involved or incompetent," Central Intelligence Agency Director Leon Panetta told lawmakers in a classified briefing on Tuesday when asked about possible Pakistani involvement, according to officials briefed on the exchange.

Islamabad, meanwhile, hardened its position against the U.S. raid that killed the al Qaeda leader deep inside Pakistan without giving warning or seeking permission. Pakistan's foreign ministry expressed "concerns and reservations" about Washington's decision. "This event of unauthorized unilateral action cannot be taken as a rule," it said in a statement.

The White House is in an increasingly difficult position of seeking to placate mounting domestic outrage about Pakistan's possible role in harboring bin Laden, while maintaining its counterterrorism cooperation. The White House stressed Tuesday that it didn't want to see a rupture in the alliance. 

"Pakistan is a partner—a key partner—in the fight against al Qaeda and terrorism," White House press secretary Jay Carney told reporters. "They have been extremely helpful, and we look forward to cooperating in the future"

In private, a number of senior U.S. officials urged caution in casting blame on Pakistan's government or President Asif Ali Zardari. "If multiple people at any level [knew], I think we would have found out by virtue of the amount of information gathering we do" in Pakistan, a senior U.S. official said. He suggested officials are going back to review their intelligence and see if they missed any signs.

In a joint statement Tuesday afternoon, U.S. and Pakistani militaries said the raid "underscores the importance of cooperation" in antiterrorism efforts. "Both sides affirmed their mutual commitment to their strong defense relations," the statement said.

Pakistan's rebuke of the raid appeared aimed at quieting mounting discontent among middle-class Pakistanis, many of whom are virulently anti-American, for what they have seen as a violation of Pakistan's sovereign space. 

But a senior Pakistani civilian official on Tuesday characterized the foreign ministry statement as "something Pakistan has to say because of the domestic debate." The official added that the role of people within the military or intelligence services remained unclear, and sounded the refrain that has grown in the U.S. "At best it's incompetence," the official said. "At worst it's complicity."

The Obama administration's special representative to Pakistan and Afghanistan, Marc Grossman, continued a visit to Islamabad on Tuesday and raised the issue of the bin Laden operation with Mr. Zardari and the head of the Pakistani military, Gen. Ashfaq Kayani, according to a U.S. official. 

President Zardari is considering establishing a commission to investigate how bin Laden avoided detection by the country's spy services and military, Pakistani officials said. 

Photos from around the world.

 "Justice has been done" and more.

A look at Monday's front pages of U.S. newspapers on the news of Osama bin Laden's death. 

On the ground

Diagram from the U.S. government

Photos inside and out



Leading U.S. lawmakers said Tuesday that without forthcoming answers, assistance to Pakistan could hang in the balance. "It's going to be very difficult" to deliver aid, said Rep. Peter King (R., N.Y.), chairman of the House Homeland Security Committee. "It's virtually impossible to believe that Osama bin Laden could have been living under their noses for six years without them getting suspicious."

The White House won the support of some leading Republicans and Democrats, including House Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio), one of President Barack Obama's harshest critics. "This is not the time to back away from Pakistan—we need more engagement, not less," Mr. Boehner told a small group of reporters Tuesday. "Pakistan is critical to breaking the back of al Qaeda."

Sen. John Kerry, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, said he would call senior Pakistani officials in the coming days to explain how they can reassure Congress. Mr. Kerry was one of the architects of the assistance package passed for Pakistan in 2009.

"It's up to Pakistan to answer some very legitimate questions," Mr. Kerry said in an interview. "In the end, I think we need to be very careful and thoughtful and not rush into a situation that makes matters worse."

Still, U.S. and Pakistani officials voiced fears that the fallout from bin Laden's death could be particularly damaging for the relationship.

Criticism of Pakistan on Capitol Hill had been mounting even before the raid. Many lawmakers questioned why the U.S., enmeshed in its own financial crisis, should be providing aid to a country whose intelligence agencies regularly have been accused by the Pentagon of aiding the Taliban in Afghanistan. With bin Laden no longer in the picture, the rationale for pouring billions of dollars into Pakistan's coffers could diminish even more, said these officials.

"Which senator is really going to want to go to the mat for Pakistan in this environment?" said a Pakistani official.

U.S. officials also fear that Pakistan's security services will be even less inclined to cooperate with Washington in the coming months. Islamabad knows the Obama administration is committed to begin withdrawing forces from Afghanistan in July. And Pakistan's generals are also believed to be alarmed at the Pentagon and Central Intelligence Agency's ability to penetrate Pakistan's defenses, as evidenced by the operation against bin Laden.

—Janet Hook contributed to this article.

 Write to  Jay Solomon at jay.solomon@wsj.com, Laura Meckler at laura.meckler@wsj.com and Tom Wright at tom.wright@wsj.com 