LISBON—Portugal's economy contracted in the first quarter, and the European Commission predicted the country's gross domestic product will shrink this year and next. 

The economy has been hit as austerity measures to control Portugal's spiraling debt intensify under the €78 billion ($112 billion) bailout from the European Union and the International Monetary Fund. 

The commission predicted the Portuguese economy would shrink 2.2% this year, compared with a 1% decline forecast in an autumn report. In 2012, the economy is expected to contract 1.8%, compared with growth of 0.8% predicted late last year. 

Portugal's GDP fell 0.7% in the first quarter compared with the fourth and on an annual basis, the National Statistics Institute, INE, said. The economy contracted 0.3% in the fourth quarter from the third, though for full-year 2010 it grew 1.4%. 

Portugal in April became the third euro-zone country to ask for a bailout from its European Union peers to meet its financial obligations over the next years, after Greece and Ireland, as its borrowing costs soared to unsustainable levels amid a stagnant economy and mounting debt. 

The EU and the IMF, as well as Portuguese officials, warned last week that budget cuts demanded under the bailout in exchange for the three-year aid package were likely to cause the local economy to contract around 2% in 2011 and 2012. A recovery is expected to start in 2013. 

"The expected further deterioration in labor-market conditions, significant cuts in public-sector wages, a temporary acceleration in consumer prices on the back of a value-added tax increase and a limited supply of bank credit for households are expected to weigh heavily on households," the commission said in its spring report. 

The commission forecast Portugal's budget deficit will stand at 5.9% of GDP this year, 4.5% of GDP next year and 3% of GDP in 2013, the same targets established in the EU-IMF aid package. 

Portugal's own GDP estimate doesn't include a statistical breakdown of growth, but the government said domestic demand and internal investment have weakened, though exports remain relatively strong. 

"These aren't positive results," Portuguese Economy Minister José Vieira da Silva said. "But there's a positive sign," he said, noting that "Portuguese firms, particularly those which sell to the external market in Europe and outside of Europe, have been able to achieve good results." 

Portugal's exports rose 17% in the first quarter from the same period a year ago. Exports are forecast to grow 6.2% in 2011 after rising 8.8% in 2010, according to the EU, but exports alone won't be sufficient to offset the effects of the Portugal's stiff austerity measures. 

Banco BPI's chief economist  Cristina Casalinho said domestic demand has fallen because of an increase in the value-added tax and public-sector cuts. 

Further tax rises are possible under the bailout plan, which also mandates wide-reaching overhauls of Portuguese labor, energy and telecommunications regulations, as well as a slew of privatizations, to shake up an economy that analysts say is uncompetitive and excessively rigid. 

In its spring report, the commission said the measures will prompt unemployment to rise to 12.3% by next year. The government said last week the figure is expected to rise to 13% by 2013 from around 11% at present. 

The commission also said government debt is expected to reach 102% of GDP in 2011 and 107% in 2012, resulting in a rapid increase in interest payments. 

Interest payments are "expected to be the fastest-growing spending item over these years and a major force hampering a faster pace of deficit reduction," the commission said Friday. 

Portugal's €78 billion bailout is likely be approved by EU members in a meeting Monday. Its implementation, however, is likely be put on hold until after elections June 5, when the country will choose its next prime minister. 

Now-caretaker Prime Minister José Sócrates resigned in March after the Parliament voted down a new set of austerity measures to help the country cut its public debt. He has consistently blamed the opposition for the bailout request. 

Mr. Sócrates and main opposition leader Pedro Passos Coelho of the Social Democratic Party, are fighting head to head for the PM post, according to recent opinion polls. 

 Write to  Alex MacDonald at alex.macdonald@dowjones.com and Patricia Kowsmann at patricia.kowsmann@dowjones.com 