London -- BILT Paper PLC, an Indian producer of writing and printing paper, has become the latest Indian company to announce its intention to list on the main market of the London Stock Exchange, where it plans to raise $330 million. 

The firm, which has operations in India and Malaysia, confirmed it plans to float in London before Easter, but was unable to be any more specific, in a conference call with reporters following its announcement. 

BILT Paper will use the net proceeds raised to finance $170 million of capital expansion plans--principally, the development of enlarged pulp-mill facilities and capacity expansion of two existing paper production facilities--and reduce debt by redeeming $140 million of profit-sharing certificates. 

The group said it intends to leverage its current market leading positions to take advantage of India's GDP growth--which currently stands at around 8%--and the expected growth in per capita consumption of paper, which it said are the primary drivers of demand for wood-free paper. 

It is anticipated that the compound annual growth rate of paper demand in India between 2008 and 2020 will be 5.5%, which is higher than both China and the rest of Asia, and significantly higher than Western Europe and North America. 

"Indian paper demand is expected to increase significantly throughout the next decade," said R.R. Vederah, the company's chairman.

"This growth in demand, which is closely correlated to growth in GDP and disposable income, has already led us to significantly expand our production since 2008," he said, adding: "We believe that we are uniquely placed to benefit from this opportunity and the proceeds from the listing will help us to meet this growth in demand." 

Following a pre-admission reorganization, the company's share capital will be owned by Ballarpur Industries Ltd and two private equity investors, a wholly owned subsidiary of Government of Singapore Investment CorporationPte Ltd, and JPMorgan Mauritius, which may sell a portion of their shares in the offer. 

The anticipated BILT Paper listing, which hopes to enter the FTSE250 index, comes almost a year after fellow Indian company  Essar Energy PLC floated on London's main market in May 2010.