MUMBAI – Housing Development Finance Corp. Friday beat market expectations with a 33% jump in the October-December period, as it earned more on mortgage loans and recorded a higher profit from sale of investments. 

Net profit for the three months through December rose to 8.91 billion rupees ($196.4 million) from 6.71 billion rupees a year earlier, exceeding the 8.55-billion rupee average of estimates in a Dow Jones Newswires poll of nine analysts. 

India's lenders emerged relatively unscathed and had a faster rebound from the global economic crisis, which affected financial institutions in many countries. 

A pickup in Asia's third biggest economy has raised the middle-class aspirations of owning a house, while a series of programs offering mortgage loans at lower interest rates has lured buyers. Bank loans grew more than 24% as of December end, faster than the 20% estimated by the central bank for the whole fiscal through March. 

And, demand for housing loans remained robust even though HDFC raised its lending rates by 75 basis points in the third quarter. 

"I don't think people buy a house because interest rates are high or low," Vice Chairman  Keki Mistry said at a post-earnings conference. "People buy a house because they need a house to stay in. It is a necessity." 

The bulk of the company's loans are given to individuals and the average loan size is 1.8 million rupees, he said. 

The lender's net interest income--the difference between interest earned and interest paid--rose 19% to 11.24 billion rupees from 9.43 billion rupees. 

The strong results pushed HDFC shares to an intraday high of 679.25 rupees. But, profit-taking and weak broader markets dragged them to close 4% down at 641.55 rupees in a Mumbai market that ended 1.7% lower. 

HDFC's results included a profit of 1.67 billion rupees from sale of an investment in infrastructure development company IL&FS Ltd. The company didn't give any details on the size of its shareholding in IL&FS. 

In the year-earlier period, HDFC had recorded 513.8 million rupees as profit from sale of investments. 

The spread--the difference between the lending rate and borrowing rate--for the third quarter was little changed at 2.33%. The lender said it aims to maintain the spread in a range of 2.15%-2.35% even as the central bank is likely to hike its policy rates further in a bid to tackle inflation. 

"It [HDFC] is likely to maintain the spreads by hiking lending rates,"  Manish Ostwal, analyst at K.R. Choksey, told Dow Jones Newswires. 

Though this may marginally affect demand, a 20% growth estimate is achievable, he said. 

"Liquidity [in the banking system] is likely to improve in the January-March quarter on higher government spending," Mr. Ostwal said. "This should help HDFC keep its short-term cost of borrowing lower." 

Vice Chairman Mistry said improving economic environment ensured good asset quality and the percentage of bad loans to total loans was down at 0.85% from 0.94% a year earlier. 

The bank carried a 10.93-billion rupee provision against bad loans, compared with the 7.75 billion rupees it required to set aside under local rules. 

 Write to  Nupur Acharya at nupur.acharya@dowjones.com 