The tour bus that arrived in Onagawa last week wasn't expected. After the tsunami that crashed into the shores of this quaint fishing village, communication was down and the fortunate few who survived had been holed up in a cold, cavernous gymnasium and make-shift evacuation hall. 

Not all of them were Japanese. Huddled under a mountain of blankets in small groups around the center were Chinese laborers. The bus had come for them.

Liu Xueni, a Chinese citizen who has lived in Japan for 13 years, walked into the evacuation center and said she was from the Chinese Embassy. Within moments, dozens of Chinese, nearly all young women, had come out to form a circle around her companion on the mission, Wang Lei, who works at a zinc die-cast company in neighboring Ishinomaki. He told them that the Chinese government was there to take them back to China. The women erupted in cheers while many started to sob uncontrollably.



The laborers had been working in Onagawa's fish factories as part of the Japanese government's training programs to help workers from developing nations learn skills in Japan. 

Critics say the program is now used as a way to exploit cheap labor. Of the nation's roughly 175,000 foreign trainees, about 80% are from China, according to 2009 figures from Japan's Ministry of Justice. 

The infusion of foreign workers has helped slow a steady decline of aging fishing villages along Japan's northeastern coast, but the devastation caused by the tsunami and the lack of young Japanese willing to work rural blue-collar jobs may make a recovery for towns like Onagawa nearly impossible. 

The Chinese on the tour bus—one of 20 such missions to evacuate Chinese workers—were quickly ensnared in a diplomatic snafu with the town's leaders, who were reluctant to let the workers leave with the Chinese volunteers whose only documentation was the business card of a senior colonel working with the Chinese Embassy in Tokyo and the names of 36 workers they were assigned to collect.

Among the Chinese lined up outside the evacuation center was Zhou Shiying, a 24-year-old factory worker at fisheries company Choei Suisan.

After the earthquake struck, Ms. Zhou heard the faint sound of water trickling like a small river outside the factory, a few kilometers from the waterfront. Then, someone yelled "Run away! Run Away!"

"The men in the office ran up to the second floor of the building we were in. We ran to the mountains. They died, we survived," said Ms. Zhou. She watched from the mountain as the water rose from about knee-high to above the rooftops in five minutes. 

Outside the center, about 100 Chinese were lined up. Many were carrying all their possessions in a single plastic bag or backpack. Mr. Wang and Ms. Liu started calling out names from their list and individuals stepped out one at a time. They didn't call the name of Ms. Zhou, who went back inside to sit with other Chinese workers at Choei Suisan, making origami baskets. 

Ms. Liu began to lead a group whose names had been called away from the evacuation center. They walked at a brisk pace past the mounds of flattened homes, twisted metal and flipped-over cars, with some women in the back sprinting to keep up.

The town's mayor, Nobutaka Azumi, pulled up in a car. Wearing a white helmet with a crest on the front, he confronted Mr. Wang. "Can you just say 'let's go, let's go' and take people from here without telling their employers?" he said. "This is Japan, you know."

"Can you ensure that you can protect their lives?" replied Mr. Wang. "This may be Japan, but these are citizens of China." 

The Japanese evacuees are free to come and go, only being asked to inform the evacuation center staff if they leave for good. But the Chinese workers face a more complicated situation. They are obligated to stay with the fisheries for three years as part of the trainee program. In turn, the companies are expected to look after them. With most of the town's fisheries in ruin, these lines have blurred. What's more, the tsunami has washed way most of their passports and other forms of identification.

Zhao Jun, the military attaché who is overseeing the evacuation of Chinese nationals out of Japan, confirmed that Mr. Wang and Ms. Liu are working with the government as volunteers since they are familiar with the area. He didn't fault Mr. Azumi, saying it appeared he had acted in the best interest of the workers. 

Messrs. Azumi and Wang along with Ms. Liu and the presidents of several Onagawa-based seafood companies drove back to town to call the Chinese Embassy in Tokyo.

"I want to make sure that the Chinese government wants these people back right now," said Yoshiaki Kimura, the president of YK Suisan, which produces mackerel pike, salmon and squid and employs 29 Chinese "trainees." Hanging up the phone, he told the mayor, "The Chinese said Japan is not safe so they want to take them." 

Mr. Azumi said he would release them if their employers agreed. The four presidents who were present all approved, but in all 16 companies in Onagawa had hired Chinese trainees. Mr. Kimura said at least two or three of the other presidents were dead. 

Ms. Zhou, the factory worker who ran from the tsunami, said she worked five days a week at Choei Suisan filleting fish. She made 5,300 yen ($67) a day, or about 662 yen ($8.39) an hour, slightly below Miyagi prefecture's minimum wage of 674 yen.

She said the work was easy, although it took time to learn how to handle a knife. She was expected to pay 12,000 yen a month for the dormitory. The women shared groceries and took turns cooking. On her days off, she watched Korean dramas on TV but her favorite show is an NHK biographical drama series about a famous Japanese manga artist. 

In China, where her parents run a family corn farm on about 1.3 acres of land in Shandong province's rural Linqu county, her 54-year-old father Zhou Lixue learned from television about the disaster that had struck the region where his daughter was. For five days, the family worried whether she had survived. 

"We couldn't eat, we couldn't sleep," Mr. Zhou said. Only days later did Ms. Zhou's brother find her name on a list of survivors on the Chinese Embassy's website.

Back at the bus, Ms. Liu and Mr. Wang were getting impatient. If the bus, adorned with a sign that read "China Rescue Bus 8," didn't leave before dark, it would be hard to navigate the twisting mountain roads or the partially flooded, debris-covered coastline streets that run across the coastline since there is no electricity in the area.

When a group of workers arrived, Ms. Liu read the names off the list and let them on the bus. Many cried and embraced their Japanese employers. At one point, Ms. Liu abandoned the list, allowing a trio of women who begged to come along to board the bus. 

With about 40 Chinese workers on board, Mr. Wang and Ms. Liu got on and the bus pulled away as the sun started to set. Mr. Kimura, the portly fisheries-company owner, watched the bus leave and said: "Wow, that's the Chinese government for you." 

—Yoree Koh in Tokyo and Kersten Zhang in Beijing contributed to this article.

 Write to  Daisuke Wakabayashi at Daisuke.Wakabayashi@wsj.com and Brian Spegele at brian.spegele@wsj.com 