I've been reading a lot about the "New Normal." And every time I see those words I think about shopping at Wal-Mart with my father, who turns 91 in March.

Dad was walking past a display of donuts selling for $2.50 a box. This is a man who likes nothing better than to save a nickel, who values duct tape above all else as a solution to home repair. 

"Dad," I teased, "a box of fresh donuts for just $2.50! How can you pass up a deal like that?"

"That's nothing," he said. "Wait until tomorrow when they're a day old, they'll be a buck and a quarter."

For my father, and the generation or two that grew up with him, there's nothing new about the "new" normal. In fact, it's old hat.

What exactly does this latest buzz-phrase mean? It springs from the discovery that—big surprise!—we've been living beyond our means. Three years of economic crisis gave life to our new cliché, chastened as we now are to be more cost-conscious, more prudent. The term is all over newspapers, television and the blogosphere. Goodbye arugula, hello macaroni and cheese. It's the New Normal. 

But, of course, it's nothing of the sort, as my father and millions of other Americans can attest. In fact, Dad is probably emblematic of a broad swath of America. He's never bought arugula. He is the regular old normal. 

"You just have to be a teenager and go hungry," Dad begins. We were in his apartment in Florida, wrapping up leftover burritos in Wal-Mart-brand Great Value Plastic Wrap. "People don't realize how tough it was." 

My father is from Minnesota and generally shies away from talking about himself, despite some of his remarkable achievements. He is, in a word, practical. Up on the shelf there's the bottle of Great Value Dishwashing Liquid, which, once Dad has finished diluting it, can last for months. There's Great Value Oatmeal and Great Value Cream of Mushroom Soup, too.

My father could afford a house on the beach but chose instead a modest apartment in a vast compound of buildings. His bedroom looks out over a lake, his kitchen over a parking lot. "It's perfect," he says, "it's all I need. And it's conveniently located near the funeral home down the road." And then his favorite joke about his age: "What's not to like: I'm beating the actuarial tables."

Over the years, my brother and I replaced the creaky stove, retired the yellow shag carpet, and finally convinced Dad to accept a new easy chair. He still has the file folders from his days in World War II, which he now uses to hold his paper work.

For most of his youth, Dad sacked out in rooming houses, with family friends, or under the tarps of carnivals he worked. A bus driver and his wife once gave him shelter for $10 a week.

He rarely saw his mother. His father was a sweet man but was on the road much of the time. Two institutions anchored him: Marshall High School in Minneapolis, and the military. No matter how many flop houses he lived in, he always attended Marshall. And it was the military that finally gave him three squares a day.

That was all the boost he needed. He went to college, joined the National Guard, worked in Army intelligence, and then stayed in intelligence and also the Army reserves, eventually retiring as a full colonel. My father fought both the hot and cold wars. This kid who survived on carnival gigs during the Depression would measure the Communists at the construction of the Berlin Wall in 1961. He'd helicopter off the embassy roof in Saigon that last night in April 1975. He'd be on hand the first time the U.S. embassy in Tehran was stormed in February 1979.

And along the way he'd put three sons through college and cut checks for military charities, Boy's Town, and old friends like Aunt Lydia, not a legal aunt but someone who each year sent us jars of tomato juice she made from her garden, and who gave my father a place to sleep when he was a boy.

His story of lean beginnings and economical living is notable largely for how common it is in U.S. history, and how uncommon it seems to purveyors of the notion that a New Normal has gripped our innocent land, threatening our right to be spendthrifts. Personal saving as a percentage of disposable income has inched up to about 6% in the last several months, from a blindingly profligate 1.4% at the height of the nation's bacchanal in 2005. But it wasn't long ago—1982, in fact—that people were saving a more sturdy 10.9%.

True, my father has taken that statistic up much higher, where few would want to roam. But I look at him—and the decades of tenacity that he and others like him represent—and don't see much "new" in the latest read on normal.

I do wish, though, that he'd buy a new set of dishes. That's my plastic cereal bowl he's still using, from when I was in grade school.

"It's perfect," he says. "Works fine." 

 Mr. Bussey is executive business editor and assistant managing editor at The Wall Street Journal. 