WASHINGTON—The prospect of a stalemate in Libya is raising the political risks for the Obama administration with its cautious approach to the crisis.

Calls for President Barack Obama to move toward U.S. military intervention in Libya are mounting in Congress, with several prominent senators arguing that Mr. Obama's efforts to isolate Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi and his calls for him to leave haven't gone far enough. They are pushing for the administration to do more to aid the opposition, including establishing a no-fly zone.

During a Senate Armed Services Committee hearing Thursday, James Clapper, Mr. Obama's national intelligence director, stoked that sentiment when he said the situation had reached a stalemate and seemed to predict that Mr. Gadhafi's forces would ultimately prevail.

Sen. Joseph Lieberman, a Connecticut Independent who caucuses with Democrats, responded by calling for more American action. 

"There's a real probability that the regime will prevail against the opponents," Mr. Lieberman said. That possibility, he said, compels the U.S. to prevent "a very bad outcome" by feeding the opposition intelligence about movements of Gadhafi forces, supplying it with weapons, or establishing a no-fly zone. 

"It calls out to our leadership here in Washington," Mr. Lieberman said, "to act quickly to not let this happen."

Two other influential senators, Republican John McCain of Arizona and Democrat John Kerry of Massachusetts, also have put pressure on the White House to be more aggressive. Mr. Kerry, chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, has called for diverting some $30 billion in Mr. Gadhafi's frozen assets to rebel groups in Libya.

Mr. McCain and Mr. Lieberman argued in a statement that because of "moral and strategic reasons" the U.S. shouldn't be "passive at this critical moment in history."

In a briefing for reporters, national security adviser Tom Donilon said the White House had taken the lead in imposing economic sanctions and diplomatic measures to "isolate" and "squeeze" Mr. Gadhafi. 

"First, we did work to ensure that the international community spoke with one voice on this, the United States, the Europeans, the U.N., the Arab League, African Union and others deliver a clear message," he said.

Mr. Donilon added that the administration's strategy on any further moves against the Libyan leader, including military steps, is to move with the international community. 

"We do seek regional support," Mr. Donilon said. "I think it's important to build out international support, particularly among the nations in the region as we go forward here, if you're going to undertake some of the options that are on the table," he said. 

"Frankly, if you look at history, that in fact the United States and the international community have moved in a pretty expeditious fashion."

Others say the administration could do a better job of communicating its strategy, even as they support Mr. Obama's careful approach. "If I were sitting in the White House, I would much prefer being criticized for holding back now than six months or two years from now be criticized for having undertaken an ill-advised military intervention," said Richard Haass, president of the Council on Foreign Relations and a former White House and State Department official. "It's a lot easier to get into those situations than it is to get out." 

He added: "But any time you go against popular political pressures, you need to come out and explain why...If a policy makes enough sense to adopt. It should make enough sense to explain."

Sen. Mitch McConnell, the top Republican in the Senate, has expressed support for arming the opposition. Other top Republicans on Capitol Hill have urged more caution. 

Sen. Richard Lugar of Indiana, a friend of Mr. Obama's, has argued against a U.S.-led military intervention. House Majority Leader Eric Cantor said this week he agreed with the president that Col. Gadhafi needed to resign immediately, but resisted a strong push for the administration to pursue military action.

 Write to  Carol E. Lee at carol.lee@wsj.com and Laura Meckler at laura.meckler@wsj.com 