In 2008 and 2009, some industry insiders wondered out loud if the private equity market as they knew it was over. Debts were colossal and there were no exits in sight. Investors were understandably both concerned and angry. The industry's once financially immaculate image was, it seemed at the time, irreversibly tarnished.

Read the complete  Wealth Adviser report .

However, the industry has eaten its humble pie. Funds are reemerging that are hungry for opportunities but also acutely aware they will need to use an entirely different set of tactics. This can only be good news for investors that wish to get in at the bottom of the market.

  Graham Elton, private equity analyst at consultancy Bain & Co, recalls a troubling time. "Raising money, putting money to work and selling things were difficult. Banks wouldn't lend money," he says. "People were scraping around to get $20 million debt. There were concerns about whether the private equity market would be substantially reduced going forward. Was it the end of an era?"

Prior to the credit crunch, private equity had seemed an easy and quick way to get rich, for investors and venture capitalists alike. It was very easy to get leverage from banks with which funds could buy companies, putting the debt onto the companies' balance sheets. Then, after a few years, or even a few months, the company could be sold on the booming equity markets or to a strategic investor. As leveraged buy-outs grew bigger and bigger, so did the salaries of the top deal-makers, and the size of their funds. 



That all changed as soon as the price of debt soared, banks stopped lending, and the equity markets plunged. Mr. Elton says: "Suddenly, the initial public offering market was pretty well closed, [the] corporate mergers and acquisitions [market] was pretty well closed, and the secondary loan market was closed, so funds had to sit on assets that were way off purchase value. Portfolios were being marked down by 50%."

By 2010, some of the highest profile companies that had been bought out were visibly struggling under their debt load. Or, as one industry report stated at the time: "The burden of the debt they are operating under has seriously restricted their ability to carry out their strategy". 

So, in a sense, private equity in its old form is indeed finished.  Paul Marson-Smith, managing partner at Gresham Private Equity in London, says: "The highly leveraged buy-out is history. It worked brilliantly when leverage was easily available, but it works against you at other stages in the cycle. And the mega-fund is as extinct as the dinosaur."

The involvement of banks in the industry may also have fundamentally and permanently changed. Industry experts say they are unlikely to be as involved in the sector as they were prior to the financial crisis.  Gregory Getschow, co-head of JP Morgan Asset Management's private equity advisers group says banks are looking at regulatory changes like Basel III, and are changing their appetite for private equity. "They used to invest in private equity as a quid pro quo to get other business from funds, but you don't see that so much anymore," he says. "We think 2011 will be a year when banks sell a lot of their private equity portfolios."

Nonetheless, venture capitalists are optimistic that the sector will survive, and they say it is already stabilizing after the crisis. Mr. Graham believes it was a blip, rather than annihilation. "Our sense is the asset class won't get bigger, but it won't get smaller," he argues.  Karsten Langer, partner at Riverside Europe, and the chair of the European Venture Capital Association, agrees: "The industry as a whole has proven that it has come through the crisis and is a viable industry." The industry will survive, experts say, by going back to basics. Mr. Marson-Smith believes the funds that will survive are those that didn't stray from what private equity is good at. Private equity, he believes, is going back to its roots. "It's losing its veneer of the Master of the Universe investment bank types, and is again becoming less glamorous, harder work. At the core of private equity is buying into small-to-medium-sized businesses, adding value by improving fundamentals, and grooming companies with the target of making them strategically valuable," Mr. Marson-Smith says. "That model is still sustainable, and you can make money with that model regardless of the business cycle."

Now could be the perfect time to invest. Corporate earnings are coming back up, but the market is still near the bottom.  David Currie, chief executive of fund-of-funds SL Capital Partners, says: "Generally, the best time to invest in private equity is around the bottom of the market. We're quite a long way away from the top of the next cycle."

  Henry Sallitt, co-head and director of Fleming Family & Partners Private Equity, points out that statistics show funds raised and invested in difficult economic environments tend to significantly outperform funds raised during booms. "At the lower end of the market, however, there's a real lack of cash for companies, which puts private equity in quite a good position," he says. Mr. Getschow agrees: "It's the right time of the cycle to invest, when valuations are as low as they've been. There are some interesting investment opportunities."

And yet, ironically, PE funds are finding it difficult to raise cash now, when conditions are optimal for them. One reason for this is that institutional investors are still waiting to get money back from funds raised between 2005 and 2007. Mr. Getschow says: "There was a lot of money raised between 2005 and 2007, it's not all been invested, and it needs to be by around 2012. The exit market has really slowed down, so cash is not coming back to investors, which is making them reluctant to put money into new funds."

Emerging market-targeted funds are finding it much easier to raise new capital than other funds, says  Jennifer Choi, director of research at the Emerging Market Private Equity Association in New York: "Globally, 2010 was a six-year low for raising new funds. But for emerging market funds, it was quite a healthy year. Deal volume was also up 35% last year."



But not everyone is convinced of the emerging market advantage. Mr. Langer remains cautious in his view. "There's been a lot of talk about emerging market private equity, and more money is flowing into BRIC funds than before. But with higher returns come higher risks. You only have to look at North Africa to see that emerging markets aren't always politically stable."

With institutional investors already over-allocated to private equity funds, now is perhaps a good time for more flexible private and high-net-worth investors to take advantage of the upswing in private equity's fortune. "Private families and individuals are less over extended than institutional investors, and have more cash to invest," says Mr. Sallitt. "There are very low returns in the bank market, so they should be doing something else with their money."

But high-net-worth investors should go in to private equity with their eyes open. Mr. Getschow warns: "Illiquidity is a big issue for many. In 2006 to 2007, investors felt they could get money back quickly through distributions or recapitalizations. Things are slower now – investors may have to wait four to six years for meaningful returns."



 Mr. Evans is a writer based in London. He can be reached at reports@wsj.com. 