Volatile oil prices have forced many businesses to walk a fine line between passing along costs to customers and finding other ways to mitigate fuel's impact on earnings.

Oil prices took big swings last week as violence in Bahrain and a bloody government assault on rebel forces in Libya drew the market's attention back to the Middle East, and away from the aftermath of the earthquake and tsunami in Japan. 

The volatility is likely to persist in the wake of allied airstrikes over the weekend against the government of Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi. On Monday, light, sweet crude for April delivery settled at over $102 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange as traders worried about long-term disruptions to Libya's oil supplies. 

"Each day there's a new headline, and the market is moving from one major event to another," says  Andy Lebow, senior vice president of energy with MF Global.

Fluctuating prices at the gasoline pump, meanwhile, may be leading consumers to rethink some purchases. U.S. gas prices averaged $3.56 a gallon Monday, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration.

"The longer the higher price remains in place, the more likely it is that people will adjust their spending habits," says  Nigel Gault, chief U.S. economist with IHS Global Insight, an economic forecasting firm. That may make businesses hesitant to pass along their costs. 

After shying away from hiring or pouring money into new plants, some of the biggest companies in the U.S. are sitting on cash piles that give them a cushion against rising costs. Many smaller companies, however, have little room to maneuver. 

Furniture- and bedding-maker  Leggett & Platt Inc.
LEG


0.30
%




 is coping with fuel surcharges on ocean-freight deliveries from its Asian plants and higher prices to fuel its domestic fleet, but the company has ruled out raising the prices of its own goods, says Chief Executive  David Haffner.

Instead, Leggett is charging customers more for delivery by adding an "emergency fuel surcharge" of six cents a mile on top of an earlier surcharge, which is pegged to Department of Energy figures. It is also replacing older, less-efficient vehicles with new trucks. Mr. Haffner says he believes Leggett will be able to cope with most of the fuel surcharges it faces in the interim, but "it certainly has the potential to affect anybody's earnings in the whole supply chain," he says.

Companies that make or buy materials made of rubber, plastics and synthetics such as nylon—in which oil is a key ingredient—are also re-evaluating their strategies.

Automotive repair and tire chain  Monro Muffler Brake Inc.
MNRO


-0.24
%




 says it is paying more for oil and tires. But Chief Executive  Rob Gross says he can't raise the price of an oil change because that's a key part of the company's strategy for attracting customers.

For tires, Monro has been able to pass along about half of the increase to consumers, Mr. Gross says. The company also stockpiled tires ahead of a price increase from tire manufacturers in mid-March.

Mr. Gross is concerned about how prices at the gasoline pump will affect consumer spending habits. In 2008, when gas prices hit $4 a gallon, Monro's earnings were flat and customers delayed purchases and repairs and "traded down" to cheaper, unbranded items, he says.

  General Motors Co.
GM


-0.87
%




 also is monitoring the consumer reaction to gasoline prices. "We have to worry about it," says  Mark Reuss, GM's president of North American operations, because gas prices can affect a consumer's decision on whether to buy a new car.

  Chris Low, chief economist of FTN Financial, says that if tensions in the Middle East don't ease, some corporations will be forced to raise prices. 

But passing along costs isn't always feasible, some companies say. In the beer industry, "it is very difficult to impose a fuel surcharge or to otherwise pass on the increased costs," says  Phil Terry, CEO of Monarch Beverage Co., a large beer distributor in Indiana.

The company is paying about 25% more for diesel fuel today than it was in November. "Our overall profitability will decrease this quarter because of fuel price increases," says Mr. Terry.

Airlines have taken several steps to reduce the impact of rising fuel costs. 

Starting in late February, United Continental Holdings Inc. imposed a $20 fuel surcharge on the price of its round-trip domestic tickets. (A surcharge was already in place on international tickets.) And earlier this month, the airline lowered its forecast for 2011 capacity growth. 

Delta Air Lines Inc. revised its forecast of first-quarter capacity growth to between 3% and 5% from between 5% and 7%. The airline said it will reduce capital spending to $1.3 billion from $1.6 billion this year to account for the increased jet fuel prices. 

Deutsche Lufthansa AG says fuel is the largest cost on the company's balance sheet, and it expects to spend €6.8 billion ($9.6 billion) on fuel in 2011, topping last year's €5.2 billion, says spokesman Martin Riecken. The company is hedging about 74% if its fuel exposure for 2011, says Mr. Riecken, in line with what it has hedged in previous years. 

Norwegian Cruise Line, meanwhile, has 60% of its fuel hedged for 2011, a move that CEO  Kevin Sheehan says will make the rise of oil prices manageable for the cruise operator.

In 2008, Norwegian had a very small percentage of its fuel hedged, and had to levy fuel surcharges on its passengers. The company began hedging more aggressively after that experience, and isn't currently considering fuel surcharges, says Mr. Sheehan.

—David Kesmodel contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Dana Mattioli at dana.mattioli@wsj.com 