  Cheryl Lassiter likes to keep a close eye on her cholesterol levels, but with a high-deductible insurance plan, she doesn't want to pay the fees for repeated checkups by her doctor. So a few times a year, she orders up a lab test herself, using an online service that charges about $40.

"You cut out the middleman," says Ms. Lassiter, 56, a writer who lives in Hampton, N.H.

Most people get lab tests after a doctor recommends them during a visit. Now, a small but growing number of consumers are skipping the time and expense of seeing a physician and are ordering up their own tests, with heart-related assays among the most popular. For some, it's a way to keep track of measures that they want to regularly monitor, such as cholesterol levels or the blood-sugar indicator known as hemoglobin A1C, which is important to people with diabetes. For others, a broad-based panel of tests may provide a quick snapshot of overall health, or a particular test could address worries about the presence of a possible condition such as hepatitis C.

Here are some lab tests that consumers can currently order online without a doctor visit:

• Lipid panel, which includes 'good' and 'bad' cholesterol, as well as triglycerides

• C-reactive protein, which has been linked to heart-attack risk

• Liver function, looking at measures such as the enzyme alanine aminotransferase, or ALT

• Vitamin D

• Hormone levels, including testosterone and estradiol, a form of estrogen

Doctors caution that consumers need to be careful about testing services. Here are some steps they can take:

• Check into the lab performing the test to ensure it is accredited by a legitimate organization such as the College of American Pathologists

• Be wary of any company that tries to peddle treatments based on lab results.

• Watch out for over-broad claims about a test's meaning, particularly the predictive power of genetic assays.

 Source: WSJ research 

Doctors say consumers should be careful about which testing services they trust, especially online companies. They also shouldn't cut their physicians out of the loop. Doctors say they can provide key guidance before a patient orders a test about whether it is worthwhile and can explain the numbers after the results are in. "There are a host of factors that go into whether a test is needed, warranted, or a waste of money," says  Roland Goertz, president of the American Academy of Family Physicians. 

Online testing services typically charge $30 to $50 for a full lipid panel, including cholesterol and triglycerides. A hemoglobin A1C test costs about $25 to $40. 

Consumers wanting to get their own tests have a number of options. Online services contract with national networks of labs to perform a range of assays. For simple tests, such as cholesterol, there have long been quick-service sites in places such as drugstore clinics and health fairs. Consumers can purchase kits to do some basic tests themselves, including ones for cholesterol from companies including Polymer Technology Systems Inc., which sells a reusable lipid-testing device called CardioChek for $99, and First Check Diagnostics, a unit of Alere Inc., which sells for $13.99 the First Check Cholesterol Home Test, a single use kit that measures only total cholesterol. A few local labs will perform tests directly for consumers, but this is relatively rare, partly because of state restrictions. 

The lagging economy, which has left some people without insurance coverage, has also helped fuel the direct-to-consumer testing market, testing companies say. Even many people with coverage are facing bigger deductibles and other out-of-pocket expenses.

Ms. Lassiter and her husband, who bought their own health plan, have a $5,000 annual deductible. Doctor visits tend to cost around $150 or more, so she only goes for a checkup once a year. She uses the online testing service to more frequently keep track of her cholesterol, which she describes as in the high range of normal, and to monitor a thyroid condition. She says she would call her doctor if she got a worrisome test result. 

For people with more generous health-insurance coverage, the traditional doctor-ordered testing route makes sense financially, since big insurers say they often only cover tests that are requested by a patient's doctor. 

Direct-to-consumer lab tests are a small but growing part of the overall lab industry, according to research firm Washington G-2 Reports, a unit of publisher BNA Inc. In a 2009 report, the company estimated people were spending about $20 million a year for such tests, and the segment was growing at 15% to 20% annually. Spending on self-ordered testing totaled about $100 million a year with the inclusion of the high-profile and controversial category of genetic testing.

The online testing services, which include companies such as Direct Laboratory Services Inc., Health One Inc., PrivateMD Labs LLC and Personalabs LLC, typically don't own labs themselves. Instead, they allow consumers to order tests online, then direct them to a lab that contracts with the firm, such as  Laboratory Corp. of America Holdings. The lab draws the patient's blood and performs the actual test. To meet state requirements, the Web firms generally have doctors on staff who sign the orders without seeing the patients. 

Lab-testing giant  Quest Diagnostics Inc. plans to relaunch its Blueprint for Wellness consumer service, which will charge about $60 for a group of four or five tests. 

  Gary Procop, chairman of molecular pathology at the Cleveland Clinic, says consumers should check that the labs performing work for online companies are certified under CLIA, or the federal Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments, and accredited by an established entity such as the College of American Pathologists. The college maintains a list of the labs it checks at www.cap.org. He says consumers should watch out for Web sites that market treatments based on test results. 

Resources for information on interpreting laboratory tests: 

 Harvard Medical School 

 Mayo Clinic  

 American Heart Association 

 MedlinePlus 

 WebMD 

Certain quick-result tests offered at drugstore clinics and other places for flu and respiratory syncytial virus, or RSV, are less sensitive than the more-advanced versions performed at some labs, says Dr. Procop. Still, he says, if done properly, the rapid versions of basic tests like cholesterol should be as accurate as those from a lab.

The Food and Drug Administration, which has approved some home-use cholesterol tests, says on its website that they should be as accurate as those available at a doctor's office, if users follow the directions. The agency offers some information on how to interpret test results at fda.gov (find "in vitro diagnostics" in the alphabetical search, and on that page click "home use tests"). 

Direct-to-consumer online testing services say they aim to help consumers understand results.  John Bell, president of Direct Laboratory Services, says the company sends email alerts to consumers whose results are significantly outside normal ranges, recommending they visit a doctor, and will phone anyone whose findings signal urgent risk. 

Still, doctors say interpreting test results is more than reading a number. Heart-related lab findings, for instance, should be evaluated as part of a broader health profile that would include factors such as family history and blood pressure. "No test should be interpreted in isolation," says  Thomas Behrenbeck, a cardiologist at the Mayo Clinic. That's because tests like those for cholesterol "denote risk factors, they do not diagnose disease."

Test results also can vary. Alfred Bove, past president of the American College of Cardiology, says the results of tests for c-reactive protein, which has been linked to heart-attack risk, can be elevated if patients have a bad cold or a bladder infection. 