LONDON—Portuguese sovereign debt came under more pressure Friday after downgrades by Standard & Poor's Corp. and Fitch Ratings late Thursday pushed the country closer to a bailout, but there was no contagion effect seen in larger debt laden euro-zone countries, such as Spain. 

Yields on Portugal's 10-year bonds pushed higher, moving above 7.8%, from below 7.7% at Thursday's close. The country's five-year bonds now yield over 8.3%. 

But yields on Spain's 10-year bonds were only marginally higher at 5.169%, from 5.159% Thursday, which was largely in line with the move in the underlying German 10-year bund yield. The yield premium on Spanish bonds versus their German peers has narrowed by 0.3 percentage point in the last month. 

Spain was long viewed as the next susceptible country if Portugal was forced into seeking a bailout, but the current Portuguese crisis may not necessarily result in a significant step-up of pressure on Spanish bonds, said Crédit Agricole. "The Spanish government has been reasonably successful in its fiscal and microeconomic reform efforts and this has led to an improved perception on the part of investors."

And while Spanish banks did rack up huge losses after failed bets on the property market, their exposure as a share of gross domestic product is smaller than in Ireland, which has already requested European Union and International Monetary Fund aid, the bank noted. 

Part of the weakness in Irish, Greek, and Portuguese government bonds compared with their larger neighbors could also be attributed to their dependence on foreign investors buying their bonds, said  Alessandro Giansanti, an interest rate strategist at ING. "We are, positively, seeing a decoupling between the spreads of the semi-peripherals—Belgium, Italy, Spain—and the real peripherals—Greece, Ireland and Portugal."

S&P cut Portugal to triple-B from single-A-minus, two notches closer to junk, and kept the country on watch for a further downgrade. Fitch also downgraded the country to single-A-minus, following the parliament's failure to pass austerity measures and the resignation of the nation's prime minister. 

S&P's rating is now two notches below that of Fitch and Moody's Investors Service, "increasing the risk of both the other ratings agencies following suit and, more importantly, clearing houses raising their margin requirements for investors in Portuguese debt," said  Richard McGuire, senior fixed income strategist at Rabobank. 

ING's Giansanti said yields on Portuguese debt implied that it would be rated double B—the highest junk category—and that with €9.2 billion ($13.04 billion) of bond redemptions due in April and June, as well as a budget deficit to be paid, "there is no other solution than tapping the [European Financial Stability Facility]." 

As of last night, Portugal had not asked for a bailout, but one senior euro-zone official said Thursday that Portugal will soon have to seek a bailout loan and that the amount could be about €80 billion. 

 Write to  Mark Brown at mark.brown@dowjones.com and Neelabh Chaturvedi at neelabh.chaturvedi@dowjones.com 