NEW DELHI --India's food inflation eased in the week to

Jan. 1, but brought little respite as the prices of vegetables

including onion continued to soar, and the government responded with

stern warnings to hoarders and promises to ease supplies to help cool

prices. 

Food inflation based on the wholesale price index slowed to 16.91%

from 18.32% in the preceding week, aided by a fall in the prices of

pulses, according to data issued Thursday by the Ministry of Commerce

and Industry. 

Pulses were about 15% cheaper during the week from a year earlier,

but, vegetable prices shot up 70% year-on-year and 4% from the

previous week. Onions, a separate item in the index, cost 2% more in

the week ended Jan. 1 from the preceding week. 

The government said it will continue to review exports and imports

of essential commodities on a regular basis. 

"The government will take stringent action against hoarders and

black marketers manipulating market prices ... so as to ensure that

products reach the markets in a timely manner to moderate the prices,"

a statement said. 

Earlier Thursday, Finance Minister Pranab Mukherjee said the

government will announce more measures to control prices, as he tried

to talk down inflation concerns that have given opposition parties

ample ammunition to stall parliamentary proceedings. 

The government last month banned exports of onions, arranged for its

imports and asked two state-backed cooperatives to sell the vegetable

at subsidized rates as it sought to boost market supplies of the

essential component in Indian cuisine. 

These and other measures have mostly failed in controlling the

blazing food prices in Asia's third largest economy where about 40% of

the 1.2 billion population lives below the U.N.-estimated poverty

line, earning less than $2 a day. 

Still, Thursday's data raised hopes that the worst of the price rise

may be close to an end and food inflation may stabilize soon. 

Government bond prices gained a bit with the most-traded 8.08% 2022

paper rising to 99.48 rupees ($2.2) after the data release, compared with

99.42 rupees before it. The bond ended the day at 99.54 rupees, up from the

previous close of 99.25 rupees. 

Yes Bank Chief Economist Shubhada Rao said food inflation, driven by

high prices of fruits and vegetables, continues to exert upward

pressure on the primary articles index. 

The index, which comprises food and non-food items as well as

minerals, rose 0.3% to 194 in the week to Jan. 1 and was up 17.58%

from a year earlier. It had risen 20.2% year-on-year in the previous

week. 

"We expect rising fuel and metal prices too to start showing up in

core inflation," she added. 

Prices of fruits and vegetables, especially of onion, have been

spiraling following damage to standing crops due to unseasonal rains

in some parts of the country. This added pressure on food inflation,

which has already been high, driven by increased demand for

protein-rich items like eggs, meat, fish and milk from wealthier

Indians. 

The stubbornly high food prices are likely to prompt the Reserve

Bank of India to resume its tightening monetary policy this month. 

"The government's measures may stem price rise going forward, but

considering the present situation, we expect a 0.25 percentage point climb

[in interest rates] at the next RBI rate setting meeting," said A.

Prasanna, an economist at ICICI Securities Primary Dealership. 

The central bank is widely expected to raise its lending and

borrowing rates for the seventh time since March when it meets to

review monetary policy on Jan. 25, ending its pause at the most recent

review in December. 

Economists now await the December inflation data due Friday, which

could firm up expectations for a minimum 25 basis points increase in

rates. 

A Dow Jones Newswires poll of 18 economists showed December

inflation will likely accelerate to 8.4% from a year earlier,

compared with 7.48% in November. 

 Write to  Anant Vijay Kala at anant.kala@dowjones.com 