A spike in lawsuits against Chinese companies that have listed on U.S. exchanges contributed to a rise in securities-fraud cases in 2010, according to a new report.

There are two potential reasons for the increase in lawsuits against Chinese issuers, according to  Joseph Grundfest, a professor at Stanford Law School.

"There's going to be a learning or adjustment process as Chinese companies adapt to different regulatory or disclosure regimes," he said. Another possibility, Prof. Grundfest said, is that some of these companies may be flouting U.S. rules.

The majority of the Chinese issuers sued had listed on U.S. exchanges within the past two years. Such lawsuits represented about 43% of all filings against foreign companies last year, the highest ever observed in a single year, according to the study.

Plaintiffs sought a total of 176 federal securities class actions in 2010, compared with 168 in 2009, according to the study, issued jointly by Stanford Law School and Cornerstone Research.

Also contributing to the total rise in filings: a nearly sixfold increase in suits filed shortly after the announcement of corporate mergers. Such suits, typically filed against takeover targets, often allege that the price agreed to by the company is too low.

The total number of filings, while up year over year, are still below the annual average of 195 filings between 1997 and 2009, according to the study.

Prof. Grundfest emphasized that the "traditional" securities-fraud suits, in which investors allege that corporate fraud led to stock losses, were down in 2010. He said this was partly due to a decline in litigation related to the credit crisis.

"That wave is over," he said. "Plaintiffs class-action lawyers are looking for business elsewhere."

According to the study, only 13 securities suits stemming from the credit crisis were filed in 2010, compared with 55 in 2009.

A wave of suits was also filed against for-profit colleges after the Government Accountability Office, the investigative arm of Congress, in August reported that admissions representatives for 15 schools allegedly offered bad information to undercover agents posing as prospective students in a federal investigation.

In regard to the suits against Chinese companies, the study shows that nine out of the 12 companies sued were listed on U.S exchanges using a process called a "reverse takeover," in which a Chinese company takes over a dormant U.S. company already listed on a U.S. exchange.

The Securities and Exchange Commission has launched a number of investigations into the practice, focusing not only on the Chinese companies, but also on U.S. banks, auditors, law firms and stock promoters.

 Write to  Ashby Jones at ashby.jones@wsj.com 