NEW DELHI—India's environment minister gave final clearance to  Posco's construction of a steel factory in eastern India, a possible signal to overseas investors that environmental concerns won't derail big projects in the country. 

South Korea's Posco, which in January was granted environmental clearance to set up a plant with an initial capacity of four million metric tons a year, can now clear forest land for its $12 billion factory and related infrastructure in the eastern state of Orissa. (A metric ton is roughly 1.1 short tons.) The plant ultimately would have a capacity of 12 million tons a year.

"We are very happy at the order on forest-land diversion," Posco India spokesman  Vikash Sharan said Monday. "After the order, the project will finally move ahead." He said the company expects the state government to begin land acquisition soon. 

Posco and other international steel companies, such as Luxembourg-based  ArcelorMittal, have struggled for more than five years to build large plants in eastern India. ArcelorMittal's plans to set up two steel plants have sparked protests by people intent on keeping their land. Posco faced similar protests, as well as hurdles on environmental clearance. 

Environmental approval to clear forests was delayed as a group opposing the project said two villages, Dhinkia and Gobindpur, had claims to the land on which the project would be built. Indian law says forests can't be cleared without explicit approval of villages that have claims to the land. 

Environment Minister  Jairam Ramesh has been strict about approving large industrial and mining projects, especially when they involve clearing forests in a nation where such land is in short supply. London-based  Vedanta Resources
VED


1.64
%




 PLC's proposal to mine the Niyamgiri hills in east India was rejected last year because it could harm forests and forest dwellers in the area. 

In Posco's case, the state government of Orissa told the Ministry of Environment and Forests that the claims of villagers about living in the forest on the project site were fraudulent and that local authorities would take legal action against the head of at least one village council. 

Mr. Ramesh said the federal government has to give "faith and trust" to provincial governments, though he said the Orissa government has been "actively canvassing" for the Posco project. 

Mr. Ramesh said a new agreement between the Orissa government and Posco shouldn't allow export of iron ore from India. He said an earlier pact, which has expired, made him "deeply uncomfortable" because it allowed export of the raw material for steel. 

India discourages companies from exporting iron ore as the domestic steel industry ramps up capacity, levying a 20% tax on the material's export. 

Posco's Mr. Sharan said the company has no plans to export iron ore and would use it to make steel at the Indian plant. 

 Write to  Prasenjit Bhattacharya at prasenjit.bhattacharya@dowjones.com 