HONG KONG—Hong Kong property developer  New World Development Co.
NDVLY


4.64
%




 said it plans to spin off a Chinese iron-ore mining business that is majority-owned by its infrastructure unit,  NWS Holdings Ltd.
NWSGY


2.40
%




, via a listing on Hong Kong's stock exchange. 

A person familiar with the situation said Tian Yuan plans to conduct the IPO in the second quarter and has put  Citigroup Inc.
C


0.69
%




 in charge of the offering. 

The proposed spin-off will be China Tian Yuan Mining Ltd.'s second attempt to go public. The Chinese iron ore miner wanted to list in Hong Kong last year but shelved a plan to raise up to $522 million in May because of volatile markets. 

Tian Yuan joins several other metal and mining firms looking to list shares in Hong Kong to raise their profile and tap Chinese demand for commodities. 

Chinese marble miner Kingstone Marble, which plans to raise up to $500 million in the first quarter. U.K.-listed Kazakh copper miner  Kazakhmys
KAZ


2.94
%




 PLC is looking to raise between $500 million and $600 million through a secondary listing in Hong Kong in the first half of this year, people familiar with the situation said last week. 

New World said NWS has a 55.02% stake in Tian Yuan, which owns and operates the Yanjiazhuang iron ore mine with a mining area of about 5.22 square kilometers in Hubei province. The developer said Tian Yuan is in the process of changing its name to Newton Resources Ltd. 

"The proposed spin-off and the global offering will provide capital for the company [Tian Yuan] for its operations and new investment opportunities, and free up capital which would otherwise be required from NWS for such new developments and opportunities," New World Development Managing Director  Henry Cheng said in a statement. 

New World said it and NWS jointly submitted a spinoff proposal to the Hong Kong stock exchange Jan. 24, but it didn't say how much it plans to raise in the deal. 

 Write to  Yvonne Lee at yvonne.lee@wsj.com 