NEW DELHI – India's industrial output growth rose more than anticipated in January thanks to robust electricity and manufacturing output, easing worries that rapid monetary tightening over the past year would cause a prolonged industrial slowdown. 

Factory output rose 3.7% in January from a year earlier, quicker than December's upwardly revised 2.53% rise, government data showed Friday. 

The January reading was above the median estimate of a 2.85% rise in a Dow Jones Newswires poll of 15 economists. 

The data will give policy makers confidence that Asia's third-largest economy is in good shape and that the weak readings of the previous two months largely reflected a cooling from the rapid production growth last year, when India's economy was shaking off the effects of the global crisis. 

It isn't completely out of the woods, however, and industrial output could remain subdued as the central bank's sharp rate increases crimp industrial demand. 

The readings suggest that "India's strong growth story remains intact despite aggressive interest rate increases from the central bank over the past year," said Matt Robinson, a Sydney-based economist with Moody's Analytics. 

"Nevertheless, there is no escaping the obvious: Capital goods production continues to decline as businesses shelve expansion plans amid tighter monetary policy settings," he said. 

Capital goods output shrank 18.6% on-year in January after contracting 9.27% in December. It has fluctuated wildly in recent months, causing sharp volatility in the overall industrial output series. 

Finance Minister Pranab Mukherjee said the industrial output growth is disappointing but he expects the numbers to improve in coming months. 

He did not say how much growth he expects in months ahead, however. 

Indian government bonds extended losses as the higher-than-expected reading strengthened the case for more aggressive monetary tightening to tame inflation. 

The most-traded 8.13% bond due in 2022 fell to an intraday low of 100.53 rupees from 100.64 rupees before the data, and 100.68 rupees at its last close. It was changing hands at 100.58 rupees as of 1000 GMT. 

One reason for the subdued annual figures in recent months is last year's high base of comparison: Industrial output grew 16.8% in January 2010 after rising a whopping 18.0% in December 2009, skewing the statistical base. 

Sujan Hajra, an economist at Anand Rathi Shares & Stock Brokers, said the sharply slower year-on-year growth didn't reflect a deterioration in industrial output and was mainly due to the high base. 

"There are signs industrial investments are picking up, which may push overall growth and industrial production rates higher in the next fiscal year," he said. 

Economists say on-year growth will continue to accelerate, although the pick up may be slow, as the statistical base steadily normalizes. 

That should ease concerns at the RBI that raising policy interest rates further will hurt the economy. 

The central bank has raised its borrowing rate by 2.25 percentage points and its lending rate by 1.75 percentage points since last March. 

With the RBI still struggling to control inflation, economists predict another 0.5-1.0 percentage point of rate increases in 2011, starting with a 0.25 percentage point move in each rate when the central bank next meets to review monetary policy on March 17. 

However, the deterioration in capital goods demand may prompt the central bank to tread slowly and cautiously, some economists say. 

"The extent to which higher interest rates have crimped capital goods demand will make the Reserve Bank of India more wary in delivering further interest rate increases," Mr. Robinson of Moody's Analytics said. 

Wholesale price index-based inflation was at 8.23% in January and is projected to ease to 7% when the current fiscal year ends in March, still well above authorities' comfort level. 

Leif Lybecker Eskesen, chief economist for India & ASEAN at HSBC, said the RBI will have to curb excess demand, as inflation remains high. 

"Moreover, fiscal policy is not expected to contribute significantly to demand-management this year, leaving RBI with the main burden," he said. 

HSBC expects the central bank to raise policy rates gradually and by a total of 1.0 percentage point in 2011. 

Friday's data showed output of consumer durables rose 23.3% year-on-year in January, compared with December's 18.8% rise. 

Manufacturing output, which has an 80% weighting in the industrial production index, rose 3.3% from a year earlier, compared with a 2.0% rise in December. 

Separate data last week showed infrastructure output, which accounts for 26.7% of the industrial output index, rose 7.1% in January from a year earlier. 

Friday's data showed growth in mining output slowed to 1.6% in January from a year earlier, compared with 5.7% in December, while electricity output grew 10.5%, quicker than 6.0% in December. 

Industrial output grew 8.3% during the April-January period, the first ten months of the current fiscal year, slower than the 9.5% growth in the comparable period last year. 



