"I don't take the movies seriously," Bette Davis once said, "and anyone who does is in for a headache." If she was right, Nick Smedley and J. Hoberman must consume a great deal of Tylenol. No student of archaeology could be more solemn about ancient artifacts than these historians are about old celluloid. Mr. Smedley, a British film historian, devotes "A Divided World" to an examination of Hollywood before, during and immediately after World War II. Mr. Hoberman, the longtime film critic of the Village Voice, focuses "An Army of Phantoms" on the Cold War period of the late 1940s and early 1950s.

According to Mr. Smedley's overview, the American film colony warmly embraced FDR's liberal idealism of the 1930s. But in the 1940s, when the New Deal came increasingly under attack from Republicans, Hollywood did not rally a liberal defense and instead responded with "a cinema of alienation and anxiety"—in movies such as "Key Largo," "The Big Sleep" and "The Maltese Falcon." In both decades, we're told, "American films were unrelenting in their hostility towards women and female self-determination."

Yet within this community of mostly American-born directors, Mr. Smedley notes, there emerged a brilliant trio of émigrés, Ernst Lubitsch, Billy Wilder and Fritz Lang, who did not subscribe to the governing Hollywood approach. All three had worked in Berlin before the rise of the Third Reich. And all three made Hollywood films that were not only skillfully crafted but also profoundly different from the usual studio productions, "articulating criticisms of American society left unsaid by their contemporaries."

Mr. Smedley discusses Ernst Lubitsch's "To Be or Not to Be," a coruscating satire of the Nazis in occupied Poland that he began filming in 1941, when noninterventionist feelings were still running high in America. The project resulted from the director's decision "to make a personal statement about the war without waiting for the United States to declare itself," we're told. 

But by the time the movie was released in 1942, his "personal statement," which might have seemed a criticism of his adopted country's neutrality, was attacked for not taking the Nazis seriously. Mr. Smedley glancingly mentions the altogether different reception that met Charlie Chaplin's Nazi-lampooning "The Great Dictator" in 1940 but doesn't weigh the movie in any serious way because . . . because the author has decided that Lubitsch, Wilder and Lang are his "control group"—as if he is conducting a laboratory experiment instead of writing film history—and has "deliberately omitted" consideration of other émigré directors in Hollywood, such as the British-born Chaplin and Alfred Hitchcock.

 By J. Hoberman  The New Press, 383 pages, $29.95

Here Mr. Smedley is giving an excellent imitation of Procrustes, the figure of Greek legend who was notorious for fitting his guests to an iron bed—if they were too short, he stretched them; if they were too long, he lopped off the excess. If your goal is to discuss how Hollywood movies were "unrelenting in their hostility towards women and female self-determination" during this era and you're intent on excluding Alfred Hitchcock (who was brought to America in 1939 by David O. Selznick), then you're purposely omitting a memorable line of determined female characters—think Laraine Day in Hitchcock's "Foreign Correspondent" (1940) and Priscilla Lane in "Saboteur" (1942).

Still, Mr. Smedley does offer other, more plausible liberal insights into the workings of the Dream Factory. He notes, for instance, that in the 1930s it "became fashionable for intellectuals, and exponents of popular culture, to 'rediscover' American virtue and innocence in a mythological rural past." The New Deal, he says, "gave tangible credence" to this thinking with projects like the Civilian Conservation Corps. "American liberalism at this time thus identified itself with the agrarian tradition, departing from the traditional association of agrarianism with conservative thought. Hollywood was to endorse this cultural program enthusiastically." He makes the provocative suggestion that "The Wizard of Oz" belongs in this tradition. Come to think of it, Dorothy's "no place like home" is a Kansas farm.

Mr. Hoberman's "An Army of Phantoms" covers some of the same turf, but its approach is entirely different. If Mr. Smedley is a maker of orderly patterns à la Piet Mondrian, Mr. Hoberman is an action painter in the style of Jackson Pollock. This is how he characterizes American science-fiction movies circa 1950: "The century declared by Time to be America's approaches its midpoint amid dreams of disaster, memories of cosmic cataclysm, the suggestion of vast conspiracies, visions of extra-terrestrial visitation, a sense of impending jihad, and intimations of Judgment Day." A sense of impending jihad, in 1950? 

In less hyperthyroid terms, Mr. Hoberman explains that film fantasies of the period were not merely entertainments; they were illustrations of national hysteria about the Soviets flourishing atomic weapons and announcing global ambitions. Thus "The Thing," a melodrama about a creature from another world, is in essence "a stark realization of adult fears. Congealed paranoia." Quite possibly. It may also be just an effective thriller produced and co-directed by the canny Howard Hawks, who knew how to keep viewers on the edges of their seats whether he was directing movies about detectives, monsters or cowboys.

The Hollywood western also comes in for re-evaluation by "An Army of Phantoms." To Mr. Hoberman, as to many other critics, "High Noon" (1952)—about a town marshal who cannot raise any help and faces a gang of outlaws by himself—can be explained as an allegory of Cold War blacklisting in Hollywood. Only a handful of outspoken actors and directors refused to play the committee's game by testifying or naming names, and they paid the price of ostracism and unemployment. But, as Mr. Hoberman acknowledges, there is another way of interpreting "High Noon": "Just as Marshall Kane cleaned up Hadleyville, making it safe for women and children, so the Truman Doctrine had maintained that it was now America's obligation 'to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or outside pressures.' (And as Kane was deserted by the selfish townspeople, so congressional Republicans had attacked Truman as a 'do gooder.')"

 By Nick Smedley  Intellect, 277 pages, $40

This spray-painting writing technique is used throughout the book, usually with passages that recall Norman Mailer, a writer Mr. Hoberman admires. Indeed, he applies a Mailerian label to Elvis Presley as "the first and greatest of White Negroes." Writing in the historical present, he observes that, in 1956, "President Eisenhower is overwhelmingly re-elected in his rematch with Adlai Stevenson and the opening of Love Me Tender, the routine Western into which Elvis was hastily inserted, is returning its investment so quickly, industry savants are reminded of The Jazz Singer. . . . Elvis's character dies at the end, so the star sings his last song posthumously. What wasn't possible?" Mr. Hoberman catalogs the possible by noting that, in late 1956, the Montgomery bus boycott ended, "triumphant. Black militancy was asserted on behalf of the entire Third World, a brazen counterculture had announced its presence. . . . Everything was in place for the convulsive cultural revolution that would reach its climax a dozen years later, at least in the Dream Life."

In the author's Unified Field Theory of Cinema, Hollywood finally subsumes all things and all events, no matter how far they might occur from California. In 1950, we're told, "FBI agents in New York arrest Lower East Side machine-shop owner Julius Rosenberg, implicated by his brother-in-law David Greenglass in stealing the Secret of the Whatzit, and NBC's We the People broadcasts an interview with Matt Cvetic, longtime double agent within the Communist Party's Pittsburgh chapter, telling a tale of treason and subversion that is currently serialized in the Saturday Evening Post and will soon be acquired by Warner Bros." 

At once trivializing the crime of espionage and braiding the varied strands of history and popular culture, Mr. Hoberman brings to mind the words of A.E. Housman when he considered the writings of Virgil. Yes, the Roman's ideas are compelling, Housman said. Yes, his mind is feverish and on occasion bright. But in the end, alas, "his besetting sin is the use of words too forcible for his thoughts."

—Mr. Kanfer is the author, most recently, of "Tough Without a Gun: The Life and Extraordinary Afterlife of Humphrey Bogart."