  Vodafone's Indian ambitions have already been sullied by regulatory changes, an influx of competition, a disputed $2.5 billion tax bill and possible retrospective license charges. Now the telecom giant faces fresh misfortune: Its Indian partner Essar Group's latest move to merge its stake in their joint venture with another majority-owned listed vehicle could land Vodafone with an even bigger bill, should Essar decide to sell its stake.

Until May 2011, Essar Group has the option to sell its entire 33% stake in Vodafone Essar to its partner for $5 billion, or to sell part of its stake at an independently appraised market value. Essar has made no decision as yet. But in November, it said it would merge a third of its stake into India Securities, to put a market value on the asset. Vodafone fears Essar will use India Securities' share price to put an artificially high price on its joint-venture stake, strengthening its hand for any future negotiation under the terms of the option.

Vodafone has lodged objections with the Indian stock exchange and regulator. It argues India Securities' investors haven't been given enough information on Vodafone Essar to value it properly. And with only a 22% free float, and 74% held by Essar, Vodafone argues India Securities' share price won't reflect a fair value of the joint venture. 

The snag is that Vodafone is neither a shareholder nor a creditor of India Securities, so its objections are likely to hold little sway. Any discussion with Vodafone over a future sale of Essar's stake is a separate issue. The valuation would then be hammered out between Essar's and Vodafone's banks, with a third acting as the final decision-maker. 

Vodafone's fears could turn out to be groundless. If Essar's total stake is valued at $2 billion, in line with peer group trading multiples, according to J.P. Morgan estimates, then its current maximum bill of $5 billion won't rise any higher. But if Essar argues that valuation is much higher, Vodafone's Indian nightmare could be set to continue.



 Write to  Hester Plumridge at Hester.Plumridge@dowjones.com 