The New York Times, reporting on the intelligence haul from Osama bin Laden's house, paints a picture of the mass murderer's politics:

So he was a global warmist who opposed the Iraq war, hated big corporations, was a fan of Noam Chomsky and thought Jimmy Carter was right on Israel. On the other hand, we understand he was more conservative on social issues.

Carter probably will not be including a posthumous bin Laden blurb on the next edition of his book. The Atlanta Journal-Constitution reports that in a commencement address at Georgia State University Saturday, the ex-president "made a brief reference to last week's killing of Osama bin Laden. It is 'imperative that America remains vigilant against threats from terrorists,' he said. 'I'm particularly proud as a Navy man of the Navy SEALs.' "

As for Chomsky, the loony-left linguist weighs in at the website of a magazine called Guernica, denouncing the terrorist's killing as "planned assassination, multiply violating elementary norms of international law." He says bin Laden should have been accorded all the rights of criminal suspects and adds, "I stress 'suspects,' " by which he means he thinks al Qaeda carried out the 9/11 attacks "like . . . I won the Boston Marathon."

He adds: "We might ask ourselves how we would be reacting if Iraqi commandos landed at George W. Bush's compound, assassinated him, and dumped his body in the Atlantic. Uncontroversially, his crimes vastly exceed bin Laden's." You can see why bin Laden thought he had found a kindred spirit.

  Generation Gap   In response to our Friday item on young people celebrating Osama bin Laden's death, reader Dan Martin makes a good point:

Bret Popper reinforces the point:

This leads us to a political thought. We've long been inclined to dismiss Barack Obama's strong 2008 performance among young voters as a one-off, an image-driven fad. We figured Obama wouldn't duplicate his success with this demographic in 2012 because the reality of his presidency is much less appealing than the fantasy of the campaign.

But perhaps it will turn out that killing bin Laden was just the ticket for getting the youngsters interested again.

  'We Need to Shut Up and Move On,' He Explained   Now that Osama bin Laden is defunct, John Kerry, the haughty, French-looking former junior senator from Massachusetts, who by the way served in Vietnam, thinks it's time to raise taxes. Here he is in an op-ed from Saturday's Boston Herald:

Kerry then says: "I hope this week shook Washington out of predictable partisan routines," though his own op-ed shows that it did not. Kerry also appeared on CBS's "Face the Nation" yesterday, where he "said it is time to stop questioning the exact occurrences in Osama bin Laden's house before his death," CNN reports:

We can't say we disagree with the substance of this particular Kerry utterance, but "We need to shut up and move on" is a loutish way of putting it. The list of awkward Kerry quotes has just grown one longer.

  Born in the USA   "On June 10, 1971, Piyush Jindal was born at Woman's Hospital in Baton Rouge, a natural-born U.S. citizen, who like every other child born in America, could, constitutionally, grow up to be president," the Times-Picayune of New Orleans reports.

Jindal, now known as "Bobby" after the youngest boy on "The Brady Bunch," is governor of Louisiana. The reason his birth just under 40 years ago is news is that he has publicly released a copy of his birth certificate. Apparently this is in response to an editorial in which the Baton Rouge Advocate objected to Jindal's having "said he would sign a bill filed in the Louisiana Legislature that would require candidates for federal office to provide a birth certificate in order to get on the ballot":

But it turns out that Jindal has no middle name. Maybe if he asked nicely, President Obama would let him use his. Speaking of which, Obama really seems to have started a trend by releasing his birth certificate, doesn't he?

     The Art of Seduction   "A group including former White House officials, union leaders and one of Hollywood's biggest producers have joined forces to start an outside effort to help President Obama and Congressional Democrats in 2012 by using the very sort of anonymous, unlimited donations from moneyed interests that the president has so deplored," the New York Times reported April 30:

We'd meant to make note of this last week but got waylaid by the action in Abbottabad. But the Times weighed in yesterday with a hilarious editorial:

The best part is the headline, "Democrats, Seduced by Secret Dollars."

Now, this column does not share the Times's view that free speech belongs only to corporations that own newspapers. The Priorities USA effort is fine by us, although we're sure we disagree with them on most questions of substance.

But note how the Times distinguishes between the two parties. Whereas Republicans "degrade" democracy by engaging in political speech in ways of which the Times disapproves, Democrats have been "seduced" into doing the same thing. Yes, the Times editors are naive enough to claim that the Dems were innocent until they were corrupted from without. Or maybe we should say they're cynical enough.

  Metaphor Alert   "Furthermore, the Supreme Court, by turning Lady Justice into a corporate concubine in the Citizens United ruling, has opened the floodgates of corporate spending on elections."--Charles Blow, New York Times, May 7

  View of the World From 8th Avenue   "A lot of Americans go for years on end without ever setting foot in Indiana even though it is a fine state, full of lovely people and some first-class universities, not to mention the RV Hall of Fame, the world's largest ball of paint and the Dan Quayle museum."--Gail Collins, New York Times, May 5

 Out on a Limb 

 Life Imitates the Onion 

  With DNC in Mind, City Bans Carrying Urine, Feces   "The Precarious Life of a Lefty Reliever"--headline, The Wall Street Journal, May 7

  So Much for the War on Drugs   "The President's Crack Team"--headline, New York Review of Books website, May 6

  Wasn't It Covered by ObamaCar?   "Medical Condition May Have Caused Car to Crash Into Building"--headline, Dayton Daily News, May 6

  Al Gore's Comeback Tour   "Doomsday Cranks Descend on Washington, Ironies Abound"--headline, Puffington Host, May 6

  The 'Do Ride' List Would Be a Lot Shorter   "Schumer Calls for 'Do Not Ride' List for Amtrak"--headline, Associated Press, May 8

  Can Cheese Production Save the Golden State's Economy?   "Wisconsin-Style Occupation Planned in California"--headline, The Nation website, May 6

  We Hope This Isn't Why He's Leaving Fox News   "Is Beck the Answer at Starting QB?"--headline, Washington Examiner, May 8

  We Thought the Fungi Had a Chance This Year   "Animal Kingdom Wins Kentucky Derby"--headline, Enquirer (Cincinnati), May 8

  No One Expects an Apology for the Spanish Inquisition   "In Majorca, Atoning for the Sins of 1691"--headline, New York Times, May 7

  Something Tells Us This Won't End Happily   "Canadian Cities Wrestle With Regulating Massage Parlors"--headline, PostMedia News, May 7

  We Prefer Them Stewed   "Scientists Say a Third or More of Sanctuary Oysters Poached"--headline, Baltimore Sun website, May 9

  It's Been Struggling Since It Opened Its Doors   "MacAdam Cage Fighting to Stay in Business"--headline, Publishers Weekly, May 9

  We're Pretty Smart, but We Don't Have That Prob--Oh, Look! A Squirrel!   "Easily Distracted People May Have Too Much Brain"--headline, NewScientist.com, May 6

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

 Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  Bites Terrorize Dog--Now That Would Be News   "ROBBINS: Dog Bites Terrorist"--headline, Washington Times website, May 6

 News of the Tautological 

 News You Can Use 

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  Sigmund Freud, Call Your Office   "Men envy women's restrooms," reports psychiatrist Keith Ablow at FoxNews.com:

It seems to us there's an obvious problem of selection bias here. As Ablow acknowledges, "I'm not talking about every man." His sample is limited to men who confide their micturition misgivings to a psychiatrist.

Anyway, maybe Ablow ought to refer these guys to a lawyer. They could file a civil-rights lawsuit claiming that it's illegal discrimination to impose urinals on the gents and not the ladies. Though if we were the judge, we'd dismiss such a case on the ground that the plaintiffs lack standing.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Michael Segal, Paul Dyck, Barry Kaplovitz, David Gerstman, Michael Capel, Jerry Sherman, Joe Perez, John Bobek, Ed Grinberg, Mark Mitchell, Michele Schiesser, Monty Krieger, Marion Dreyfus, Margaret Hemenway, Rob Slocum, Jim Doyle, Mark Ven Der Molen, David Hallstrom, Arlene Ross, Zack Russ, Ray Hendel, E.P. Shareck, Bob Roenigk, Rod Pennington, Hillel Markowitz, Harris Perry, Tom Jackson, Daniel Mullen, Merv Benson, Brian Warner, Andrew Wolgemuth, Leonard Peirce, Larry Grant, Chris Harrington, Christopher McPherson, Charlotte Reineck, Daniel Peterson, Ethel Fenig, Peter Iorio, Andrew Pietila, Mark Nicholas and John Alder. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)