No TV show wants to live very long on the bubble. In industry parlance, that's when a show's existence hangs in the balance. Ahead of the annual "upfront" sessions in New York next month when networks pitch new shows to advertisers, executives are deciding which series get another season and which get canceled. 

With marketers poised to spend more money on TV commercials for the coming season than last year, expect to see the big-four broadcast networks push schedules packed with ambitious new shows. New presidents at ABC and NBC mean those networks will want to greenlight shows that signal a creative regime change, and lose some old baggage. 

The DVR could save some bubble shows, as advertisers slowly embrace the loyal, typically younger viewers who watch via time-shifting. Tuesday, the CW network renewed "90210," which is no ratings hit but boasts some of the largest percentage increases from DVR playback, according to Nielsen Co. 

This year NBC, the fourth-ranked network in total prime-time viewers, must start almost from scratch. "Chuck" is on the bubble, in addition to newcomers like "Law & Order: L.A." and "Harry's Law." The network is practically a "tabula rasa," says media analyst Shari Anne Brill. 

ABC's aging dramas "Brothers & Sisters" and "Desperate Housewives" may expire, giving new network president  Paul Lee a chance to put his stamp on development. Top-ranked CBS has a relatively stable lineup but must contemplate killing "CSI: NY," the underperforming spinoff of one of the most successful TV franchises in history. 

Fox needs a drama that brings back its "24" buzz and could sacrifice "The Chicago Code," "Lie to Me," or "Human Target" to give some fresh shows a whirl. The youth-centered CW network is betting on pilots with witches and zombies to fill a void left by the canceled "Smallville." 

Name: "Detroit 1-8-7" (ABC)  No. of Seasons: one  Average Number of Viewers: 7.6 million, according to Nielsen.

 Pro/Con: The cop drama shot on location in Detroit has been a boon to the local economy, and brought male viewers to the female-centric ABC, but low ratings and a trend towards lighter, sunnier crime shows could make ABC scrap its attempt to reprise gritty onetime hit "NYPD Blue."

 In the Wings? A "Charlie's Angels" remake starring Minka Kelly.

Name: "Desperate Housewives" (ABC)  No. of Seasons: seven  Viewers: 11.7 million 

 Pro/Con: The prime-time soap from Executive Producer  Marc Cherry broke new ground when it debuted in 2004, but ratings have fallen as stories have spun out of control. Meanwhile, cast salaries have exploded. ABC says the series will almost certainly return if contract negotiations can be settled. 

 In the Wings? Mr. Cherry's "Hallelujah," about a stranger who arrives to save a Tennessee town. 



Name: "Brothers & Sisters" (ABC)  No. of Seasons: five  Viewers: 8.2 million

 Pro/Con: A devoted following may not be enough to save this Sally Field-led ensemble. A flood of cast departures, including Rob Lowe, hasn't helped. ABC has several similar pilots on the runway and may want a change. 

 In the Wings?Texas-set soap based on the 2008 novel "Good Christian Bitches" by Kim Gatlin and starring Kristin Chenoweth. 

Name: "The Defenders" (CBS)  No. of Seasons: one  Viewers: 10.5 million

 Pro/Con: The legal drama with Jim Belushi and Jerry O'Connell as Las Vegas lawyers was CBS's lowest-rated drama of the season. The network bumped it to Friday nights, never a good sign for an ailing series. 

 In the Wings? In "Rookies," no relation to the 1970s Southern California show, six young cops work the crime-ridden streets of Manhattan; executive-produced by Robert De Niro.

Name: "CSI: NY" (CBS)  No. of Seasons: seven  Viewers: 11 million

 Pro/Con: After 150 episodes, this spinoff of the hugely popular "CSI" franchise is showing signs of age. Last season CBS consigned it to Fridays. The network may hang onto it for another season as a salute to its powerhouse producer, Jerry Bruckheimer.

 In the Wings? "Person of Interest" follows an ex-CIA agent who fights crime with an elusive billionaire played by Michael Emerson ("Lost")

Name: "The Chicago Code" (Fox)  No. of Seasons: one  Viewers: 8.1 million

 Pro/Con: Critics loved the character-driven cop series from "The Shield" creator Shawn Ryan, but ratings haven't lived up to the hype. Fans of the show can hope that Fox will keep it around in the hope it gains momentum like "House" did in its second season. 

 In the Wings? J.J. Abrams's crime drama "Alcatraz" about FBI agents chasing down escaped convicts. 



Name: "Law & Order: LA" (NBC)  No. of Seasons: one  Viewers: nine million

 Pro/Con: After a three-month hiatus "LOLA" returned with Alfred Molina as an LAPD detective. The cast changes didn't bring in new viewers, and despite "Law & Order" creator Dick Wolf's longtime relationship with NBC, the newest spinoff may not get a second season. 

 In the Wings? "S.I.L.A." (Special Investigations L.A.), starring Jimmy Smits. 

Name: "Chuck" (NBC)  No. of Seasons: four  Viewers: 5.8 million

Pro/Con: Perennially on the bubble, this action comedy about a computer-geek-turned-spy has survived because other NBC dramas were so weak. But with a busy slate of new shows, NBC's new president,  Bob Greenblatt, may decide Chuck Bartowski's luck has run out. 

 In the Wings?David E. Kelley's "Wonder Woman" remake.