I wrecked my right knee recently, probably while climbing up the Eiffel Tower, but rather than telling people I had a torn meniscus, I said that I had gout.

If you tell people that you have a torn meniscus or chronic back pain or three herniated discs in your neck, they'll start bombarding you with unsolicited medical advice, because everybody in this country is an expert on skeletal malfunction. But if you tell them you have gout, a weird, anachronistic disease, they'll immediately change the subject. Something about gout conjures up images of Henry VIII carousing, or Mad Anthony Wayne groaning through his victory at the Battle of Fallen Timbers, or dissolute slobs in Hogarth paintings slouched in wing chairs downing vast tankards of mead. Gout, like leprosy, is a can't-miss conversation-stopper.

I hate getting medical advice from laymen. I'd rather get typhus. Or gout. As soon as your friends—the Overlords of Obviousness—find out that you've wrecked your meniscus, they start asking if you've thought of having it shaved, or getting your knee drained, or perhaps giving arthroscopic surgery a shot.

They recommend cortisone shots or hydrotherapy or deep heat or rest or some space-age medication they read about on the Internet, which brings the Mayo Clinic into every conversation. Their grandmother in Aurora, Ill., had a miracle cure for knee pain: applying a package of frozen peas to the patella while taking massive doses of castor oil and hyssop. They mean well enough, sure, but so does the knucklehead who recommends wearing a hat while visiting the Sahara "because of the sun." What, after all, is the likelihood that a person past the age of, oh, 12, with a bum knee has not already:

1. Had an MRI

2. Done exercises to strengthen those quads!

3. Ingested truckloads of anti-inflammatories

4. Tried to stay off the knee as much as possible!

Asking someone with a damaged knee if he's resorted to any of these solutions is like asking a manic depressive if he's ever tried lithium. It's like asking an unemployed person if he's ever thought about looking for work. 

Americans do not consider themselves to be experts on municipal bonds, Aikido, the Albigensian Crusade or the jazz banjo. But get them started on lesions, contusions or cysts and you'd think that Hippocrates, Jonas Salk and Marcus Welby had all just strolled into the room.

I learned this years ago when I screwed up my neck playing basketball. For the next 15 years, every time somebody noticed that I never looked over my shoulder when backing into a parking space, they'd say, "Hey! You should get that neck looked at, buddy!" They then wondered aloud if I had ever considered osteopaths, chiropractors, muscle relaxers, pain management, acupuncture, St. John's wort or suicide. 

Yeah, I had. And none of it worked out very well. The chiropractor told me I didn't need to come back after I asked if she had done her internship wrestling steers at the rodeo. She particularly objected to my remark: "If I want a woman to put me in extreme physical discomfort, I can get my wife to do it for free."

Some people may say that I am being unnecessarily cruel here. After all, my friends are only trying to help. Well, I am being cruel, primarily because I want my friends to keep their yaps shut and stop trying to help. I don't tell anyone what to do with their billowing stomachs or fallen arches or inability to read fine print, and I expect the same from them. I certainly don't want some rank amateur giving me advice about elliptical machines or visiting one of those bozos who insist that pain is all in your head. The pain is not all in my head. It is in my knee. Or let's just say that it started in my foot and has now worked its way up into my knee, the way gout so often will. Gout, man, it's a killer.