LONDON—The U.K. opposition Labour party comfortably won a by-election in northwest England on Thursday, in the first public test of Prime Minister David Cameron's government, although there was some cheer for the junior Liberal Democrat coalition party whose vote share held up. 

The result, a win by over 3,558 votes, will be a boost for Labour's new leader, Ed Miliband, who campaigned several times in the Oldham East and Saddleworth seat and used the race to attack the government's deep austerity measures. 

However, the Liberal Democrats' solid backing will calm some of the worries in Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg's party, whose support has plummeted since May's general election. 

Opposition parties tend to win by-elections in the U.K. Not since 1982 has an opposition party failed to retain a seat it already held in a by-election.

However, the Oldham race was harder to call because of the situation that triggered it. 

In November, a special election court stripped Labour lawmaker Phil Woolas of his seat, ruling that his campaign had deliberately lied about his Liberal Democrat opponent. Mr. Woolas, who was banned from running again, won with a margin of just 103 votes in May 2010. 

In Thursday's vote, Labour's vote share swelled to 42% from 32% in May. The Liberal Democrats' vote edged up to 31.9% from 31.6%, but Conservative support plummeted to 13% from 26.4%. 

Turnout was a decent 48% in Thursday's vote. 

  Iain Martin: Tories Vacate Ground They'll Find Hard to Win Back 

The result was a poor one for Mr. Cameron's Conservative party. However, the Conservative campaign was somewhat lackluster, with the prime minister signaling he didn't want to see the Liberal Democrats humiliated. 

After the result was announced, Labour candidate Debbie Abrahamas said the outcome offered a warning to Mr. Cameron's government. "Across the country there is growing anger against your reckless policies, your broken promises and your unfair cuts," she said. 

However, speaking to the British Broadcasting Corp., Liberal Democrats lawmaker Norman Lamb said his party will take "real heart" from the fact the party's vote share had held up. 

And Conservative Deputy chairman Michael Fallon played down his party's finish. "We were third to start with. We're still third," he told the BBC. Mr. Fallon said the Conservative vote had been squeezed in this one-off race. "In by-elections, that always happens," he said. 

While the government holds a solid majority in parliament, Liberal Democrats' troubles have raised questions about the durability of the coalition. 

The Liberal Democrats have had to break key pre-election pledges in recent weeks, supporting government policies to treble the cap on university tuition fees and impose a sales-tax rise. 

A YouGov poll for The Sun newspaper Tuesday had the party's support at a record low of 7% support, down from 23% in May's election. 

With the economy expected to slow markedly in the first half of 2011 as the government launches an austerity drive that promises to cut spending by £81 billion ($128.18 billion), May's local elections could prove a difficult night for both governing parties. 

Labour argues the austerity policies risk throwing the economy back into recession and say the government's spending cuts go too far, too fast. 

May will also see the public vote in a referendum on electoral reform that was one of the biggest concessions the Liberal Democrats won from the Conservatives as a condition of joining the government. 

If the public votes down the referendum, some believe the party's commitment to staying the course may waver. 

But in an interview on the eve of the Oldham vote, senior Liberal Democrat lawmaker  David Laws, one of the architects of the coalition, warned that while 2011 might be the "toughest year" for his party, opponents shouldn't count them out. 

"We have been written off more often than a piece of Latin American debt," Mr. Laws said. "During this time we've got stronger in local government. We're now part of the national government. We've got the Deputy Prime Minister." 