MELBOURNE—Formula One revs up for its first race of the season this weekend as local debate rages over whether the costly event delivers enough international exposure for Australia's second-largest city. 

Melbourne seeks to carve out a niche for glitzy international sporting events like F1, but hosting the sport of millionaires doesn't come cheap.

Unrest in the Middle East has worked in Melbourne's favor this year, with its Grand Prix replacing Bahrain at the top of the 19-race calendar, which culminates with the Brazilian Grand Prix in São Paulo Nov. 27. 

But faced with a rising bill of about 50 million Australian dollars (US$50.4 million) for putting on the show on a temporary street circuit in the city's Albert Park, the Victoria state government will this year conduct a review of the economic benefits that the race delivers.

The review risks angering F1 boss  Bernie Ecclestone at a time when the sport's owner is considering shrinking the number of races to 16, threatening traditional events while at the same time planning new Grand Prix venues in India, Russia and the U.S. 

Mr. Ecclestone won't attend this weekend's opening race, choosing instead to be in New York for talks with Mayor Michael Bloomberg about running a Grand Prix in the city.

"Everybody wants one," said  Ron Walker, chairman of Australian Grand Prix Corp. "Forget motor sport, it's about promoting Melbourne and we're using that as a tool to promote the city."

Melbourne's Grand Prix, which draws more than 100,000 spectators into the grandstands on race day, has never been profitable and requires the Victoria state government to subsidize the event to keep it out of the red.

Mr. Walker faces resistance from skeptical Melbourne Mayor  Robert Doyle, who says the cost of the event will rise to A$70 million by the time the city's contract with F1 expires in 2015. Mr. Doyle, who declined to be interviewed, has publicly criticized the event. 

In a local newspaper opinion piece, Mr. Doyle questioned whether the economic returns were worth the A$70 million of taxpayers' money that may soon be needed to keep the event afloat. 

"I intend to ignore the comments made by the mayor of Melbourne as they will not influence any future decision which would be taken," said Mr. Ecclestone, adding that F1 is happy to renegotiate a new deal with Australian Grand Prix beyond 2015. 

Melbourne, headquarters to some of Australia's largest companies including BHP Billiton and National Australia Bank, markets itself on being an "events" city. It hosted the 1956 Summer Olympics and 2006 Commonwealth Games. The city, home to about four million people, also plays host to the Australian Open tennis tournament and Australia's most prestigious horse race, the Melbourne Cup.

"The Grand Prix is show business, it's got that Hollywood touch to it and we treat it like show business. But it's a very cheap gig for the A$50 million the government puts into it when you think of the exposure it brings," said Mr. Walker, who estimates the race brings A$160 million into the local economy. Mr. Walker said the city would have to spend A$100 million a year advertising to reach Formula 1's global television audience, which last year reached 527 million people in 187 countries.

To be sure, the uncertainty surrounding the future of the sport in the Middle East and the cancellation of this season's Bahrain Grand Prix has helped to restore the status of traditional races like Melbourne, which has been a fixture on the calendar for 15 years. 

Local businesses in Melbourne are reluctant to see the race head overseas. Crown Ltd., which runs the Crown casino, hotel and entertainment complex in the centre of Melbourne and employs 7,000 staff, said the Grand Prix was a "very important component" of the city's events calendar and should be supported by the government and business community. "It's a fact that a significant number of interstate and international visitors continue to travel to Melbourne specifically to attend the Grand Prix," said  Gary O'Neill, Crown's general manager of government and media relations.