 SAN DIEGO  

Torrey Pines usually spoils the PGA Tour with everything it could possibly want—perfect weather, big crowds, a golf course perched on cliffs above the sea and Tiger Woods. 

As the embattled golfer sunk birdies, climbed the leaderboard and prompted the gallery to holler his name this week, it was easy to hear the faint echoes of his triumphant U.S. Open victory here in 2008.

Mr. Woods skipped Torrey Pines last year (for obvious reasons) and at precisely the same time, professional golf's prospects became hard to predict. The game's essential plot line since 1996—just how big would the Tiger Woods legend become?—had unraveled like a $15 sportcoat. 

The recession was crushing both the financial services business and U.S. car manufacturers; two of golf's largest traditional sponsors. Even if the picture wasn't particularly bright, PGA Tour executives said they'd be fine. 

By some measures, they were probably right. Though golf participation continues to drop—down another 2.2% in 2010, according to the National Golf Foundation—the PGA Tour's contributions to charity (its profit) rose 10% to $120 million last year, from $109 million in 2009. That was only slightly below its 2008 record of $124 million.

Ty Votaw, the PGA Tour's chief spokesman, said local sponsorships and hospitality sales—up 12% for the dozen tournaments the PGA Tour itself manages—drove the turnaround. In addition, the PGA Tour renewed or secured title sponsors for 14 tournaments. 

Tiger or not, golf remains a good place for companies that want to target a wealthy demographic while being able to support tournaments where nearly all the "profits" go to charity. "We want to be seen as net givers in the community, and this allows us to do that," said Robert Woudstra, chief executive of Farmers Insurance, the title sponsor of the Torrey Pines tournament.

The title sponsors are the lifeblood of any tournament, often covering the prize money that averages $6.1 million per tournament. Three of the PGA Tour's 46 tournaments this year are without title sponsors, the same as in 2010. The recently completed Bob Hope Classic, formerly sponsored by Chrysler, survives because it charges nearly 400 amateurs $12,000-$25,000 to participate alongside the pros.

On the other, less cheerful side of the scorecard, the sport has two lingering issues to contend with: television and Tiger. The Tour's six-year, roughly $3 billion broadcast deal expires after 2012. Negotiations for a new deal will occur later this year. 

Last year, audiences were down. Even Mr. Woods, who knows a little about business, acknowledges the challenges. "We're just in a tough marketplace right now," he said here Wednesday. "Obviously I would like to play well, and hopefully that helps." 

The average television audience for weekend golf event broadcasts dropped to 2.8 million last year, a drop of 800,000 or 22% from 2009. That's below the average of 3.2 million in 2008, when an injury sidelined Mr. Woods in the second half of the year. The PGA Tour's cumulative audience—the number of individuals who watched—dropped to 150 million in 2010, down from 159 million in 2009. That's the lowest level since 2007.

Tour Commissioner Tim Finchem blamed competition with the Olympics, the NFL's record audiences and Mr. Woods's down year for the drop-off. He noted that ratings on cable's Golf Channel were up by a third for this year's first three tournaments. Having Mr. Woods return to his "competitive level" would undoubtedly help, he said. 

A new generation of talent is emerging, including Americans Hunter Mahan and Rickie Fowler and Irishman Rory McIlroy. Rocco Mediate called Mr. McIlroy's talent "ridiculous" this week. Still, nobody seems to move the needle like Mr. Woods. Tom Wilson, tournament director at Torrey Pines, said when Mr. Woods plays, more than 150,000 fans show up. That compares to 110,000 when he doesn't. To make matters worse, two of the game's biggest stars, Mr. McIlroy and the current world No. 1 Lee Westwood, play on the European Tour. 

Executives with PGA Tour broadcast partners NBC and CBS declined to comment for this article. Don't look for ESPN, which broadcasts weekday coverage of three of the four majors and the Ryder Cup, to provide a lifeline. Leah LaPlaca, vice president of programming, said it got out of the PGA Tour business in 2006 because the audience was too narrow. "We're focused on the big-ticket events that can cut across a wide array of sports fans," she said.

Mr. Finchem is making some subtle changes. He asked all players to play an additional event this year. The Tour will also work to create more star-studded pairings during early rounds. Mr. Woods played Thursday and Friday with Mr. Mediate, his rival from the 2008 U.S. Open here, along with rising star Anthony Kim. Retired pro Lee Elder said Tour players need to look like they're having fun "instead of just making people watch a stone-face all the time." 

Mr. Woods, who finished Friday's round in the hunt here,tends to equate fun with winning—something that didn't happen in 2010. "I expect he will be the Tiger we've known for over a decade," longtime rival Phil Mickelson said. "Unfortunately." 

 Write to  Matthew Futterman at matthew.futterman@wsj.com 