The quake that struck Japan on Friday is testing the strength of buildings, from homes and offices to factories and nuclear plants, constructed based on the country's already demanding quake-resistance standards.

In Japan, small earthquakes occur so frequently that they are almost part of everyday life. And quakes are also part of the nation's history, with the most destructive ones like the Great Kanto quake in 1923 and the Kobe quake in 1995 shaping the nation's collective memory.

Japan's familiarity with earthquakes fueled research, while major quakes in recent decades triggered efforts to set stronger standards for new buildings. 

Colliding plates under earth's surface make Asia Pacific one of the most tectonically active region on earth.

The Japanese land ministry's Web site says buildings made under the current quake-resistance standards, based a law revised in 1981, would suffer little damage in a quake as strong as "upper 5" on the Japanese scale. The current standards are also meant to prevent buildings from collapsing, and hurting or killing people, in rare quakes with the strength of "upper 6" or "7." 

Friday's quake recorded seven on the Japanese scale in part of northern Japan where the tremor was the most intense. It also jolted Tokyo with the intensity of five on the same scale. 

The meteorological agency's Web site has descriptions of each number on the Japanese scale, which is different from the magnitude scale commonly used in the U.S. A quake with the intensity of seven on the Japanese scale is so strong that one is unable to stand, the ministry says. The only way one can move is by crawling. Inside buildings, most pieces of furniture move or collapse unless they are firmly fixed to the walls or floor.

Friday's quake challenges not only the maximum resistance of houses and office buildings; it is also testing much stricter regulations that govern Japan's nuclear power plants. Standards introduced in 2006 require utilities to enhance quake resistance in parts of their plants previously considered less sensitive to potential radioactive leaks. Still, the quake disabled the back-up cooling systems at the Fukushima No. 1 reactor in the north. The government declared an atomic emergency late Friday and evacuated about 3,000 people from the vicinity of the plant. As of early Saturday morning, the Japanese government was still trying to keep the plant under control. 

 Write to  Juro Osawa at juro.osawa@dowjones.com 