The federal government isn't simply bleeding money. Because of its addiction to red ink, it's bleeding power, which is starting to flow away from the nation's capital and out to the states. This is the little-recognized reality behind the remarkable political upheaval being seen in state capitals. 

Republican governors such as Wisconsin's Scott Walker, New Jersey's Chris Christie and Indiana's Mitch Daniels are pursuing their own controversial fiscal policies out of what they consider financial necessity; they have budgets to balance, and little time and few options to do the job. But governors of both parties also have less reason to wait and hope for help from a federal government that, with overwhelming budget deficits, is losing its ability to offer financial goodies to the states. 

For decades, the implicit deal between Washington and state capitals has been that the feds would offer chunks of cash, and in return would get commensurate influence over the states' social policies. Now that flow of federal goodies has begun what figures to be a long-term decline, as the money Washington has available to pass around to the states is squeezed. Already the funds the federal government offered states as part of the 2009 economic stimulus package have nearly run out, and the budget-cutting that has begun in Washington is curtailing the other money available to dole out. 

A loss of federal largess means a loss of influence in state capitals—particularly if states succeed in winning more autonomy in running the Medicaid health program for the poor, one area where money from Washington continues to grow. 

It was telling that when the nation's governors gathered in Washington for their annual meeting last weekend, state chief executives from both parties were asking for more freedom from Washington's rules in order to shape education and Medicaid programs, which are funded jointly by states and the federal government. More than half have asked for an exemption from federal Medicaid rules.

"South Carolina is not going to wait on D.C. anymore," says the state's new governor, Republican Nikki Haley. "We're going to strike out on our own." 

Indeed, polling suggests that the federal government is slipping in its standing with voters, who express declining confidence that Washington's politicians can come together to solve problems. Citizens show more confidence in state governments.

In a survey by the Pew Research Center in February, a majority of Americans—53%—said they had a favorable opinion of their state government, while just 38% offered a favorable opinion of the federal government. The ratings of both were about even a decade ago, and, while both have dropped, positive views of the federal government have fallen almost twice as far.

As a result, governors feel they have a broader political mandate, as well as an economic need, to try new—some say radical—policy steps.

Frank Luntz, a consultant who advises Republican leaders as well as some Democrats, calls this effect "the decentralization of politics." Much as power has shifted from big, centralized institutions in other parts of American society, he notes, so it is moving in political life.

"Not only do the party bosses not matter any more," Mr. Luntz says, "neither do the Washington bosses."

Of course, governors, like all human beings, want to have their cake and eat it, too. They would love to have money from Washington as well as the freedom to spend it as they see fit. But their desire to blaze their own policy trails doesn't mean they'll turn down checks from Washington when available.

It's also possible that Gov. Walker in Wisconsin overreached when he went beyond seeking to curb the cost of pension and health benefits paid to state employees—where he has more public support—to attempting to sharply limit the ability of state employees to bargain collectively through their unions.

When Gallup asked last week whether Americans would approve of taking away collective-bargaining rights of public unions, including teachers' unions, 61% said they opposed such a move, including 62% of the important bloc of independent voters. By going after public-employee unions as well as public-employee benefits, Gov. Walker has opened himself up to charges that he wasn't just seeking a solution to a budget crisis but making a partisan move to cripple an important element of the Democratic party's base.

Still, there seems little doubt that the outburst of freelancing by governors is both reflecting and furthering a shift in the balance of power. Standing at the governors' meeting in Washington over the weekend, Mr. Luntz mused: "The battle right now in New Jersey and Wisconsin has a greater potential to affect the future of the country than anything happening here."

 Write to  Gerald F. Seib at jerry.seib@wsj.com 