KAMPALA, Uganda—Ugandan police Thursday arrested the leader of the country's second-largest opposition party, the Democratic Party, for taking part in protests against steep food and fuel prices, witnesses said. 

The police intercepted Norbert Mao in the city suburb of Bukoto as he walked to his party offices, witnesses said. He was detained at the Kiira Road police station, and the police barred the media from the station early Thursday. Mr. Mao had just been released on Monday after spending around three weeks in prison following his arrest last month during the protests. 

Other opposition leaders belonging to several parties took part in the protests, but there were no clashes with the police as has been in earlier cases, a police spokeswoman said. 

"The police arrested Mao because he had a procession which was likely to breach public order," she said, adding that the opposition leader has since been freed without being charged. 

The Ugandan opposition are rallying people to walk from their homes to work places at least twice a week in protest at the steep food and fuel prices. The protests were originally planned to express dissatisfaction with the rising cost of fuel and food in Uganda, but have since turned into larger, antigovernment demonstrations. 

Ugandan security forces have mounted a violent crackdown on protests in the past three weeks, in which at least 10 people have died and hundreds injured. Uganda's veteran opposition leader Kizza Besigye, President Yoweri Museveni's main challenger during the disputed Feb. 18 election, has been beaten, tear-gassed and pepper-sprayed on several occasions during the protests. He is currently in a Kenyan hospital after his arrest last week. 

Mr. Besigye has maintained that the results of the February poll were falsified, and that both he and President Museveni got just under 50% of the vote. Ugandan lawyers went on strike Wednesday protesting the manner in which security forces have been breaking up the protests. 

Uganda Law Society President Bruce Kyerere said Wednesday that the manner in which security forces have reacted to the protesters amounts to "crimes against humanity". 

Last week, the United Nations high commissioner for human rights also criticized the government over the excessive use of force on protesters. 