As the global economy stuttered to life in 2010, so the number of initial public offerings began to pick up. This year, most specialists agree, will see the return of the IPO market to its pre-crisis highs. Risk-averse investors, who had built up large cash positions in their portfolios, are now losing money in real terms as inflation rapidly outstrips stubbornly low interest rates. This fact, combined with a return of risk appetite, will drive investor demand for IPOs in 2011. 

Read the complete  Wealth Adviser report .

There will be no shortage of supply either. Data provider Dealogic says there are already 528 deals in the pipeline for 2011, which are set to raise over $78 billion worldwide. But while opportunities will abound, discerning investors will need to be wary of the twin threats of emerging markets bubbles and global inflation.

Top of investors' shopping lists are likely to be companies with exposure to commodities. 

According to Dealogic, natural resource firms (mining, oil and gas) are estimated to make up 30% of total ECM deals in 2011 - the largest percentage of new shares to be listed. As a result, commodities related dealflow will outstrip the number of financial institutions raising money for the first time in five years. But buyer beware. Chris Searle, partner in the transaction team at accounting firm BDO, warns that the U.S. recovery has driven up valuations. "Prices are way above historical levels . . . also hedge funds are piling in and prices may be inflated. Investors should look for well managed companies that will continue to grow," he says.



Many natural resources companies are located in emerging markets, which have continued to experience much stronger growth than developed markets. Confidence in their economies' performance has led to a flurry of proposed new listings. However, the threat of an emerging markets bubble appears very real to many investment advisers.

  Oliver Gregson, head of investment advisory at Barclays Wealth, says his bank favors developed markets for new listings in the short term: "We still buy into the emerging markets growth trend and in a few years [emerging markets] will be very important for IPOs, but prices are looking fully valued and we have seen a lot of capital move into these markets," he says.  Simon Miles, head of Europe, Middle East and Africa at Merrill Lynch Portfolio Managers is equally skeptical: "If emerging markets are getting overheated, we will see a very significant uptick in the number of IPOs - if these are oversubscribed, that is a fairly sure sign [of a bubble]."

  Robert Farago, head of asset allocation at Schroders Private Bank, believes strong growth does not necessarily equal good equity returns. "[Emerging markets] governments' finances are relatively healthy, but the threat of inflation has been underestimated, and this can put pressure on earnings multiples," he says. The U.K. is also suffering inflationary pressure, which has meant continental Europe and North America are the destinations of choice for advisers looking to benefit from strong IPO activity.

Mr. Miles says he is positive on corporate Northern Europe. "One of the major themes that will drive the region is the increasing level of capital expenditure as businesses start to use the cash they have amassed," he says. 

At the end of last year, cash made up 12% of total assets on corporate balance sheets in Europe, almost a third higher than at any point in the last economic cycle, according to investment bank  UBS. Mr. Farago says information technology companies are also likely to receive a boost from firms spending this cash on updating internal structures that have been neglected during the financial crisis.



Ms. Pfeuti is an asset management reporter at Financial News in London. She can be reached at liz.pfeuti@dowjones.com.