The U.S. government Thursday said it has strongly protested Vietnam's treatment of a U.S. diplomat who was detained and wrestled to the ground while attempting to visit a dissident Roman Catholic priest—a development that could further inflame concerns in the U.S. about the Southeast Asian nation's human rights record.

U.S. Ambassador  Michael Michalak confirmed an incident occurred after the American-funded Radio Free Asia reported that an embassy political officer it identified as  Christian Marchant was intercepted by police Wednesday outside the home of the Rev. Thadeus Nguyen Van Ly in Hue, central Vietnam. The report said Mr. Marchant was manhandled by local authorities before being forced into a police car and driven away. He was later released.

"The United States government, both here in Hanoi and in Washington, has lodged a strong, official protest with the government of Vietnam regarding the treatment of one of our diplomats," Mr. Michalak told reporters Thursday during a press briefing in Hanoi, the Associated Press reported.

Mr. Marchant couldn't be reached for comment. Vietnamese government officials couldn't be reached for comment, although the AP reported Vietnamese Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Nguyen Phuong Nga as saying the Vietnamese government is reviewing what happened. She also said foreign diplomats have to abide by a host country's laws.

Vietnam's treatment of dissidents and religious activists is a major point of contention in relations between Hanoi and Washington, which have otherwise been warming significantly in recent months. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton last year announced during a visit to Vietnam that the U.S. endorses an international, multilateral approach to resolving territorial disputes in the South China Sea, portions of which are claimed by both China and Vietnam, as well as other countries in the region. Her statement echoes Vietnam's preferred strategy for dealing with the problem, and angered Chinese authorities in Beijing.

The U.S. and Vietnam also are developing a deepening military relationship and U.S. Navy vessels have visited the country several times in recent years. Vietnam is enthusiastically endorsing Washington's proposals to create a pan-Pacific trading zone known as the Trans-Pacific Partnership.

Hanoi's dwindling tolerance for free speech and freedom of worship in recent years, though, threatens to sour the relationship. Political analysts say the upcoming Communist Party Congress, which begins next week, has prompted security forces in Vietnam to take an increasingly harsh line against dissidents in order to deter any possible disruptions.

Father Ly's involvement is especially significant. The priest is a potential lightning rod for dissent and is one of Vietnam's best known antigovernment critics and a persistent advocate for greater human rights and religious freedoms in the one-party state. In 2007, he was sentenced to eight years in prison after being convicted of attempting to undermine the government, prompting several members of the U.S. Congress to demand his release. Now 63 years old, Father Ly is being held under house arrest in Hue because of health problems, including treatment for a brain tumor.

In a symbolic resolution, the U.S. House of Representatives last month called on Vietnam to be included on Washington's blacklist of religious rights offenders. 