Just a few weeks ago, Cairo was little more than an intriguing place to visit, at least for most investors. Many couldn't find Libya and Tunisia on a map. And pundits and market prognosticators focused on earnings, not uprisings, to assess where the market was headed.

But reverberations from the upheaval in the Arab world sent stocks tumbling several days last week, as oil prices surged and questions were raised about a U.S. economy threatened by higher energy costs.

The Dow Jones Industrial Average dropped more than 160 points on Tuesday alone, recovered spectacularly on Thursday and sold off again on Friday, ending the volatile week up 0.3%. Oil, meanwhile, hit $104 a barrel.

The sudden events have raised questions about the portfolios of investors and their ability to withstand surprises. Some political and economic shockers impact markets for short periods; others have longer import. Still others are buying opportunities, at least for the boldest investors.

The events in the Middle East are a useful reminder to consider steps that can help prepare a portfolio for unexpected events.

A few recommendations from analysts and financial advisers:

Cash will cushion a portfolio from shocks and provide dry powder to take advantage of unexpected troubles.

Even experts say they find it hard to anticipate the next development to rock the market. But one way they prepare is by assuming markets will be jolted from time to time, and having sufficient cash on hand when that happens.

"Since the unexpected by default is not what one was planning on, it's impossible to perfectly protect or prepare for it," notes  Jeffrey Rubin, director of research at investment firm Birinyi Associates. "The way to do it is to always hold some levels of cash so that when that day comes, it will first cushion the decline in the portfolio, and second it allows you to take advantage of the weakness."

Some advisers say investors should carry as much as 10% of their investment portfolio in cash, higher than a decade or so ago, when markets were less volatile. Money-market funds pay puny returns today, but some say investors should hold cash amounting to six to 12 months of living expenses.

"Consider the worst-case scenario where equities drop 50%," says  Jeff Fishman, who runs JSF Financial, a Los Angeles-based financial-advisory firm. "Can you sleep well at night? If not, you have too much equity exposure." And not enough cash.

  Bob Treue, who runs hedge-fund firm Barnegat Fund Management, says "excess cash...allowed us to survive while our competition got wiped out." He says investors can "profit from the remnants of unexpected events" by buying quality investments that suddenly become cheap as other investors panic and sell.

The importance of diversification has long been stressed by financial advisers. The recent upheaval is a useful reminder of the importance of the adage to avoid placing all of your eggs in one basket.

"You need to be diversified," says  Matthew Tuttle, who runs Tuttle Wealth Management, an investment advisory firm. "Anyone with commodities was happy last week."

But excessive diversification reduces any chance of outperforming the market, experts say. Mr. Tuttle recommends exchange-traded funds and notes that rise in value when markets quake and volatility picks up. Such funds can act as insurance policies, costing investors a bit when markets are raging but bailing them out when stocks tumble.

He's a fan of the iPath S&P 500 VIX Short-Term Futures ETN (VXX), which tends to rise in value when the market's volatility, and investors' fear, jump. This fund has lost 70% in the past year, as markets have rallied, suggesting it can be risky and that investors should keep only a small portion of their portfolio in the fund -- the portion aimed at protecting them from abrupt troubles in the market.

Mr. Tuttle likes this fund, which climbed last week, because it has a longer track record than some rivals that aim to do the same kind of investing, "so even though it has been pretty much a straight line down, we have a good feel for what we will get from it."

Advisers say that an investor worried about unexpected, short-term events might place 5% of the value of his portfolio in shares of ProShares Short S&P500 (SH), an ETF that climbs when the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index falls.

Some individual investors shy away from using options because they can be risky. But more are embracing options strategies, not to amplify returns but to make their portfolios safer and steadier, especially in turbulent times.

Mr. Rubin of Birinyi recommends that investors sell "call" options on individual stocks in their portfolios. How this strategy works: An investor can call a broker or go to an online broker and enter into a transaction to sell a call option on a stock in his portfolio, pocketing cash from that sale. The purchaser of the call option acquires the right to buy that stock at a specific, higher price. If it rises, the stock could be sold to the holder of the call option. If it drops, it won't be sold. But either way, an investor will have received cash by selling the call option, cash that can act as a buffer for the rest of a portfolio.

This cash collected by selling a call option "acts as a hedge to an unexpected decline in prices," Mr. Rubin says. He recommends selling call options for the most volatile or expensive stocks in one's portfolio, which have a higher likelihood of getting crushed by an outside event than a more stable company.

An investor looking for cheap insurance might also buy "put" contracts, or options that pay off only if the market tumbles. Such an investment can act as a safety net, rising in value if markets suddenly drop.

—Email: gregory.zuckerman@wsj.com 