 Jill Newhouse Gallery  4 E. 81st St.  (212) 249-9216, through April 15

A small private collection devoted to a popular and prolific artist can offer an unusual portrayal. It is almost as if we are seeing an artist in fragments and along the edges—instead of, as in a deep-pocketed museum's display, full-force and head-on. Such is the case with this show of 13 small sculptures (in bronze, terra cotta, plaster, marble and biscuit de Sévres), 13 works on paper, 15 period photographs of Rodin's sculptures by Jacques-Ernest Bulloz, and several rare books and artist's letters.

Rodin (1840-1917) can be overwhelming and over-the-top. Confronted with his "Gates of Hell" or his "Burghers of Calais," I want to run for the comforts of less strident, less expressionistic sculpture. This exhibition, however, in which we see a range of Rodin from across his career, is personable. The experience is like thumbing through the pages of a diary. Not everything here is memorable, and some works aren't casts made in Rodin's lifetime. But the dreamy photographs alone, acquired by Rodin in 1914-15 from the dancer Loie Fuller, demand a visit.

A row of sculptures—from the tender, white marble "Alsatian Orphan" and patinated terra-cotta "Bust of a Woman" to the exuberant bronze "Head of Balzac"—lines the gallery's mantle. Among the show's masterpieces are tiny, writhing bronze hands—like trinkets or charms, but with the fullness of figures; and the bronze "Nijinsky," a zigzagging conflation of dancer, discus thrower and lightning bolt. Also here is an astounding grouping of three small ink drawings inspired by Michelangelo's "Tomb of Julian and Lorenzo de Medici." Writing from Florence, in 1876, while he was making the drawings, Rodin remarked, "I believe that the great magician is giving me some of his secrets." The same could be said of this show, which presents an intimate portrait of both artist and collector.



 The Drawing Center  35 Wooster St.  (212) 219-2166, through March 31

To "draw" has traditionally meant to draw from—not to copy—life. But since the dawn of photography (c. 1822), artists have had to defend against the belief that painting and drawing are chiefly mimetic, rather than poetic, acts. The camera's ability to manufacture a likeness has unwittingly pitted the metaphoric functions—the truths—of painting and drawing against the mere fact of the photograph. Now, a legion of artists (eschewing life altogether) is drawing only from photography.

"Drawn From Photography" focuses its lens on 13 contemporary artists who translate photo-based and digital media into so-called drawings. The hook here is that most are commenting on charged themes, including war, industrialization, activism and revolt, political upheaval and assassinations—subjects that come to us primarily through photography, television and the Internet. The drawings here generally are black-and-white and photorealistic. Their iconic subjects—Lenin, Malcolm X, JFK, Yitzhak Rabin, civil-rights demonstrations, the Iraq War and the Statue of Liberty—trigger a sense of familiarity. But the show's renderings feel remote and sterile. We are offered dim likenesses of the people and events of our lives, without the life of art. 



 Luxembourg & Dayan  66 E. 77th St.  (212) 452-4646, through May 27

This oxymoronic exhibition with its marquee names—Jean Dubuffet, Martin Kippenberger, Yves Klein, Piero Manzoni, Robert Rauschenberg, Julian Schnabel and Andy Warhol, among nearly 30 others—is an object lesson in just how much—or how little—you can do to a substrate (most often canvas), with tedious results.

In these works from the 1950s to the present, artists employ collage, gold leaf, plaster, textiles, flowers, ceramics, urine and actual garbage. Historical precedents exist for almost every act in this show, but most of the unpainted paintings stand as acts of defiance of, if not actual attacks on, the pictorial tradition.

Pictures are torn, defiled, pricked, nailed, burned and assailed with acid. Granted, it must be difficult to compose with fire or a stream of one's urine, but not much here is visually interesting. Sometimes the irony and pretentiousness—as in Steven Parrino's "Thanxs for the Blades" (1993), a painting that has been repeatedly slashed but is ensconced here in a generously deep and protective Plexiglas box—are laughable. 

The dyed-cotton works by Richard Tuttle and by Blinky Palermo are refreshingly minimal, clean and demure. This is especially true when seen alongside so many unjustifiably tortured works, in which the means overpower the ends.

—Mr. Esplund writes about art for the Journal.