Saudi Arabia's aged leaders are grappling with their biggest challenge in years as demands for sweeping internal change follow a wave of Arab unrest that has unseated a key ally in Egypt and unleashed a Shiite revolt in neighboring Bahrain.

The ruling Al Saud family now faces unprecedented calls for political overhauls before a "day of rage" promised for Friday by Facebook activists.

Track events day by day.

See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

A look at the economic and political status of selected countries facing unrest in North Africa and the Middle East.

"Saudi Arabia has reached a critical stage in which it has to react to people's demands effectively and swiftly," said a Shiite businessman in the oasis district of al-Ahsa. "But it is very hard to predict what will happen in the next few weeks. Every country that saw a revolution in the region had a different trigger."

Few Saudi insiders expect Friday's demonstrations to be very large, but in a country where all public protests are rare, any signs of trouble will receive intense scrutiny.

Al-Ahsa lies in Saudi Arabia's Eastern province, home to both the kingdom's Shiite minority, which is thought to make up around 10% of the population, and its enormous oil reserves. Shiites complain of discrimination when seeking jobs and of harassment by the authorities. 

The government says Saudi law treats members of both Shiite and the majority Sunni sects equally.

Last week in al-Ahsa and the Shiite fishing village of Qatif, hundreds of demonstrators took to the streets demanding democratic change and the release of long-held prisoners. Some 26 people were arrested but were later released.

The political element of that message resonates outside the Shiite community among more-liberal Saudis hoping to capitalize on the wave of Arab unrest to press their own demands for more-rapid change. Despite a few small protests last month—including demonstrations over inadequate flood defenses in the kingdom's second city of Jeddah—outside the Eastern province the most prominent manifestations of dissatisfaction have taken the form of petitions and open letters to King Abdullah. 

So far, there has been no official response to the petitions, but the king has met with Sunni and Shiite tribal leaders this week.

The U.S.'s most important Arab ally has provided a bulwark of stability to world energy markets by raising its crude production levels to make up for Libya's lost supply.

The Saudi population is richer than those in countries now affected by unrest and the government has deeper pockets to alleviate public anger. Moreover, the calls for change voiced to date have stopped well short of direct attacks on the royal family.

"King Abdullah is not only facing calls from people who want reform, but [also] people who think things have already gone too far and are fighting to preserve the traditional balance of society," said  Robert Lacey, author of "Inside the Kingdom," a study of the monarchy. "Things have got better under Abdullah. What realistic alternative could have done better? It's a classic example of the way the House of Saud can create compromises."

While there is no semblance of democracy in Saudi Arabia, analysts who know the country well say the government, long-schooled in tribal politics, is in many ways more sensitive to the varying demands of its constituencies than is the case in most Middle Eastern states.

The government has recently accelerated some reforms, released prisoners, rallied venerable clerics to declare protests un-Islamic, and splurged $36 billion on housing support, unemployment benefits, student grants and other subsidies.

"The placatory measures could well have some effect on the population—they're not trivial and will be received quite well," said a Western diplomat familiar with the area. "But there are more deep-seated reforms that we need to look for to match the strict control on protests."

King Abdullah has pushed deregulating Saudi markets, giving a more technical bent to education and attempting to standardize the application of religious law. He has also prodded the conservative religious establishment to accept less gender segregation, but Saudi liberals believe the reforms have been too slow.

"People would like to see reform and a crackdown on corruption—there's no doubt about that," said  Asaad al-Shamlan of the Institute for Diplomatic Studies in Riyadh. "But the mood so far as I can see is not of defiance—it's very different from the mood that there was in Egypt or in Tunisia. And I think there's a realization on the part of the state that a process of reform should be generated and it should be meaningful."

One of the most potent fears voiced by outsiders is that a Shiite rebellion in neighboring Bahrain might spill across the 16-mile causeway connecting the two countries and into the heartland of Saudi oil production.

"The current situation we live in is not the situation we want," said Sayed Hassan Al Nemer, a senior Shiite leader in the Eastern province. "We appreciate the king's latest reforms, but they are not enough. We want more democracy."

Shiite leaders are divided on whether protests would further their cause or simply create more trouble for the community. A recent drive around Shiite neighborhoods revealed none of the police or military units some media had reported to be patrolling the streets.

Sheik Tawfiq al-Amer, a Shiite cleric whose arrest helped prompt last week's demonstrations, said he was still wavering over whether to support protests.

"I have not decided yet on whether I will join or support the demonstrations," he said after being released from prison. "My general recommendation will be not to demonstrate now as there are signs the government is willing to do some reforms."

Some Shiites say they fear protests could unleash a wave of attacks from Sunni militants, and say the Al Saud have modestly improved the lot of most Shiites. But others believe dialogue aimed at releasing long-held prisoners, ending discrimination and improving investment in Shiite neighborhoods has run its course.

While their demands are chiefly political, the irony hasn't been lost on local people that they are sitting atop the world's most bountiful hoard of mineral wealth, some 260 billion barrels of proven oil reserves. Their villages are famed across the nation for the succulent dates they produce, but unlike in many other areas of Saudi Arabia, the roads are often unpaved and many houses are little better than tin shacks or mud huts.

"Look around you—these houses are floating on one of the biggest oil fields in the world," said the Shiite businessman. "What more resources does the government need to make people's lives better?"

 Write to  Summer Said at summer.said@dowjones.com 