The Chinese economy is slowing. 

This could give beleaguered Europeans something to cheer about. No, not out of a sense of schadenfreude, but because of economics.

If the Chinese slowdown portends a rebalancing of the country's economy, this ultimately should mean it imports more from other countries relative to how much it exports. At the same time, less-frenetic Chinese growth should take some of the steam out of commodities prices, which, in turn, should make the European Central Bank less eager to raise interest rates.

Chinese GDP growth could ease to 8% this year, according to  Jim O'Neill, chairman of Goldman Sachs Asset Management. That's lower than the International Monetary Fund's estimate last month of 9.6% and substantially below the 10.3% growth China notched in 2010.

The slowdown comes as China has responded to high inflation and fears that price pressures are feeding into wage demands, threatening a pernicious price spiral. China raised its banks' reserve requirement by half a percentage point on Thursday to 21%, the eighth such move since October, as a way of taking some of the heat out of the rampant lending said to be behind the inflationary pressure. 

Many commentators have argued that the Chinese economy was instrumental in leading the world out of recession in 2009. If that's the case, a weakening China will be a worry, particularly for the countries that sell into the Chinese market. Like Germany.

"Basically, Europe depends for its growth on German exports, since there is no growth from Club Med and little from France or the U.K. And German exports' primary dynamic is towards China," says  Charles Dumas of consultancy Lombard Street Research.

With domestic consumption growth lackluster and little prospect of a recovery in demand across the peripheral European economies struggling with fiscal austerity and sovereign debt crises, Germans selling goods to China are a key source of European economic growth. 

China is Germany's third-largest trade partner by value. In 2010, Germany imported $68 billion worth of goods from China and sent $74 billion in the other direction. The same year, the total value of trade rose 35%. Although there was a contraction in 2009, growth in trade between the two countries has averaged 20% since 2004.

Nowhere is this relationship more apparent than on Chinese streets.

China has become a major market for German luxury-car manufacturers like Daimler and BMW, which together sold more than 100,000 cars to Chinese buyers in the first quarter of this year alone. China represented 12.5% of BMW's sales in 2010, after sales grew 85% on the year.

So how is it that China's slowdown could be good for Europe?

In two ways, argues  Julian Jessop at consultancy Capital Economics.

First, its growth hasn't been particularly good for other countries. And, second, a Chinese slowdown will take some of the heat out of European inflation by pushing down commodity prices.

To begin with, while Germany runs an export surplus with China, the European Union overall doesn't. Indeed, in 2010, it imported €282 billion ($404.49 billion) from China but only exported €113 billion, producing a €169 billion bilateral deficit.

This one-sidedness of China's relationship with Europe reflects, in large part, the Chinese government's currency policy. The yuan is even more undervalued against the euro than it is against the dollar. The Economist magazine's Big Mac Index, about as good a proxy for exchange-rate parity based on purchasing power as there is, showed that the euro was more than 20% overvalued against the dollar last October, while the yuan was 40% undervalued.

If it meant a shrinkage in its trade surplus, a Chinese slowdown would be good for those European firms that compete directly with it. It could even be good news for German and other European exporters if it entailed a shift in Chinese growth from supercharged investment to domestic consumption. Economists like  Michael Pettis at Peking University say any significant rebalancing of the Chinese economy toward domestic consumption and thus to smaller trade surpluses would almost certainly entail a slowdown in the country's overall GDP growth. 

Arguably, the other benefit of a Chinese slowdown is already starting to be felt. Imports of key commodities have been slowing. And investors have started to react, particularly by selling industrial metals and oil. Commodity prices have started to fall, in some cases even more sharply than they had risen since last summer.

"The only consistent source of inflation in Western economies has been commodity prices," says Mr. Jessop. If, as he expects, commodity prices continue to fall, the inflation fears that have recently started to spread across developed economies will evaporate.

Nowhere is this likely to be more important than in the euro zone, where the European Central Bank has shown itself more sensitive to rising headline inflation than other central banks.

The ECB raised its key refinancing rate by a quarter of a percentage point to 1.25% in April and economists have been expecting another quarter-point increase in July. The most recent data show German inflation jumping to 2.7% in April from 2.3%, largely as a result of rising energy prices.

As long as recent oil price falls aren't reversed, the ECB could well start to take a slightly less hawkish view on monetary policy. This won't necessarily mean it won't raise its refinancing rate over the summer, but the pace of rate increases could be slower than investors have been expecting. This would be particularly good news for the euro zone's peripheral economies, already traumatized by fiscal contraction.

Of course, if the Chinese slowdown is just an early symptom of a deeper malaise in the global economy, that's another matter entirely.

 Write to  Alen Mattich at alen.mattich@dowjones.com 