The threat of rising inflation has sent investors rushing to "floating-rate loan" funds—and firms are rolling out new products to sate that demand. But the category has run up so quickly that investors might want to reconsider. 

Floating-rate funds contain adjustable-rate bank loans made to companies, often for leveraged buyouts. The loans feature a fixed yield on top of the London interbank offered rate, or Libor, which resets quarterly. When Libor rises, the companies pay higher interest rates and the owners of the loans collect more yield. Thus, unlike conventional bond funds, they are best suited for periods when interest rates are rising. 

With inflation fears heating up, demand for floating-rate funds has reached record highs. This year through Feb. 28, investors poured $10.6 billion into the category, according to Lipper Inc., accounting for nearly half the cash that has moved into all categories of taxable fixed-income funds this year. Last year, only $2.1 billion went into floating-rate funds—which also are called bank-loan funds—during the same period, just 5% of taxable-bond inflows. 

"The numbers we're seeing are unprecedented," says  Matthew Lemieux, a research analyst at Lipper. 

With so much money flooding into floating-rate funds, firms are launching a slew of new offerings aimed at retail investors. 

At least seven new floating-rate funds were launched over the past 12 months, bringing the total number to 52, according to  Morningstar Inc.
MORN


-0.23
%




 (By contrast, just two were launched during all of 2009.) And 10 more are set to launch later this year. 

On Thursday,  Invesco Ltd.'s Invesco PowerShares launched the first floating-rate-loan exchange-traded fund, the  PowerShares Senior Loan Portfolio,
BKLN


-0.21
%




 which tracks the S&P/LSTA U.S. Leveraged Loan 100 Index. 

The funds are even making their way into retirement plans. Later this month, some of Fidelity Investments' asset-allocation funds—such as its target-date Freedom Funds—will be able to use the Fidelity Series Floating Rate High Income Fund as one of their underlying investments. 

The problem? Because of the increased demand, prices for the underlying loans are rising. The average loan issued in February sold at 100.66% of its face value at the start of trading—the highest since the lending bubble of 2007, according to Standard & Poor's. Meanwhile, the average loan in the Barclays Capital Leveraged Loan Index now trades at around 96 cents on the dollar, up from 90 cents a year ago.

"If this demand isn't met with new supply, then a new bubble could be created," says  Craig Russ, who co-manages  Eaton Vance Corp.'s
EV


1.07
%




 floating-rate funds.

What's more, the outsize demand has made some lenders more willing to lower their lending standards. So-called covenant-lite loans, which carry looser repayment terms, have accounted for 25.2% of the market so far this year, up from 5.1% during 2010 and slightly higher than the previous peak of 25% in 2007, according to Standard & Poor's. That means investors are taking on more risk. 

"The pendulum is starting to swing from investor-friendly to issuer-friendly," says  Steven Miller, head of S&P's Leveraged Commentary & Data.

There are other potential pitfalls. A weakening economy could cause investors to sour on the asset class. And since there is no organized exchange on which bank loans are traded, the floating-rate-loan market isn't as liquid as stocks or bonds—meaning investors could face steep losses in a market panic if sellers can't find willing buyers. 

That is what happened in 2008, when hedge funds were forced to sell into illiquid markets, causing prices to fall 30%. 

"The market is looking really good right now, but it can turn relatively quickly," says Morningstar analyst  Timothy Strauts. "Since bank loans are often used to fund leveraged buyouts, anything that hurts the global economy—such as higher oil prices—can roll this market over."

Yet investors are being paid less to take these added risks. About 65% of new loans are being used to refinance old debt, according to S&P—and that means lower yields for investors.  Burger King Holdings Inc., for instance, issued a bank loan in February at an interest rate of Libor plus 3% to refinance a loan issued in October with a rate of Libor plus 4.5%. 

Investors should be particularly careful with new products hitting the market. Bank loans require particular expertise, so investors should seek out managers with long track records in the asset class, says  Louis P. Stanasolovich, president and chief executive at Legend Financial Advisors Inc. in Pittsburgh. Eaton Vance, Fidelity and OppenheimerFunds, for example, all have experience managing floating-rate-loan funds for more than 10 years, according to Morningstar.

 Write to  Jane J. Kim at jane.kim@wsj.com 