DUBLIN—Ireland's besieged Prime Minister Brian Cowen on Thursday set March 11 for the country's much-anticipated general election, setting off a 50-day campaign that is expected to result in his ruling Fianna Fail party losing most of its seats. 

All recent public opinion polls point to a coalition between the Christian Democratic Fine Gael and left-of-center Labour Party forming the next government, with Fianna Fail becoming the smallest of the three main parties for the first time in its 85-year history. 

Both Fine Gael and Labour have expressed their desire to alter the terms of the EU and International Monetary Fund's €67.5 billion ($90.35 billion) rescue package, particularly the 5.8% average interest rate. Ireland will contribute an additional €17.5 billion to the package. 

But the government has said the interest rate is set and can't be renegotiated unilaterally by Ireland. Mr. Cowen insists the bailout was essential to stabilize the economy in the wake of the financial crisis that has ravaged the country since the collapse of the construction sector. 

  Ajai Chopra, deputy director of the IMF's European department, said last month there was room for discussion between the IMF and future Irish governments about the finer details and conditions of the financial aid package, as long as the overall objectives remained. 

With only about 14% support among the electorate, according to the most recent public-opinion poll, many senior Fianna Fail lawmakers are worried about their party, which has been in power on-and-off for nearly 54 years since its inception in 1926. 

An opinion poll of 1,000 voters by  Paddy Power PLC and Red C, taken between Jan. 4 and Jan. 6, put Fine Gael in prime position, with 35% of first preference votes, Labour with 21% and the left-wing Sinn Fein party with 14%, the same as Fianna Fail. Mr. Cowen's Fianna Fail party, which has been accused of close relationships with bankers and property developers, negotiated the IMF/EU bailout and introduced one of the toughest budgets in modern times: €6 billion in cuts this year out of a total of €15 billion over four years.

Mr. Cowen was under mounting pressure Thursday to name the election date after opposition parties, plus Mr. Cowen's junior coalition partner, the Green Party, all expressed their unhappiness at a wave of surprise resignations by government ministers who have decided not to stand in the election. 

Parliament was suspended earlier Thursday to allow the prime minister to make a statement on the resignations. "I understand that people are suffering and experiencing immense hardship because of this recession. I deeply regret that," he told a packed and sometimes rowdy chamber.

Ireland's President Mary McAleese on Thursday accepted the resignations of Health Minister Mary Harney, Justice Minister Dermot Ahern, Transport Minister Noel Dempsey and Defense Minister Tony Killeen, and Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Innovation Batt O'Keefe. 

The former Minister for Foreign Affairs Micheal Martin had tendered his resignation this week after he spearheaded an unsuccessful challenge to Mr. Cowen's leadership of Fianna Fail. Mr. Cowen himself temporarily took over Martin's portfolio. 

Enda Kenny, leader of Fine Gael party and the most likely candidate for the next prime minister, said: "These are the last days of the worst days in the history of the state. What is happening with a government that is imploded, that has disintegrated and has let our country down?" 

Mr. Cowen met Green Party leader John Gormley amid widespread speculation that the prime minister had intended to reassign the vacated ministerial posts to noncabinet members to boost their profile and status among the electorate ahead of the general election. 

Labour leader Eamon Gilmore said, if that was the plan, it backfired and he accused Mr. Cowen of losing the authority to appoint ministers. He said: "The way this has been handled has been hugely disrespectful for the country. The country needs a government and a government that is functioning. We have 50 days to bring real change to our country, to elect a government that will go to work on behalf of the Irish people. Ireland has many difficulties, but our capacities are far greater than our problems." 

Parliament hasn't been dissolved, which will likely happen closer to the election on March 11.