Big U.S. companies have cleaned up their balance sheets and, flush with cash, appear open to using it in 2011 on factories, stores and even hiring.

"We preserved cash" over the past few years, said  Jim Flaws, chief financial officer of  Corning Inc.
GLW


0.52
%




 "Now we're turning around and feeling comfortable about our outlook and spending it."

The maker of specialty glass and ceramics is investing $300 million to expand its research and development center near its headquarters in Corning, N.Y., adding about 100 researchers and Ph.D.s. It also is spending $800 million on a liquid-crystal display factory in China and building more LCD capacity in Taiwan.

Engine maker  Cummins Inc.,
CMI


-0.25
%




 meantime, plans to add about 2,500 U.S. jobs in 2011, many requiring engineering or other technical skills. In 2010, Cummins raised its U.S. employment by only 185 people. The company has about 14,800 U.S. employees. 

At the end of the third quarter, cash held by 419 nonfinancial companies in the Standard & Poor's 500 list was up 49% from three years ago—before the start of the recession—while total debt was up a more modest 14%, according to an analysis by The Wall Street Journal. 

The improvement in just the past year was even more pronounced: cash was up 10.6% from the 2009 level, while debt grew 2%.

Profits are higher, too, after companies slashed their work forces and closed less-efficient operations. Total U.S. corporate profits in 2010's third quarter rose 26% from a year earlier to $1.64 trillion, the highest in four years, according to government data. 

With this stronger foundation, coupled with new confidence about the global economy, corporations are looking to expand. Many are focusing on the faster-growing economies of Asia, Latin America and Africa, rather than the sluggish markets of Europe and the U.S. Others plan to enlarge existing operations through new equipment, products, factories and research labs.

While the mood is much improved from a year ago, executives say their outlook faces potential hurdles. Executives fret that the cost of energy, raw materials and other commodities will keep rising and that high unemployment will continue to restrain consumer spending. While the credit crunch that helped lead to the recession has eased, CEOs remain jittery about the threat of trade barriers and volatile currency-exchange rates. 

The Republican gains in Congress in November's election added new questions to the outlook for health-insurance costs borne by companies. Since then, some party leaders have said they aim to reverse or at least starve the Obama health-care law; meantime, lawsuits challenge some aspects of it. "You don't know where it's going to go," said  Robert J. Olson, CEO of  Winnebago Industries Inc.,
WGO


-0.97
%




 a maker of motor homes. 

For many pharmaceutical companies, the health-care law will be 2011's biggest challenge. The closing of the "doughnut hole," a gap in Medicare Part D prescription-drug coverage, will cost drug makers revenue and profit because they must give a discount on brand-name drugs for people who fall in the gap.

  Dave Holveck, CEO of Endo Pharmaceutical Holdings Inc., estimated that closing the Medicare hole will cost his company between $20 million and $30 million in annual revenue. 

Profit growth for corporate America likely will slow in 2011, partly because companies will be up against tougher year-earlier comparisons and partly because higher sales are prompting them to invest more in plants and equipment and, in some cases, hire more workers.  Dean Maki, chief U.S. economist at Barclays Capital in New York, expects 2011 profit growth to slow to about 8% from the 26% surge seen in the third quarter. 

The degree of both confidence and planned spending varies across industries; companies with the greatest global reach, particularly in emerging nations, are the most bullish, while those largely dependent on U.S. consumers are the most reserved. 

Continued growth in the mining and energy businesses around the world is expected to fuel a wide range of U.S. companies, including those that make mining equipment. 

"The next two years are going to be pretty good" as emerging markets remain strong and truck demand bounces back in the U.S., predicts  Tim Solso, CEO of Cummins. Cummins plans to boost capital spending 50% in 2011 to about $600 million from 2010. It is adding plants in China and India and building a technical center in Seymour, Ind., for huge engines used in mining equipment and oil rigs. 

 One big concern for Mr. Solso: trade barriers. While he was encouraged by the recent trade agreement between the U.S. and South Korea, he fears that politicians' rhetoric about the need to protect jobs eventually will lead to more trade barriers, hurting global companies like his.

Meantime, consumer-dependent companies remain wary, although they feel better than they did a year ago. During 2010,  Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd.
RCL


0.58
%




 deferred buying equipment and funding projects. Now, it plans to be a bit less cautious as it examines investments and head-count increases, said Royal Caribbean CEO  Richard Fain. 

A good portion of the company's investments will go to ships in Europe and Asia, where Mr. Fain sees higher growth. It also is buying equipment to reduce fuel consumption and beginning a computer-systems project it had deferred. 

Investment by U.S. companies in equipment and software in the third quarter was up 15% from a year earlier to $1.08 trillion, nearly matching prerecession levels, government data show. 

Corporations received more incentives to invest Dec. 17, when President Obama signed into law a tax compromise reached by Congress that, among other things, lets companies deduct from taxable income 100% of certain types of investments in 2011. 

That and other tax incentives in the bill should provide at least a modest boost to business investment, said  Thomas Duesterberg, CEO of the Manufacturers Alliance/MAPI, a public policy and economics research organization in Arlington, Va. "At least we've clarified [tax policy] for the next two years," he said, and that alone may help unleash some business spending.

  3M Co.
MMM


0.20
%




, a conglomerate whose thousands of products include medical supplies and Post-it notes, plans to raise capital spending to between $1.3 billion and $1.5 billion in 2011 from an estimated $1 billion to $1.1 billion in 2010. Most will involve expanding capacity in fast-growing foreign markets, including China, India, Singapore and Brazil, the company said.

  Tractor Supply Co.
TSCO


0.84
%




, a farm and ranch retail chain, is more comfortable making capital expenditures in 2011 for two main reasons: It has built up its cash reserves, which means it is stronger financially, and it is beginning to see the average price per order increase, which means its customers are stronger.

Tractor Supply in 2011 will spend $50 million to erect a 840,000-square-foot distribution center in Kentucky and $20 million to retrofit four other distribution centers, said its chief financial officer,  Anthony Crudele. 

After two years of selling warehouses,  ProLogis
PLD


0.10
%




 will spend $800 million to $1 billion this year on new warehouses in the U.S., Europe and Asia. "It's driven by the amount of demand we're beginning to see in the marketplace as companies look to grow their inventories again," said ProLogis CEO  Walt Rakowich. 

Likewise, Kohl's Corp. plans to open 40 of its discount stores in 2011, which would bring its total to about 1,130, said CEO  Kevin Mansell. While that's more than the 30 stores Kohl's opened in 2010, it is below prerecession levels of 75 to 100 annually. Mr. Mansell said Kohl's is waiting for consumer demand to return before expanding at its pre-recession pace.

In addition, Kohl's and other retailers are grappling with inflation, especially on products from Asia. A mixture of rising cotton prices and labor costs in China worries retailers since they believe it will be tough to pass along increases to thrifty consumers. 

Such investments are only one option as companies ponder their piles of cash and the paltry investment returns on that money in a period of extremely low short-term interest rates. 

  General Electric Co.
GE


0.72
%




 Honeywell International Inc.
HON


0.30
%




 and  Tyco International Ltd
TYC


-0.05
%




 all have boosted dividends in recent weeks. GE also said it aims to boost R&D spending to $5 billion in 2011, up from the estimated $4 billion in 2010, and is expanding research operations in Brazil, China and Michigan. Intel Corp.
INTC


-0.27
%




, meantime, announced a 15% dividend increase in November and resumed share buybacks in the fourth quarter after a year-long halt. The computer chip maker also said it will spend $6 billion to $8 billion on manufacturing technology at its U.S. chip factories over the next 2½ years. 

  Howard Silverblatt, a senior analyst at S&P, predicts that more than half of the companies whose stocks are included in the S&P 500 index will raise their dividends.

Acquisitions are another option.  Illinois Tool Works Inc.,
ITW


0.32
%




 whose products range from commercial dish-washing equipment to auto parts, had cash and equivalent short-term securities of $1.65 billion at the end of the third quarter, up from $943 million a year earlier. The company, which has long relied heavily on acquisitions, told analysts in December it expects to step up its acquisition pace in 2011.

—Paul Glader contributed to this article.

 Write to  James R. Hagerty at bob.hagerty@wsj.com and Dana Mattioli at dana.mattioli@wsj.com 