SFAX, Tunisia—Daily protests and counter-protests in this Mediterranean port city highlight the dangerous popular divisions in the North African country six weeks after the ouster of its despotic leader.

Many here want to jump on the revolutionary wave to seek better job opportunities and social benefits from the country's interim government. But critics say more unrest will wreck the country's economy, whose credit rating was downgraded by Fitch Ratings to one notch above junk status Wednesday.

Since former president Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali fled to Saudi Arabia Jan. 14, amid a popular uprising that unleashed a revolutionary wave across the Middle East, Tunisians have gained new political rights and new freedom-of-speech protections. The interim government has announced fresh elections and is considering a change in the constitution to anchor Tunisia in democracy, though it hasn't given details.

Many say it's not enough. All day Wednesday, a motley crowd of several hundred high-school and university students, factory workers and job-seekers camp assembled on the Dakar square to call for better pay and conditions for private- and public-sector workers and an end to government corruption. "Tunisia is still governed by Mr. Ben Ali's former allies," said first-year medical student Mohammed Yassine Guermani, 19, who protested in his white lab coat and stethoscope.

But in the afternoon, a rival group of people—calling themselves "the silent majority," took to the streets as well, urging their fellow Tunisians to go back to work or to class. Like the protesting youths, the counter-protesters had used text messages and social networks to organize the meeting.

"My business is going to go bust if they keep striking and protesting for any reason," said Imen Taktak, who runs a trading company, Soppec, and joined the counter-protest group this week. "If this mess goes on, I am going to have to make redundant 10 of my 12 employees."

The Sfax protests were tame, but elsewhere in the country more violent protests have been breaking out. Six people died in violent clashes over the weekend between youths and police in Tunis, the capital.

The protesters scored a victory when interim Prime Minister Mohammed Ghannouchi, a longtime member of Mr. Ben Ali's government, resigned. His successor, Beji Caid Essebsi, will now have to convince Tunisians that he can do better managing the transition to elections.

The events in Tunisia could serve as a lesson for other Middle East countries that are still in the midst of revolt. With Mr. Ben Ali gone now, Tunisia's interim leaders appear almost wary of imposing a new direction for the country, lest they appear like new despots and unleash new uprisings.

"A weak government, weak political parties, all this creates a dangerous political vacuum," said Ahmed Néjib Chebbi, a longtime opponent to Mr. Ben Ali who briefly took part in the interim government. "My fear is that the army takes power like it did in Egypt," he told a Tunis news conference Tuesday.

The upshot of the confusion is that many Tunisians are trying to get out, in particular to make the dangerous crossing to Europe, mainly via the small Italian island of Lampedusa. More than 6,000 Tunisians have arrived in Lampedusa over the past few weeks, and Italian authorities expect tens of thousands more. 

Tunisian authorities say the outflow has intensified since Mr. Ben Ali's downfall, because the country's police have more urgent priorities than to assist Europe in policing borders against illegal migrants.

As the protests and counter-protests continued into the evening in Sfax, the city's governor—the highest-ranking central-government representative in the city—said there was little he could do to help one side or the other.

"Once the wind of change is blowing, it is hard to stop it," Mohamed Ali Janbouli said.

 Write to  David Gauthier-Villars at David.Gauthier-Villars@wsj.com 