For years, whenever significant political or financial turmoil reared its head anywhere on the globe, investors would turn to the U.S. dollar as a safe haven.

Yet as the chaos in North Africa has grown over the past month, investors have largely shunned the dollar and sought shelter elsewhere. They have turned to other traditional islands of stability, buying Japanese yen and the Swiss franc. 

What has especially raised eyebrows has been the move by investors to buy euros, a currency traditionally seen as a riskier prospect than the dollar, especially with the euro zone's debt problems still largely unresolved. 

This has sparked a debate over whether the dollar has lost its safe-haven status.

"Over the last 20 years, people have always moved into the dollar on any sort of uncertainty in the global economic space, but what we've seen over the past two weeks is actually a terrific move out of the dollar," says  Douglas Borthwick, a managing director at Faros Trading in Stamford, Conn. 

That, he says, reflects the emergence of a lack of confidence in the dollar as a safe place to stash money in times of trouble, thanks in part to concerns about rising government budget deficits in the U.S.

Some say it reflects a broader move in global financial markets where, very slowly, the dollar is facing competition from other currencies as a reserve currency. 

Others see the lack of dollar buying as reflecting the specifics of the turmoil that started in Tunisia in late January and has spread over the past month. The inflationary impact of rising oil prices is seen as tilting the odds more in favor of interest-rate increases in Europe. In the U.S., the Federal Reserve has said it still believes core inflation is contained, despite rising energy prices.

So for now, the argument goes, there are better safe havens available to investors than the U.S. currency.

"Safe-haven buying is very dependent on the exact nature of the shock," says Jeff Young, head of North American foreign-exchange research at Barclays Capital. "If it's a shock that triggers risk aversion, but the underlying cost is going to hurt the U.S. disproportionately more than Switzerland, you wouldn't expect the dollar to be on the list of safe havens." 

Since Jan. 24, the day before protests began in Egypt that would ultimately topple its government, the dollar has lost ground against the currencies of every one of so-called G-10 industrialized nations except the New Zealand dollar, which has suffered in the wake of last week's earthquake. 

The euro, in particular, has gained 1.2% against the dollar and traded at $1.3799 late Monday afternoon in New York. The Swiss franc, meanwhile, has risen 2% against the dollar and the Japanese yen has gained 0.7%. 

Even on individual days when events have sent a scare through the financial markets, the dollar hasn't benefited. 

On Jan. 25, when the protests in Egypt first flared up, the euro advanced more than two cents to almost $1.39. This contrasts with other episodes of flight-to-safety currency buying in the past. During the 2008 global financial crisis, the dollar rose by roughly 24%. 

Analysts at BCA Research also point out that some investors also are looking to gold as a more appealing safe-haven investment. 

"We would agree with this assessment," the analysts wrote. Gold rose 5.7% in February, its biggest monthly gain since April 2010.

When it comes to the buying of euros, many strategists point to the idea that the jump in oil prices over the past few weeks has increased conviction among investors that the European Central Bank will be more likely to raise interest rates before the year is out. 

However, the Federal Reserve is widely seen as not viewing higher oil prices as an inflation risk and thus not tightening monetary policy until 2012.

Some note that Japan's economy also is in the doldrums and the country imports essentially all its oil. 

Yet buyers continued to seek out the yen as a safe haven. Investors aren't concerned about Japan's own fiscal problems and loose monetary policy.

Mr. Borthwick at Faros says that focus on oil misses the point of flight-to-quality buying, which is that investors are thinking first and foremost of moving their money somewhere safe where they can be sure they will get it back. 

With investors increasingly wary of the ability of the U.S. to solve its fiscal problems and the Fed perceived to be "printing dollars" as part of its quantitative-easing strategy to support the economy, there's less confidence that the U.S. dollar is "safe" in the sense, Mr. Borthwick says.

"It's the knee-jerk reaction that matters," he said. "Nowadays the knee-jerk reaction is buy euros and not to buy dollars. The mindset of buying euros is a complete switch."

 Write to  Tom Lauricella at tom.lauricella@wsj.com 