"According to new research, the happiest man in the U.S. isn't a billionaire or movie star but a 65-year-old Chinese-American Jewish man who lives in Hawaii," London's Daily Mail reported yesterday.

Sorry, Alvin Wong, your day is past and gone. No one can doubt that today the happiest man in America is Fox News contributor Juan Williams.

In October Williams reportedly signed a seven-figure contract with Fox after having been fired by the federally subsidized radio network NPR, the ranks of whose former employees have been rapidly swelling this week. The latest to go: CEO Vivian Schiller. NPR's own website has a manically updated report attempting to nail down just what happened. It's more confusing than "Pulp Fiction": The initial report, posted at 9:19 a.m. ET, is followed by the updates--14 of them as of 12:02 p.m.--which are in reverse chronological order.

The upshot seems to be that the board of directors wanted her out and allowed her to resign to save face: "Schiller, [chairman Dave Edwards] said, told the board members that they should have 'the flexibility to do what [they] felt was important.' She 'offered to step aside if that was the board's will,' he said, 'and the board ultimately decided that was in the best interest of the organization.' " Though saying you're allowing someone to resign to save face saves face in roughly the same sense that Congress saves money when it increases spending by slightly less than it had planned.

Schiller owes her faux-voluntary ouster to fellow Schiller Ron Schiller, NPR's former senior vice president for development. Although the Schillers are unkindred except in spirit, the Columbia Journalism Review reported in its March 2010 issue that he was "one of her most significant hires." Man, did that ever turn out to be true! (Less prescient was CJR's subheadline: "Can Vivian Schiller build a journalism juggernaut?" We're going to go out on a limb and say probably not.)

Ron Schiller, as we noted yesterday, was caught on video as part of an Alinskyite prank in which he was misled by men masquerading as Muslim moneybags meting out millions in mullah moola. He made bigoted comments about "Tea Party people," asserted that NPR would be better off without federal funding, and did not challenge the mock Muslims' anti-Semitic statements.

Mr. Schiller now claims he was merely shilling, Yahoo! News reports:

Schiller had been slated to leave NPR next month for the Aspen Institute. Instead he announced this morning that his resignation was effective immediately. The institute's website carries a press release: "Ron Schiller has informed us that, in light of the controversy surrounding his recent statements, he does not feel that it's in the best interests of the Aspen Institute for him to come work here." The link that formerly returned the press release announcing Schiller's appointment now reiterates the new line more bluntly and even more briefly: "Access Denied."

The Daily Caller quotes Williams, reacting to yesterday's news on Fox Business's "America's Nightly Scoreboard," hosted by our old pal David Asman:

House Majority Leader Eric Cantor concurs. The NPR report quotes him: "Our concern is not about any one person at NPR, rather it's about millions of taxpayers. NPR has admitted that they don't need taxpayer subsidies to thrive, and at a time when the government is borrowing 40 cents of every dollar that it spends, we certainly agree with them."

Edwards, the NPR chairman, doesn't have much of a counterargument. "It is absolutely true that without federal funding, a lot of our public radio and public TV stations in the system could go dark, and that will happen in some of the smallest communities we serve," he tells the Associated Press. "In some cases, public broadcasting remains that community's primary connection with the outside world."

This shows almost as well as Ron Schiller's bigoted comments how far out of touch NPR's leadership is. Can Edwards name a single community in 21st-century America that lacks access to roads, telephones, commercial broadcast outlets, and the Internet?

Why not let NPR go it alone, preferably as a for-profit business? Its programming is better than its executives' attitudes, and left to its own devices it could either choose to market itself as a network for snotty liberals or broaden its appeal to those with highbrow tastes regardless of politics. Either way it would be freed from the constraint of having to pretend to respect ordinary Americans, who would no longer be coerced into paying for the enterprise.

As for Juan Williams, we note that he alluded to the following comment Ron Schiller made at the fateful lunch (quoted on "Hannity" last night):

Is this one of the statements that Schiller now claims are "not reflective of my own beliefs"? And if he tells you it is, how do you know whether to believe him?

  We Forgot to Wring Our Hands   In a FutureOfCapitalism.com post that very kindly opens with our name, Ira Stoll (who a decade ago worked with us on this column) raises some objections to the NPR prank/sting:

This made us stop to think that in our item yesterday, we omitted our usual disclaimer to the effect that the techniques in question do not meet the ethical standards of elite journalistic institutions, including of course The Wall Street Journal.

It did not occur to us to mention this because unlike in earlier cases (such as Acorn and Common Cause), we were not getting out ahead of the rest of the "mainstream" media in writing about this. Major liberal news organizations had already covered the story, and NPR itself had admitted its executives' statements were wrongful.

Why were the mainstream media more willing to cover this story than the earlier ones? In part, probably, because NPR, its federal funding already under threat, had to move swiftly into crisis-management mode, which necessitated the quick acknowledgment. But also in part because of something to which Stoll alludes:

A fair point, though we'd draw two distinctions between the Walker prank and the NPR one: First, the guy who prank-called Walker claimed to be an actual person, so that there was a second victim of his prank. Second and more important, as far as we are aware, the governor did not actually say anything that was worse than slightly embarrassing. You can't fool an honest man.

But mainstream news organizations were much quicker to report on the Walker prank than they had been on the Acorn one, or even on the Common Cause video, whose deceptions were considerably lesser. Perhaps some editors, having treated a left-wing prank as newsworthy, felt fairness obliged them to do the same with a right-wing one.

If the guy who prank-called Scott Walker turns out to have helped end taxpayer funding for NPR, that will be an irony to savor, though of course we deplore all the deceptive practices that made it possible.

  We're All in the Same Bloat   "Government payouts--including Social Security, Medicare and unemployment insurance--make up more than a third of total wages and salaries of the U.S. population, a record figure that will only increase if action isn't taken before the majority of Baby Boomers enter retirement," CNBC reports:

This doesn't give a full picture, since it omits income from saving and investment. But it does give a sense of why Americans are increasingly nervous about the growth in government spending, which has only accelerated since Barack Obama became president. On a related note, the Associated Press reports on growing resentment of government workers' generous benefits:

This explains the ferocity of the union reaction to proposals such as Gov. Scott Walker's to curtail the special privileges government employees have enjoyed. The AP notes that some opinion polls show the public is sympathetic to the government employee unions on some points of dispute. Our guess is that that won't last.

  It's Raining Men   "According to the United Nations, there are far more men than women on the planet," Niall Ferguson reports in Newsweek. "The gender gap is especially pronounced in Asia, where there are 100 million more guys than girls."

Why? Ferguson explains:

Yet the National Organization for Women is all for it:

Ferguson notes that in the Western world, women outnumber men. Maybe the ladies at NOW would like to change that ratio.

  Out on a Limb   "People & Entertainment: Sheen's Career Ruined--or Maybe Rising"--headline, Portland (Maine) Press Herald, March 9

  'I Have the Net to This Day. I Have the Net.'   "Kerry Says Government Invented Internet, Cuts Would Stifle Innovation"--headline, TheHill.com, March 8

  'We Have to Pass the Bill So That You Can Find Out What Is in It'   "Our Robot Overlords Will Walk Like Us--and Among Us"--headline, FastCompany.com, March 8

  'Could You Say "Senator" Instead of "Ma'am"?'   "New Cougars Have the Same Hunger for a Title"--headline, South Charlotte (N.C.) News, March 9

  That's a Low Standard   " 'Climate Change' Rings Truer Than 'Global Warming' "--headline, USA Today website, March 8

  He's Luckey He Wasn't Charged With Breaking and Entering   "Obama Picks Locke for Ambassador to China"--headline, TheDailyBeast.com, March 9

  Where Women Glow and Men Plunder   "Obama and Australian PM Duel Over . . . Vegemite"--headline, USA Today website, March 8

 Sounds Like a Wild Party 

 So Much for the War on Drugs 

  Hokey Smoke, Bullwinkle   "Police Say Moose Leader Smoked Pot With Students"--headline, Associated Press, March 8

  The Lonely Lives of Scientists   "Urge to Own That Clapton Guitar Is Contagious, Scientists Find"--headline, New York Times, March 9

  News to Make Your Hair Stand on End   "Cure for BALDNESS Causes IMPOTENCE, Says New Study"--headline, TheRegister.co.uk, March 8

  Try Closing the Oven   "Why Can't Miami Heat Create More Turnovers?"--headline, SBNation.com, March 9

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

 Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  JFK Nearly Caught With Woman Hidden in Her $170,000 Underwear--Now That Would Be News   "Queens Woman Claire Abdeldaim Caught With Nearly $170,000 Hidden in Her Underwear at JFK"--headline, Daily News (New York), March 8

  Look Out Below!   "Stanford Drops List of 'Easy' Classes for Athletes"--headline, San Francisco Chronicle website, March 9

  News of the Tautological   "Teen Admits Misconduct During Underage Party"--headline, Associated Press, March 9

  Breaking News From 2008   "Fears Grow as Obama Hits Trail"--headline, RollCall.com, March 8

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  Great Moments in Public Education   Yesterday we noted that the White House has been having trouble ginning up interest in an annual contest among high schools in which the prize is a commencement speech by President Obama. Maybe the kids don't want their essays to appear on the White House website. That happened to last year's finalists, including the Environmental Charter High School in Lawndale, Calif.:

They must have one heck of a desalination plant to extract water from asphalt. And it's no wonder that freeway is so congested when someone has taken blocks from it and brought them to a high school!

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Frank Free, Hillel Markowitz, Ethel Fenig, Abe Beyda, Bill Gately, Ed Grinberg, Michele Schiesser, Ed Lasky, John Bobek, Stewart Levine, Rod Pennington, Steve Obeda, Bob Sanchez, Bill King, Monty Krieger, Michel Hendricks, John Sanders, Steve Hoffman, T. Young, Mark Finkelstein, Dave Kolander, Dave Evans, Bryan Fischer, Kyle Kyllan, David Gerstman, Robert Elworth, Joseph Heschmeyer, John Kennemer, Bruce Goldman, Peter Huntsman and Andrew Garman. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)