Retailers saw their best holiday season since the start of the recession, but a loss of momentum in December fed concerns about the strength of the sector's revival in the new year.

December retail sales at stores ranging from car dealers to grocers rose 7.9% from a year ago, the Commerce Department said Friday, and overall sales surpassed their pre-recession peak. 



But the pace slowed toward the end of the season, inching up 0.6% between November and December to $380.9 billion, after growing 0.8% the month prior. A rash of early-season discounts prompted some shoppers to make their purchases earlier. 

Shoppers' appetites remain uneven as unemployment is still high and stronger job creation is necessary to keep up the pace of consumer spending, analysts said. 

Some retailers are planning for tougher growth this year. 

"We are concerned about consumer spending,"  Robert Shearer, VF Corp.'s
VFC


-0.23
%




 chief financial officer, said Thursday, citing continued high unemployment, among other factors. 

Many American shoppers still face headwinds amid high joblessness and slow wage growth. The Labor Department said Friday that real average weekly earnings fell 0.4% last month. 

The makes it hard for retailers to raise prices for their goods, but for many, costs are going up. Inflation has been tame during the economic recovery, rising just 1.5% last year, according to the Labor Department's consumer price index, released Friday. Prices have risen more sharply for commodities such as cotton and fuel, energy prices were up 7.7% last year, but so far businesses haven't passed those costs along to customers. Excluding food and energy, prices last year rose a slight 0.8%.

Going forward, apparel companies are in a particularly tough spot, caught between uncertainty about the consumer and a sharp increase in raw material costs. 

Benchmark cotton prices have more than doubled over the past year, leading retailers to raise prices on spring-season merchandise starting to hit stores now—even though they're not sure if shoppers will stomach the increases. 

As it places its orders for the fall and holiday shopping seasons this year,  VF
VFC


-0.23
%




 is watching inventory levels. "We're going to be cautious in what we build" in inventory, said Mr. Shearer. 

VF, the apparel manufacturer that is home to brands such as North Face and Vans, said that it has discussed plans to raise prices with the stores where its brands are sold. 

"Everybody's a little anxious about how the consumer is going to react," CEO  Eric Wiseman said at a conference this week.

VF's denim holdings, including Lee, Wrangler and Seven for all Mankind, are the most at risk, as cotton makes up about a quarter of the cost of a garment. The company said Thursday it is analyzing pricing on a style-by-style basis across all of its brands. 

It plans to spread out the increases over a variety of categories and minimize the impact on a particular product. 

Teen retailer  Aeropostale Inc.
ARO


-2.79
%




 is also keeping inventories lean. "Spring is tight," CEO  Tom Johnson said this week. Aeropostale lost market share during the holiday because of steep discounting at higher-priced brands such as  Abercrombie & Fitch Co.
ANF


1.66
%




 The company expects to raise its prices between 3% and 5% for spring, Mr. Johnson said.

  Phillips-Van Heusen Corp.
PVH


-0.66
%




, which includes Tommy Hilfiger and Izod, said this week its prices could increase by as much as 15% in the second half of the year.  Warnaco Group Inc., maker of Calvin Klein jeans and underwear, also expects some price increases. 

Those planned increases will run up against a still frugal shopper. Consumers' views of the economy had already begun to sour by early January. 

A Reuters/University of Michigan index of consumer sentiment declined Friday to 72.7 in a preliminary January reading, down from 74.5 in December. The drop came as Americans' views of current economic conditions grew more pessimistic.

Dana Walker, 44 years old, was among those whose mood has dampened. 

Ms. Walker, who lives in lives in Louisville, Ky., was able to splurge a bit during the holiday season because she snagged a temporary job filling orders for an online retailer. 

The position lasted only about a month, though. Once again she's hunting for full-time work, a search that's been going on since she was laid off from her position at a health department in June 2008. 

"I put in I guess over 50 applications this past week and haven't heard anything," she says.

At  Overstock.com Inc.,
OSTK


-0.44
%




 an online retailer, "December ended quite soft for us, especially the second half," says  Patrick M. Byrne, chief executive. "That was a surprise." 

Business has been picking up in January, he adds, but Mr. Byrne is skeptical about how long that can last when unemployment is still high and government is still helping to support the fragile economy.

"We saw strong retail activity through the end of the fourth quarter," says  Robert Dye, a  PNC Financial Services
PNC


0.59
%




 economist. "We're likely to see that dial back." 

Still, some business owners feel more optimistic heading into 2011, in part because of government support. 

Congress passed a tax package that included a cut in the payroll tax that should bolster consumer spending, for instance. 

"It's going to put a little bit more money in everybody's pockets," says  Myron Gersh, president of Armourdale Furniture Co. Inc., a Kansas City, Kan., retailer. Sales at the company have "improved pretty dramatically" in 2010 and by the end of the year were up 30% from a year earlier, Mr. Gersh says. Furniture stores as a whole had a fruitful December, with sales rising 1%. 

Mr. Gersh says he expects sales to pick up later this year as tax refunds start rolling in. 

 Write to  Sara Murray at sara.murray@wsj.com and Elizabeth Holmes at elizabeth.holmes@wsj.com 