DAVOS, Switzerland—An annual gathering of world leaders was interrupted Thursday when a blast ripped through a hotel on the main street in Davos, Switzerland, in an attack linked to anticapitalism political extremists. No one was injured.

Authorities say an explosive device, variously described as pyrotechnics or fireworks, shattered internal windows in a basement room at the Morosani Posthotel, about 1,000 yards from the conference center where former President Bill Clinton, French President Nicolas Sarkozy and British Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg were set to speak.

A blogger identified as "Revolutionary Perspective" claimed responsibility for the blast on a Swiss website, adding that government officials and UBS AG employees were staying in the hotel. The luxury hotel, whose main entrance is guarded with metal detectors and security personnel, was attacked with "pyrotechnics and sugar," according to the blogger, who apparently posted the message before the blast occurred at about 9 a.m.

"This time we have chosen to not endanger employees," the blogger said.

After the blast, a rear door to the basement was unlocked and unguarded, and a hotel staff member surrounded by broken glass declined to comment about the incident. Beyond the broken interior windows was a tiled room with tables, apparently used for storage or staff breaks.

The attack rattled some nerves in the serene Alpine town, only hours after Russian President Dmitry Medvedev's keynote address highlighting terrorism as an international problem following a blast that killed 35 people in Moscow's busiest airport on Monday.

The main conference center and surrounding areas of Davos are surrounded by barbed wire and myriad guards, including snipers on the roof, and entry is possible only through metal detectors. Some hotels, including the Morosani Posthotel, also require metal detectors, but the Promenade where it's situated and other public parts of town have little visible security presence.

Police are looking into exactly what caused the blast, local police spokesman Thomas Hobi said by telephone, declining to provide further details. 





