RAMALLAH, West Bank—The turmoil in Egypt looks set to bolster the militant Islamic group Hamas in its rivalry with the U.S.-backed Palestinian Authority, especially if Egypt's Muslim Brotherhood gains influence as part of a future government in Cairo.

President Hosni Mubarak, whose 30-year hold on power is teetering after a week of mass demonstrations, has been a key regional patron for Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas. He has helped mediate negotiations with Israel, and served as an important ally against Hamas since it took control of the Gaza Strip three years ago. 

If the wave of protests against Mr. Mubarak ends up strengthening the Muslim Brotherhood, some predict it will create a significant shift in the balance in favor of Hamas–-an offshoot of the Egyptian Islamic group—potentially consolidating its control in Gaza and helping it to gain more support in the West Bank. It could also give Hamas an upper hand in talks to reconcile its split with the Palestinian Authority in the West Bank. 

On Sunday, the Muslim Brotherhood said it will back secular opposition figure  Mohamed ElBaradei as the lead spokesman for the country's opposition groups, to negotiate further political reforms with the shaky Egyptian government.

`"If the Muslim Brotherhood groups gain a prominent place in the government, this would definitely help consolidate Hamas's hold on Gaza,'' said Atiyeh Jawwabra, a political science professor at Al Quds University. 

Mr. Abbas, who telephoned the Egyptian leader over the weekend to express support for "stability and security'' in Egypt, has followed Mr. Mubarak's policy of cooperation with both the U.S. and Israel. In another show of loyalty, Palestinian Authority police on Sunday dispersed a small group of demonstrators outside the Egyptian embassy in Ramallah. 

A new government in Cairo less oriented toward Washington could weaken Abbas by exposing him pressure from to Arab critics like Syria that have assailed the Palestinians for their willingness to negotiate with Israel.

Hamas, whose founder was a member of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, has rejected negotiations with Israel and refuses to foreswear military and terrorist attacks. 

Wary of Hamas rule on its doorstep, Egypt has cooperated with Israel by trying to limit weapons smuggling across its border with Gaza and by restricting civilian traffic at the Rafah border terminal. 

Cairo has mediated repeated rounds of unsuccessful talks aimed at reconciling Mr. Abbas with Hamas, though Mr. Mubarak is often seen as siding with the Palestinian Authority in those talks. A new government could take a more neutral tack. It might also decide to lift restrictions on movement at their joint border.

"The Egyptians have always stood as supporters of the Palestinian Authority,'' said an official in Mr. Abbas's office who asked not to be named. "It will change the whole formula in the region if the Muslim Brotherhood prevails in Egypt.''

For now, Hamas officials have said little about the turmoil in Egypt, taking care not to appear as if they are rooting for their affiliate, the Muslim Brotherhood.

"We are with the choice of the Egyptian people. This doesn't mean that we are pressuring in the direction of the Muslim Brotherhood,'' said  Huda Qirnawi, a Hamas legislator in Gaza. "We support the movements of the people against the dictatorships in the region, but we do not encourage chaos.''