For about two centuries, the Lower East Side was home to generations of new immigrants, and the neighborhood is famed for its melting-pot past, historic buildings and narrow, tenement-lined streets. 

Over the last decade, a rapid gentrification has turned the Lower East Side into one of the city's hottest destinations, with a proliferation of restaurants, bars, clubs and galleries as well as new condominiums built alongside aging apartment buildings and former tenements.

"It's a funky neighborhood— maybe the last funky area of the city," says  Ariel Tirosh of Prudential Douglas Elliman, who is representing 115 Norfolk, a seven-story condominium building that went on the market in December. On Norfolk Street alone, he said, "You have three new condos and a 120-year-old synagogue across the street, so it's really an intriguing mix."

So far, 115 Norfolk has five of its 24 units in contract, Mr. Tirosh says. The building includes an atrium entrance, roof deck and basement parking. Asking prices for one- and two-bedroom units run between $665,000 and $1.95 million.

 Down the street is the Blue condominium, a 16-story glass tower built in 2007, with four apartments for sale on StreetEasy.com ranging from $850,000 for a 782-square-foot one-bedroom to $1,943,400 for a 2,000-square-foot three-bedroom.

"The Lower East Side used to be known for run-down apartments that have crazy features like a shower in your kitchen; that's not really happening anymore," says  Jordan Luke March of Rutenberg Realty. "There's a lot of really good building going on."

The Lower East Side is moderately priced compared with other downtown neighborhoods. The median sales price for houses, co-ops and condos on the Lower East Side was $600,000 in the fourth quarter, compared with a median price of $719,000 in the East Village and $917,937 for all of downtown, according to StreetEasy. The neighborhood saw less of a slide in prices over recent years than other areas, with prices in the fourth quarter running 9.8% higher than the same period in 2007, and 17.7% higher than in the 2009 period, StreetEasy data show.

The neighborhood's quick growth has fueled a backlash. Last month, the local community board approved recommendations aimed at making liquor licenses more difficult for new businesses to obtain.

Three years ago, the National Trust for Historic Preservation included the Lower East Side on its list of America's 11 most endangered historic places. Also in 2008, the city approved height restrictions to ensure that new construction in the Lower East Side and East Village remains in scale with the rest of the neighborhood. 

"It's still on the uptick," Mr. March says. "The area is getting so refined and so cleaned up— it's almost unreal the rate it's happening."

 Parks: East River Park, a 57-acre expanse that stretches between the river and FDR Drive from Montgomery to East 12th streets, includes playgrounds, tennis courts, soccer fields, running tracks and a bicycle path. An $80 million renovation of the waterfront promenade is expected to be completed this spring. 

Sara Delano Roosevelt Park, a narrow, eight-acre green space bordered by Canal, Chrystie, Forsyth and East Houston streets, includes a senior center, a turf soccer field and a roller-skating rink.

 Schools: The Lower East Side is part of District 1, where 82.4% of students met state standards in math in 2009, compared with 58.1% in 2006. On the English exam, 71.3% were proficient in 2009, compared with 50.1% three years earlier.

Local public schools include P.S. 2, which received an A rating from the city last year, and P.S. 184 M, the Shuang Wen School, which offers a dual-language English-Mandarin program. 

Nest+m, one of Manhattan's three citywide talented and gifted schools, is located here, as is the Bard High School Early College. Neighborhood private schools include the Beth Jacob Parochial School, a Jewish girls' school.

 60 Orchard St., No. 7 

 415 Grand St., No. E1001 

 264 E. Broadway, No. C905 

 550 Grand St., No. J9E 

 Restaurants: Dining choices include a handful of old-world stalwarts, such as Katz's Delicatessen, and a multitude of newer destination restaurants, including Schiller's Liquor Bar and wd-50. Ethnic eateries abound, particularly in neighboring Chinatown.

 Shopping: The neighborhood features a wide range of clothing stores, from decades-old family run shops along Orchard Street to cutting-edge vintage and designer boutiques.

The Essex Street Market, a 70-year-old market now run by the New York City Economic Development Corp., features more than 20 gourmet food vendors. Some of the area's original immigrant flavor can still be found in such stores as Russ and Daughters on East Houston, a 97-year-old store specializing in smoked fish.

 Entertainment: The neighborhood is one of the city's primary nightlife destinations, filled with bars and lounges as well as rock and indie music venues, including the Mercury Lounge. The Landmark Sunshine Cinema on East Houston offers both art films and new releases. The Tenement Museum, on Orchard Street, offers a look at immigrant life in a 148-year-old former tenement building.