Knicks center Jared Jeffries is a key contributor to a team that is second in the NBA in scoring since his arrival. He is teammates with superstars and sandwiched between two of the best scorers in the NBA. Which is why he has one simple offensive philosophy: "Get out of the way."

Jeffries has accomplished his offensive goals—albeit not lofty ones. He's scored just nine total points in his 188 minutes as a Knick since signing with the team last month, and yet Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni has called him "invaluable."

His importance comes with the fact that he does many of the things the team needs, like defending and rebounding, and does not do the things they do not need more of, like putting the ball in the basket. That job falls to Carmelo Anthony and Amar'e Stoudemire.

Since Jeffries joined the Knicks, he leads the team in offensive rebounds (2.6 per game) and is in the top five on the team in blocks, total rebounds and steals, this despite playing 23 minutes per game. After being bought out of his contract by the Houston Rockets, Jeffries re-joined the Knicks, where he played from 2006 to 2010. He has started in six of his eight appearances so far. Though he started on the bench in Tuesday's loss to the Indiana Pacers, he still played 25 minutes.

"Every team is different and this team has two of the best scorers in the league," said D'Antoni. "[The offense] is not predicated on spacing or great this, great that, it's about the movement of those two guys because they are going to score. Jared is a perfect complement to these guys; he's got all the intangibles."

Jeffries didn't exactly want to have to be an offensive presence—he said the runner-up for his services last month was the Miami Heat, who have their own elite stars in LeBron James and Dwyane Wade. He said that after playing in New York during three full losing seasons, he wanted to see what winning felt like here. He noted that his style of play is much more valuable to a winning team. He noted that in some seasons in his career, like in 2005 with Washington, he's scored as much as 6.8 points per game—but he said he feels comfortable that D'Antoni lets him simply work on what his best attributes are.

"If you win games, everyone appreciates what I do. The kind of game I've always had, if we don't win I'll get criticized because I'm not a great offensive player, I don't really look for it. I try to do what it takes for our team to win," Jeffries said. "Right now, for our team to win, it's me being a defensive player and a rebounder."