Arkansas authorities on Friday ordered two companies to temporarily stop injecting wastewater into deep underground storage wells, as regulators investigate whether they are linked to a recent spate of earthquakes in the area.

  Chesapeake Energy Corp.
CHK


-2.46
%




 and Clarita Operating LLC didn't oppose the order affecting the two storage wells but said their operations weren't related to the 850 or so mostly minor quakes that have agitated north-central Arkansas since September.

"We remain confident that the facts and science will lead to a more constructive and satisfactory conclusion to this matter," said Danny Games Sr., a Chesapeake official in Arkansas, in a statement.

Clarita's parent company, True Energy Services LLC, said on its website Friday that the earthquakes were "the result of natural causes."

"The impact of shutting in our disposal well is devastating to our small company," it said, adding that its only business in Arkansas is disposing of wastewater.

The Arkansas Oil and Gas Commission says there is no evidence that natural-gas drilling itself is related to the earthquakes, including last Sunday's 4.7-magnitude quake that was the state's most severe in 35 years. That temblor reportedly knocked items off shelves and cracked plaster, though it caused no injuries. 

But drilling produces wastewater, especially the technique of hydraulic fracturing, in which natural-gas producers inject millions of gallons of water and chemicals at high pressure to break apart tight rock formations, allowing gas to flow to the surface.

Drillers often dispose of the liquid in deep underground wells, known as injection wells, which are used by a wide variety of industries and governments. 

The oil and gas commission thinks that one or both of the injection wells may be "enhancing or inducing earthquakes," Director Lawrence Bengal wrote to commissioners, based on an analysis of the location and number of earthquakes, as well as data submitted by the companies. 

The state regulator continues to investigate and wants to collect more data from the companies. 

Mr. Bengal said he would present an analysis to the commission later this month. Friday's order prohibits wastewater injection at the sites until the commission's next meeting, March 29. 

In February, the commission imposed a six-month moratorium on drilling new wells to store wastewater. 

The moves won't prevent natural-gas producers from drilling in the region, which has other injection wells unaffected by the order.

Scientific studies dating back decades have linked storage wells to seismic activity.

"It is confirmed and established that injection wells can induce seismicity," said Scott Ausbrooks, a geologist for the Arkansas Geological Survey.

The research on earthquakes and disposal wells extends to the early 1960s, when the federal government drilled a well 12,000 feet deep near Denver to hold waste fluids generated from the Rocky Mountain Arsenal, then a chemical weapons manufacturing site. A swarm of mostly small earthquakes began soon after the injection of fluids.

Will Fleckenstein, a professor of petroleum engineering at the Colorado School of Mines, said the Rocky Mountain Arsenal case was the only one he knew of where fluid injections into a fault triggered earthquakes at the surface. 

The recent earthquakes in Arkansas—as many as 18 a day—aren't the first to rumble through the north-central part of the state. 

Swarms were recorded there as early as 1982, according to the U.S. Geological Survey—before drilling companies arrived to produce natural gas from the Fayetteville Shale.