In the late 1950s, when Provence was still an uncharted destination, writer Lawrence Durrell rhapsodized about an enchanted landscape—vines that were "glittering silver-green bundles, or softly powdered by the gold dust of the summers," set against a "taut wind-haunted blue sky," where the "great wines of the south sleep softly on the French earth." 

Fortunately, some things never change. A half-century later, despite the inevitable gentrification and post Peter Mayle craze for Provencal pleasures, there are still pockets of spectacular countryside, bordered by emerald grass or sniff-and-swoon pungent lavender fields, lush vineyards and burnished blue lakes. And in some of these miniature medieval perched villages—a cluster of stacked houses, honey-colored stone churches with forged-iron bell towers, shaded squares and flower-lined narrow streets—there still isn't a designer boutique in sight. Nor will you find any nouveau rustic cafés jam-packed with pastis-sipping tourists draped in their white linen finery. Even celebrities strut around the local markets undisturbed, sampling the olive oil and goat's cheese. You're on your own here.

Here are of some of the best offerings, far from the glitz and traffic snarls of the coast:

Northernmost on the itinerary, at the foot of the gray limestone peaks of Mont Ventoux, sits the hilltop sleepy hamlet of Crillon le Brave, once home to a long line of dukes and to Brave Crillon, the favorite general of Henri IV. Next to the tiny village's church, the hotel, which bears the same name, is a sprawling property of seven small 16th- and 17-century stone village houses connected by a maze of little paths. When the British owner, Peter Chittick, launched his country hideaway back in 1989, it was a simple 11-room inn; now it has expanded to 32 rooms and suites. Each is a different shape and size; all are done in soft beiges, with dove-gray walls, terra-cotta tiles and furnished with plump armchairs and sofas. The most sought-after: La Tour, a vast split-level suite in a 12th-century tower outfitted with a pair of side-by-side claw-foot tubs facing a bay window with a spectacular view.

Guests lounge by the small heated pool, carved into the rock, or duck into the mini spa next to the pool deck. But sooner or later everyone drifts to the cool leafy terrace for another eye-popping panoramic vista. Another draw is the terrace restaurant, headed by Provencal-born Philippe Monti, whose flavorful market-fresh cuisine includes starters like homemade foie gras steeped in Baumes de Venise wine, and hearty main dishes like rabbit with truffles.

Above all, the atmosphere at Crillon le Brave is friendly and unpretentious. Off-season packages feature everything from a five-day crash course in Provencal cooking and French-language classes to seasonal truffle hunting, or participating in a grape harvest combined with a wine-tasting extravaganza.

If you visit just one among the countless top-notch vineyards in the Lubéron region, perhaps the most surprising is Château La Coste, situated north of Aix-en-Provence, in the pokey agricultural village of Le Puy Sainte-Réparade.

Glimpsed from the road, the colossal 1,500 square-meter curved shed of silver, glinting in the dazzling sunlight, smacks of a surreal UFO that has landed the middle of a vast field of vines. Designed by French architect Jean Nouvel, the winery is strictly state-of-the-art, with three underground levels of towering stainless steel vats and a complex computer-regulated system to assure the most gentle methods of fermentation. The organic grapes are harvested and sorted by hand, yielding a wide range of biodynamic wines. 

Art aficionados and designer hounds can hide out in stylish private villas at Domaine des Andéols, near Apt, which resembles a lovely but deceptively Provencal-style hamlet of "guest houses" in weathered ocher stone, surrounded by lavender and an olive grove. You won't find hand-stitched flowery quilts or dried lavender sachets under your pillow, but you'll be surrounded by priceless works by Warhol, Arad, Araki and Noguchi. 

When owner Olivier Massart, head of a Paris fashion agency, transformed his family property in the tiny village of Saint-Saturnin-des-Apt into a unique hotel in 2003, he decided to use more than 400 pieces from his enormous private collection of contemporary art and furniture. Each of these nine multilevel houses—some with private stone pools and sundecks—has been named according to theme. They range from the kitschy "La Maison Voyageurs," with a stuffed Bengali tiger, mock-tortoise sofa and giant live palm in the living room to the high-ceiled zen-white Maison Blanche, filled with only white furniture (a Barcelona banquette by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, a marble table by Florence Knoll) and Plexiglas chairs by Philippe Starck. A more flamboyant favorite is "La Maison Rouge," with scarlet Pucci-designed furnishings, a crimson lacquered bed, and gleaming red resin floors. 

More a retreat than a classic hotel, guests can take in all the lavender-y splendor on horseback riding excursions through the countryside or laze at a dreamy pool. The domain's adjacent restaurant (for guests only) is under the direction of Michelin-starred chef Guy Martin, whose ever-changing dinner menu features simple country cooking, but anyone can drop in for a three-course lunchtime picnic (seasonal vegetables galore, barbecued meats and grilled fish) served under an enormous plane tree. 

Another nearby option, set back on a lush hilltop near Apt, the recently-opened La Coquillade, is an eco-friendly 28-room neo-Provencal bastide with sleekly-designed spacious rooms (the split-level "honeymooner's" suite has its own pool and hammam), built on a 30-hectare vineyard with an ultra-modern wine cellar, Caves Aureto. Owned by Swiss entrepreneur Andreas Rihs, the hotel has postcard-perfect vistas of the sun-drenched countryside, but the star attraction is 32-year-old chef Christophe Renaud. Expect exquisite creative combos of "forgotten" rare vegetables, organic meats and whimsical desserts like banana egg rolls with Espelette pepper and passion fruit sauce, served on the bistro terrace restaurant or at the gastronomic Le Gourmet. 

Northeast of Apt, hidden away in Mane, a tiny village between Manosque and Forcalquier, is the Couvent des Minimes, an elegantly restored 17th-century Franciscan convent, surrounded by terraced gardens, cypresses and fruit groves. Opened in June 2008, this stylishly minimalist 46-room hotel also features France's first spa run by the l'Occitane brand with an exclusive line of natural beauty products infused with fragrant local lavender, verbena, rose and lemon. The deeply comfortable rooms have sweeping views of the countryside. 

You dine in a vast vaulted whitewashed cloister or in the shady inner courtyard, while talented chef Philippe Guérin dishes up tasty regional specialties: Try the red mullet with lemon confite, olives and almonds, the Sisteron lamb topped with mascarpone sauce served with purple artichokes, and strawberries with basil and olive ice cream for dessert. This is deep Provence in all its stark beauty and authenticity (the quintessential Provencal writer, Jean Giono, was born just down the road). If ever you tire of lazing by the peaceful pool, the local outdoor market, a 10-minute drive away, is a must for that killer rosemary honey.

Finally, after working up a gargantuan appetite hiking through the rugged trails of the Gorges de Verdon, make a beeline south for Hotellerie Les Gorges de Pennafort. At the foot of red ocher cliffs in a forest of green oaks, this pretty 16-room stone blue-shuttered Provencal farmhouse, run by native-born Varois Michelin starred chef, Philippe da Silva, is the place for guiltless gorging on generous and artfully authentic cuisine. Plan to linger a while at the table, since meals begin with a few delicate amuse-bouche and end with a true fanfare of heavenly desserts. 

Work it off at the pool, which looks out onto the cliffs and a pond, replete with wild ducks and swans, then indulge in a body scrub with sea salt, sugar and Mediterranean fruit at their new mini-spa. It's the restful flipside of the buzzing coastal scene, but if you must join the oily bronzing hordes, packed together in rows of striped sun beds comme des sardines, know that the beaches of Cannes and St. Tropez are less than an hour's drive away.