New York City's population grew to a high of 8,175,100 over the past decade, according to the U.S. Census count released Tuesday—but the 2.1% bump was still far smaller than officials had anticipated.

Asian and Hispanic populations spiked between 2000 and 2010, transforming the city's racial landscape. But the number of black New Yorkers dropped 5%, the first dip in that group since 1860. There were fewer whites, as well. 

Mayor  Michael Bloomberg and other elected officials disputed the count. A 2009 federal survey of New York and the rest of the nation predicted the Census would reflect a 4.8% jump in the city's population. 

Queens, in particular, was a sore point for officials. The Census tally there showed the borough added a paltry 1,300 people. 

"The Census says that we have added 166,000-odd people since the 2000 count, but we are concerned that there's been a significant undercount," the mayor said. "When three boroughs go up dramatically, and the two most populous boroughs don't, something is wrong."

Gov. Andrew Cuomo's office said he is still reviewing the numbers.

The Asian population enjoyed the biggest gain in New York, adding 247,900, a climb of 31.8% 

Hispanics also had strong growth and increased their numbers by 175,500, or 8.1%. The non-Hispanic white population fell by 78,300, a decline of 2.8%.

The Census put the city's population at 33.3% non-Hispanic white, 28.6% Hispanic, 22.8% non-Hispanic black and 12.6% Asian.

Keeping in line with national urban trends, New York's black population declined over the past decade—joining Detroit, Dallas and Washington, D.C. New York's non-Hispanic black population dropped by 100,859, a 5% decrease, with Brooklyn losing the lion's share.

"I think it's a turning point. The fact that blacks declined, however small it might be, is in keeping with a broad national trend where there is a loss of blacks in most cities that have high concentrations of blacks," said  William Frey, a demographer at the Brookings Institution in Washington, D.C.

Overall, Brooklyn remained the city's most populous borough, growing by 39,300 people, a 1.6% increase. The Bronx led the city in growth with 52,400 new residents, a jump of 3.9%. Manhattan's population grew by 48,700, a 3.2% increase, and Staten Island added 25,000, a 5.6% jump.

The numbers have real-life consequences: Funding for several federal and state programs is determined by population counts.

Astoria, a longtime Greek enclave that has begun to attract young professionals, lost the most people of any neighborhood in the city—more than 10,000, according to a city analysis of Census figures. 

  Michele Lamberti, 35 years old, has lived in the neighborhood for 10 years and doubts the accuracy of the count. "It seems curious, it's surprising. We have a lot of immigrants, so I don't know how forthcoming people would be," Ms. Lamberti said. "I do have friends who have moved out, but I do feel there is a flux of people always looking for apartments."

Manhattan's Battery Park City was among the neighborhoods that grew the most. "I'm not surprised, it's a great neighborhood," said  Jeff Rosen who moved with his wife, Tricia, to the area three years ago. "We love the quiet, we love the view."

"I just hope it's not going to push the rents up," said Ms. Rosen. 

Some demographers weren't surprised by New York's limited growth given that some parts of the city are already bulging at the seams. "I think each of the five boroughs can congratulate themselves for having any growth at all," said  Peter Francese, demographic trends analyst for Ogilvy & Mather, an advertising agency in New York. "There is simply not enough buildable land that growth can be any faster than that."

  Christopher Jones, vice president for research at the Regional Plan Association, agreed. "You never expect New York City or Chicago or Boston to grow like Miami or Atlanta or Houston. They are denser more developed places. It's much more difficult to add to the housing stock." 

But an undercount could have occurred, Mr. Jones said. He noted that city's census figures had to be revised in 2000. "This is slower than what most people would have predicted based on the housing growth in the city, if nothing else," he said. 

One factor in the city's lower growth rate could be smaller immigration rates, said  Mark Mather, a demographer for the Population Reference Bureau in Washington, D.C. The 2010 Census, which asked far fewer questions than in the past, did not examine immigration. 

Population growth was mixed in New York's suburbs. 

Suffolk County's population rose by 74,000, a 5.2% jump. Nassau County saw much weaker growth and added only 5,000 new residents, a less than 1% increase. Westchester added 25,700 people, or 2.8%.

—Alison Fox and Anna Louie Sussman contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Joseph De Avila at joseph.deavila@wsj.com and Sumathi Reddy at sumathi.reddy@wsj.com 