Brazilian authorities are investigating a possible fraud at a São Paulo financing company partly owned by a  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS


0.08
%




 vice president.

The Goldman executive,  Cristiano Camargo, 31 years old, now owns a stake of less than 5% in Porto Forte SA, according to his lawyer. The company provides financing to small businesses, and its name means "strong harbor" in Portuguese. Some investors said they were attracted to Porto Forte by the potential of steady, low-risk returns.

Some investors in Porto Forte have been told in recent days by managers at the firm that it uncovered a fraud involving large, previously undisclosed loans made by the company to an agriculture firm controlled by Mr. Camargo's parents, according to people familiar with the situation.

According to a person familiar with the firm's operations, the loans total at least $4 million, or nearly half of the $9 million in assets at Porto Forte. The agriculture company, Santa Marina Agropecuária e Comercial SA, defaulted on the loans, people familiar with the matter said. And because the loans haven't been repaid, day-to-day operations at Porto Forte have fallen apart.

The brother of Mr. Camargo,  Guilherme Camargo, 33, is chairman of Porto Forte. Guilherme Camargo started and ran the company.

Brazil's securities regulator, the Comissão de Valores Mobiliários, has opened an investigation into the situation, said a spokeswoman for the agency.

  Rogerio Leal, a lawyer representing Cristiano Camargo, said the Goldman executive hasn't been contacted by Brazilian investigators. Mr. Camargo would suffer along with other shareholders from any financial problems at Porto Forte, Mr. Leal said.

In a statement, Guilherme Camargo denied any wrongdoing and said he welcomed an audit of the company's books. His lawyer,  Paulo Ferreira, said in a telephone interview that his client hasn't been contacted by investigators.

Cristiano Camargo is well-known among young, midlevel bankers, traders and investors in São Paulo's financial scene. His Goldman career began in 2004 in New York, and he returned to São Paulo in 2006 to work for Citigroup Inc. Mr. Camargo then worked for Merrill Lynch & Co. before returning to Goldman last April.

The Goldman executive isn't involved in Porto Forte's daily operations but helped attract investments from colleagues and friends, according to several investors who said he approached them. Mr. Camargo also discussed Porto Forte at work, sometimes sending emails about the firm's returns and business plan, these people said.

"That's the reason I invested," said a former colleague. "Everyone trusted him." More than 400 companies and people, including investment bankers, traders and analysts in Brazil's banking sector, invested in Porto Forte, according to company documents and people familiar with the matter.

Mr. Leal said his client denies soliciting funds or investors for Porto Forte, adding that emails circulating in Brazil in which Mr. Camargo supposedly sought investments for the firm were "not written by him." It isn't clear who wrote the emails 

A Goldman spokeswoman said Mr. Camargo "disclosed a minority investment" in Porto Forte "when he joined" Goldman, as required by rules at the New York company. Porto Forte "is not affiliated with Goldman Sachs," the spokeswoman said.

As of September, Cristiano Camargo owned about a 9% stake in Porto Forte, while Guilherme Camargo owned about 16%, according to documents on the company's website.

The Camargos' parents and the agriculture company couldn't be reached to comment.

In a letter to a Porto Forte manager last month, Mr. Leal said the Goldman executive was "completely oblivious" of loans made by Porto Forte to the company owned by his parents.

Porto Forte has been pressing Cristiano Camargo to repay the loans made to the agriculture company, claiming he is responsible for the money. Mr. Camargo has "shown good will to help bring both sides to good terms, to ensure a solution," the letter said. The Goldman executive didn't agree in the letter to repay the financing firm.

 Write to  David Enrich at david.enrich@wsj.com, Liz Rappaport at liz.rappaport@wsj.com and Paulo Prada at paulo.prada@wsj.com 