PARIS—France's experimental-comic-book movement, OuBaPo, has been trying to revolutionize the genre for two decades.

OuBaPo's members produced one book that could be read back-to-front; another that boiled down the 4,300 pages of Marcel Proust's voluminous "In Search of Lost Time" to six drawings; and one that told a single story—of how a man went to get something from the refrigerator—in 99 different ways.

The exclusive group's nine current members live in France, the U.S., Spain and Switzerland. Thousands of OuBaPo books have been sold, and the drawings have been featured in several museum exhibitions. "They have opened the door to a vast artistic territory," says Julien Misserey, the organizer of an annual comic book symposium in France. The name OuBaPo abbreviates a long French phrase meaning Potential Comics Workshop.

Click to see more comics.

Trouble, however, is brewing at OuBaPo. After years of infighting over the group's artistic direction, at least four of the nine founding members have quit. OuBaPo's two highest-profile artists aren't speaking to each other.

"The aim was to work together to rethink the comic book," says Gilles Ciment, director of a French cultural center dedicated to comics, who has abandoned the group. "Sadly, the dream has faded."

In France and other European countries, comics have long been considered more than child's play. Known in some circles as the "ninth art," after music, theater, dance, etc., comics have entertained French adults since the 19th century and today are a big business. In 2008, 7% of all books sold in France were comics, according to the French Publishers' Trade Union. That's the same market share held by elementary, secondary and high-school books.

Academic study of comics also dates to the 19th century. A Swiss writer named Rodolphe Töpffer is considered by many to be the first comic-book theoretician, for the work he published on comic strips in 1845. French scholars came to grips with comic books in the middle of the 20th century.

OuBaPo stands for Ouvroir de Bande-Dessinée Potentielle. It was founded in 1993 by a group of artists and a comic-book historian who used to hang out in a Parisian artists' studio called Nawak, French slang for "nonsense." Aspiring members can't apply to be part of the group; they have to be singled out and then unanimously approved by existing OuBaPo members.

The collective was inspired by a French literary group called Ouvroir de littérature potentielle (the Experimental Literary Workshop), whose members write books using defined restrictions. In 1969, one member of the literary workshop wrote a book without using the letter "e."

OuBaPo applies similar constraints to comic books in the belief that an artist becomes more creative the more limitations he faces. "OuBaPo's mantra is simple," says artist and OuBaPo member Étienne Lécroart. "Constraints free the artistic mind."

For a decade, things went well. The nine founding members would meet three times a year and, over beer and snacks, discuss various constraints for hours at a time. The group worked on a game called Scroubabble—a board game based on Scrabble but with comic-book panels instead of letters. They also created a comic-book tale that repeats itself over and over.

A first collection of works, OuPus 1, was published in 1997. It included examples of "reduction," where a book or comic is summarized in very few panels; "reversibility," where a comic strip can be read back to front; and "iconic alliteration," where the same drawing is reproduced throughout the whole comic with only the words changing.

Over the following years three more OuPus books were published, and the group held several exhibitions in Paris.

Soon, however, OuBaPo members were overwhelmed with requests to organize exhibitions and take part in comic-book conferences.

Relations between the group's two most famous members began souring. In 2005 Jean-Christophe Menu, a shaggy-haired comic-book editor, and Lewis Trondheim, one of France's most prolific cartoonists, clashed over accusations of selling out.

Messrs. Trondheim and Menu were themselves co-founders of an independent comic-book company that published most of OuBaPo's books. But Mr. Trondheim was also making extra cash editing comics at a mainstream publishing house called Delcourt.

Mr. Menu, who founded an underground comic book group called the Association for the Apology of the Liberated Ninth Art, accused Mr. Trondheim of pandering to big business. In a 76-page book featuring illustrations of people having their teeth pulled, Mr. Menu wrote that big publishers like Delcourt were stealing ideas from the little independents.

Mr. Trondheim's behavior "should be the symbol of something one can never hope to see again," Mr. Menu wrote in a book review in 2007. Mr. Menu didn't answer emailed and phoned requests for comment.

Mr. Menu "wanted all the power" at the publishing house, Mr. Trondheim said in an email. Mr. Trondheim, who has been decorated by the French government for his contributions to comics, added that, in the office, Mr. Menu was nicknamed Jean-Bédel Bokassa after the former African dictator. At first "we laughed about it," he said. "Later we wept."

Tensions persisted. In 2007, another member quit after falling out with Mr. Menu over an exhibition of experimental cartoons inspired by toys. Then, in 2008, Mr. Ciment, the cultural center director, left after arguing with Mr. Menu over an exhibition at his museum featuring sexually explicit comic books from South Africa. Recently, Messrs. Trondheim and Ciment, who have both quit OuBaPo, have begun discussing a spinoff to the movement. The 46-year-old Mr. Trondheim is also preparing a tell-all comic detailing various fallings out with Mr. Menu.

OuBaPo's remaining members are sticking to it, however. Last November, an OuBaPo delegation traveled to the French city of Rennes to celebrate the 50th anniversary of Oulipo, the literary group. There, they played Scroubabble before a live audience.

"OuBaPo is not an artistic school of thought like minimalism or surrealism," says Matt Madden, an artist and OuBaPo's U.S correspondent. "It's something you can take or leave."

 Write to  Max Colchester at max.colchester@wsj.com 