Regulatory filings made in Hong Kong show that  Angela Leong, the woman known as the fourth wife of gambling mogul  Stanley Ho, has increased her stake in his booming Macau casino business.

Stock-market filings made public Thursday indicate Ms. Leong's effective stake in SJM Holdings Ltd., the Hong Kong-listed portion of the multibillion-dollar gambling business Mr. Ho founded four decades ago, has risen to 11%. That strengthens her influence over the business, bolstering her position despite challenges mounted by other factions of the sprawling Ho family over who will control the ailing Mr. Ho's gambling empire. Shares and options previously gave Ms. Leong control of roughly 8% of SJM.

"This consolidates her hold," said  Huei Suen Ng, gambling analyst at CLSA Asia-Pacific Markets.

Ms. Leong's enlarged stake is the result of a settlement ending a bitter months-long family quarrel over control of Mr. Ho's holdings. The settlement, announced March 10, puts to rest a dispute that burst into the open earlier this year, casting an unflattering spotlight on the mogul's warring family. 

Mr. Ho has 17 known children by four different women that he and others refer to as his wives. Mr. Ho shuttles among his households.

Representatives of Mr. Ho's children declined to comment. Mr. Ho couldn't be reached for comment. 

Last year, SJM accounted for a roughly 30% share of Macau's gambling business, which altogether earned around $25 billion, mostly from high-rolling players visiting from mainland China. The former Portuguese territory is the only place in China where casinos are legal. 



SJM reported net profit of 3.56 billion Hong Kong dollars (US$456.7 million) for 2010, up nearly fourfold from HK$906.7 million a year earlier. Its share price has more than quadrupled since a listing in 2008, but is down nearly 10% from a peak earlier this year. 

Speculation about who would inherit control of the 89-year-old Mr. Ho's empire started after he fell ill two years ago. He appeared to put in place an orderly succession plan, parceling out pieces of his business to his various children. Two children from his second wife have their own casino operations in Macau.

But in January, he filed a lawsuit—since withdrawn—accusing the children of his second wife of colluding with his third wife to steal his share of a holding company called Lanceford. 

Lanceford, in turn, controlled Mr. Ho's share of Sociedade de Turismo e Diversoes de Macau, or STDM, the company that owns more than half of SJM. His lawyer said at the time Mr. Ho wanted to divide up Lanceford equally among all four branches of his family.

 The bitter public dispute clouded the future of Macau's biggest casino operator until the settlement was announced.

In Thursday's filing, SJM said Mr. Ho's stake in STDM, through Lanceford, is 0.117%, while 25.538% of STDM is held by other members of Mr. Ho's families, excluding Ms. Leong. It's unclear how ownership of Lanceford is split among the other family factions. 

 Write to  Shai Oster at shai.oster@wsj.com 