WASHINGTON—The House of Representatives, shaken by an attack on one of its members, put partisanship aside Wednesday to honor victims of the Saturday shooting spree outside a Tucson, Ariz., supermarket.

Lawmakers conducted a bipartisan prayer service and passed a resolution condemning the shooting, in which six people were killed and 14 were wounded, including Arizona Democratic Rep. Gabrielle Giffords. She remains hospitalized in critical condition. 

Lawmakers also reviewed security procedures that offer them scant protection against such random acts of violence.

The day of tribute supplanted what would likely have been a divisive debate over House Republicans' proposal to repeal the health-care law that is President Barack Obama's signature achievement.

House Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio) postponed debate on the repeal, probably until next week, and assumed the role of chief consoler on the somber occasion.

"Today, we are called here to mourn," Mr. Boehner said, his voice choked with emotion as he spoke on the House floor. "These are difficult hours for our country."

In speeches, House members exposed a personal side voters seldom see, demonstrating that lawmakers and staff on Capitol Hill are bound by a web of personal connections that is often obscured by partisan infighting.

Texas Republican Rep. Louie Gohmert told his assembled colleagues about how he shared Ms. Giffords's "chocaholic" tendencies. New York Republican Rep. Chris Gibson recalled meeting Ms. Giffords in graduate school at Cornell University. 

Ohio Democratic Rep. Betty Sutton spoke of her pride at being elected to the House with Ms. Giffords in 2006, when they were the "majority makers" who gave their party control of the chamber.

In a particularly emotional speech, New York Democratic Rep. Carolyn McCarthy addressed survivors of the tragedy and their families, drawing on her experience as the widow of a man who was gunned down on a commuter train.

"I'll say to all of you: time will heal you," Ms. McCarthy said. "You'll never forget but time will make you smile again."

Also attending the prayer service were some of Ms. Giffords's former colleagues, including Labor Secretary Hilda Solis, a former House Democrat from California, and former Louisiana Rep. Charlie Melancon, who lost a Senate bid last year.

Lawmakers seemed especially uneasy about the fact that Ms. Giffords was gunned down while conducting the sort of constituent outreach that is routine for each of them—widely publicized events held in the open, usually with no security detail. 

"That's the whole purpose," said illinois Democratic Rep. Jan Schakowsky, who added that she notifies voters well in advance of such events. "We want people to know about it."

In closed-door security briefings, congressional officials urged lawmakers of both parties to make a habit of notifying local police when they are holding public events in their districts.

Texas Democratic Rep. Sheila Jackson Lee said that after Saturday's shooting, she met with the mayor and police chief of her hometown of Houston to discuss such security arrangements. But she said she wouldn't curb her appearances as a result of the Arizona attack. 

"I still want to be touched by my constituents, and to touch them," Ms. Jackson Lee said.

Lawmakers generally shied away from addressing the contentious question of whether heated political rhetoric had played a role in inciting the violence. 

But House Democratic Whip Steny Hoyer of Maryland said the current period was "a time for us to reflect on the heightened anger being projected in our public debate and the daily denigration of those with whom we disagree." 

House Majority Leader Eric Cantor (R., Va.) said the Arizona shooting wasn't just a random act of violence. "It was an attack on the very essence of democracy and representative government," he said.

Some lawmakers have argued that the episode underscored the need to limit access to guns or to high-capacity ammunition clips. But those ideas gained little traction among Republicans.

"I wish there had been one more gun there that day, in the hands of a responsible person," said Arizona Republican Rep. Trent Franks.

The House session was held as Mr. Obama traveled to Tucson for a memorial service at the University of Arizona. He was accompanied on Air Force One by House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D., Calif.) and members of the Arizona House delegation.

The House resolution honored each of the 20 victims, including federal judge John Roll and Gabe Zimmerman, a 30-year-old aide to Ms. Giffords, both of whom were killed, as was Christina Taylor Green, a 9-year-old third grader born on Sept. 11, 2001, who went to the "Congress on Your Corner" event with a neighbor to learn about the democratic process. The resolution also praised the bravery of bystanders who responded to the shooting.

"Words are inadequate at a time like this," said Ms. Pelosi in her tribute on the House floor before joining the president for the flight to Tucson.

Mr. Boehner, who was elected speaker last week, thanked congressional staffers on both sides of the aisle as he fondly recalled the service of Mr. Zimmerman. Tearing up toward the end of his remarks, he said the House would move forward in honor of Ms. Giffords.

"Let us not let this inhuman act frighten us," he told his assembled colleagues. "We will continue the unfinished work."