The world's economic powerhouses banded together in an attempt to tame an unwelcome rise in the value of the Japanese yen—a development that had threatened to handicap Japan's recovery from the recent devastating earthquake and tsunami.

For the first time since they joined to rescue a sinking euro in 2000, the U.S., Japan, U.K., Canada and the European Central Bank Thursday night agreed to "concerted intervention in exchange markets." The ECB manages the currency shared by G-7 members France, Germany and Italy. 

The move came "in response to recent movements in the exchange rate of the yen associated with the tragic events in Japan," according to a statement issued after a conference call among financial ministers and central bankers from the Group of Seven economies. 

Japan's Finance Ministry sold yen through the Bank of Japan Friday for the first time since September, sending the dollar surging as high as ¥82 from a low of ¥79.19 around the time of the announcement. The dollar was at ¥81.49 at 0640 GMT. (When the earthquake struck last week, a dollar bought ¥82.80.)

The central bank entered the market continually, dealers said. One with direct knowledge of the flows said the selling reached ¥2 trillion ($24.6 billion) in Asian hours—matching September's record one-day intervention—though a government source called that figure "groundless." 

The yen was also sharply down against the euro Friday, with the common currency at one point going as high as ¥15.56. The euro was at ¥114.776 as of 1040 GMT, up from a low of ¥111.12 around the time the interventions began.

The rise in the yen against the dollar has been something of a puzzle to officials. One explanation, rejected by Japanese authorities, is that big Japanese institutions have been bringing money home from abroad, which involves selling foreign currencies and buying yen. Another is that Japanese households, some of whom have invested overseas to get higher interest rates, are also bringing money from abroad. A third is that speculators and investors who bet against the yen are now forced to buy it to close their positions.

A higher yen, among other things, hurts Japanese exports by making them more expensive to foreigners. Even before the earthquake, some Japanese manufacturers were complaining that the yen had risen too much.

Since the earthquake last week, G-7 finance ministers and central bankers have been in frequent contact, officials said. The possibility of a joint intervention to smooth the volatility in the yen was discussed but no consensus was reached until shortly before Thursday's call, which French officials had initiated. 

U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner spoke with his French counterpart, Christine Lagarde, whose government currently chairs the G-7, as well as the Japanese finance minister, Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke and ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet to seek agreement that the group would deliver whatever the Japanese were asking. Mr. Geithner also alerted President Barack Obama.

Officials briefed on the G-7 call, which lasted about 90 minutes, said Mr. Bernanke and Mr. Trichet spoke first and said they would back the Japanese request for help; the British and the Canadians then followed. A senior French official said the possibility of foreign purchases of Japanese government bonds, an idea floated by the French finance minister, did not come up. 

"No nation hesitated and all readily accepted Japan's request," Japanese Finance Minister Yoshihiko Noda said at a press conference Friday in Tokyo. He said the G-7 shared Japan's view that movements in the yen were excessive and disorderly. 

The Bank of Japan, both to arrest the currency's rise and to keep financial markets functioning, has pumped trillions of yen into money markets over the past week. When a central bank sharply increases the supply of its currency, its value usually falls. But that hasn't been happening to Japan. 



Intervention was the next logical move. "It's the only way they can stimulate the economy," said BNP Paribas foreign-exchange strategist Robert Ryan, who described it as another form of monetary easing. "This is the last tool in the tool box," he said. "They have to make it work."

Mr. Noda said the Japanese authorities aren't targeting a specific level for the yen.

But Mitul Kotecha, head of global foreign-exchange strategy at Credit Agricole, said "the psychologically important level of 80.00 will likely stick out as a key level to defend." 

The governor of the Bank of Japan, Masaaki Shirakawa, said Friday the central bank's role will be to facilitate "powerful monetary easing and to ensure stability in financial markets" by providing "ample liquidity." 

In large part, the move reflected the willingness of other countries to do what they could to make things easier for the beleaguered Japanese. 

Said Daniel Price, who was an international-economic adviser in the George W. Bush White House: "The action underscores the commitment to cooperation and coordinated action that has been the hallmark of the G-7 in times of great stress or volatility." 

Since the breakdown in 1971 of the international monetary system known as Bretton Woods (named for the New Hampshire resort where it was fashioned after World War II), the U.S. and its allies have used intervention tactics in foreign-exchange markets both to slow or resist rapid and unwelcome moves in currency rates. At times, they have acted when authorities considered exchange rates to be out of step with fundamental economic conditions. 

Intervention by major economies was common in the 1990s, but the practice fell from favor in the late 1990s and now is used sparingly. The U.S., for instance, bought and sold the dollar in the foreign-exchange markets on eight days in 1995, but has done so only twice since August 1995, according to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 

The Japanese traditionally have been more active in exchange markets. Without support from other countries, the Japanese sold yen to try to reduce its value in September—a maneuver that was not regarded as a success. 

Jeffrey Frankel, a Harvard University scholar of currency intervention, said the maneuvers tend to work under two conditions. 

One is that several countries, including the U.S., join together. The second is that the exchange rate is seen as being "pretty far out of line based on fundamentals," and there's a shared agreement that it needs to be corrected. 

"As we have long stated," the G-7 said Thursday night, "excess volatility and disorderly movements in exchange rates have adverse implications for economic and financial stability."

—Nathalie Boschat, Arran Scott and Tatsuo Ito contributed to this article.