The proposed new takeover code seeks to put in place a fair, equitable and transparent legal framework for substantial acquisition and takeover of publicly listed companies, in conformity with the best global practices. 

In drafting the proposal, the Takeover Regulations Advisory Committee, which under the chairmanship of C. Achuthan submitted its report to SEBI in July 2010, has adopted an approach of balancing and calibrating conflicting objectives of all stakeholders including the acquirer, the target company, management and public shareholders.

While proposals such as requiring the acquirer to make an offer for 100% of the shares are investor-friendly, acquisitions would become a costlier proposition for companies.

A comparative analysis of some of the features of the existing and proposed takeover regulations is enumerated below.

 The definition of "control" is to be amended to include 'ability' and 'right' to appoint a majority director or to control management or policy decisions. A director or officer of the target company would not be regarded as being in control merely by virtue of holding such a position as an employee. 

 The definition of "shares" is to be amended to include Depository Receipts (DRs) which entitle the holder to exercise voting rights in the target company. 

 The open offer threshold is proposed to be increased from 15% to 25%. 

 Creeping acquisition of 5% per financial year to be permitted for shareholders holding 25% or more, up to the maximum permissible non-public shareholding limit.

 Currently, an acquirer is required to make a statutory open offer for acquisition of a minimum 20% of the voting capital from public shareholders. The new regulations propose to increase the offer size to 100%. 

 Under the existing regulations, the acquirer is required to reduce its shareholding when open offer results in public shareholding falling below the minimum limit. The proposal is to allow automatic delisting of a target company, if the acquirer so opts, as part of the open offer and if its holding in the target company crosses the threshold limit of delisting. 

 Special provision that would bring more clarity on indirect acquisition. Further, if the indirectly acquired company is a predominant part of the business, it would be treated as direct acquisition for all purposes.

 Under current rules, the offer price is based on the volumes weighted average of 26 weeks market price of the target company. It is proposed to base it on the volumes weighted average of 12 weeks market price of the target.

 Non-compete fee to promoters, currently up to 25% of offer price, is to be omitted. 

 The timeline for an open offer to be reduced to 57 days from 95 days. 

The advisory committee has done a commendable job in removing the ambiguity in the prevailing takeover code. While there are areas that still need to be deliberated upon—like negative control and cross border takeovers-- the proposed regulations will trigger welcome capital market reforms. 

By Akash Gupt, Executive Director, and Radhika Jain, Associate Director of Tax & Regulatory Services, PwC India

