WASHINGTON—The U.S. Treasury Department froze $30 billion in assets controlled by Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi and his family in what the Obama administration said was the single largest seizure of foreign funds in American history.

U.S. officials said the Treasury's action was a crucial step to further increasing pressure on Col. Gadhafi to give up power in Tripoli, amid signs that his security forces have intensified a crackdown on political opponents.

Treasury officials said their actions are being closely coordinated with European financial institutions after the European Union voted Monday to impose its own sanctions regime against the Gadhafi family and more than 20 other senior Libyan officials. The United Nations Security Council also passed a sanctions resolution against Libya on Saturday.

On Tuesday, Germany temporarily froze assets worth about €2 million belonging to a son of Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi, the economy ministry said Tuesday. The measure is to ensure that the assets won't leave Germany before EU sanctions kick in, the economy ministry said, without revealing at which bank the assets are being held. 

Italy's economic and financial stability committee met Tuesday, a first step towards possible government action on Libyan assets in the country, a person familiar with the situation said. Foreign Minister Franco Frattini had appealed for the meeting, needed to discuss technical details ahead of a possible freezing of Libyan assets in the country. 

Italy's government may meet later in the week to authorize such a freeze. Libya has more than €3 billion in assets in Italy, including some 7.5% of  Unicredit SpA held by LIbya's central bank and a government-run investment vehicle. 

President Barack Obama signed an executive order Friday calling for the seizure of all assets controlled by Col. Gadhafi and four of his children. U.S. officials said they held talks with American firms holding Gadhafi money and concluded there was at least $30 billion in the U.S. These firms are to hold the money until the Treasury lifts the freeze, allowing a new Libyan government to claim the funds.

Track events day by day.

Treasury officials said some of the assets frozen since Friday belonged to Libya's central bank and its sovereign-wealth fund, the Libyan Investment Authority. The U.S. concluded both were directly controlled by Col. Gadhafi. 

U.S. officials said they believed the central bank of Libya has over $100 billion in foreign-currency reserves world-wide, while the sovereign-wealth fund holds more than $70 billion.

"This is the largest blocking under any sanctions program ever" by the U.S., said David Cohen, the Treasury's acting undersecretary for terrorism and financial intelligence.

Mr. Cohen didn't say which U.S. financial institutions or companies hold Gadhafi assets. Before the recent unrest, the State Department wooed the Libyan Investment Authority to make investments with American financial institutions. U.S. officials briefed on Libya said they believed some of the money seized was being managed by major Wall Street investment houses. 

The head of the Libyan Investment Authority, Mohamed Layas, told the U.S. ambassador to Tripoli last year that his institution had invested $300 million to $500 million each in a number of U.S. financial institutions, according to a diplomatic cable obtained by the Internet site WikiLeaks. 

The EU is expected to publish the details of its asset freeze in coming days. The EU's moves Monday sparked confusion among some bankers because it was unclear whether the sanctions are limited to assets held by Col. Gadhafi and his family, or if they also include overseas investments made by the Libyan Investment Authority.

Mr. Cohen said he believed the EU would follow the U.S. and take an expansive view of what constitutes Col. Gadhafi's assets. "We are hearing that major European financial institutions are interpreting their obligations…as requiring them to block all government of Libya assets," he said. 

European governments will bear the greatest burden in imposing financial sanctions on Libya. Germany, France and Italy are the biggest oil importers from the country, while the Libyan governments and members of the Gadhafi family have significant holdings of assets in the country.

Some Libyan investments in Europe include a 3% stake in  Pearson PLC, a British publisher of educational materials and the Financial Times newspaper; the 7.6% stake in Italian bank  UniCredit
UNCFF


-1.02
%




 SpA, held by the sovereign-wealth fund and the Libyan central bank; a 2% stake in  Finmeccanica,
FNC


2.99
%




 an Italian defense firm; a small stake in Rusal, a large Russian aluminum company; and a 7.5% stake in Juventus SpA, an Italian soccer club.

On Sunday, the U.K. froze the assets of the Gadhafi family, including Saif al-Islam Gadhafi, the colonel's son, who, according to media reports, owns a $16 million home in London's affluent Hampstead neighborhood. Switzerland announced sanctions over the weekend. 

The Libyan leader pulled billions of dollars from Swiss banks after his son, Hannibal, and wife, were briefly detained in 2008 for allegedly beating servants at their Geneva home. Col. Gadhafi also arrested Swiss diplomats based in Tripoli in retaliation.

Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said Monday in Geneva that financial measures should be addressed at Col. Gadhafi and his government but shouldn't affect ordinary Libyans. She said priorities for the U.S. also included averting a humanitarian disaster, dealing with people fleeing the country and making sure adequate food and medicines were available inside the country. 

Mrs. Clinton said the U.S. is pledging $10 million from aid funds to help refugees, and is sending two specialist emergency teams to the Libyan borders to help those fleeing the country.

Treasury has increasingly utilized targeted sanctions in a bid to support U.S. foreign-policy goals. Washington has particularly attacked Iran's leadership and its financial institutions in a bid to force Tehran to give up its nuclear programs. U.S. officials say these measures increase pressure on leadership while limiting the economic harm done to the public.

—Stephen Fidler in Geneva, Bernd Radowitz in Berlin and Christopher Emsden in Rome contributed to this article.

 Write to  Jay Solomon at jay.solomon@wsj.com and Keith Johnson at keith.johnson@wsj.com 