RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil—Heavy rains again drenched the devastated mountain region northwest of Brazil's beachfront city of Rio de Janeiro on Saturday, hindering rescue efforts and raising concerns of more floods and landslides that have claimed almost 600 lives and left 14,000 people homeless. 

Rains were falling on the centuries-old cities of Nova Friburgo, Petropolis and Teresopolis on Saturday afternoon, and forecasters said it will continue until at least Wednesday. 

Rio de Janeiro Gov. Sergio Cabral, who visited the region Saturday, told reporters of a harrowing experience during his trip from Rio de Janeiro to Nova Friburgo. Mr. Cabral's motorcade traveled through a 40-minute downpour that caused a landslide visible from the roadway, the governor said. 

Search and rescue efforts continued in region, where access is difficult because of the many bridges and roads that have been washed away. Brazil's government sent in Army troops and security officers to help clear blocked roads, as well as guard homes abandoned by frightened residents. 

 In Nova Friburgo, the hardest hit by the flooding, jittery residents scrambled for high ground after a rumor, later proved to be false, suggested a nearby dam was about to burst. In Teresopolis, another hard-hit city, shopkeepers shuttered their doors after sporadic looting in nearby neighborhoods. 

State authorities have confirmed 591 deaths in at least a half-dozen of the hillside towns that dot the verdant mountains north of Rio, but the toll is expected to climb. More than 14,000 people have been forced from homes that were destroyed or damaged. 

The damage continued to prompt the country as a whole, amid an economic boom and growing aspirations of global influence, to question why it wasn't better prepared to cope with such disasters. Despite frequent flooding during Brazil's rainy season, Brazilians acknowledge, authorities haven't sufficiently enforced proper building and zoning codes, making towns more vulnerable to disaster. 

Criticizing the lack of proper development in the country over the years, Justice Minister José Eduardo Cardozo in televised comments said Brazil as a state had "failed." As a result, he added, "people have paid with their lives." Mr. Cabral, for his part, said he recognized the need for better development, but said the focus now and in coming days must continue to be on recovery and relief.

The chore at hand remains immense. Though the federal government has already authorized at least 780 million reais ($463 million) for affected areas, long-term reconstruction is expected to cost much more. In Teresopolis, a city of 150,000 people, Mayor Jorge Mario said reconstruction would cost at least 500 million reais. 

Estimates for the overall economic impact of the flooding still vary, but most of the losses will be incurred by the local tourism industry and small textile, furniture, and manufacturing businesses. Rio's state government said local hotels could face about $18 million in lost business over the next month. Though not responsible for Brazil's lucrative agricultural exports, damages to farms in the region could marginally push up domestic food prices in coming weeks, according to Tendencias, a São Paulo consultancy. 

Meanwhile, the short-term challenges of relief have overwhelmed local officials. 

Morgues at overcapacity have forced authorities to use shipping containers and warehouses as temporary backups. Workers struggled to dig graves at soggy cemeteries. Those rendered homeless took shelter in schools, sports gyms, and churches.In addition to providing soldiers, Brazil's military also set up field hospitals to help tend to the sick and injured. Authorities were also warning residents to be careful with food, water and sanitary conditions to avoid the spread of illness. 

—Jeff Fick contributed to this article.

 Write to  Paulo Prada at paulo.prada@wsj.com 