NEW DELHI –An India court will continue hearing Monday the bail pleas filed by five corporate executives allegedly involved in rigging the sale of telecom licenses in 2008, while a lower court will resume hearing Saturday a related case that implicates a lawmaker in the scandal. 

Both the courts Friday heard arguments in the related cases and postponed the matter for further consideration. 

The Delhi High Court was considering the appeals filed by the executives against the lower court's order denying bail and sending them to jail, pending trial. The lower court—a special court set up by India's Supreme Court to examine cases related to the telecom – was hearing arguments on why Kanimozhi Karunanidhi, a member of the upper house of parliament, shouldn't be arrested. 

Ms. Kanimozhi is the daughter of M. Karunanidhi, who leads the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam, or DMK, political party. The DMK is a key member of India's Congress party-led coalition government. 

The five executives, who were arrested in April, are Reliance Telecom Ltd. Managing Director  Gautam Doshi and senior vice presidents,  Hari Nair and  Surender Pipara; Swan Telecom Pvt. Director  Vinod Goenka, and Unitech Wireless Ltd. Chairman  Sanjay Chandra. India's Central Bureau of Investigation lodged charges of cheating, forgery and abetment to crime against the executives last month. All have denied any wrongdoing. 

The CBI subsequently filed a second set of charges, of accepting bribes against Ms. Kanimozhi and Kalaignar TV Managing Director  Sharad Kumar, and of giving bribes against  Rajiv Aggarwal and  Asif Balwa, directors at Kusegaon Fruits and Vegetables Ltd. and partners of Dynamix Realty, a unit of DB Group. Also charged was  Karim Morani of Cineyug Films Pvt. for being involved in the irregularities. All have denied any wrongdoing. Kalaignar TV is jointly owned by Mr. Kumar and Ms. Karunanidhi's relatives. 

Arguing for Ms. Kanimozhi in the special court, her lawyer Ram Jethmalani said that Ms. Kanimozhi is only a 20% shareholder in Kalaignar TV and doesn't make any executive decisions for the company, which are taken by board-appointed professionals. 

"I have no intention to abscond," Mr. Jethmalani said on why Ms. Kanimozhi shouldn't be arrested. 

A counsel for the CBI said that the agency would strongly oppose any moves to seek bail by the five named in the second charge-sheet. 

The investigation agency is probing one of the country's biggest corruption scandals ever and has arrested 11 people so far in connection with a probe into allegations that telecom licenses and spectrum in 2008 were sold at prices below market value. 

The CBI estimates that the government lost more than 300 billion rupees ($6.77 billion) in potential revenue. A federal audit body, however, estimates the potential revenue loss to be as much as $40 billion. 

Ms. Kanimozhi is the second DMK politician to be embroiled in the CBI probe. Senior DMK leader and former Telecom Minister Andimuthu Raja was arrested by the CBI in February in this case, where allegations include bringing forward the cut-off date for filing applications so as to benefit some companies. Ms. Raja, who has denied any wrongdoing, is currently in jail. 

The agency, in its charges filed April 25, said Raja, Kanimozhi and Kumar accepted bribes of 2 billion rupees from Swan Telecom's Goenka and co-founder  Shahid Balwa from the accounts of DB Group companies in lieu of "undue favors" in the allocation of licenses to Swan Telecom. 

The CBI says that the 2-billion rupee bribe was funneled to Kalaignar through an intermediary firm, Cineyug Films, which was aided by Asif Balwa, Mr. Aggarwal and Mr. Morani. 

Swan is now called Etisalat DB Telecom Pvt., in which the U.A.E.'s Emirates Telecommunications Corp. bought a stake in 2008. DB Realty, a real estate firm, is Etisalat's partner in Etisalat DB. 

The scam has raised a political stink, embarrassing the prime minister and putting the government under immense pressure to clean up house. 

 Write to  R. Jai Krishna at krishna.jai@dowjones.com and Romit Guha at romit.guha@dowjones.com 