On Saturday, 78,936 people filled New Meadowlands Stadium to watch the United States hold Argentina to a 1-1 draw. Short of actually beating one of the world's top teams, it was a good day for U.S. soccer.  Bob Bradley's crew soaked up the pressure in the first half but held its own until  Esteban Cambiasso put Argentina ahead just before the interval. Then, in the second half, the Americans switched to a 4-4-2 set, found an equalizer through teenage starlet  Juan Agudelo and matched its illustrious opponent the rest of the day. 

In short: great crowd, pulsating match between two teams that played well and a coming-out party for the U.S.'s 18-year-old potential phenom. What's not to like? Not much. But it would have been better if the game had actually meant something. 

Saturday's exhibition was nothing more than a friendly, soccer's equivalent of Grapefruit League baseball. The national team convenes for a few days, hopes to build some chemistry in training and then tries to assess whether it's getting better or not against an opponent that's probably doing the same. When the priority is improving, rather than winning, friendlies can be frightfully dull—especially, as is often the case, if players focus more on avoiding injury and over-exertion before returning to the clubs that actually pay their salaries. 

Saturday's match wasn't like that. Indeed, many observers were delighted that both sides took it seriously. But when it comes to friendlies, that's the exception, not the rule.

And that's the problem for the U.S., in particular. Every four years, it's expected to do something meaningful in the World Cup. Yet in between, the Americans only play a handful of competitive games against quality opposition. The rest are friendlies. 

Blame geography. FIFA, the game's governing body, carves up soccer into six regional confederations. Depending on their relative strength, all send a number of teams to the World Cup. Most of a country's competitive games will be against opponents from its own confederation. These are usually qualifying games for the World Cup or continental championship.

The United States—like Mexico, another middle-to-upper tier soccer nation—is in something called CONCACAF, the Confederation of North, Central American and Caribbean Association Football. Simply put, it isn't very good. Apart from Mexico and the U.S., only once has a CONCACAF nation advanced past the group stage of the World Cup. 

This means the U.S. only plays a handful of quality opponents in competitive matches in every World Cup cycle. Between June 2008 and the 2010 World Cup in South Africa, the Americans played 18 competitive games in CONCACAF qualifying. Apart from the two clashes with Mexico, the bulk of those matches weren't games that help a nation improve (or are attractive to broadcasters and advertisers, though that's obviously a secondary consideration).

It's not just that the likes of El Salvador, Trinidad and Guatemala aren't very good. (They're not, but that's beside the point.) The problem for the U.S. is that these games don't mimic anything it would find in a World Cup. 

Since it's March, here's an apt analogy: This is a bit like what a Big East team might encounter playing a mid-major on the road in a small gym and hostile atmosphere. The underdog opponent is determined to seize the day by playing the kind of basketball that, say, Connecticut doesn't see in conference play. In short, there's lots to lose—the U.S. has often struggled in such venues—and little to gain.

That's why the best possible thing for U.S. soccer may be combining CONCACAF and its equivalent in South America (CONMEBOL) into one confederation of the Americas. With its 10 members, CONMEBOL is the smallest confederation, but it's filled with the game's historical and current heavyweights: Brazil, Argentina, Uruguay and others. Creating one pan-American confederation would allow the U.S. and Mexico to play more competitive games on a regular basis. Second-tier CONCACAF teams—countries that rarely meet top opposition, even in friendlies—would benefit, too.

South American teams would get something out of this arrangement, as well. They'd play a wider variety of teams and styles, which would be a welcome break from playing each other over and over again. There are also financial benefits, like accessing the television markets in the U.S. and Mexico, which would translate into an increase in rights fees and lucrative sponsorship deals. It's not a coincidence that both Argentina and Brazil, arguably the sport's biggest draws, chose to play friendlies in the United States in the past nine months: It pays to do so. 

The same theory applies at the club level. A Copa Libertadores—South America's version of the UEFA Champions League—featuring American clubs would be more lucrative and attractive for these reasons. Mexican teams already play in the competition, evidence that rules are flexible in soccer.

There are logistical issues involved, of course, mostly pertaining to scheduling and travel. But they are far from insurmountable. 

Skeptics cite two main reasons why this won't happen, both grounded in soccer's Realpolitik. The first is that a merger would mean the combined confederation would have eight World Cup spots for its 45 members, putting the U.S. and Mexico at risk of not qualifying. The possibility exists now, too, but it's pretty remote: Both nations have qualified for every World Cup since 1994. And a World Cup without either of the two North American heavyweights would impact the value of the broadcasting rights. The U.S. World Cup television-rights deal was the most-lucrative for FIFA in 2010, and Mexico wasn't far behind.

The other reason is purely political. Confederations matter in soccer, particularly within FIFA's power structure. A merger would mean that one of the two presidents, either CONMEBOL's  Nicolas Leoz or CONCACAF'S  Jack Warner, would lose some clout. It would also be more difficult to engage in things like bloc-voting and the kinds of deal-making to which any political organization can fall prey.

Both, sadly, are valid, which is why it's probably best not to hold your breath: This won't happen any time soon. There are too many whose personal interests would suffer if there were a merger, even if it might be good for the sport. And for U.S. soccer, this means growth will likely continue at the current pace: not frustratingly slow, but nowhere near as accelerated as it could be.

—Gabriele Marcotti is the world soccer columnist for The Times of London and a regular broadcaster for the BBC.