  Q: As I sit here in Chicago, which has not seen the temperatures rise above freezing in the last week or so, and more of the same is in the future, I wonder just what effect below-freezing temperatures have on hybrid electric cars and the new electric Volt and Leaf. My understanding of batteries is that they lose their charge and do not perform as well in cold weather as in warm. Are there any studies or opinions regarding that in the car industry? 

—Matthew Duff, Westchester, Ill.

 A: I just finished test-driving the Chevy Volt in temperatures that stayed below freezing for nearly the whole time I had the car. As a result the battery's range fell more than 30%. In ideal conditions the Volt is supposed to go 40 miles on battery power alone, but I was traveling between 22 and 25 miles before its range-extending gasoline generator kicked in.

I'm not knocking the Volt, which is a technical gem. This is just the way batteries behave in cold weather. Other electrics I have driven suffered similarly in the cold. 

I have also worked with rechargeable batteries for years in power tools, personal electronics and radio-controlled models and they always run out of power after what seems like too little time. Count on losing at least 35% of battery range in winter driving.

  Q: I'm considering installing an aftermarket computer chip in the 5.7L Hemi engine in my Chrysler 300C to improve its gas mileage. The companies selling these chips claim they will increase gas mileage, increase horsepower and lower emissions. Naturally, I'm skeptical and worried that installing an aftermarket chip might damage the engine over time or cause other problems. What do you think? 

—Chris Hart, Austin, Texas

 A: I'm also skeptical when it comes to aftermarket chips. Years ago they seemed to make more sense because many cars' engines had a lot of untapped potential for power and fuel economy. But today, with drivers clamoring for vehicles that perform well while using less fuel, I feel as if car makers have come pretty close to maximizing horsepower and fuel economy without putting undue stress on engines, transmissions and other delicate, expensive parts.

Still, car companies are generally conservative so there is probably some room for a few more horses under the hood without doing damage. If you get better fuel economy, that's great, but I wouldn't count on it. Usually you wind up trading miles per gallon for horsepower. 

  Q: I know it is like shoveling sand against the tide but is there anyway to tell how expensive electricity is to recharge a battery like the one in a Prius, Volt or Leaf? All municipalities charge different rates but there must be an average. 

—Wes Rasmussen, Las Vegas

 A: The cost to charge varies widely with utility rates and battery sizes, but one rule of thumb is that charging an electric car is like paying about 75 cents per gallon for gasoline. Some reports have put the gasoline equivalent closer to $1.50 while others say it can be less when utilities offer lower off-peak rates. Either way it is less expensive than gasoline. However, if you are looking at electric vehicles purely as money savers you'll probably be disappointed. Almost without exception it will take many years for the savings on fuel to make up for the price premium that is typical of electrics and hybrids.

  Q: Since I retired I went from driving 30,000 miles a year to fewer than 5,000. I have a 2007 Buick Lucerne: change oil every 5,000 miles—or once a year. Most driving is local, but I try to go at least 25 to 30 miles one day in the week. What can you suggest to protect the car? 

—L.J. Carber, Mt. Laurel, N.J.

 A: It is true that regular exercise tends to help cars last longer. Your annual mileage and the weekly frequency with which you drive are enough to keep the mechanical systems in good shape. In addition to regular oil changes you should also think about draining and refilling the cooling system, and perhaps using a trickle charger on the battery to keep it at full capacity in case the car sits for a few weeks without use.

—Email mecar@wsj.com 