Mexico—its failures, its fate, its future—is really the central figure in Carlos Fuentes's novel "Destiny and Desire." In the course of telling his story, Mr. Fuentes offers fitful meditations on the abuse of power and the art of manipulating people, in particular the more than 300 million inhabitants of his home country. They are the victims, he implies, of a governing class that "cannot provide work, food, or schooling to half the population," that does not know, in the words of one disaffiliated character, "how to build highways, dams, schools, housing, hospitals, to preserve forests, enrich fields, construct factories."

This broad theme is played out in the contest between two giant, egotistical Mexican power brokers whose shadows are cast across the pages of "Destiny and Desire," an ideas-novel with a surprisingly compelling tale to tell. Both men are ruthless manipulators—the communications magnate Max Monroy, a probable stand-in for the real-life billionaire Carlos Slim; and the country's weak but cunning president, Valentin Pedro Carrera, a probable composite of any number of feckless Mexican leaders.

By Carlos Fuentes  Random House, 415 pages, $27 

Below stairs, so to speak, is a parallel contest—in fact, the novel's dominant rivalry—between the ambitious young assistants of each powerful man: Jericó, who becomes underchief to Carrera; and Josué, who rises to become a kind of majordomo to the titan Monroy. Growing up together—school friends, dreamers, debaters—Jericó and Josué are "brothers not in blood but intelligence." They are explicitly compared, early on, to Castor and Pollux, the loving twins from Greek mythology. By novel's end they more closely resemble Cain and Abel.

When we meet the two friends they are tyros—they read Spinoza, study Bergson (in prep school!), write about Machiavelli and actually find meaning in Justin Timberlake. Jericó, the more feverish of the pair, is also the wiser and tougher man, an anticlerical intellectual whose conversation is filled with philosophical word games. At first he dominates the kinder, gentler Josué (the novel's narrator). Eventually the two find themselves at loggerheads, especially when the novel's plot moves toward a coup aimed at Carrera. At certain moments the dialogue in "Destiny and Desire" seems like a milder version of the revolutionary, rage-for-change quarreling among the high-minded Russian students in Dostoevsky's "The Possessed."

Like the debates of his young protagonists, Mr. Fuentes's novel is allusive, intellectually serious and inclined to wander in all sorts of directions. At various points we get lavish set-pieces discussing everything from the Pelagian heresy and the history of Mexico City to Errol Flynn's looks. A cast of secondary characters make their entrances and exits: an oddball aviator, an intransigent prisoner, a casuistical priest. Mr. Fuentes seems hell-bent on plumbing the depths of the whole Spanish-American consciousness, compelling us to consider—often within a satirical or ironical frame—all the inequities, paradoxes and tensions that vex Mexico, not least its relations with the gringos up north.

We see, for instance, the harsh Maria Egipciaca, Josué's former nanny, constantly praising the Caucasian race, the "whiteys." She fondly wishes that North Americans had taken over the entire Mexican territory "once and for all." President Carrera is less keen on Mexico's northern neighbors. "Just look at the Gringos!," he says. "Look at what prosperity has done for them! They work constantly, eat badly. . . . They don't have vacations, they don't have social welfare, they retire at fifty and die beside a lawnmower."

Not that Carrera himself carries much moral authority. Stained by corruption and chronically indifferent to the poverty of his people, he proclaims by way of excuse: "I don't want Mexicans to be rich. I want them to be happy." And so he treats the citizenry to bread and circuses. The titan Monroy is more concerned with generating wealth—he wants to interconnect all Mexicans by way of his hand-held devices—but he is not stainless either. He seems at times nearly feral and is compared at one point to a serpent that "coils around himself" in a "self- sufficient circle." An aggressive capitalist, apparently, is no answer to Mexico's woes.

It should be said that "Desire and Destiny," for all its appealing richness of theme and character, can be annoyingly difficult to take in. The narrative is often rather cubist, with chrono logical dislocations, portentous symbols, biblical allusions and strangely slotted if brilliant asides. There are even fantastical, magic-realist touches—most notably a talking severed head that acts as an oracle or chorus. A certain coherence is lost in the collision of literary effects. (I sometimes wonder whether we have Faulkner to blame for the aimlessness of the modern novel.)

Mr. Fuentes himself seems aware of the problem and feels compelled, at the novel's end, to rely on delayed revelation to tie up the loose threads of his story. In a kind of 18th-century "wrapping up," he tries to sort out parentage questions and other matters, though not always convincingly.

Mr. Fuentes has a first-rate, encyc lo pedic mind, and ultimately the value of "Destiny and Desire" may rest on the author's own rumination and insight, however variously conveyed in the novel itself. "In Mexico, in all of Latin America, we mistake rhetoric for reality," Josué observes. "Progress, democracy, justice. It's enough for us to say them to believe they're true. That's why we go from failure to failure." Mr. Fuentes is brave enough to look at his country through disinterested eyes—pondering its pain and possibilities—and in doing so has given us a book with a power all its own.

—Mr. Theroux, a novelist, lives in West Barnstable, Mass.