"Bad Thoughts #1" is an 8-foot-tall group of red photographs created by British duo Gilbert & George in 1975. Christie's put the work up for sale Wednesday hoping its title wouldn't influence the mindset of collectors in town for this week's series of contemporary-art auctions. 

Not to worry: Christie's sold the work for $1.5 million in a lively $301.6 million sale that may go some way toward soothing the market's jitters following Sotheby's patchy $128.1 million sale the night before. Christie's total also surpassed its own presale estimate of $214 million to $299 million.

The mood in the auction house's Rockefeller Center salesroom was tentative at the start, but the bidding perked up within minutes and remained relatively deep for much of the sale's two-hour stretch. The global turnout included Laurence Graff, a London jeweler, and Maria Bell, a trustee for the Los Angeles Museum of Contemporary Art. 

Yet it was Pop icon Andy Warhol who garnered most of the attention on Wednesday—the artist had eight pieces in the sale and they all sold. Christie's got $38.4 million for a series of four blue self-portraits the artist created around 1963-64 after he stepped into a photo booth. The resulting group, "Self-Portrait," reveals the young artist at his jaunty best, posing in black sunglasses and a trench coat. 

The work was priced to sell for up to $30 million, but a dogfight ensued between art adviser Philippe Segalot and a European telephone bidder, and the room chuckled as the pair ratcheted their bids in $100,000 increments for over 10 minutes. When the telephone bidder ultimately won it, the room applauded.

Christie's also got $27.5 million for Warhol's last "Self-Portrait" from 1986, better known as a "fright wig" work because the artist stares out hauntingly from beneath his signature spiky hairpiece. The red silkscreen's sellers, San Francisco collectors Norman and Norah Stone, expected the work to sell for at least $30 million. The buyer was Warhol dealer Jose Mugrabi. A similar self-portrait comprising a single image from this photo-booth series in red sold for $6.8 million, just over its $6 million low estimate.

This sale also tested the markets for several artists whose prices soared before the recession, including Francis Bacon. Christie's got $25.2 million for his 1974 "Three Studies for Self-Portrait," hitting its $25 million estimate with Christie's fees included. It also sold Bacon's blue "Untitled (Crouching Nude on Rail)" from 1952 for $9.6 million.

Mark Rothko, another pre-recession favorite, also fared well. "Untitled No. 17," a newly rediscovered abstract by the artist painted in cheery colors of pink and red, was priced to sell for $18 million but ultimately sold for $33.6 million to an unknown young man with a goatee sitting in the second row.

Not everyone is bouncing back so quickly, though. Five years ago, Richard Prince's painted car hood, "Pro Street," fetched $744,000 at auction. The seller put it up for auction again at Christie's and priced it at $600,000 to $800,000, but he didn't break even: The winner bidder got it for $722,500. 

Alexander Calder's "Aspen" performed better, selling for $2.8 million—more than quadrupling the $651,500 it auctioned for in 1997.

Several other artists' price records were also broken. Cy Twombly's 1967 chalky blackboard abstract sold for a record $15.2 million, and Richard Diebenkorn's abstract from 1980, "Ocean Park #121," sold for a record $7.6 million. It was priced to sell for at least $7 million.

Christie's largest piece in the sale proved a minor disappointment, though: Urs Fischer's "Untitled (Lamp/Bear)," a 20-ton sculpture of a yellow Teddy bear crouched under a black desk lamp, was initially priced by the auction house to sell for around $10 million. But when the sale actually began, auctioneer Christopher Burge started the bidding around $2.8 million. The winning telephone bidder got it for $6.8 million. But in the topsy-turvy world of contemporary art, that "Bear" still represents a record for the sculptor, whose work first crossed the $1 million mark at auction last fall.

Overall, 62 of the sale's 65 works found buyers, helping Christie's achieve 95% of the sale's total potential value. Phillips de Pury wraps up the two-week round of spring auctions with its Thursday sale of new art.

 Write to  Kelly Crow at kelly.crow@wsj.com 