KARLSRUHE, Germany—The Kosovo native suspected of murdering two American soldiers at Frankfurt airport was specifically targeting U.S. military personnel heading to Afghanistan, German prosecutors said. 

The suspect, 21-year-old Arid Uka, has confessed to the murders, prosecutors told reporters during a briefing here, where they described how Mr. Uka struck up a conversation Wednesday with U.S. airmen before opening fire on them. He was arrested shortly afterward. 

Mr. Uka told police he was inspired to kill the U.S. airmen after seeing an online video the day before showing American soldiers raiding an Afghan home and raping a girl, prosecutor Rainer Griesbaum said. The authorities can't find any evidence of this video, he added.

Mr. Uka held the U.S. airmen responsible for the U.S. war in Afghanistan, according Mr. Griesbaum. "He was trying to stop them," the prosecutor said.

Mr. Uka had been in contact with Islamic radicals in Germany on Facebook and other social networking sites, but authorities believe he acted alone and isn't part of any known terror organizations.

Authorities said Friday that Mr. Uka hadn't come to their notice before the shooting. Prosecutors cited Germany's privacy laws, which set a high bar for authorities seeking to monitor or gather information on potentially threatening individuals, as one reason he hadn't drawn attention.

Mr. Uka came to the Frankfurt airport armed with a Belgian-made Fabrique National 9mm pistol and two knives, Mr. Griesbaum said. He approached a group of 15 airmen who were dressed in civilian clothes and boarding a bus on their way to Ramstein Air Base in southern Germany. The servicemen belonged to an Air Force Security Forces team, a type of military police.

Mr. Uka asked for a cigarette from one of the airmen in order to strike up a conversation, Mr. Griesbaum said. After the 25-year-old airman confirmed that the soldiers' final destination was Afghanistan, Mr. Uka followed him as he boarded the bus, shooting him in the back of the head and killing him instantly, the prosecutor said. 

He said Mr. Uka then climbed onto the bus, shouting "Allahu akbar," Arabic for "God is great," and then allegedly shot the 21-year-old bus driver in the head, killing him. Mr. Uka is also accused of shooting two other soldiers, one in the head, wounding them both seriously. 

He then allegedly held his gun to a fifth airman's head. The gun jammed with six bullets left, and Mr. Uka ran off the bus and into the terminal, according to Mr. Griesbaum. The fifth airman chased Mr. Uka and, along with two German policemen, helped to apprehend and disarm him, the prosecutor said.

The U.S. Air Force identified the dead airmen Friday as Nicholas J. Alden, 25, of Williamston, S.C., and Zachary R. Cuddeback, 21, of Stanardsville, Va. Mr. Alden was stationed at RAF Lakenheath in the United Kingdom, and Mr. Cuddeback was stationed at Ramstein.

Mr. Uka told authorities he bought the weapon about six months ago "without a clear purpose" and hadn't fired it before Wednesday, according to a German investigator.

Mr. Uka, who was born in Kosovo and raised in Germany, didn't have any in-person contact with radical Islamists here or abroad, as far as prosecutors can tell. Mr. Uka recently began a temporary job sorting letters at the Frankfurt airport operation of Germany's postal service. 

Described by authorities and others as shy and quiet, Mr. Uka didn't have very many friends and only recently demonstrated radical tendencies. On his Facebook profile, which was taken down Thursday, Mr. Uka made plain his Islamist political leanings and approval of jihad and his love of first-person shooter computer games such as "Call of Duty: Black Ops."

 Write to  Laura Stevens at laura.stevens@wsj.com 