If 'The Princess, the King and the Anarchist" were the fairy tale its title implies, it would end with a royal wedding and a dastardly traitor in chains. Instead, we start with a blood-spattering bomb and end with a shocking act of revenge. Swiss novelist Robert Pagani has taken a little-remembered snippet of history—the attempted assassination of Spain's King Alfonso XIII and his new bride in Madrid in 1906—and woven it into a playful meditation on individual obsession. His novella opens in medias res, with the explosion, and then fills in the surrounding events, seeing the wedding day through to an unlikely conclusion. 

Rotating among the perspectives of the three titular characters, Mr. Pagani's novella—translated from the French by Helen Marx—follows them as they grapple with their own private anxieties on the royal couple's wedding night. King Alfonso, eager at the promise of consummating his marriage, is trying to keep himself from visible arousal; the anarchist Fernando broods on the details of his plot against the crown; and Princess María Eugenia, anxious about the unknowns of the marriage bed, is more immediately concerned with finding a bathroom.

By Robert Pagani  Helen Marx Books, 92 pages, $14.95 

María Eugenia is at once the most compelling and the most artificial of the three. She comes from proper, upright England—she is one of Queen Victoria's many grandchildren—where she is Mary, not María, and where her only encounters with sex involve the barnyard: "At Balmoral, she had seen a boar coupling with a sow. It was easier for animals." This is as much as María knows. A princess in her own right, she has been brought up to maintain the appearance of worldliness, but her new husband, with his catalog of erotic conquests, puts her to shame. The sexual anticipation that pervades the novella at times makes it read like Ian McEwan's "On Chesil Beach," only with royals instead of Middle Englanders. 

Still, Mr. Pagani's interests aren't all so intimate. Throughout the spectacle of the royal wedding procession, he leaves indications of an institution in decline, his subtly ironic register hinting that royal power is more symbolic than actual. When Fernando finally succeeds in launching his bomb, which kills an untold number of bystanders but misses the king and his bride, Mr. Pagani gives a brief augury of María's future: "Those cries—dead! dead!"—will re-echo in her head from year to year, beyond the fracas of a great war, and then another great war, and many lesser but still terrible wars between those two, before and after, and during the course of a long life." Compared with the tragic century we know will follow, the anarchist's violence seems quaintly archaic. 

— Amelia Atlas 