Ceglie Messapica's whitewashed streets contort around each other with geometric fury, a reflection in stone of the centuries-old olive trees whose sun-stunted trunks and twisted branches dominate the surrounding Valle d'Itria. 

When wandering through the town's streets on the hunt for one of its enticing restaurants—Cibus, with its jug-shaped caciocavallo cheese hanging from rafters, or Vicolo della Felicità, with its joyous impromptu pizzica dance sessions—getting lost is practically a prerequisite. 

A brief car ride to the edge of town, though, brings you to Ceglie's most highly regarded restaurant. On a plot of land studded with vines and gardens sits Al Fornello da Ricci (Contrada Montevicoli; 39-0831-377-104; www.ricciristor.com), a family restaurant whose blend of local culinary tradition and technical innovation is credited with putting the city's cooking on the map, both within Puglia and Italy. "My father was somewhat the precursor of Ceglie's cuisine," says current co-owner and chef Antonella Ricci. "He was very forward-thinking." 

In Italy, you can find heaven on a plate in any town from the head to the heel, but it can be hard work. The geography of the Italian table is complex and full of subtle variations that make it hard to pinpoint the exact lineage of a dish and the history behind it—and ordering the right meal in the wrong town or at the wrong time can make for an unrewarding experience.

Now is a good time to take a trip through one of Italy's richest culinary breadbaskets—the south—on a journey to the roots of some of the country's most robust regional traditions. The recent addition of the Mediterranean diet to Unesco's World Heritage list provides the backdrop to explore the south, where the ingredients of that diet were first cataloged by American scientist Ancel Keys, who began his research there in the late 1950s. The resurgence of interest in the area's cuisine has bolstered the work of chefs and small-scale agricultural producers. 

By picking a few regions, moving slowly and looking well outside the tourism-driven centers, you will find your way to hidden gems that unlock the secrets of local dishes. 

My road to Ceglie started in Rome, at Agustarello (Via Giovanni Branca 100; 39-06-574-65-85), an unassuming space with a pervasive scent of roasting peppers in the middle of the Testaccio neighborhood. "A place for many," reads the menu, "but not for all." Serving Roman specialties since 1957, the restaurant comes highly recommended by local experts, but the catchphrase on the menu serves as warning to anyone with the nerve to try Testaccino cuisine. Nerve salad, in fact, is on the menu. So is cow tail alla cacciatora, as well as appetizers, including pecorino cheese with peppered bruschetta, that refer to the city's traditions and change according to the season.

Rome is the link between Italy's center and the south. The traditions that influence the dishes you can buy in Roman restaurants illustrate the capital's historical ties: the pork-working tradition known as Norcineria, imported by Umbrian butchers; or the famous spaghetti all'Amatriciana, derived from a town in the Rieti province. "One of the main axes of Roman cuisine is the cooking of offals," says journalist Andrea Pipino, a native Roman who for a time managed a cooking section for the newsweekly Internazionale, where he works. "The Quinto Quarto [or fifth-fourth cuisine, a humorous reference to the different cuts of an animal] were the interiors of the animal. They were given to the employees of the slaughterhouse," which was built in the late 19th century in Testaccio, Mr. Pipino explains. The neighborhood today is still the center of Quinto Quarto. A walk through the local market—which will soon be replaced by a larger, more modern complex next to the old slaughterhouse— puts you in direct contact with vendors whose family stalls have been selling the prime ingredients for generations.

"It's always been the interiors of the cow, plus the head and the tail," Delia Finanzieri, who along with her husband is the third generation to run their family stand in Testaccio, says before explaining how to make tail alla cacciatora, a traditional dish that pops up in osterie throughout the city: "You roast it with onion and oil, salt, a drop of wine. Then tomato sauce and celery. A good amount of celery," she says. 

Farther afoot in the Pigneto neighborhood, Betto e Mary (Via dei Savorgnan 99; 39-06-4542-17-80) is a "can't miss" stop. According to legend, poet and playwright Pier Paolo Pasolini (1922-75) patronized the restaurant when he lived in the city. Here, Quinto Quarto cuisine meets other local traditions such as fried artichokes, alla Giudea, a staple of Roman Jewish cuisine.

For a taste of the future, take a 10-minute walk from the Lepanto metro stop to Settembrini (Via Luigi Settembrini 27; 39-06-323-26-17; ristorantesettembrini.it), where chef Luigi Nastri is plugging Roman cuisine into a broader Mediterranean context—for instance, a play on the cacio e pepe (cheese and pepper) tradition that resulted in a dish of mussels served with a celeriac grown in the surrounding region and a sauce that combines seven kinds of pepper. Settembrini's warm, wooden interior matches the passionate verve of its chef, and of wine-cellar chief Luca Boccoli, who spends most of his time in vineyards across Italy and France seeking out vintages that reflect Old World craftsmanship. Stagionalita, says Mr. Nastri, is a respect for ingredients' relationship with the seasons and the cycles of nature. That is both the lost and fundamental art of Italian cuisine and a dynamic that Mr. Nastri believes restaurants like his can restore to the new generation, with an eye on perennial Mediterranean traditions. "Even fish has its season," he says. "We get our fish from a guy who has a shop and buys it every morning fresh at auction. So I never know from one day to the next which fish will be on the menu."

His passion and creativity are mirrored in Marianna Vitale, who describes her restaurant Sud (Via SS Pietro e Paolo 8; 39-081-020-27-08; www.sudristorante.it) in Quarto, just outside Naples, with poetic verse. "Sud represents a form of positive resistance, deriving from the conviction of belonging to a magical territory that can't be bargained away." Like her counterpart in Rome, Ms. Vitale has staked out relationships with local producers, who she defines as "friends who join our project with great rigor," as she seeks to reinterpret the produce of the Campania region—buffalo mozzarella, seafood, a wide variety of vegetables—from recipes based on childhood memory. "Campania's is a conceptually simple cuisine with a strong gastronomic history," she says.

The history of Naples' cuisine rides on two rails, explains Luciano Pignataro, a blogger and newspaper reporter whose writings on Campania's food and wine scene have earned accolades around the globe. "Neapolitans were called mangafoglie, leaf-eaters," he says. "They made virtue out of necessity, and the traditional peasant cuisine was almost vegetarian." The other rail ran from the 18th-and 19th-century courts of the Italian Bourbons. Heavily influenced by their French counterparts, the legacy of the court can be seen beyond the pastries and pizza (the pizza cook during this time went from being the humblest of all professions to the standard bearer of Naples' gastronomy), in the service ethic that permeates the local food sector. Throughout the city—from the bustling alleys of the Spanish quarter to the baroque avenues of the upscale Chiaia neighborhood—baristas in waistcoats and dress pants carry coffee and sfogliatelle on covered trays to offices and homes.

Follow one back to Moccia (Via San Pasquale a Chiaia 21-22; 39-081-41-13-48) for a rum-soaked baba, the pièce de résistance of Naples' pastry tradition. Then head uptown to the historic Pignasecca Market, a warren of fish stands, cheese vendors and vegetable hawkers that provide the ingredients for local restaurants, such as the nearby La Vecchia Cantina (Via S. Nicola alla Carità 13-14; 39-081-552-02-26), which for two years has been run by Patrizia Morra and Mimmo Iuliucci. Essential Neapolitan pasta dishes such as Genovese meet cantina specialties like spaghetti Miseria e Nobiltà, a dish that exalts the quality of papaccelle, a local pepper variant prepared sott'olio (pickled in oil), and derives its name from an old Italian movie starring the legendary comic actor Totò. "Certain first courses are served on established days according to tradition," Mr. Iuliucci says. "In Naples, Thursday you eat ragu, Wednesday you eat Genovese, Monday you eat beans. Today is Friday, so we're serving chickpeas."

My road from Rome ended in Puglia, a peninsula of abundant seas and land cultivated with cherries, vines, vegetable farms and the centuries-old olive trees that serve as a synecdoche for the region's culinary identity. Italy's southeastern-most region is a Johnny-come-lately on the tourism circuit and much of its newfound draw has revolved around hyperlocal agricultural and culinary realities. "It's no coincidence that the Mediterranean diet, and its proposition as intangible heritage, took off exactly from Puglia," says Angelo Iaia, Puglia representative of Slow Food. "The pastures of Valle d'Itria lend themselves to the production of outstanding meats and cheeses, while Salento presents a different culture that revolves around vegetables, wine and olives."

The different culinary cultures are intersecting and evolving thanks to the tourism boom and technology, but in this region, direct contact with materie prime—the fresh ingredients of soil and sea—is always close at hand. On the Adriatic coast, especially around Bari, the local diet is still fished out of the sea. A dazzling variety of mollusks are among the shellfish served—often raw—at eateries including Il Grottone (Via Grottone; 39-08-0424-89-38) in Polignano a Mare, where, when the weather is right, the staff supplement the menu with their own fresh catches, reeled in from a fishing pole on a platform over the rocks.

Moving southwestto Salento, you find yourself in wine country. Recent technological advances have put producers in the position to refine the sun-scorched flavors of Primitivo and Negroamaro vintages. Until recently, the wines, produced in situations of extreme heat, were limited to "extremely rustic" results, says Gianni Cantele, owner of Cantele winery. "The introduction of cold stabilization technology...has allowed the use of the same grape to move from the production of rustic wines that were almost looked down upon in certain situations to wines that can stand alone." This meeting between new technologies and craftsmanship is a common theme among the region's culinary traditions. In the Valle d'Itria, Il Frantolio's organic oil-production line mixes an Old World stone olive grinder with cutting-edge production that allows owner Pietro D'Amico's staff to carefully control every step of the process that results in oils like Lacrima, a blend of seven different olives culled from the wealth of Puglia's oldest culinary staple. The company sells the oil directly to customers who visit its sprawling masseria (S.S. 16 Km. 874, Ostuni-Brindisi; 39-08-3133-02-76; www.masseriailfrantoio.it), which doubles as a museum dedicated to the product.

Ms. Ricci's Al Fornello da Ricci restaurant on the edges of Ceglie, meanwhile, references the old fornello concept. Densely clustered in the nearby town of Cisternino, fornelli are the ovens used by butchers to slow-cook cuts of meat chosen by customers, to be eaten on the spot. "This is the right moment for Pugliese cuisine, which is a reflection of Mediterranean cooking as a whole," Mr. Ricci says. "We always start from the ingredients that are only available in this place. Then we move forward."