State and local governments, aiming to reduce their budget deficits, cut jobs at an accelerating pace in February.

Even as private employment climbed for the 12th consecutive month in February, states and localities shed a combined 30,000 jobs after cutting 8,000 positions a month earlier, the Labor Department said Friday. The trend is likely to continue as states and cities keep trimming services and payrolls to mend their budget shortfalls. 

"We won't expect the government cutbacks to reverse any time in the near future," said Guy LeBas, chief fixed income strategist at Janney Montgomery Scott. "It's going to be a slow leak of 20,000 to 30,000 jobs a month lasting at least until the end of 2011."

State tax revenue is rising but remains below pre-recession levels. States also are nearing the end of billions of dollars of federal stimulus funding that helped them plug budget holes in recent years. Their shortfalls could grow larger as the federal government works to tame its own massive budget deficit by taking aim at nonsecurity discretionary spending, about a third of which flows to state and local governments. Groups of state and city officials say they most likely won't be able to fill the holes from waning federal funding.

"I can't even remotely fill in the gaps of the federal cuts because I'm struggling to keep my own investment in education and safety-net [programs]," Washington Gov. Christine Gregoire, a Democrat, said in an interview last week. 

Some groups say that state and local officials have known for a while this was coming. 

"Job losses are not an easy thing to contemplate," said Pete Sepp, spokesman for the National Taxpayers Union, a nonprofit organization that advocates for lower taxes and smaller government. But "state and local government leaders knew two years ago when the stimulus passed that the money would not keep flowing forever," he said.

States reduced payrolls by 12,000 last month and local governments shed 18,000 workers. Federal employment remainedwas steady in February. States have cut 82,000 jobs since their payrolls peaked in August 2008. Localities have eliminated 377,000 jobs since their high point in September 2008. Federal government employment has fluctuated in recent years but has risen by 99,000 workers since the recession began in December 2007.

 Write to  Sara Murray at sara.murray@wsj.com 