LISBON—In re-electing Aníbal Cavaco Silva as president, Portuguese voters left the nation's reins in the hands of an economics scholar who has pledged to use his second five-year term to help steer his country out of sovereign debt crisis.

Although Portugal's constitution gives Mr. Silva few executive powers, the 71-year-old center-right Social Democrat has vowed to preserve unity and stability at a time when the country is increasingly divided on how to reduce its budget deficit and avoid an international bailout.

Mr. Silva, 71 years old, was born in Boliqueime, in Portugal's sun-kissed southern region of Algarve. He showed an interest in finance and economics from an early age and earned a doctorate in economics from York University in the U.K.

He served as a military officer for three years in Mozambique, a Portuguese colony at that time, and then returned to Europe to complete his studies, teach and work at the Bank of Portugal.

Mr. Silva became active in politics only after the Carnation Revolution of 1974, a bloodless military coup that toppled the 42-year dictatorship of António de Oliveira Salazar and ushered in a new era of democracy.

Mr. Silva served as Portugal's finance minister at the beginning of the 1980s and was president of the National Advisory Plan from 1981 to 1984. He assumed the leadership of the Social Democrat Party in 1985 and in the same year became prime minister, serving two consecutive terms until 1995.

As prime minister, he presided over the county's first years as a member of the European Union and gained popularity for guiding Portugal through a period of strong, uninterrupted growth.

In 1995, however, his government lost popularity due to an economic crisis and internal politics. He decided not to run for another term as prime minister, instead seeking the presidential office in 1996, a race he lost by a narrow margin.

Mr. Silva returned to teaching and became a well-respected economist, writing nearly a dozen books ranging from topics such as the public debt to political budgets, the euro and economic stabilization.

He returned to politics in 2006 with a successful campaign for president of Portugal. The role of president is largely ceremonial, as the state's executive powers lie with the prime minister. But as head of state, the president plays a key role in mediating, striving for unity between the country's fractious party system. The president also has the power to dissolve parliament if the government is rendered ineffective.

 Write to  Alex MacDonald at alex.macdonald@dowjones.com 