SYDNEY—Australia's central bank Friday signaled its intent to raise interest rates in coming months to confront rising inflation, despite softness in parts of the economy harmed by a high Australian dollar.

In a quarterly monetary-policy statement, the central bank announced higher forecasts for inflation, predicting core inflation will rise this year to the top of its target band of 2% to 3% and remain there before finally busting higher at the end of 2013. Economic growth is expected to run well above historic averages for most of the forecast period, hitting 4.25% in mid-2012.

The trajectory implies an intense level of discomfort at the Reserve Bank of Australia about price risks as the economy heads toward full employment, wages rise and a mining-investment boom engulfs the country.

"Further tightening of monetary policy is likely to be required at some point for inflation to remain consistent with the 2%-3% medium-term target," the RBA said in its quarterly outlook.

The Australian dollar rose on the back of the report, defying news overnight of hefty falls in commodity prices. It was recently trading at US$1.0695.

Government bonds were hammered. The price of June three-year bonds collapsed while the overnight interest-rate-swaps market moved to price in a 35% to 40% chance of a rate increase in June and an 80% chance in August. An increase is fully priced in around October.

The inflation warning sets the scene for the government's 2011-12 budget, to be released Tuesday; Treasurer Wayne Swan is under acute pressure to deliver a responsible budget that takes pressure off interest rates. He told reporters fiscal settings are already contractionary, with the government aiming for a budget surplus by 2012-13.

"So we are playing our role in making sure that we don't add to the pressures of the mining boom and the investment that we are seeing across the community," he said in Canberra.

The official inflation data last week stunned policymakers, both for the size of the surge and its breadth. Prices in the first quarter were up 3.3% from a year earlier.

In February, RBA Governor Glenn Stevens said confidently the central bank was "ahead of the game" with the cash-rate target at 4.75%. But confidence has been replaced by urgency; economists say interest rates could be raised as early as next month.

A June rate increase may be difficult to justify, given that the economy is widely thought to have contracted in the first quarter. First-quarter economic growth data is due June 1 and the next policy meeting is scheduled for June 7. Floods in Queensland in January knocked out coal production from the resource-rich state and severely disrupted commerce as a deluge rushed from rural areas into Brisbane itself. The high Australian dollar, which earlier this week topped a fresh 29-year high above US$1.1000, is eroding export competitiveness and hammering tourism, education services and manufacturing.

"While these factors may still get in the way of a June move, it's still appropriate to believe the June meeting is live," said Gavin Stacey, strategist at Barclays Capital. The mining boom is delivering a massive income shock to the economy.

Fueled by China's stellar growth, Australian mining and energy companies are moving at full throttle. While commodity cycles often prove capricious, many policy makers believe the current upswing could well span decades, not just years.

Economist and chief executive of property group Rismark, Chris Joye, said the RBA could raise interest rates three times in 2011 to try to stay ahead of inflation.

"If unemployment holds steady at 4.9% and wages growth remains healthy, the RBA is a very high probability to hike in June," he said. "The RBA knows it cannot rely on politicians or the currency to do its work for it."

With the RBA having tightened monetary policy seven times since late 2009, Australian property prices have been flat to weaker across different regions in the past year. A further increase will put more pressure on the sector, stretching affordability for first-time home buyers.

Adam Carr, senior economist at ICAP, said the RBA's language points to an interest-rate increase in June, adding it matches remarks made ahead of the most-recent increase last November 2010.

"I say 'possible' because, again, it's not a commitment to hike in June, but it can't be coincidence that the last time they used this phrase, they hiked the following month," he said.

—Geoffrey Rogow and Enda Curran in Sydney and Ray Brindal in Canberra contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Enda Curran at enda.curran@dowjones.com 