President Obama's plan to force federal contractors to disclose political contributions was dealt a surprise blow yesterday when Steny Hoyer, the second-ranking Democrat in the U.S. House, said that he opposed the idea.

"I am not in agreement with the administration on that issue," Mr. Hoyer told reporters. "It's not a requirement now. I don't think it ought to be a requirement."

The debate is over Mr. Obama's decision to draft an executive order that would require companies applying for federal contracts to disclose contributions to independent political groups, as well as the donations of their executives and subsidiaries to political parties and independent organizations. Congress considered such changes last year but failed to pass them. That prompted liberal groups to urge the White House to act unilaterally through an executive order that bypassed Congress.

But the proposed executive order is giving many Democrats heartburn. "The issue of contracting ought to be on the merits of the contractor's application and bid and capabilities," Mr. Hoyer said at his weekly press briefing. "There are some serious questions as to what implications there are if somehow we consider political contributions in the context of awarding contracts."

Chairman Darrell Issa of the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee has scheduled a hearing for tomorrow to take testimony on whether the new order would curb free speech and harm small businesses. But don't expect the administration to show up.

The director of the White House Office of Management and Budget, Jacob Lew, has said he won't accept Mr. Issa's invitation to appear because the draft order "is still moving through the standard review and feedback process." It sounds as if the Obama White House isn't ready to defend the order in public. Perhaps Mr. Hoyer's surprise opposition will prompt them to reconsider their hasty end-run around the legislative branch.

To read more stories like this one, please subscribe to Political Diary.