WASHINGTON—The U.S. economy looks to be in better shape, but a full recovery will only be achieved once small firms begin to prosper, Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke said Thursday. 

Mr. Bernanke said the economy should expand at a healthy pace of between 3% and 4% this year, but that still won't be enough to cut a high unemployment rate. The program, announced last week, is intended to encourage banks to lend again by having the government take equity stakes in the institutions so they can rebuild their capital levels.

Speaking on a panel with politicians and business leaders, Mr. Bernanke urged banks to strike the right balance in making sure bad loans are no longer made, while getting the financing to those companies that deserve it. 

"We do want businesses that are viable and have good business plans and lots of experience backing them up to get loans," Mr. Bernanke told a small-business forum. 

The U.S. credit crunch that resulted from the worst financial crisis since the 1929 Wall Street Crash is easing, but it's far from over. Banks started to loosen some lending standards in mid-2010, a year after the recession ended, but loans remain hard to get by historical standards. That's particularly damaging to small firms, which rely on bank credit for a lot of their funding. 

Mr. Bernanke said that 2011 will be "a better year for small-business lending" and noted that "things have stopped getting worse and are getting a little better." 

Over the past year, the Fed's been urging banks to lend to creditworthy small firms. The central bank has been participating and hosting several roundtable discussions to gather information that could help address the specific needs of various types of small businesses. 

While many big companies have bounced back, showing strong profits, small companies remain the weak spot in the recovery. Small firms account for about half of the private-sector economy. 

The Fed's most recent moves to boost the economy by buying bonds tend to benefit big companies more than small ones. Through its planned purchase of $600 billion in government bonds, the Fed aims to keep long-term rates low, a move that benefits mainly large companies that can borrow by issuing bonds at low rates. The Fed's so-called QE2 also helps by stimulating exports via a lower dollar, but small companies account for less than one-third of U.S. exports. 

 Write to  Luca Di Leo at luca.dileo@dowjones.com 