MOUNTAIN VIEW—In Silicon Valley, sometimes even computer geeks want a little human contact. And one place they gather is Hacker Dojo in Mountain View, which fashions itself as a shared office space crossed with a modern version of the famed 1970s Homebrew Computer Club, an incubator for early personal-computer companies including  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.94
%




 

For $100 a month, Hacker Dojo members get 24-hour access to work in its building, a fast wireless Internet connection and the right to participate in sessions ranging from advanced data mining to old-fashioned lock picking. The center has a Friday happy hour, too.

Hacker Dojo differs from most other co-working spaces in the region because it emphasizes community over just renting a desk. "The Dojo provides the Bay Area technical community with infrastructure. Our infrastructure happens to be both physical and social in nature," said David Weekly, one of the organization's founding directors.

"We are a place you can go on a 24-hour programming binge fueled by Red Bull, and you won't feel like a freak. But you have to bring your own Red Bull," said the 32-year-old Mr. Weekly, who is also the founder of collaboration-software company PBworks.

After opening in the summer of 2009 with about 25 members, the Dojo expanded quickly and now has more than 230. The group has expanded its industrial park location into a second work space next door, and now is looking for an additional property for expansion, said Mr. Weekly. 

The name dojo comes from the Japanese term for a gathering place for martial-arts students. And hacker, despite its association with criminal activity, also suggests an expert who pushes the envelope of what's possible, said Mr. Weekly.

Hacker Dojo is registered with the state as a nonprofit, and has received some corporate funding from  Google Inc., Microsoft Corp.
MSFT


0.37
%




 and others, though the majority of funding comes from members.. It doesn't fund projects itself, but a number of start-ups have sprouted roots there, including Kiputers, which makes a computer operating system for kids.

Jay Liew, a 29-year-old software engineer, moved from San Diego to Mountain View in December, partly because he thought Hacker Dojo would be a good place to work on his start-up.

"People might think it is weird," he said, but "it boils down to the chemistry of the people. It is filled with hard-core techies—it's like a playground heaven for me."

Mr. Liew said he totes a backpack filled with his laptop, books and snacks to the center seven days a week, and usually stays there until the wee hours of the morning working on his start-up, an online marketplace for computer-repair experts. "The only time I am at home is when I sleep and eat," he said.

 Write to  Geoffrey A. Fowler at geoffrey.fowler@wsj.com 