BERLIN—Japan's nuclear disaster threatens to upend Germany's long-term energy strategy, as policy makers consider phasing out nuclear energy faster than originally planned.

Following Chancellor Angela Merkel's decision this week to order the temporary shutdown of nearly half of the country's 17 reactors, German lawmakers have already suggested that several may never come back online and that others be phased out ahead of schedule. Such scenarios are already forcing German political and business leaders to consider how to make up the potential energy shortfall and the impact on Germany's energy prices.

German industry chieftains, while treading gingerly on the subject of nuclear safety, have warned that any abrupt change in the country's long-term atomic-energy policy would result in higher energy prices and threaten German competitiveness abroad. "Germany will still need to address how it secures a safe and affordable energy supply and, at the same time, reach its emissions targets," said Hans Heinrich Driftmann, head of Germany's Chambers of Industry and Commerce.

Ms. Merkel's three-month shutdown of reactors built before 1980 has already hit energy prices, with futures contracts for German electricity trading up 6% on the European Energy Exchange in Leipzig after the chancellor's announcement Tuesday afternoon.

Waning public support in Germany for nuclear power since the Japan disaster will make it difficult for Ms. Merkel to stick with plans to keep some reactors running into the 2030s as a "bridge technology" to a mid-century target for renewable power sources to provide 60% of the country's total electricity needs. A poll published Wednesday by Stern magazine showed that 52% of respondents wanted nuclear power phased out within five years.

The seven reactors shut this week were generating just 5% of Germany's electricity. An eighth reaction also ordered closed has been out of service for some time. The remaining plants have enough excess capacity to cover demand and keep overall nuclear power production at current levels, around 23% of the national total. At the same time, Germany's steady buildup of renewable power capacity—responsible for about 16% of national consumption—is likely to continue unimpeded by any shift in policy, the government said.

Abandoning nuclear power soon would oblige Europe's largest economy to draw more electricity from fossil fuels, endangering the government's ambitious self-imposed commitment to slash greenhouse-gas emissions to 80% below 1990 levels by 2050.

"The question is what other types of power station we build," said Claudia Kemfert, head of the energy department at the German Institute for Economic Research in Berlin. "The danger is that we will see a growing share from coal." 

Dropping nuclear power entirely could raise the share of German electricity generated by coal-fired plants to over 60% from 45% currently, Ms. Kemfert said. That would push up the price of emissions permits issued through the EU's carbon trading scheme, and in turn the price of electricity.

Germany's electricity prices, among the highest in Europe, have already more than doubled in the past decade, thanks in part to the country's aggressive subsidy push into renewable energies. That has made them a particularly sensitive topic for German business, whose domestic manufacturing and office sites make up some 50% of the country's electricity consumption and which had lobbied hard for the nuclear power extensions.  BASF AG
BASFY


-0.40
%




, which operates the world's largest chemical manufacturing site at its Ludwigshafen headquarters, alone accounts for more than 1% of Germany's total energy consumption.

"Of course, after the horrible events that have occurred in Japan, we can't to back to business as usual," said  Hans-Peter Keitel, president of Germany's influential BDI business lobby, in an interview published in Wednesday's Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung. Nevertheless, he added, "I hope that policy makers assess the facts with extreme responsibility instead of making rash and emotional decisions."

Another traditional alternative to nuclear power, natural gas, burns more cleanly than coal but has its own drawbacks. Some 45% of the natural gas Germany uses to generate electricity and heat homes comes from Russia, and price disputes between the national utility, Gazprom, and its customers in Eastern Europe have endangered that supply several times since 2005. 

But diversifying Germany's supply by buying cheaper gas from countries including Norway and the Netherlands is complicated because many German utilities have signed long-term contracts with Russia that lock them in to a price pegged to the price of oil, Ms. Kemfert said.

Turning away from nuclear power would hit utilities' profits and the federal budget, too. The agreement Ms. Merkel struck last fall for power companies to operate their reactors up to 14 years longer than planned would have brought them billions of euros in unexpected profits. And the government stood to take in more than half of that windfall through new levies and taxes.

The four utilities with German reactors— E.ON AG,  RWE AG
RWEOY


-0.59
%




,  Energie Baden-Wuerttemberg AG
EBK


1.25
%




 and Vattenfall Europe AG—agreed to pay a tax on new fuel rods worth €2.3 billion ($3.2 billion) annually through 2016, which the government earmarked for its budget consolidation efforts, and planned to contribute some €25 billion more to a new fund for renewable energy research. It isn't clear whether that fund will survive the current review.

 Write to  Patrick McGroarty at patrick.mcgroarty@dowjones.com, Vanessa Fuhrmans at vanessa.fuhrmans@wsj.com and Marcus Walker at marcus.walker@wsj.com 