The British military is no longer a "full-spectrum" force in the aftermath of aggressive budget cuts, and has at times been "stretched" by commitments to operations over Libya, the heads of the U.K.'s three armed services said on Wednesday. 

Asked by a Parliamentary defense committee whether the U.K. will remain a full-spectrum force—one capable of deploying all aspects of military power across the world—the chiefs of all three services, the British Army, Navy and Air Force, answered "no."

Their view contradicts that of many senior U.K. officials, such as Britain's ambassador to the U.S., who maintain that the U.K. has emerged from a recent strategy review and an ensuing round of spending cuts announced by Prime Minister David Cameron in October as a full-spectrum military power. 

Once the world's dominant armed force, the U.K.'s forces have shrunk in recent decades. This, coupled with the recent cuts, has left the U.S. worried about the future power of what it sees as its closest and most capable military ally.

Britain currently has around 10,000 personnel in Afghanistan and is helping a coalition defend civilians in Libya from attacks by the forces of Col. Moammar Gadhafi.

"There are times and there are phases on the operations were we have stretched the capabilities absolutely to the point where we find it very difficult to do anything else at that particular time," said Air Chief Marshal Sir Stephen Dalton, chief of the air staff. 

If operations in Libya continue over a longer period both the Air Force and Navy would feel overstretched, the chiefs said. Adm. Sir Mark Stanhope, the chief of naval staff, said operations can be sustained for six months, but he worries there would be a "significant challenge" after that in terms of rotating frigates out of operation. 

The Libyan operation began in March. 

The U.K. armed forces typically rotate equipment and personnel out of conflict zones every six months in order to rest the personnel and to service and repair equipment. 

Sir Mark also said he regretted the decision to retire Britain's two aircraft carriers and said it will be a "major challenge" to regenerate that capability when new carriers are brought into service in around ten years time, given the loss of relevant skills. 

The U.K. is currently the second-biggest contributor of operational aircraft to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's operations over Libya, after France. 

Current global operations also are putting army personnel under strain. "We are certainly putting our individuals and their relationships with their families under intense pressure," said Gen. Sir Peter Wall, head of the army. 

The Ministry of Defence didn't immediately provide comment. 

However, the three chiefs also said that as operations stand, the military is fulfilling its commitments and that the U.K. wants to remain a player in defense on the world stage. 