When  Leslie Richin launched a public-relations business after getting laid off in 2009, her first instinct was to invest in a company website. But hiring a professional to build one for her wasn't in the budget.

So Ms. Richin, 32 years old, set up free profiles on LinkedIn.com and Twitter.com. She created a free online business card using a service called DooID.com. And she launched a blog, spending roughly $50 on a decorative template, though she could've gotten a generic one for free.

"I wanted to establish myself in as many places as possible" online and without breaking the bank, says Ms. Richin, who runs her business from her home in New York and last year generated roughly $60,000 in revenue.

For most businesses today, having a presence on the Internet is the modern equivalent to being listed in the phone book, say experts. Consumers expect to be able to find and learn basic information about companies when they go online.

"When people get a referral to a business, what's the first thing they do? They go look for it online," says  Bruce Freeman, an adjunct professor of entrepreneurship at Seton Hall University's Stillman School of Business in South Orange, N.J. "You need to be online."

But if you're starting a business with limited funds, a flashy company website isn't a must. For little or no cost, you could put your fledgling enterprise on a third-party site such as a blog-hosting service, social-media outlet, business directory or marketplace.

Facebook is the online home of  Frank Bradley's bakery business, 3 Kids Bake House in  Jim Thorpe, Pa. Mr. Bradley, a baker for 30 years, turned to entrepreneurship in late 2010 after getting laid off from a sous-chef job at a private club.

He created a "fan page" for the business in January that features 40 photos of the cream puffs, whoopie pies, brownie tartlets and other made-from-scratch treats he sells.

If you're going to use Facebook or another social-media outlet to represent your business online, keep it professional. "Business contacts aren't going to want to know that you're watching American Idol," says  Megan Reichert-Kral, program manager for the venture accelerator at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor.

For little or no cost, you could put your start-up on a third-party site. Some options:

Consumers also can find 3 Kids Bake House at Manta.com, a directory of 65 million small businesses world-wide and networking site for entrepreneurs. Manta offers a basic company listing for free, which can include a brief description, logo, contact information and links to external sites such as social-media profiles or news coverage. It charges for special features, such as premium placement in its search results.

"I haven't had a website now for six months and the business is growing," says Mr. Bradley, who, despite not spending any money on advertising, expects to become profitable this summer.

  Laura Lundy's start-up, Slipped Stitch Studios, also lacks its own Internet domain, even though it's an e-commerce company. The two-year-old business sells knitting and crochet supplies through Etsy.com, an online marketplace for handmade and vintage goods with more than eight million members. Etsy charges vendors 20 cents to list an item for sale for four months, plus a 3.5% transaction fee on the final sale price.

Ms. Lundy, 29, started Slipped Stitch Studios from her Huntington Beach, Calif., home after being let go from an office-manager job at an accounting firm while on maternity leave. At first, Ms. Lundy says, she attempted to teach herself how to build a website. But the task proved too challenging and ate up time she says would've been better spent on marketing and building inventory. Then a friend introduced her to Etsy.

Today, Ms. Lundy's magnetic pattern holders, knitters' tote bags and other products are available on Etsy as well as 40 yarn shops in 17 states, plus Canada and the U.K. She says she developed relationships with one third of those retailers because of her business's exposure on Etsy. The rest Ms. Lundy formed by participating in craft shows and through referrals. She says her company posted $40,000 in revenue last year and is profitable.

"I plan on having a website as soon as I have the time and money to run one," says Ms. Lundy. "Until then, Etsy is the easiest and fastest way to keep my business growing."

Some entrepreneurs were able to afford a company website early on by hiring a friend or relative skilled in Web design. When  Corey Fleming launched Jersey City Screen Printing in 2009 after getting laid off from a graphic-design job, a friend agreed to create a website for him at a discount.

The site has just four pages with a plain white background that feature samples of the T-shirts and posters he sells, plus his contact information.

"It shows people I can do this type of printing or that I've worked with this type of client," says Mr. Fleming, whose business is now profitable.

—For more on starting a business, please visit wsj.com/smallbusiness. Email: sarah.needleman@wsj.com 