 Utrecht, Netherlands 

Getting inside the mind of an architect and understanding how pathbreaking buildings are made, and how drawings become three- dimensional artifacts, isn't easy. A major exhibition at the Centraal Museum here is making an exceptional effort to explore and expose the creative energy of the pioneering modern Dutch architect Gerrit Rietveld (1888-1964). But it is not just the show that justifies a special trip to Utrecht. In the town and close by are some of Rietveld's major buildings. It is a rare opportunity to experience the benefits of the scholarly research that lies behind an exhibition and to see how well theory and experimentation work when put into practice.

Centraal Museum Utrecht  Through Jan. 30 

Rietveld is best known for his "Red Blue Chair"—a piece of furniture famous more for the experimental way it breaks down the structural idea of a chair than for its contribution to comfort. He is also linked with the De Stijl artistic movement, especially the abstract language and use of primary colors associated with the artist Piet Mondrian. The exhibition, while placing Rietveld in historical context alongside his contemporaries Mies van der Rohe, Le Corbusier and Walter Gropius, concentrates much more on his experimental ways of working. The title of the show—"Rietveld's Universe"—is ambitious, demanding that the organizers show Rietveld's development from furniture maker to town planner and architect of more than 100 buildings. The "universe" also has to encompass the architect's interest in rebuilding a society damaged by major wars and political and economic unrest. 

This is a large exhibition, dependent on the scholarship of curator Ida van Zijl (author of "Gerrit Rietveld," a major new monograph published by Phaidon), as well as that of Rob Dettingmeijer and Marie-Thérèse van Thoor (co-editors, with Ms. van Zijl, of the book of essays that accompanies the show). Short films and an audio guide, featuring the actual voice of Rietveld (with translations), helps visitors immerse themselves in the thinking and practice of the architect. There is also an iPhone App, "rietveld architecture," which, with its GPS function, locates the architect's buildings and gives short descriptions of them all.

At the Rietveld Workshop across the street from the museum, visitors are shown how to make their own model of a typical Rietveld chair, working from reproductions of the designer's actual blueprint drawings. This hands-on approach helps promote an understanding of Rietveld's own exploratory approach to design and construction. Rietveld's prefabricated chair design is just one example of his return to first principles—simplifying the basic parts that make up a chair and then reassembling them; a radical approach he also applied to the design of houses.

We see in the show the expansion of Rietveld's range, from furniture design to shop displays to architecture, and it is fascinating to see the maquettes and drawings that have survived from his office. There is a rare chance to see prototypes, from colorful timber to monochrome "zig-zag" metal examples of his chairs and simple experiments with cardboard and packing crates that would delight Frank Gehry. A fascinating display shows Rietveld's proposed design for the Philips electronics company's pavilion at the 1958 Brussels World Fair (which was not chosen), alongside an intriguing model of the design by Le Corbusier that was ultimately selected and built. Almost unknown is the home for handicapped children in the Dutch Caribbean colony of Curaçao, which Rietveld designed incorporating local organic materials. His vital experiment in public housing, with a design for a service core surrounded by flexible rooms, failed to catch on despite its evident practicality. 

Utrecht is also home to the restored Rietveld Schröder house of 1924—one of the few World Heritage sites of the 20th century. Visitors are encouraged to take advantage of one of the new primary-colored "Rietveld bicycles" and ride the short distance (less than half a mile) to see the house that broke all the rules in the 1920s. Commissioned by the woman who was to become Rietveld's mistress, Truus Schröder-Schräder, it is a pure example of his early work. While the structure is well known, it is still something of a surprise to be encountered at the end of a row of conventional 19th-century houses. Bright white, with a flat roof and three balconies, the house looks as though it should overlook the sea. But it is the interior that is of the greatest interest. Almost all the walls on the main living and sleeping floor slide open, making for flexible spaces furnished with folding pieces. There are sinks in every corner and huge windows that let in all the light. While the area is small, the space feels large. But the interior is somehow poorly constructed with rough edges—was the architect deliberately improvising and reacting against the ultracool rationalism of an architect like Mies?

In Amersfoort, a swift train ride from Utrecht, the art gallery De Zonnehof Museum is a late (1958) Rietveld example of a glazed pavilion with a light-steel structure and free-flowing galleries. More interesting—and well worth the longer journey—is Arnhem, where the Rietveld art school (designed between 1958 and 1963, now known as ArtEZ Academy), stands on a superb site on the Rhine. It still shines as an example of Rietveld's crisp, glass-curtain walls and thoughtful planning for the teaching and displaying of art, a subject that Rietveld felt could not really be taught. 

It is a beautiful drive through the National Park of Hoge Veluwe to the Kröller-Müller Museum, where Rietveld's sculpture pavilion, which he designed in 1955 for a different site, was re-erected in the '60s and has recently been well renovated. The best example of Rietveld's approach to architecture as a spatial art, this is a good place to contemplate his refined discipline of simplified structure, color and materials.

It is rare treat to be able to see a learned exhibition that tells the full story of an internationally significant 20th-century architect and also to travel in and around his home city to explore his built achievements. The chance to be totally immersed in the life and work of Gerrit Rietveld is well worth the journey.

 Mr. Amery is an architectural consultant, critic and historian based in London. 