The firefighters of New Jersey's North Plainfield Fire Department are getting buzz cuts to raise money for childhood cancer research. 

On March 19, the fire department will host a head-shaving event to raise money for the St. Baldrick's Foundation, a Monrovia, Calif.-based nonprofit that has made more than $57 million in grants to pediatric cancer research. The foundation's signature event is a head-shaving party uniting shavees and children undergoing cancer treatment. 

As of Friday afternoon, the North Plainfield Fire Department had raised just over $50,000 for the foundation and signed up 119 shavees, an all-time high, including women, kids and at least 12 members of the department. Licensed barbers and cosmetologists donate the time to do the buzz cuts. "We're talking peach fuzz," says North Plainfield firefighter Robert Beattie, the organizer of the event. "I tell people all the time, 'Please don't feel like it's some kind of cult following or anything like that.' "

He adds, "It's really all about the solidarity with kids who lose their hair from cancer treatments."

Over the past seven years, the department has donated a total of about $350,000 to the foundation. Every dollar raised goes to the charity. The event, which begins 3 p.m. at the department's fire station at 8 Lincoln Place in North Plainfield, is followed by a party at the social hall across the street. 

Uniting the department to support the foundation is a "no-brainer," says Mr. Beattie. "You can't go far without finding someone who has been affected by cancer," he says. 

This year's event honors Campbell, the daughter of Greg Hoyt, a volunteer firefighter for the neighboring Bernardsville Fire Company. Campbell is now tumor-free. "She puts a face and a name to why we're all here," says Mr. Beattie.

March is the most popular time of the year for St. Baldrick's head-shaving events—about 600 of the 900 events planned nationally for this year will happen this month. They are especially popular with fire departments; firefighters for the Collingswood, Hamburg and Winslow Township fire departments in New Jersey have events planned this month, too. 

Mr. Beattie says firefighters especially relate to kids that feel isolated because of cancer treatments. "We see people on their worst days and they feel like they're all alone. They feel like they are the only ones in the world that are going through what they are going through at that moment in an emergency," he says. "When we hear that this is a sign of solidarity with these kids that feel that way, it's something we can get behind."