ROME—Pope Benedict XVI attributed a medical miracle to the intercession of the late Pope John Paul II on Friday and announced plans to beatify his predecessor during a Vatican ceremony on May 1.

The beatification of John Paul II is a major step forward in his path to sainthood, putting him on track to be declared a saint in record time. In a statement, the Vatican said Pope Benedict formally recognized as genuinely miraculous the recovery of a French nun from Parkinson's disease after she prayed to John Paul II. The miracle is the first of two miracles that candidates for sainthood require to be proclaimed a saint. 

The honoring of John Paul will provide the Vatican, which has been racked with banking and sex scandals over the past year, with an occasion to bask in the legacy of one of modern Roman Catholicism's most celebrated heroes.

The Polish-born pope helped usher in the fall of Soviet communism and famously survived an assassination attempt, forgiving his would-be assassin in a dramatic visit to his jail cell. John Paul II's death in April 2005, following a long and public struggle with Parkinson's disease, brought millions of faithful to Rome for his funeral in St. Peter's Square, where chants of "Santo Subito!" or "Sainthood now," burst from the massive crowd.

"He gave the world an example of what it means to live-and die-as a Christian should," said Carl Anderson, chief executive of the Knights of Columbus, a Catholic organization based in New Haven, Conn., and a member of several Vatican advisory bodies.

The plans to beatify John Paul II have also generated some criticism from victims of sexual abuse by priests. Some victims blame the late pope, who was elected in 1978, for the church's sluggish response to sexual abuse, a crisis that continues to wash across Catholic dioceses worldwide.

"The church hierarchy can avoid rubbing more salt into these wounds by slowing down their hasty drive to confer sainthood on the pontiff under whose reign most of the widely-documented clergy sex crimes and cover ups took place," said Barbara Dorris, Outreach Director of the Survivors Network of those Abused by Priests.

Weeks after John Paul II's death, Pope Benedict waived a traditional five-year waiting period for beginning a canonization, the process for making someone a saint. On Friday, Vatican spokesman Rev. Federico Lombardi said John Paul's "fame of sanctity" allowed his campaign for sainthood move forward at an unprecedented pace.

The miracle involves the case of Sister Marie Simon-Pierre Normand, a French nun who was diagnosed with Parkinson's in 2001, a disease that left her severely debilitated. Shortly after John Paul II's death, Sister Simon-Pierre began praying to the late pope for help. Her prayers were joined by other members of the Congregation of Little Sisters of Catholic Maternity Wards, an order based in Bourgoin-Jallieu, in south-western France. In June 2005, her doctors found no signs of her illness.

In the statement on Friday, the Vatican said a panel of physicians had reviewed the nun's case and found her recovery "scientifically inexplicable."

Sister Simon-Pierre appeared in an interview on French and Italian TV on Friday, seated in a chair, smiling. "As you can see, I'm well," she said. 

 Write to  Stacy Meichtry at stacy.meichtry@wsj.com 