The Oakville, Calif., estate of  Maria Manetti Farrow, an entrepreneur and philanthropist who splits her time between Oakville and San Francisco, has hit the market for $35.8 million. 

The nearly 60-acre property, in the Napa Valley, is known as the Villa Mille Rose. It comprises three separate parcels and has 43 acres of vineyards, an organic olive orchard and rose gardens. There are five dwellings on the property, including a 7,500-square-foot stucco-and-tile Tuscan-style house with three bedrooms with expansive views. There's also a two-bedroom guest house with an office.

Ms. Manetti Farrow, who grew up in Florence, Italy, worked as the director of Gucci franchises, opening about a dozen shops within specialty stores. She has owned the Napa property for 26 years. She plans to spend more time in Florence, where she owns a home. "I decided to simplify my life," she says. "Sometimes a property owns you, and you don't own it." 

  Ginger Martin and  Carol Sebastiani of Sotheby's International Real Estate have the listing. 

A large property on Pebble Beach Golf Links in Pebble Beach, Calif., has come on the market for $30 million. The seller,  Sanford Edward, has owned the property since 2008; he also owns the Strand at Headlands in Dana Point, a residential development. 

The double lot is the largest on the golf course, with 375 feet of golf-course frontage overlooking the 12th green and fairway and the ocean. It was the location of one of the first houses built on Pebble Beach, which is no longer on the property. The lots are also available separately for $14 million and $16 million. 

  Karen McDermott and  Mary Gullixson of Alain Pinel Realtors have the listing. 

An oceanfront Malibu, Calif., home that originally listed for $50 million has gotten another price cut. It's now available for $32.9 million, or $7 million off its previous list price. 

Built in 2007, the 19,000-square-foot home has nine bedrooms. It's on a bluff with three acres of oceanfront and a stone stairway that leads down to the beach. There's a saltwater swimming pool, a beauty salon and a massage room. A guest house has three additional bedrooms. A climate-controlled 15-car garage is adjacent to a game room. 

The estate is owned by  Jonathan Frank, a real-estate investor. Mr. Frank, his wife and two young children plan to move to another house in Malibu they recently purchased that's directly on the beach.  Bob Hurwitz of Hurwitz James Co. has the listing. 

—  Candace Jackson 

—Email: privateproperties@wsj.com