WASHINGTON—President Barack Obama opened the door Tuesday to lowering U.S. corporate tax rates, launching a politically fraught and complex effort that holds promise for some U.S. firms and pain for others.

In his State of the Union address, Mr. Obama said he wanted to lower the corporate tax rate, now at 35%, "without adding to our deficit." That means offsetting any cut in the overall rate by ending scores of broad tax deductions, the impact of which would be distributed unevenly across corporate America. The president didn't offer specifics.

In November, a White House-appointed commission on reducing the deficit recommended lowering the corporate tax rate by seven percentage points to 28%. To achieve that, it recommended repealing research tax credits, tax breaks for domestic manufacturers and a tax provision that allows faster write-offs for equipment purchases.

Companies that don't make big use of the deductions on offer and pay a high effective tax rate, such as Wal-Mart Stores Inc. and CVS Caremark Corp., would welcome such a move. Rachelle Bernstein, tax counsel for the National Retail Federation, a trade group, called the president's outline "very positive. Rather than having a tax incentive here and a tax incentive there, it makes better sense for the economy to allow businesses to make decisions on what will create the most growth."

By contrast, the firms that have been most vocal in pressing for a straight rate cut are multinationals that pay a relatively low effective tax rate and would have much to lose in a package that repealed the current tax benefits.

In a meeting earlier this month, executives with General Electric Co., PepsiCo Inc. and Procter & Gamble Co., among others, urged Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner to abandon his position that a tax overhaul must not lower overall corporate tax collections. GE Chief Executive  Jeffrey Immelt was recently appointed to head a key presidential advisory board. The company declined to comment.

  David Cote, CEO of Honeywell Inc., said this kind of give-and-take was inevitable but necessary. "One thing I can guarantee is, unless you go to a zero tax rate, there's going to be somebody annoyed," he said. He called the Obama proffer a "reasonable compromise."

A corporate-tax revamp appeals to the White House because it is one of the few policy options available that might help economic growth without deepening the deficit. It also could help the administration revive its battered relationship with companies. And few dispute the notion that the corporate tax code has grown into an unwieldy beast that is out of step with other major economies in key areas, such as how it taxes companies' overseas income. 

But the move comes with serious political risks. By calling for a rate reduction that is offset by nixing deductions, Mr. Obama may run into trouble from the left, which would like to raise the tax burden on business, and from Republicans, who want to reduce it. Both camps have reason to oppose the White House's approach.

"It's a big, big hill to climb," said former Rep. William Archer (R., Texas), who once served as chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee. "It's a solid stone wall that you run into if you want to try and do it without losing revenue."

Mr. Archer, who tried unsuccessfully to overhaul the tax code in the 1990s, said that the administration would have to lay the groundwork in the hopes of getting a better political environment after the 2012 elections.

Obama administration officials in private and congressional Republicans in public have recently been talking enthusiastically about embarking on a tax overhaul, if only in general terms. Company chiefs in recent weeks have pressed officials in the Obama administration for a rate cut, which they say would extend the recovery and spur long-term growth.

They cite the U.S. top statutory corporate rate of 35%, the highest among developed nations with the exception of Japan, which has promised to cut its corporate rate to 35% later this year. Thanks to tax credits, deductions and exclusions, most U.S. companies pay an effective tax rate much lower than the nominal U.S. rate.

In his speech, Mr. Obama didnt embrace a specific rate, or indicate what parts of the current code he wants to scrap. Also left unclear is the White House position on a critical issue for business: how companies are taxed on income earned abroad. While the U.S. taxes such income, most major countries largely exempt it.

Another possible obstacle: Many businesses are organized as partnerships or s-corporations, and are taxed as individuals, not companies. Some lawmakers are pressing the administration to broaden its focus to encompass a reduction in individual rates. In his speech, Mr. Obama offered that as a distant possibility, saying he's "prepared to join" lawmakers who have "expressed interest" in simplifying the individual tax code.

 Write to  Martin Vaughan at martin.vaughan@dowjones.com 