BRUSSELS—European Union member states agreed Tuesday to carry out stress tests on nuclear plants as soon as possible to verify safety, Europe's energy chief said, as worries about leaks of radioactive materials rise in catastrophe-hit Japan.

"There is general agreement ... on the carrying out of common stress tests on the basis of common, strict standards,"  Guenther Oettinger said during a press conference after a meeting with top representatives of national governments and the European nuclear industry. 

The meeting among government, industry and regulatory representatives was called over the weekend after the nuclear crisis in Japan. Last week's earthquake and tsunami caused nuclear reactors to fail in Japan and put the Asian nation on high alert because of the danger of a rise in radiation levels. That spurred debate about the safety of nuclear plants in Europe.

Mr. Oettinger described the aftermath of the earthquake that hit Japan as an "apocalypse" and said the situation at the Japanese nuclear power plant seemed to be "out of control." He added: "I think in the coming hours we cannot exclude the possibility" of the worst.

In the EU, the choice of how to produce electricity lies in the hands of member states with Brussels holding limited direct power over the issue beyond coordinating safety standards. National policies therefore differ widely, with nuclear power used heavily France but not at all in 13 of the EU's 27 member states.

Nuclear-power stations currently produce around a third of the electricity and 15% of the energy consumed in the European Union.

Mr. Oettinger said that participation in the stress tests will be voluntary, but that none of the participants in Tuesday's meeting spoke against them. 

He also said the tests shouldn't be limited to the 27 EU countries, but should be undertaken by neighboring nations as well. 

The EU will aim to select criteria for the tests by June, and then carry them out in the second half of the year, Mr. Oettinger explained later Tuesday speaking to a European Parliament Committee. The criteria will be based on the best practices from member countries, they will contain common standards for all plants, but will also take into account situations specific to each one, like the presence of earthquakes risks.

Mr. Oettinger stopped short of saying what consequences plants not successfully passing the tests would have, but said that the "tests will carry such authority that the necessary consequences will be drawn." 

Nuclear power is still key to providing EU's power supply, and the plants would likely have to be replaced with other ones if some were to close down.

The situation in Japan is being closely watched in Germany. The Berlin government said earlier Tuesday that it will shutter seven nuclear reactors, or just under 5% of the country's power production capacity, while it undertakes a three-month review of atomic plant safety. 

That could create "some substantial stress elements at least in parts of the system," namely in Northern Germany, E.ON AG's Chief Executive  Johannes Teyssen said, but added that the plants shutting for three months are the smaller and older ones. 

The European Union also said late Tuesday it is sending coordinated assistance to Japan to help following the earthquake and tsunami, European Commission President  Jose-Manuel Barroso said in a statement Tuesday.

Japan has requested blankets, mattresses and tanks to store water, an EU spokeswoman said. 

 Write to  Alessandro Torello at alessandro.torello@dowjones.com and Laurence Norman at laurence.norman@dowjones.com 