Near GLENCOE, Ala.—Pastor Allen Murphy, 61 years old, spoke to worshippers Sunday at the new Mamre Baptist Church, framed by a stained-glass window of Jesus kneeling and looking upward. Above, the church roof was torn away. 

"We'd be lost and undone without Jesus," he told the assembly of about 100 people.

Two Mamre Baptist Churches in northeast rural Alabama, the old and the new, were destroyed by last week's tornadoes. One church member died and several others were injured in the old church, where they had sought shelter.

The last words of Spencer Motes, 33 years old, according to witnesses, were, "Get on your knees!" as the door of the church basement blew open and the structure fell in. 

Throughout the service, in the new church down the hill from the old one, people called out amens and raised trembling hands. They sang "Victory in Jesus," calling for salvation and rebirth.

Several who were close to Mr. Motes went up and knelt before the church's front platform, sobbing and calling to Jesus. At one point, half the congregation—including Mr. Motes's parents—huddled tearfully at the front of the sanctuary.

Ralph Motes, whose son was killed, preached extemporaneously to the congregation. He said he had been amazed by the strength God and the community had shown him and his wife. God "sent angels to my house," Mr. Motes said.

The dead man's mother, Deborah, said she has grieved deeply since the storm, but her faith and this community has helped her through. "He's with Our Father," she said. "I have that piece of mind."

Terry Gibbs, 58 years old, stood weeping as he asked the church's forgiveness. Mr. Gibbs's home was next to the old Mamre church and he had let people into the basement when they sought shelter. 

He left them to go get flashlights from his own house, and Mr. Motes called for him to come back. It's too late, he shouted. 

Mr. Gibbs was blown down the stairs of his home. Within minutes, his home was destroyed and the church crushed. "I keep wondering if there was more I could have done," he cried.

Deborah Motes stood up and hugged me Mr. Gibbs.

"He was where God wanted him to be," she said of her son.

Mamre comes from Genesis, a name for a place in the forest where Abraham built an altar to worship God. 

The area around the church, shady for years with towering pines, is now studded with jagged stumps of cracked trees jutting from the red clay. 

But those gathered Sunday talked only of rebirth, of renewed faith.

 "God's going to bring storms to your life, not just ones like this but others," said Eric Carter, 37 years old, said before the service. "You've got to learn to praise him through the storms."

  Joanne Brown-Darnell, 50 years old and the assistant church pianist, said church members have been talking for days about what the storm and its fatal power has meant to their little church. It seems to her and others, she said, that "God has come and stirred us up. This is going to be a new day…you can just feel the spirit flowing."

She smiled as she spoke.

The gathering met for about an hour, then Rev. Murphy urged them to go out and help others to rebuild. 

Even as he spoke, the roar of chainsaws filled a hillside nearby as crews—many of them volunteers from neighboring communities—cleared debris from roads and people's yards.

The buildings of Mamre Baptist are gone, he said, but not what made it strong.

"The church is not gone," said Rev. Murphy, looking out at the congregation. "I'm looking at it."