The Obama administration has delayed for several months the launch of a $1 billion effort to help unemployed homeowners avoid foreclosure, sparking fears the program is running out of time to help many borrowers.

Congressional Democrats mandated creation of the program, dubbed the Emergency Homeowners' Loan Program, as part of the Dodd-Frank financial overhaul bill enacted last summer. It aims to help about 30,000 unemployed homeowners continue making their mortgage payments by providing zero-interest loans of up to $50,000, which can be forgiven over five years.

The administration has not yet launched the program because officials are still hashing out agreements with state agencies, a nonprofit network of housing agencies, and a financial processing firm that will help run it.

The delay highlights the difficulties of establishing government programs to assist struggling homeowners as the housing crisis continues as a drag on the broader economy. Both the Obama and Bush administrations launched numerous programs aimed at helping borrowers avoid foreclosure, with often disappointing results.

Advocates for the unemployed, however, are getting impatient. They note that homeowners need to be enrolled by Sept. 30 to participate in the EHLP and worry that many won't have enough time to sign up, especially in states that have never run such a program before.

"Speed is of the essence," said  John Dodds, director of the Philadelphia Unemployment Project, who has been pressing officials to launch the program more quickly. "It really is a shame that there is so little time." 

The Department of Housing and Urban Development initially expected to launch the program at the end of last year but now say it will start sometime this spring.

"It's a very complex program to implement," said  David Stevens, an assistant HUD secretary. "We are doing all we can to work to establish the capacity nationally to distribute the funds."

There are several reasons for the delay. The administration is still evaluating applications from 10 states that already have similar programs and want to use the money. It also needs to complete contracts with a nonprofit housing counseling network, NeighborWorks America, that will take applications from borrowers and screen them to make sure they are eligible. And HUD has yet to select a company to collect payments from borrowers and distribute them to mortgage servicers.

The Obama administration's largest effort to help struggling homeowners, the Home Affordable Modification Program, has assisted about 540,000 borrowers. That's far short of initial projections that it would aid up to four million. 

About 3.6 million homes are likely to be lost to a foreclosure or distressed sale by 2013, on top of 6.7 million since 2006, according to Moody's Analytics.

Many of the initial foreclosure-prevention programs were designed to help borrowers with adjustable-rate subprime mortgages who had trouble making payments after the rates rose. As the jobless rate rose during the recession, lawmakers realized that many of the newly unemployed were at risk of falling behind on their mortgage payments and losing their homes to foreclosure as well. Congress responded by establishing the EHLP, modeled after a 1980s-era program created in Pennsylvania to assist unemployed steel and coal workers.

The program provides loans to unemployed homeowners or those who have seen their paychecks decline dramatically. The loans are forgiven over five years—20% per year—if the homeowner doesn't fall behind on their mortgage payments. HUD officials estimate that around 30,000 homeowners could participate.

House Republicans say the program and the Obama administration's other foreclosure-prevention efforts are wasteful and unlikely to succeed, and plan to vote to end the program on Friday. The Senate is unlikely to follow suit, and the White House has threatened to veto the bill if it does pass both chambers.

"At what point do you say enough is enough?" Rep. Jeb Hensarling (R., Texas) said last week. "We are spending money that we do not have."

Supporters of the unemployment-assistance program say it will save taxpayers money because it will avoid costly foreclosures on government-backed loans. The program, they say, will also stabilize hard-hit neighborhoods.

"You get foreclosures in a cluster, it drops the value down in the whole neighborhood," said Rep. Chaka Fattah, (D., Pa.), who pushed for the program for several years.

The delays have been particularly infuriating in Philadelphia, where advocates for the unemployed persuaded a local judge to put foreclosures on hold in December as they waited for the program to start.

Several Pennsylvania homeowners have made numerous trips to the nation's capital to push for a quicker start to the program. One of them,  James Tyson, 50, of Philadelphia said he was about $20,000 past due on his mortgage and was getting by on unemployment benefits. His lender has agreed to cut his $1,000 mortgage payment in half temporarily, but that expires at the end of this month. 

"This would allow me to catch up on the mortgage," he said. "Also, it will help me protect my credit rating. When you don't have a credit rating, you don't get a job either."

The program provides aid to 32 states and Puerto Rico. Texas is scheduled to receive the most funding, at more than $135 million, followed by New York, $112 million, and Pennsylvania, $106 million.

The program doesn't include Michigan, California, Nevada and some other states. They are already due to receive aid through a separate Treasury Department effort directing $7.6 billion in assistance to hard-hit states.

