WASHINGTON—House Republicans introduced a bill Friday to end the Obama administration's main foreclosure-prevention effort, calling the White House program a "colossal failure." 

Rep. Jim Jordan (R., Ohio) introduced the bill to terminate the Treasury Department's Home Affordable Modification Program immediately. He was joined by Rep. Darrell Issa (R., Calif.), chairman of the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, and Rep. Patrick McHenry (R., N.C.).

The bill could gain traction in the Republican-led House but is unlikely to gather support in the Senate, where Democrats have a majority. 

The move by Republicans highlights a mounting political problem for the Obama administration's efforts to attack the foreclosure crisis. The administration has been criticized from both sides of the political spectrum. 

Republicans call the effort a waste of money. "It's one more example of why government interference in the private sector doesn't work and that's why it should be repealed," Mr. Jordan said in a statement. 

Meanwhile, many Democrats in Congress say the government hasn't been aggressive enough in preventing foreclosures. The government should do more, they say, to press banks to write down principal balances to assist homeowners who owe far more on their properties than their homes are worth. 

In a hearing on Capitol Hill this week, the Treasury Department's acting assistant secretary for financial stability, Tim Massad, defended the effort. 

"I think this program can still help a lot of people," Mr. Massad said. "It's constructed so that we only use taxpayer funds prudently and wisely. To the extent that we do help people, I think it's helping the right people." 

Administration officials also say the government program has helped to standardize industry practices and spurred the private sector to provide more meaningful loan modifications. 

About 522,000 homeowners were enrolled in HAMP loan modifications and were making payments on time as of the end of last month, the Treasury Department said. That is far short of the original goal of helping as many as four million homeowners. 

About 793,000 homeowners, or roughly 54% of the nearly 1.5 million who have enrolled since spring 2009, have dropped out of the program.

Due to low participation from homeowners, the government has spent only about $1 billion out of a possible $75 billion on the program, Neil Barofsky, the special inspector general for the Troubled Asset Relief Program said in a report issued Tuesday. 

Mr. Barofsky told lawmakers at a hearing Wednesday that he supports "a credible revamp" of the mortgage program so it can achieve its original goals. 

 Write to  Alan Zibel at alan.zibel@dowjones.com 

