The more things change, the more they stay the same around Yankee Stadium. 

Moments after Rafael Soriano was introduced as the newest Yankee in a press conference full of smiles in the bowels of Yankee Stadium, general manager Brian Cashman wasted no time in noting that this was not his deal—it was made over his head, by Hal Steinbrenner, and he was not involved in consummating or negotiating it. 

"I didn't change my mind," Mr. Cashman said of his opposition to Mr. Soriano's signing. "My recommendation stood. It was received, it was heard, it was dissected, and then Hal had to do what Hal's job as owner is: he had to make a difficult decision, and he made one." 

While all involved downplayed talk that there is any rift in the Yankee hierarchy, the moment echoes the divisions that used to exist within the New York front office. Until he was given full authority over the baseball operations in 2005, Mr. Cashman was used to being overruled by the late George Steinbrenner, and undermined by the owner's advisers in the so-called Tampa Faction. But as the signing of Mr. Soriano made clear this week, there are still limits to the GM's power, and when the Yankees appear to be falling behind in the short term, the Steinbrenner sons will not hesitate to step in. 

The disagreement isn't over whether Mr. Soriano is a bad player —he's an elite pitcher who Mr. Cashman agreed makes this team better—but Mr. Cashman was against the deal from the start, both because it cost the Yankees a draft pick, and because the three-year, $35 million deal is the most ever given to a non-closing relief pitcher. 

"We are better with Soriano, there's no doubt about that. It's all the other stuff wrapped around the deal—the money, allocating closer money to an 8th- inning situation," Mr. Cashman said. 

"I didn't recommend it….I just didn't think it was an efficient way to allocate the resources we had," he added. 

The divide comes in a winter when the Yankees' relative inactivity seemed to have proven Mr. Cashman's power within the Yankee hierarchy. 

Mr. Cashman has been New York's general manager since 1998, but at times his position within the organization has been tenuous. When George Steinbrenner was in charge, Mr. Cashman was often second-guessed by the "Tampa faction," and the GM nearly left after the 2005 season, until he was promised autonomy. 

With a few exceptions, the formula has worked: Mr. Cashman has called the shots, the Yankees have retooled and won a World Series, and the general manager has retained his strong position even as sons Hal and Hank Steinbrenner gradually took over their father's role as owners. But now it seems that, like their father, Hal and Hank are ready to overrule their baseball operations employees when they want to make a splash. 

Mr. Cashman's offseason target had long been Cliff Lee, and after Mr. Lee spurned New York's dollars to sign with Philadelphia, Mr. Cashman preached patience, arguing that other opportunities to improve the team would eventually pop up.

But in the end, the Steinbrenners chose not to wait, instead lavishing unprecedented millions on Mr. Soriano, in a deal that has unusual opt-out clauses after both the first and second years. 

Mr. Cashman spoke respectfully of his owners, and of the broad latitude they have granted him in the past. He said plainly that this is the owners' money, and their final decision. But he also made it crystal clear that he was not in the least involved in crafting this curious deal, even once the owners decided they wanted Mr. Soriano. 

"I couldn't speak to that," Mr. Cashman said of the opt-out clauses. "That was a byproduct of the discussion [agent] Scott Boras was having with the club. I couldn't speak to why the structure is the way it is." 

That begged the question— did the general manager not negotiate this important deal, by far the biggest of this offseason? 

"I did not negotiate this. No," Mr. Cashman said. 

Cashman seemed resigned that this may not be the last time he is overruled. He's an employee, and this is part of the job —especially around Yankee Stadium.

"I think it's certainly a sign that at times, if Hal wants to go a different direction, that could happen,'' Mr. Cashman said.