Will Rahm Emanuel be the next mayor of Chicago? All signs point to yes: The Chicago Sun Times notes that the Illinois Supreme Court this afternoon stayed a lower-court decision holding the former congressman and White House chief of staff ineligible. That means ballots will be printed with Emanuel's name while the state high court deals with his appeal.

To be sure, even Mayor Carol Moseley Braun would be preferable to a repeat of what happened in New Jersey in 2002, when that state's Supreme Court simply cast aside the Garden State's election law and allowed the Democrats to replace scandal-plagued incumbent Sen. Bob Torricelli with former senator Frank Lautenberg.

But it looks to us as though the law is on Emanuel's side. Time magazine explains the rationale for the lower court's ruling:

Time notes that Emanuel is basing his argument on the Illinois Election Code, which provides that "no elector"--meaning voter--"shall be deemed to have lost his or her residence in any precinct or election district in this State by reason of his or her absence on business of the United States."

A conflict of laws? It would appear not. The relevant Municipal Code provision reads: "A person is not eligible for an elective municipal office unless that person is a qualified elector of the municipality and has resided in the municipality at least one year next preceding the election or appointment.'

Since Emanuel was in Washington "on business of the United States," he is still a qualified elector and a resident of Chicago under the Election Code. The Municipal Code's residency requirement is not a separate one from the Election Code's, but an additional requirement pertaining to the duration of residence--one that Emanuel obviously meets, since he was away "on business of the United States" for more than a year.

The Municipal Code's additional exemption for military service, however, got us to thinking: Maybe Emanuel could argue in the alternative that engagement in Beltway political combat is analogous to going off to war. It wouldn't be his strongest claim, but it might help put an end to all the prissy exhortations for more civility in politics.

  Beck the Mirror   Fox News host Glenn Beck is right up there with Rush Limbaugh and Sarah Palin as a hate figure for the far left, and lately we've been wondering why. When we interviewed him for The Wall Street Journal last year, he struck us as a bright, genial and sincere fellow. His on-air style is too intense and emotive for our taste, so we have watched him on TV at most half a dozen times.

Perhaps, then, we're missing something, but what we've seen of him bears no resemblance to the hateful figure of the left's imagination. Since the same is true of Limbaugh and Palin, with whom we are more familiar, our tentative conclusion is that "hateful Glenn Beck" is a product of liberal psychopathology rather than a description of the actual man.

Here is a further hypothesis: "Glenn Beck," as imagined by liberals, is a mirror that reflects back to them the darkest elements of their own psyches. We got to thinking about this after reading a blog entry by Jeff Dunetz of YidWithLid.com.

Dunetz notes that Cenk Uygur, the MSNBC host who is replacing the MSNBC host who is replacing the MSNBC host who is replacing Keith Olbermann, on his yet-unnamed show last night issued a bizarre accusation that Beck is anti-Semitic. Uygur ran together brief clips of Beck naming nine people whose ideas he was criticizing, then proclaimed that it was no coincidence that eight of the nine were Jewish. Well, obviously! All of them would have been Jewish if Uygur had not included the one who wasn't!

On its face, Uygur's charge was merely silly. But Dunetz makes the case that it was more sinister: "Uygur runs a website called Young Turks which is loaded with Antisemitic comments." Dunetz reproduces a cartoon from Uygur's website depicting a caricature of a Jew manipulating hand puppets of Barack Obama and an old white man, possibly John McCain. He also finds this passage on the site:

Uygur didn't draw the cartoon or write the passage, As Dunetz writes: "Do I think that Cenk Uygur is an anti-Semite? Absolutely not. I do thing [sic] that he is insensitive to the plight of Israel and the Jews in the world, and he runs a website loaded with anti-Jewish references. Allow me to suggest that before he makes false claims of Antisemitism against Glenn Beck, Cenk Uygur should fix his own 'Jewish Problem.' "

Uygur's anti-Semitism charge came in the course of introducing a guest, superannuated socialist sociologist Frances Fox Piven, whose work has drawn criticism from Beck. Blogress Ann Althouse notes that the American Sociological Association is joining the attack on Beck:

The sociologists should have checked with some law professors before making a display of their legal ignorance. As we noted yesterday, the right to free speech does include the right to advocate violence. But so far as we know, Beck has never advocated violence. Piven has. If the ASA actually opposed advocacy of violence, it would be policing its own. It ought to praise Beck for his criticism of Piven rather than join in on the demagogic attack on him.

  'CNN Could Not Independently Verify Those Claims'   This is from a CNN report on yesterday's terrorist attack at a Moscow airport;

Fair enough, but consider this CNN report from Jan. 9 on the Tucson massacre;

How come the next sentence wasn't, "CNN could not independently verify those claims"?

  Defund the McCain Campaign   "The House of Representatives will decide Wednesday whether to end a 35-year-old program that uses taxpayer money to help pay for presidential campaigns and political conventions," USA Today reports:

It's a small cut, estimated to save $617 million over a decade. But if congressional Republicans can't agree that John McCain's campaign isn't worth subsidizing, they might as well just resign now.

  Homer Nods   Rep. Larry Kissell of North Carolina was not the Democrat who switched votes on ObamaCare repeal last week. His spokesman tells us that Kissell, who voted against ObamaCare in March, had been opposed to repeal all along. We relied on a report from National Review Online's Daniel Foster, later updated to reflect the same correction.

As only final votes are recorded, there is no way to know which Democrat was the flip-flopper or whether the switch reflected a change of mind or merely the correction of a mistake.

 Out on a Limb 

  So Much for Civility   "Obama Speech Could Provoke Fight on Deficit"--headline, Reuters, Jan. 25

  With DNC in Mind, City Bans Carrying Urine, Feces   "Group: D.C. Ranks No. 1 for Road Safety Laws"--headline, WTOP-FM website (Washington), Jan. 24

  Medical Researchers Discover Chris Matthews   "A Skater With Tingling Feet"--headline, Medscape.com, Jan. 11

  How Much Did He Get Paid to Tweet That?   "Olbermann Tweets: 'Reports of the Death of My Career Are Greatly Exaggerated' "--headline, TheWrap.com, Jan. 24

 He Has the Cleavage to This Day 

  The Lonely Lives of Scientists   "No Expiration Date on Love: Scientists"--headline, New York Post, Jan. 24

  The Lonely Lives of Researchers   "UC Davis Researcher Warns Against Kissing Pets"--headline, Sacramento Bee, Jan. 25

  The Lonely Lives of Grapes   "Lack of Sex Among Grapes Tangles a Family Vine"--headline, New York Times, Jan. 25

  'He Bit My Ear Off, Your Honor'   "Farmer Who Tangled With Tyson Asks High Court Help"--headline, Associated Press, Jan. 24

  Steelers Win Anyway   "Jets Intercept London-Bound Plane After Threats"--headline, CNN.com, Jan. 24

  If So, Break Out the World's Smallest Violin   "Is the World's Largest Super-Volcano Set to Erupt for the First Time in 600,000 Years, Wiping Out Two-Thirds of the U.S.?"--headline, Daily Mail (London), Jan. 25

  ¿Quién Es Más Malo, Eliot Ness o Ricardo Montalbán?   "Tasting Menu: Mas Malo"--headline, Los Angeles Times, Jan. 21

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking   "Why I'll Miss Keith Olbermann"--headline, The Wall Street Journal, Jan. 25

  Search Party Finds Snowmobiler--Now That Would Be News   "Missing Snowmobiler Finds Search Party"--headline, KMGH-TV website (Denver), Jan. 24

  Snowman Found Dead in Plum--Now That Would Be News   "Plum Man Found Dead in Snow"--headline, Associated Press, Jan. 24

  Orrin Hatch Aides Violated Bush Act--Now That Would Be News   "Report: George W. Bush Aides Violated Hatch Act"--headline, Politico.com, Jan. 24

  Look Out Below!   "GOP Dumps Pelosi's Composting Program"--headline, Politico.com, Jan. 24

 News of the Tautological 

  News You Can Use   "North Dakotans Offer 2 Winter Musts: Kitty Litter and Schnapps"--headline, New York Times, Jan. 25

  Bottom Story of the Day   "Obama Puts Political Correctness Ahead of Economics"---headline, Washington Examiner, Jan. 24

  Island of Misfit Motormouths   "Liberals want Keith Olbermann to run for retiring Connecticut Sen. Joe Lieberman's (I-Conn.) seat," reports TheHill.com, attributing the idea to a blogger on the Angry Left site DailyKos.com who uses a bizarre pen name that suggests he suffers from a combination of constipation and flatulence.

We rolled our eyes at the thought of Sen. Olbermann, but then we thought of Al Franken. Do you remember him? Neither do we, but he used to be almost as much of a lamebrained left-wing loudmouth until he was elected to the Senate a few years back, and he hasn't been heard from since. If the same thing happened to Olbermann, and any number of other such ranters, can anyone deny America would be a better place?

The only proviso is that we need to come up with a way of denying them the legislative power that senators usually have.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Dan O'Shea, David Gerstman, Michele Schiesser, Rod Pennington, Lewis Sckolnick, John Sanders, Hillel Markowitz, John Russell, Ethel Fenig, T. Young, Jim Fehrle, Kevin Walker, Dave Ceely, Paul Cooper, Glenn Reynolds, Bob Roenigk, Jeanie Ribble, Richard Ong, John Bobek, Dave Olim, John Williamson, Marion Dreyfus, Albert Stern, John Barrett, Bill Schweber, Lew Olowski, Chris Cahill, Neal Hamel, Jim Doherty, Philip Ellison, Robert Kay, Tim Willis, Israel Pickholtz, William Schultz, Zack Russ, Ed Lasky, Bryan Fischer, Joe Olson, Peter Huntsman, David Hallstrom and Marty Stephens. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)