WASHINGTON—The U.S. said Friday an arbitration panel had decided in its favor in a dispute with Canada over softwood lumber. 

The decision by a London Court of International Arbitration tribunal, coming just days after the U.S. requested arbitration on a separate complaint, found that support programs from Quebec and Ontario had violated a 2006 deal between the two countries on softwood lumber. 

If the Canadian government fails to address the problem, it would have to impose an estimated $59 million in fees on exports of lumber from those two provinces. It could also face U.S. import duties. 

"The tribunal agreed that a number of provincial assistance programs put into place by Quebec and Ontario circumvent the Softwood Lumber Agreement and breach the deal struck by the United States and Canada in 2006," said U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk in a statement. He urged Canada to quickly implement the decision. 

The Canadian government is "closely reviewing" the arbitration panel's decision, Trade Minister Peter Van Loan said Friday. "I note that the tribunal rejected 97% of the United States' $1.86 billion claim as having no basis," he said in a statement. 

Mr. Van Loan said the government remains committed to the 2006 softwood lumber agreement with the U.S. which he said provided for a "fair and independent ruling on these claims." 

He said the agreement has brought "much-needed stability and predictability" to the lumber industry and returned more than C$5 billion to Canadian exporters.

On Tuesday, the U.S. requested arbitration over its claims that timber from public lands in British Columbia is being underpriced. 

The U.S. has sought help from the tribunal three times since the 2006 Softwood Lumber Agreement was reached in an attempt to resolve the long-simmering dispute between the neighboring countries over lumber. 

In the first challenge, a tribunal ordered Canada to impose additional export duties on lumber. 

—Nirmala Menon contributed to this article.

 Write to  Tom Barkley at tom.barkley@dowjones.com 