Two conservative groups founded last year with the help of Republicans Karl Rove and Ed Gillespie have set a goal of raising $120 million in the effort to defeat President Barack Obama, win a GOP majority in the Senate and protect the party's grip on the House in the 2012 election. 

That effort comes as Democratic groups are promising to raise tens of millions of dollars for their own independent advertising effort to help Mr. Obama win a second term. The arms race could result in a record level of spending on the 2012 campaign.

If the conservative groups meet the target disclosed to The Wall Street Journal, they would establish their organizations—American Crossroads and Crossroads GPS—as possibly the largest force in the 2012 campaign, aside from the presidential candidates themselves and the political parties.

American Crossroads and its sister group helped conservative groups reach parity in the 2010 elections with labor unions and other Democratic-leaning groups that for years had led in campaign fund raising. 

When Messrs. Rove and Gillespie helped launch the groups last year, they hoped to raise $52 million. They exceeded their goal by raising $71 million in the 29 weeks between opening their doors until the election. That made them the second-largest source of campaign spending other than candidates and political parties. The largest was the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, which spent more than $90 million during the 2009-10 campaign. Mr. Rove writes a weekly column for The Wall Street Journal's editorial pages.

In setting their new fund-raising goal, Crossroads officials say they spoke with nearly all of their major 2010 donors, numbering in the dozens. "They have told us they are sticking with us, and most of them have said they plan to come in at a significantly higher level," said Steven Law, the president of the two Republican groups. Mr. Law said he also has found new donors.

American Crossroads and Crossroads GPS were set up under two different sections of the law and follow slightly different rules. American Crossroads is a so-called 527 organization, which must disclose its donors, while Crossroads GPS is a 501(c)4 entity that doesn't have to make public its donors. 

Since new election rules were put in place in 2002, labor unions, liberal organizations and other pro-Democratic groups have spent far more on independent campaigns to support Democratic candidates than have groups backing Republicans. That began to change in the 2010 congressional elections, when conservative organizations helped level the playing field. Each side spent about $300 million on television advertisements, get-out-the-vote activities and other efforts, according to Journal reporting.

Mr. Obama raised almost $750 million in 2008 and is likely to raise large sums again for the next election. But there are signs that Crossroads and other conservative groups could outspend labor unions and pro-Democratic groups for the first time on independent efforts.

Democratic fund-raisers face several challenges. Wall Street, once a reliable source of donations to Democrats, gave most of its money to Republicans in the 2010 election, according to finance reports. Another problem: public-sector unions face financial troubles as Republicans look to cut government spending.

Major labor unions have pledged a combined $30 million this year to oppose efforts by some Republican governors to eliminate collective bargaining across the country. That leaves unions with less money for the 2012 election.

"Every dollar [Republicans] force unions to spend protecting collective bargaining is a dollar that can't be spent on politics, representing workers or organizing new workers," said  Steve Rosenthal, a Democratic political strategist for labor unions.

Leaders of the two Crossroads groups say they will focus on television advertising and other election activities, which could complement the Republican National Committee's focus on rallying Republican voters and funding state parties.

Campaign-finance rules give groups such as Crossroads an advantage over the RNC. Because political parties can't raise more than $30,000 from an individual, they must spend millions of dollars to raise money from thousands of donors. 

Outside groups face no such caps, so they can raise larger amounts from fewer individuals, incurring smaller fund-raising expenses in the process. American Crossroads and Crossroads GPS disclosed in an annual report sent to donors this week that they spent 96% of the money raised on campaigns.

The RNC spent about 70% of its money for the 2010 campaign on fund raising and other overhead expenses.

 Write to  Brody Mullins at brody.mullins@wsj.com 