 Chinese businesses, including state-controlled companies, invested nearly $5 billion in U.S. firms last year. A Marketplace article on Tuesday incorrectly said private-sector Chinese businesses were responsible for the investment.



 The surname of Peter Shurman, a member of an Ontario government committee examining the proposed merger between TMX Group Inc. and London Stock Exchange Group PLC, was misspelled as Sherman in a Global Finance article in some editions Thursday.



 Will Marshall is a scientist at Universities Space Research Association, a contractor to NASA. In some editions Tuesday, he was incorrectly identified as a NASA scientist in a photo caption with the continuation of a front-page article about the BIL technology conference.



 Boise County, Idaho, filed for municipal bankruptcy protection. The headline in Credit Markets on Thursday incorrectly said an Iowa county had filed.



 The National Pork Board will continue to use its "Pork. The Other White Meat" marketing campaign for consumers. A Corporate News article Wednesday in some editions incorrectly stated it would be retained only for educational purposes.



  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.97
%




's revenue from sales of iPads through the end of 2010 totaled about $9.6 billion. The Week Ahead article on Monday incorrectly reported the total as $4.6 billion.



  Paola Venturi is creative director of the shoe label Via Spiga. A photo caption for the Tricks of the Trade article in Personal Journal on Thursday incorrectly stated that she was the owner of the label. 



A photograph that appeared with Thursday's Urban Gardner column on interior designer Mario Buatta showed a facade bookshelf that contained a fake book spine with the title "Hints From the Prince of Chintz" by Mr. Buatta. The caption incorrectly implied that the shelf and book were real.



Sadie Samuelson Levy's father worked in the cloak and suit trade. An article Wednesday on an Orchard Street visitor's center bearing her name incorrectly said she was the daughter of a dry-goods merchant.