Overall, it was a good year for mutual-fund investors, with most stock and bond funds ending in the black. But of course, not every fund was a winner.

Read the complete  Quarterly Investing in Funds report .

So, which were the turkeys of 2010?

Investors who bet on alternative-energy funds will remember 2010 as a year to forget. You might have thought the oil disaster in the Gulf of Mexico would give this sector new life. But instead, most of these funds ended the year about a mile underwater—while traditional energy funds posted gains. Thank the collapse of legislation in the U.S. that would have encouraged the use of alternative energy, and the expiration of certain tax breaks for the sector in Europe.

Notable among the losers: The  iShares S&P Global Clean Energy Index
ICLN


0.17
%




 exchange-traded fund slumped 27%;  Market Vectors Global Alternative Energy,
GEX


0.67
%




 19%; and  PowerShares Global Clean Energy Portfolio,
PBD


0.24
%




 15%, according to fund tracker Lipper. Many actively managed funds in the sector tumbled as well, such as  Guinness Atkinson Alternative Energy, down 22%.

Certain energy subsectors fared even worse. Anyone who bet on wind energy through  First Trust ISE Global Wind Energy Index
FAN


0.26
%




 is taking deep breaths about now. They lost 31%. And it was a dark year for investors who saw a bright future in solar-energy stocks:  Market Vectors Solar Energy
KWT


0.04
%




 lost 29%,  Guggenheim Solar,
TAN


1.31
%




 28%.

What about overseas funds? Did you bet on Spain or Italy last year? Bad move. The  iShares MSCI Spain Index
EWP


0.38
%




 ETF lost 20%, and  iShares MSCI Italy Index
EWI


0.33
%




 fell 15%. Overall, it was a lousy year for many investors in Western Europe as the financial crises there hurt share values and the euro. The  iShares MSCI France Index
EWQ


0.80
%




 fund lost 4%, as did  iShares MSCI EMU Index.
EZU


0.54
%






Maybe you saw trouble coming and invested in so-called market-neutral and long-short funds, which bet on some shares falling as well as others rising. These funds tend to hold up quite well in a slump. The downside: They can also perform poorly in a rising market, like last year's. Just ask anyone with money in  Quaker Long-Short Tactical Allocation, which dropped 12% last year;  Leuthold Hedged Equity, down 10%;  James Market Neutral, off 8%;  Nakoma Absolute Return, which dropped 6%; or  JPMorgan Multi-Cap Market Neutral, down 4.5%. Meanwhile,  Federated Prudent Bear, which did well during the recent financial crisis because of its bets on falling stocks, lost 13%.

Among the more mainstream diversified U.S.-stock funds, a couple of star performers in the recent crash paid a price last year for staying too cautious while markets rose.  Forester Value, the only diversified U.S.-stock fund to make money in 2008, lagged way behind its large-cap-value peers in 2010, with a mere 4.7% gain. And  Hussman Strategic Growth, which also outperformed its competitors during the crash, lost 3.6% last year. 

None of these funds, though, takes the prize for the absolute worst mutual-fund investment of 2010. For that raspberry one has to turn to those volatile "ultra" funds that use derivatives to make leveraged bets. They're supposed to be used only over short periods, because of the compounding effect of repeated losses. But some investors haven't gotten the message. So anyone who put money in  ProShares UltraShort Silver,
ZSL


1.02
%




 which took leveraged bets against rising silver prices, and held it there all year managed to lose 79% of their stake. When you see that, your CD with its measly 0.5% interest rate may not seem quite so bad after all.

 Mr. Arends is a personal-finance columnist for The Wall Street Journal. Email him at brett.arends@wsj.com. 