WASHINGTON--The U.S. is considering providing arms to Libyan rebels who are trying to topple Col. Moammar Gadhafi, but hasn't yet made a final decision, a senior American diplomat said Friday.

"The full gamut of potential assistance that we might offer, both on the non-lethal and the lethal side, is a subject of discussion within the U.S. government," Gene Cretz, the U.S. ambassador to Tripoli, told reporters in Washington.

Mr. Cretz said, however, that the administration has made "no final decisions… on any aspect of that."

Mr. Cretz left Tripoli in December, followed by the remaining American diplomats in Libya. The State Department has effectively moved the embassy to Washington amid the turmoil in Libya, where rebels backed by U.S. and European airpower are fighting forces loyal to Col. Gadhafi.

Since the crisis began, the U.S. officials have had contacts with rebels they had previously met, especially those from eastern Libya, the rebel stronghold, Mr. Cretz said. "We have been gradually stepping up contacts on a daily basis," he added.

The U.S. and other members of the coalition are in the process of handing over enforcement of the no-fly zone in Libya to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. But the U.S., France and Britain continue to lead attacks on ground forces loyal to Col. Gadhafi until NATO is ready to take control of all operations.

The main goals of U.S. outreach efforts have been two-fold: Identify the rebels and figure out their agendas. Rebel leaders have made informal requests for U.S. assistance on political development, drafting a future constitution, and democratic transition. 

The U.S. appraisal of the rebels is generally positive, based both on knowledge of key players in their governing body, the Interim Transitional National Council, and on signals the rebels have sent so far. For instance, the policy papers the council has issued "have all the right elements," including support for human rights generally, and women's right specifically, Mr. Cretz said.

"We're not Pollyannish, but based on our experience so far, they are off to a good start, both in word and deed," Mr. Cretz said.

Mr. Cretz dismissed as "patently ridiculous" Col. Gadhafi's claims that the opposition is riddled with al Qaeda militants. 

He did say, however, that "we are not at a point where we can make a 100% judgment that this is a 'kosher,' so to speak, group."

 Write to  Keith Johnson at keith.johnson@wsj.com 