The Rev.  David Wilkerson created the longest-running show on Broadway, an 8,000-strong Pentecostal church dedicated to saving New York City's drug addicts and prostitutes.

Mr. Wilkerson, who died Wednesday at age 79, was founder of World Challenge, a nondenominational Christian ministry that has worked in more than 50 countries, with a special emphasis on young people. 

Mr. Wilkerson's car veered into oncoming traffic in East Texas and collided head-on with a tractor-trailer, police said. He was not wearing a seat belt. His wife, Gwendolyn, was injured in the accident.

In 1963, Mr. Wilkerson published "The Cross and the Switchblade," an autobiographical account of working with teenage gang members in New York. 

The book sold 15 million copies, his church claims, and in 1969 was made into a movie starring  Pat Boone as Mr. Wilkerson and  Erik Estrada as troubled gang leader  Nicky Cruz.

After kicking drugs via Mr. Wilkerson's cold-turkey, scripture-reading method, Mr. Cruz went on to become a Pentecostal minister himself, often preaching in Eastern Europe.

Teen Challenge, Mr. Wilkerson's antidrug organization, runs nearly 1,200 drug centers, 233 of them in the U.S. 

A native of Hammond, Ind., Mr. Wilkerson was the son of Pentecostal ministers and attended Central Bible Institute in Springfield, Mo. He was ordained by the Assemblies of God, the same denomination that included  Jimmy Swaggart and  Jim Bakker. 

Initially pastor to a congregation in bucolic central Pennsylvania, Mr. Wilkerson was inspired to undertake a more activist ministry by a 1958 Life magazine article about a murder trial involving teen gang members unfolding in New York. 

Mr. Wilkerson sold his television to raise funds and drove to the city, where he created a disturbance when he stood up in the courtroom and demanded to be heard as a minister of the Gospel. The judge had him removed but the incident put Mr. Wilkerson on the front page of the Daily News, under the headline, "Bible-Waving Preacher Interrupts Trial."

Undeterred, Mr. Wilkerson created a ministry for gang members in Brooklyn, and soon began opening satellite Teen Challenge programs in other cities, including Los Angeles and Chicago. Medical professionals were skeptical, but he claimed that 80% of those who completed the program stayed clean.

Mr. Wilkerson stayed in New York until 1971, when he moved to Tyler Texas, where he founded World Challenge.

He claimed that God spoke to him at critical junctures in his career—in 1958 when he opened his Brooklyn ministry; in 1973, when he had a vision of calamities in the U.S. caused by homosexuality and greed; and 1986, when on an annual visit to New York, he was struck by squalor in Times Square.

Determined that God had called him to New York once again, he opened the Times Square Church in 1987 to minister to the homeless, the addicted and the ill. Broadway was in a funk at the time, and Mr. Wilkerson found it easy to rent a series of empty theaters. He eventually settled on the Mark Hellinger Theater, a 1,500-seat hall that had once seen the openings of "My Fair Lady" and "Jesus Christ Superstar."

Crowds materialized at the lively services. which also attracted a more upscale clientele.

"We're going to be the longest-running show on Broadway," an exuberant Mr. Wilkerson told the Dallas Morning News in 1989.

Mr. Wilkerson made many predictions in his career. Some of them—the New York Metropolitan area in flames, major famines, and nude dancing in church—have yet to come true. 

But the one about setting a Broadway record has held up. The Times Square Church opened months ahead of "Phantom of the Opera," the official Broadway record-setter for most consecutive shows. Both continue to draw SRO crowds.

 Write to  Stephen Miller at stephen.miller@wsj.com 