The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is awaiting additional explosives to break open a hole in a southeastern Missouri levee to help control water levels upstream on the Mississippi and Ohio Rivers, a Corps spokesman said Wednesday.

Spokesman Jim Pogue said the Corps needed more of an aluminized slurry blasting agent than it originally projected to operate the Birds Point-New Madrid Floodway and divert water for 35 miles before returning it to the Mississippi at New Madrid, Mo. 

On Monday night, the Corps inundated more than 130,000 acres of farmland in the floodway through a controlled breaching of a levee near Cairo, Ill. Another breaching of a levee followed around noon on Tuesday at the southern end of the floodway.

See the latest data from flood gauges throughout the Midwest and South.

As of midafternoon Wednesday, the Ohio River at Cairo had fallen nearly two feet, to 59.82 feet from 61.72 feet before the first explosion.

"When this operation went down, we did go through more of the slurry mix than we expected to," Mr. Pogue said. "This is the first time this has been attempted with this system, at least on this scale."

The Corps plans to open a third hole in a levee on the southern end of the floodway, perhaps as soon as Wednesday afternoon. Mr. Pogue said the Corps has ordered a shipment of a similar explosive agent from a company in Marion, Ill., and it is on its way to the blast site.

Maj. Gen. Michael Walsh said the river is expected to rise again when water held back at dams on the Ohio are released and new storms move into the area in about five days. He said he didn't expect the levels to rise back to Monday night's level.

The floodway is one of four developed by the Corps under a plan dating to the aftermath of the great flood of 1927. It consists of a mix of public and private lands, many of which have easements granting the Corps the right to run water through. 

Col. Vernie Reichling, commander of the Memphis Corps district, said his men had been working 24 to 36 hours straight to pump the slurry mix from barges into pipes inside the top of the levee. Just before the first levee was hit with the explosive Monday evening, they battled driving rains and 50-mile-an-hour winds on the river to move into position for the second blast—about 40 miles away at the southern end of the floodway. 

When the first barge arrived, some of the pipes were flooded, and engineers had to wait for a second barge with equipment to pump the water out.

Some 3,800 Western Kentucky residents have evacuated their homes as the Mississippi River and its tributaries continue to rise.

Kentucky, along with Tennessee, Mississippi, and other Southern states have been urging evacuations and bracing for what state officials say could be near-record crests of the Mississippi River in the coming days after the intentional breach of a flood wall upstream in Missouri. 

Heavy rains on Monday and Tuesday brought as much as four-and-a-half inches of rain to Kentucky and have contributed to flooding that has already hit low-lying parts of the state; in addition, authorities expect the Ohio River to crest on Thursday, and the Mississippi River to do so on Friday. 

More than 600 Kentucky National Guard members are assisting with flood-relief in six Western Kentucky counties, and some 264 roads in the area are closed, according to the office of Kentucky Gov. Steve Beshear, who has been touring flooded areas of the state. Most of the evacuations have been voluntary, and displaced residents have gone to stay with friends or families. Red Cross shelters housed 37 people on Tuesday night; the state is opening a total of six shelters. 

The state has "people postured and read to get in" to communities to provide assistance after the crests, said Buddy Rogers, a spokesman for Mr. Beshear. 

In a statement, Gov. Beshear said he supports the decision by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to blast a hole in a Missouri levee, saying the move "may lessen some of the damages that many Kentucky communities face." 

—Jennifer Levitz

 Write to  Joe Barrett at joseph.barrett@wsj.com and Ilan Brat at ilan.brat@wsj.com 