Indian mobile handset maker Micromax Informatics Ltd. has cut the size of its initial public offering by about 30%, reflecting the turbulent Indian stock markets this year. 

The company now plans to raise up to $104 million by offering 21.5 million shares at an indicative price range of between 187 rupees and 217 rupees ($4.8), according to a term sheet seen by Dow Jones Newswires Wednesday. The initial plan last August was to raise as much as $150 million, according to people familiar with the matter. 

Indian stock markets, after a buoyant 2010 when the benchmark Sensex gained 17%, have been laggards this year with the index having lost 10.4% so far due to concerns ranging from corruption scandals and political instability at home as well as higher global crude and commodity prices that threaten to hurt companies' profitability. 

Micromax joins Indian Oil Corp. and L&T Finance Holdings Ltd. in deferring or curtailing their share sale plans due to adverse market conditions. L&T Finance was earlier targeting a launch of its up to 15 billion rupees IPO in February, but is now considering a listing by June. State-run Indian Oil deferred its follow-on offering, initially planned for earlier this year, as surging global crude prices looked set to damp appetite for the fuel retailer's shares. 

Micromax, based in New Delhi, entered the Indian handset market in March 2008 and its market share for the quarter ended March 31, 2010, was 6.24%. 

The company, which currently makes handsets through contract manufacturers in China, Taiwan and South Korea, plans to use the bulk of the issue proceeds for setting up a factory in a bid to capture growing demand. It also plans to invest a significant amount in marketing its handset brand, according to the company's draft offer document filed with the stock exchanges in September last year. 

To fund its expansion, the company sold an under 10% stake last September to private-equity investors Sandstone Capital LLC, Sequoia Capital and Madison Capital Management LLC for about 2 billion rupees or $45 million. In January 2010, Micromax had sold an unspecified minority stake to private-equity firm TA Associates for about $45 million. 

According to the term sheet, Micromax's management is planning to begin discussions with potential anchor investors. It added that the company is holding a roadshow for the offering in the U.S. this week. 

The roadshow follows a previous set of investor meetings in February, a person familiar with the matter said. However, weak local stock markets following the initial meetings forced the company to defer its share sale plans until markets stabilized. 

The launch dates will be finalized after the investor meetings and the resolution of procedural issues with India's capital markets regulator, the person said, without elaborating. 

"Whether it's this month or the next is clearly a function of how the roadshows go and how stable markets are, but there is a high desire to launch it over the next few months," he said. 

  Citigroup Inc.,
C


1.31
%




 Edelweiss Capital Ltd.,  Nomura Co.
9716


0.06
%




 and JM Financial Ltd. are bookrunners on the deal.