MILAN— Fiat SpA Chief Executive  Sergio Marchionne said Monday he doesn't plan to merge operations with Chrysler Group LLC, but added that the Italian company could lift its 20% stake in the U.S. auto maker to more than 50% this year if Chrysler returns to the stock market. 

"I think it is possible, don't know whether it is likely, but it is possible that we go over the 50% if Chrysler decides to go to the market in 2011," Mr. Marchionne said on the sidelines of an event in Milan to celebrate the first trading day of Fiat's industrial division. 

Mr. Marchionne took the helm at Chrysler in addition to his job at Fiat after the U.S. auto maker's government-orchestrated bailout. He reiterated previous remarks that Chrysler's initial public offering might take place in the second half of this year.

The 58-year-old CEO has been integrating business operations between the two car makers for the past 18 months. He said Chrysler's business developed well in December.

In November 2009, Mr. Marchionne unveiled a five-year Chrysler business plan that predicted the U.S. auto maker would achieve a break-even operating profit for the 2010 financial year and a break-even net profit for the 2011 financial year. "In 2011, we will have to deliver what we told the markets in November 2009," Mr. Marchionne said Monday.

On Jan. 1, Fiat divided itself into two companies to allow its car and truck businesses to pursue separate development strategies. Fiat Industrial SpA controls the trucks and tractors units Iveco and CNH Global NV, while Fiat SpA comprises the passenger-car operations. 

"It's a very important moment for Fiat, because it represents at the same time a point of arrival and departure," Mr. Marchionne said.

Fiat Industrial's shares closed Monday at €9 ($11.80), while Fiat SpA's stock ended at €7.03. A combined price of the two companies is slightly higher than the old Fiat closing price of €15.43 on Thursday. 

Later Monday, official data from the Transportation Ministry showed that Italian new-car sales fell 21.7% to 130,319 vehicles in December, registering a 9.2% drop for all of 2010. Fiat SpA's share of its domestic market increased to 29.7% from 28.5% in November.

Observers expect that Mr. Marchionne will be able to focus more on potential alliances in coming quarters. When asked about possible acquisitions in coming months, Mr. Marchionne said the company doesn't need to raise capital if opportunities arise. He added that Fiat has no plans to sell assets.

Fiat Industrial plans to conduct its first board meeting during the year's first three months, Mr. Marchionne said. He added that he hasn't yet considered a potential board-member successor to former Italian Economy Minister Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, who died in December. 

 Write to  Sabrina Cohen at sabrina.cohen@dowjones.com and Liam Moloney at liam.moloney@dowjones.com 