TUCSON, Ariz.—U.S. Rep. Gabrielle Giffords remained in critical condition after brain surgery, but doctors said Tuesday that she would survive Saturday's shooting.

"She has a 101% chance of survival," said Peter Rhee, head of the University of Arizona Medical Center's trauma unit, where Ms. Giffords was brought after being shot in the head at point-blank range while meeting constituents near a Tucson supermarket.

Ms. Giffords has shown some slight movement on one side of her body, and there are signs she could open her eyes soon, Dr. Rhee said.

A gunman on Saturday emptied a semiautomatic pistol on the congresswoman and a crowd attending her event. Six people died and 14 were injured, including Ms. Giffords. Six of the wounded patients remained at the medical center, doctors said. A suspect, 22-year-old Jared Lee Loughner, is being held in federal in custody without bail.



Doctors think the bullet that wounded Ms. Giffords entered through the front and exited through the back of her head, tearing through the left side of her brain. 

Michael Lemole, head of neurosurgery at the medical center, said caretakers had scaled back Ms. Giffords's sedation and she was breathing on her own.

"We're very encouraged by the fact she's done so well," he said.

Some relatives of the dead and wounded were present at the news conference at the medical center Tuesday. Bill Hileman, the husband of Susie Hileman, who was hit by three bullets, said his wife was on her way to recovery as her spine and internal organs were intact.

Mrs. Hileman was the person who took 9-year-old Christina Taylor Green, the daughter of family friends, to meet Ms. Giffords at the event. Christina was killed in the attack.

"The Greens remain in our prayers every minute," Mr. Hileman said, adding that when his wife was drifting back to consciousness at the hospital she remembered crying: "Christina, Christina, let's get out of here."

Mr. Hileman said that he and Christina's father, John, were playing phone tag all day Monday until they finally "got together and cried for 10 minutes."

Angela Robinson, the stepdaughter of Dory Stoddard, one of the six killed, said Mr. Stoddard was now "walking with the Lord," and called him a hero who "brings out the hero in all of us." Mr. Stoddard died protecting his wife, Mavy, from the shooter, Ms. Robinson and her sister Penny Wilson said.

President Barack Obama was scheduled to travel to Tucson Wednesday for a memorial event at the University of Arizona. White House aides wouldn't say what Mr. Obama would discuss in his remarks. But Monday, officials said he was looking to address the larger discussion, prompted by the shootings, about civility in the nation's political discourse.

Mr. Loughner made his first court appearance in Phoenix on Monday. Federal authorities have charged Mr. Loughner with two counts of murder, two counts of attempted murder and a count of attempting to assassinate a member of Congress. More charges are expected, officials said.

Federal prosecutors will try to show that Mr. Loughner planned the Saturday attack. Investigators are still trying to piece together the events leading to the shooting.

Mr. Loughner was assigned two federal public defenders, including Judy Clarke, who had represented Theodore Kaczynski, the so-called Unabomber, as well as Sept. 11 conspirator Zacarias Moussaoui. 

 Write to  Angel Gonzalez at angel.gonzalez@dowjones.com 