TOKYO—Prime Minister Naoto Kan's renewed focus on fiscal consolidation has brought seasoned policy expert Kaoru Yosano to the inner circle of his cabinet. And for the Bank of Japan, the move is a relief, as it now faces less pressure to take on additional monetary-easing.

Mr. Yosano, Japan's new minister for economy and fiscal policy, said in an interview Wednesday the central bank has taken sufficient easing steps over the past few years to fight the country's recession and continued deflation.

He said that some in Japan have "over-expectations" for what the central bank can do to overcome deflation. A senior politician known for his expertise in economic policy, Mr. Yosano appeared to be taking aim at private-sector economists and some lawmakers who have called for more aggressive monetary steps, such as inflation targeting. 

"We naturally have expectations for the BOJ's monetary policy but it is wrong to expect too much from them," he said. "We really need to make sure the real economy recovers on its own, and remain well aware of the limitations of monetary policy." The minister added he had nothing but good things to say about the central bank, as it is cooperating well with the government.



As Japan's economy languished after the financial crisis in late 2008, government officials and lawmakers stepped up pressure on the central bank to adopt more aggressive steps. With Japan's huge government debts limiting fiscal policy options, they felt they needed to count on monetary policy to spur the economy. While such calls have subsided since the BOJ's easing steps last year, some lawmakers, including those within the ruling party, are still hoping for additional measures to conquer deflation. 

Mr. Yosano's remarks on the central bank policy are in clear contrast to those of his predecessor and rival, Banri Kaieda.

Mr. Kaieda, who was reassigned to the post of trade and industry minister, said in an interview last week that monetary easing was among the tools the government should use to fight rapid movements in the yen's exchange rate. 

Mr. Yosano, 72 years old, is a veteran of the conservative Liberal Democratic Party of Japan, who recently became independent to join Mr. Kan's cabinet following a short stint with a small opposition party.

While serving various senior cabinet positions in the LDP government, he established a reputation as a fiscal hawk who pushed for curbing government spending to reduce Japan's massive government debts and increase a broad national sales tax, known as the consumption tax. Mr. Yosano once suggested the consumption tax should be boosted to 10% by the mid-2010s. 

Raising the consumption tax to pay for the nation's surging social-security cost is one of the key policies pursued by Mr. Kan. But it is a sensitive issue that is opposed by many lawmakers concerned it could harm them in an election. The ruling party's defeat in upper house elections last July was largely attributed to Mr. Kan's aggressive push for such a tax increase. 

Mr. Yosano noted the timing of the consumption tax increase must be determined by balancing the need to turn around Japan's dire fiscal conditions while ensuring continued economic recovery. 

While he said that Japan must gain the trust of the global community and markets by showing its resolve on fiscal consolidation, Tokyo won't rush to a tax increase. 

"It is our prerequisite in setting a broad policy that we must have friendly economic conditions when the consumption tax hike is implemented and the tax payers start feeling its impact."

The government is currently conducting fast-track studies to prepare for the tax increase. Such studies, the minister said, should be completed by March, well ahead of the June deadline that Mr. Kan has set.

But even that is likely to prove too slow for investors in Japan's government debt. Distrust over the government's resolve could push government bond yields higher, making it more difficult to finance a debt mountain already the largest among rich countries at near double annual economic output.

"The market holds out almost no hope for successful execution" of fiscal retrenchment goals, Jun Ishii, chief fixed income strategist at Mitsubishi UFJ Morgan Stanley Securities, said in a research report this week.

The yield on the benchmark 10-year Japanese government bond, at just 1.24%, "is very low," Mr. Yosano said. "But there is no guarantee that such a happy period will last for years to come." 