Crisis and calamity in the auto industry are good for car buyers. The next couple of years should demonstrate why.

The restructuring of the U.S. auto industry during the past three years was painful, controversial and costly—taxpayers put up more than $80 billion to bail out  General Motors Co.
GM


0.16
%




, Chrysler Group LLC and their auto finance arms. Companies that didn't get government rescues—notably  Ford Motor Co.
F


-0.30
%




—slashed their work forces, cut costs and overhauled their strategies. 

What will consumers get out of all this?

Most importantly, we'll get better cars and trucks. Car makers tend to run into trouble about once a decade—either because the economy goes into a slump, or because their product lines go stale. In a crisis, innovative design ideas that got shunted aside when times were flush get a fresh look. It's happened before—the groundbreaking Chrysler minivans and the aerodynamic 1986 Ford Taurus emerged from corporate crises—and it appears to be happening now.

The latest crisis pushed the Detroit Three to re-think their decades-old strategy of shortchanging small cars. Thanks to the 2008 gas shock and regulatory heat from Washington, people who like small cars are going to see a feast of attractive offerings such as the 2012 Ford Focus, the Ford C-Max mini-minivan, the retro-cute Fiat 500, and a flock of small models from GM, including the Chevy Sonic and the first compact Buick in years, the Verano.

Detroit brands have a long way to go to regain sales in the small-car segment. But there are signs that car shoppers are noticing the effort. The Ford Fiesta was considered by 17% of shoppers considering a subcompact last December, according to data from Edmunds.com. Of shoppers who looked at the Honda Fit—a leader in that segment—about 21% also considered the Fiesta. 

At the larger end of the spectrum, yesterday's stiff-handling, gas-slurping sport utility vehicles are morphing into smoother driving, safer crossovers less apt to roll over and more fuel efficient. The redesigned 2011 Ford Explorer represents this shift. The idea of putting the one-time best-selling SUV in America on a more fuel-efficient car chassis knocked around Ford for years. Now, Ford has made the move.

At the recent Detroit auto show, Ford Chief Executive Alan Mulally said the company's new small-vehicle offerings are made possible by a strategic decision taken as part of the company's recent overhaul to build 10 different compact car and crossover models using the same basic chassis, or "platform." With the advent of the new Focus in the U.S., Ford expects to spread its small-car engineering costs over two million small vehicles a year—achieving economies of scale that allow for more affordable hybrid and electric models, Mr. Mulally said. "You make less money on smaller cars," he said, "but we can make a return." 

Adversity has also pushed car makers to get more serious about quality and reliability. 

Consumer Reports, in its annual forecast of new vehicle reliability, said Ford and GM are both making significant gains, although  Toyota Motor Corp. and  Honda Motor Co.
HMC


0.66
%




 models still dominated the rankings. David Champion, head of automotive testing for Consumer Reports, says Chrysler's efforts to upgrade its existing cars are paying off. "They've put all their cars on the consideration list," Mr. Champion says. 

The increased competitiveness in the industry isn't just a Detroit story. Mr. Champion and other industry analysts say the rise of Korea's Hyundai Motor Co.—which now has an impressive lineup of well-designed models such as the midsize Sonata—is putting pressure on all mass market auto makers, including Toyota and Honda.

Consumers will benefit in another way from the auto industry's post-crisis religion—at least for a time. Closing factories and slashing labor costs and overhead give auto makers more freedom to build cars and trucks customers want, and not flood the market with vehicles destined to sit unsold for months. 

"They don't have to go back to the insane production push," says  Mike Jackson, chief executive officer of  AutoNation Inc.
AN


-0.02
%




 Flooding the market and running fire sales—the old Detroit business model—hammered the resale values for many brands.

Detroit should also be in a better position to weather another run-up in gas prices, Mr. Jackson says. In 2008, when gas prices rose to $4 a gallon, SUV values plunged because the Detroit auto makers had stuffed dealer lots with big vehicles that took months to clear. Now, Mr. Jackson says, re-stocking dealerships with cars appropriate to a $4 a gallon gas price environment could take just 90 days because car makers kept SUV inventories lean.

Finally, the economic crisis—and volatile oil prices—have spurred car makers to push more new technology out of their labs. Germany's premium auto makers, who face home-market pressure to present a more eco-friendly face to the world, are cranking up a technology arms race to deliver high performance without as much carbon dioxide.

  BMW AG
BMW


-0.59
%




's new M5 sedan, due out this fall, will have 25% to 30% better fuel economy than the current model—which is rated at a profligate 13 miles to the gallon. To achieve this, without compromising the model's high-performance image, will require using more lightweight materials instead of steel, designing water pumps and power-steering systems so they can disconnect from the engine, and technology tricks to give the car a dual personality.

Instead of tuning the M5 to run in high-performance, gas-guzzling mode all the time, BMW will upgrade its so-called "M" button to give the car two clearly distinct personalities, says  Kay Segler, head of the M brand. With the button off, the M5 will operate like a dignified business sedan. Push the button, and it becomes a race car. "You save money," he says. "You have two cars in one."

Plenty could go wrong for auto makers. Not all cars that look smart in prototype form at an auto show turn out to be marketplace winners. But if you go shopping for a car this fall or in 2012 after three or four years on the sidelines, you're probably going to like what you see.

 Write to  Joseph B. White at joseph.white@wsj.com 