PORT-AU-PRINCE—Haitians turned out in large numbers and voted peacefully Sunday as a popular singer and a former first lady vied to be the next president of the beleaguered nation. 

Sunday's election pits Mirlande Manigat, a 70-year-old law professor, against Michel "Sweet Micky" Martelly, a 50-year-old pop star. Pre-election polls put Mr. Martelly slightly ahead in what is expected to be a close contest. Results aren't expected for at least 10 days. 

Through the voting seemed to get off to a rocky start at some polling places, the election generally went smoothly, electoral officials said. The last minute arrival of former populist president Jean Bertrand Aristide on Friday, also heightened worries that the election would end in failure. Mr. Aristide, a divisive figure in Haitian politics, was deposed in 2004 and had been living in exile in South Africa. 

"This was a good election. Everything worked and there were no incidents, said a tired Francois Johnny, supervisor of polling station in the huge slum of Cite Soleil where some 26,000 Haitians cast their votes through the day. "It was a good day for Haiti." 

The winner will face a gigantic task. Haiti is one of the poorest nations in the world. A January 2010 earthquake killed about 230,000 people and caused an estimated $9 billion in damage. Even before the quake, half the population didn't have access to safe drinking water. Adding to the misery, an October cholera outbreak has claimed 4,717 lives and affected 400,000 people.

A successful election would go a long way toward bringing a measure of political stability which would reassure foreign donors and help to speed up the country's process of rebuilding from the ruins of the earthquake. 

The November first-round vote ended in chaos when followers of Mr. Martelly rioted after government electoral authorities prevented him from advancing to a run-off. The Organization of American States, which monitored the first-round vote, found evidence of fraud and pressured Haiti's government to eliminate the first count, which had showed Jude Célestin in the No. 2 slot, in favor of including Mr. Martelly as a second-round candidate.

But doubts remain. Haiti's election authority said results from the run-off wouldn't be known until March 31, creating a long waiting period likely to be filled with tension and rival claims of victory. Both candidates have already told supporters that they should be ready to take to the streets to celebrate and defend their victory. 

After casting his ballot amid a crush of Haitian journalists and supporters in the suburb of Pétionville, Mr. Martelly said the election was an opportunity for "change and a chance for Haiti to come out of its misery." 

Lutner Dimanche, a 32-year-old information technology worker, looked on after casting his own ballot for Mr. Martelly. "He is a man who is sensitized to the situation in Haiti," said Mr. Dimanche. 

Mr. Aristide, a fiery ex-priest who was twice elected president and twice deposed, could still cast a long shadow over the vote. 

The U.S. government had urged Mr. Aristide to delay his return until after the vote. But the former president disregarded the pleas, and turned up on Friday saying he wanted to help with the country's reconstruction. Some analysts say Mr. Aristide could try to take advantage of any post-election trouble to revive his political career.

In Cité Soleil, a sprawling slum in the capital, a group of young men in the courtyard at a voting center on Saturday debated which of the two official candidates had more support. One said: "Fifty-fifty, Martelly and Manigat. One hundred percent, Aristide." Many residents said they wouldn't vote or would cast blank votes in support of Mr. Aristide.

Ms. Manigat and Mr. Martelly differ in style but not in politics: Both advocate a conservative agenda overall. Mr. Martelly, a 50-year-old firebrand known for his outlandish stage performances, has traded in tone and temper for sophistication and stately appearances, and his campaign has hired an international public-relations firm to put some polish on the novice politician. 

Mr. Martelly's popularity as a singer has won the support of Haiti's youth, in a country where half the 9.6 million inhabitants are under 18. He has also galvanized the poor, a majority of the population, through a convincing message of change and better livelihoods.

Ms. Manigat, on the other hand, favors the homespun look, being called "grandma" and appearing at rallies in oversized shirts and pants. The grandmother and former first lady has branded herself "mother of Haiti." She served briefly as a senator but has been a teacher since returning from exile with her husband, a former Haitian president.

Ms. Manigat has been loudly critical of the role played by international aid organizations in reconstructing the country after the quake. She has also suggested getting rid of the peacekeeping troops that have been here since 2004.

The stakes are high for Haiti. The winner will have a large say in how billions of dollars donated by the international community are spent to rebuild the nation, whose capital was decimated by the quake. Little progress has been made, and 14 months after the quake hundreds of thousands of Haitians are still living in fetid tent cities that have sprung up on the ruins of the city.

Both candidates have promised to make housing for earthquake refugees their first priority, as well as to address a cholera epidemic that has claimed nearly 5,000 lives to date.

Many Haitians, however, seem discouraged by the lack of progress since the quake.

"We had a lot of promises," says 31-year old Mackinzi Delysar, a former private-school director who is working to coordinate aid to a large tent city that houses 4,524 people. "We have more kids today, almost all the young girls are pregnant, the kids don't eat every day."

Mr. Delysar says he won't bother to vote. "How can these candidates promise free education? It's a lie! It will never happen," he said, referring to a pledge by both candidates.