The Bay Area is one of cookbook author Patricia Wells's favorite regions for dining. So when her publicist scheduled a tour here to promote her latest book, "Salad as a Meal," Ms. Wells extended the trip by several days to fit in as many restaurants as possible.

Ms. Wells, a 64-year-old American who splits her time between Paris and Provence, is considered one of the foremost authorities on French cuisine and received the Chevalier de l'Ordre des Arts et des Lettres for her contributions to French culture. The easy yet sophisticated recipes found in her eight cookbooks have been credited with helping make French cuisine less intimidating. 

Ms. Wells said that when she travels she prefers "to see what is local and what's going on in each town that's new." In a week of eating, Ms. Wells said, she found the Bay Area restaurant scene as lively as ever. Here are some of her favorites: 

Just opened last year, this casual counterpart to the highly rated Boulevard was the restaurant Ms. Wells was most looking forward to visiting. She said the seared calamari and octopus salad flanked with house-made chorizo, a confit of garlic potatoes and garlic mayonnaise ($15) could make "a whole meal." The black cod with shiso shrimp fritter ($16.50) was so good that she plans to try to re-create it at home. 

Prospect, at 300 Spear St. in San Francisco, is open for brunch on Sunday from 11 a.m. to 3 p.m. and for dinner from 5:30 p.m. daily.

This San Francisco institution is known for its delicious, but pricey, dim sum. As with most dim sum restaurants, servers circulate with carts and trays of items—about 60 varieties a day—and diners choose plates. 

Ms. Wells's favorites were Shanghai soup dumplings ($11.20 for six) made with minced pork, scallion and ginger, and spinach dumplings ($5.60 for three) with spinach, water chestnuts, carrots, shiitake mushrooms and bamboo shoots. 

Rincon Center is Yank Sing's main location, where on Sundays it takes over the food court and sets up additional tables. It has a second, smaller outlet on Stevenson Street.

Yank Sing Rincon Center, at 101 Spear St. in San Francisco, is open for lunch Monday to Friday from 11 a.m. to 3 p.m., and Saturday and Sunday from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. 

Among the few French restaurants Ms. Wells goes to outside France is Piperade. Located at the bottom of San Francisco's Telegraph Hill, the restaurant serves simple but authentic Basque cuisine, among the few U.S. restaurants with that specialty. The must-have item, according to Ms. Wells, is one of its signature dishes that goes by the same name as the restaurant, piperade: a mixture of onion, green peppers and tomatoes with Serrano ham and poached egg ($18). Basque is "one of the few regions in France that has spice," she said. 

Piperade, at 1015 Battery St. in San Francisco, is open for lunch Monday to Friday from 11:30 a.m. to 3 p.m.

When it comes to pizza, Ms. Wells has simple tastes, which is why the Cheese Board Collective's pizza stand on Shattuck Avenue in Berkeley appeals to her. The worker-opened business started as a cheese shop but expanded to include a bakery and pizzeria. The pizzeria makes just one type of pizza a day ($2.50 a slice, $20 for a whole pie), using fresh seasonal ingredients, such as a combination of crimini mushrooms, green peppers, onions, French feta, mozzarella and Italian parsley. There are no tables, so customers sit on the sidewalk to eat. But that's all part of the experience, said Ms. Wells. 

The Cheese Board is open for lunch Tuesday to Saturday, 11:30 a.m. to 3 p.m.

In San Francisco's Jackson Square near the Financial District, Cotogna serves rustic Italian fare, including pasta, pizzas, and grilled meat and fish. Ms. Wells chose the restaurant because she was impressed by Quince, a fine dining establishment run by the same owners. The highlight of her lunch was the fava leaf sformato with grana padano cheese, a flan-like baked egg dish ($12). It was "all green, soft, smooth and satisfying," she said. 

Cotogna, at 490 Pacific Ave. in San Francisco, serves lunch Monday to Friday, 11:30 a.m. to 2:30 p.m., and Saturday, 11 a.m. to 3 p.m. 