LONDON—Nigeria's central bank might raise interest rates again this year if the government fails to rein in spending, its chief said Tuesday as he outlined plans to spur investment in agriculture and industry. 

Sanusi Lamido Sanusi said that the Central Bank of Nigeria stands ready to tighten monetary policy to curb inflation if a much-needed fiscal contraction doesn't materialize. 

"I believe that, in an environment where there are still lots of concerns about sovereign debt, the government will have to face up to the fact that the markets are jittery about debt," Mr. Sanusi said in an interview at the Royal Institute of International Affairs in London, also known as Chatham House. 

President Goodluck Jonathan won re-election in Nigeria in April, and Sanusi said the central bank wishes to see the new government not only reduce overall spending but also cut its overhead costs, in favor of a greater proportion of capital spending. 

"It is not so much the size of the deficit but the very low levels of investment and capital. Lots of the money is being spent on salaries and overheads, and that is inflationary." 

Rising prices remain a big concern, the central bank governor said, despite recent falls in commodities. In the 12 months to March, inflation in Nigeria rose to 12.8% from 11.1% in February, according to the bank's website. 

Mr. Sanusi said the biggest contributors to inflation are high prices for food and energy. Although an oil exporter, Nigeria imports petroleum products and many are subsidized to keep prices for consumers low. This support must end, Mr. Sanusi said, as it is straining government finances. 

The central bank raised its main policy rate to 7.5% in March from 6.5% in an effort to ease inflationary pressures. 

Mr. Sanusi said there is little monetary policy can do to mitigate the effect of imported inflation. But he added higher borrowing costs may be needed if the government fails to act on fiscal policy. 

"If we think we are going to have tighter fiscal controls we will probably wait and see. If there was evidence that spending has continued after the elections unabated then we may have to react," Mr. Sanusi said. 

Emerging markets are grappling with excessive flows of "hot money," as investors in developed economies pour cash into developing neighbors in search of higher returns. 

Mr. Sanusi said Nigeria is eager for foreign capital but wants to make sure it is attracting long-term investment. The country operates limited capital controls to this end—like demanding bond investors keep their holdings for at least a year—and doesn't plan to extend them, he said. 

Unusually for a central bank, the Central Bank of Nigeria is examining ways of encouraging greater investment in agriculture and industry. 

Earlier Tuesday, Mr. Sanusi told an audience of academics, business people and officials that the bank will offer to cover some losses on bad loans to farmers in an effort to boost lending to agriculture. Just 1.4% of Nigerian banks' lending goes to farmers, he said. 

Mr. Sanusi added the central bank will also extend similar guarantees to investors willing to fund infrastructure projects in power and transportation. 

"We have an interest as a central bank in financial stability. Financial stability can only be guaranteed when banks continue to lend to the real economy rather than speculate. To do that we have to unlock the bottlenecks in the economy," Mr. Sanusi said. 

More controversially, Mr. Sanusi said emerging economies should consider whether or not to raise trade barriers to protect nascent industries. 

He said tariffs or similar measures could be put in place for a short while to enable African nations to move away from exporting raw materials to building a manufacturing base for finished goods and services. 

 Write to  Jason Douglas at jason.douglas@dowjones.com 