BERLIN—German Chancellor Angela Merkel is set to endorse Italian official Mario Draghi as the next president of the European Central Bank, said people familiar with the matter.

German backing makes Mr. Draghi's elevation to Europe's top central-banking job a virtual certainty because the Italian, who now heads Italy's central bank, already enjoys the support of other key euro-zone countries, including France. European leaders are due to make a formal decision on the successor to current ECB head Jean-Claude Trichet at a summit in June.

The German leader has come to the view that there is no viable alternative to Mr. Draghi, but hasn't yet made her position public because she is concerned about a possible adverse reaction in Germany's media and parliament to an Italian ECB head, these people said. 

Some in Germany have also viewed Mr. Draghi as being too close to the investment-banking community because he previously worked for Goldman Sachs Group. 

Ms. Merkel might make her endorsement Mr. Draghi public soon, although the timing of any statement remains uncertain, said the people familiar with the matter. 

The chancellor's reluctant backing of Mr. Draghi is a recognition that French President Nicolas Sarkozy effectively closed off other options on Tuesday by pre-emptively endorsing Mr. Draghi for the job. 

Ms. Merkel would risk a serious rift with France, her most important partner in managing the euro zone's debt crisis, if she tried to veto Mr. Draghi now, German officials said. She is unwilling to spark such a fight with Paris, they said. 

German officials have so far viewed Mr. Draghi's candidacy warily, not because they regard him personally as unsuitable, but because in Germany, Italy has long a poor image on fiscal and monetary discipline. 

Berlin is worried that an Italian-led ECB could add to public skepticism about the euro at a time when southern European countries' debts have sparked a crisis of confidence in the currency. 

However, Ms. Merkel has had to accept that Mr. Draghi's professional credentials are widely respected in Europe, and that no other candidate has much appeal across the euro zone.

Mr. Draghi, who has a doctorate in economics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, has held senior positions in Italian government as well as at Goldman Sachs. 

He has won international plaudits for his work at the Financial Stability Board, an international committee charged with coordinating the overhaul of global financial regulation in the wake of the banking crisis.

Ms. Merkel is likely to try to sell Mr. Draghi's nomination to her skeptical public by arguing that he can be trusted to take a tough line on fighting inflation, and that his southern European origins will be an asset in persuading the euro's southern members to adopt stricter financial discipline.

Ms. Merkel originally planned to put a German at the helm of the ECB, as part of her strategy for convincing German voters and lawmakers that the euro remains in Germany's interests despite the rising cost of propping up cash-strapped euro-zone countries such as Greece. But Ms. Merkel's preferred candidate—Bundesbank President Axel Weber—unexpectedly resigned in February, citing fundamental differences with his ECB colleagues over how to respond to Europe's debt crisis. That left Germany without a credible successor to Mr. Trichet. 

Since February, Mr. Draghi has worked hard to convince Germany that he would safeguard financial rigor and price stability in the euro zone, and momentum behind his campaign has grown while other candidates have failed to attract much support.

A deal between France and Italy this week appears to have sealed the matter. Mr. Trichet's retirement this fall will leave France without a representative on the ECB's six-member executive board. Mr. Sarkozy this week proposed a simple swap with Italian premier Silvio Berlusconi: Italy would get the ECB presidency in return for withdrawing its current member of the ECB executive board, Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, to make way for a new French member. 

The bilateral accord between the euro zone's second- and third-biggest economies irritated Berlin, which wanted to take more time before settling the ECB succession. 

Some German officials believe Ms. Merkel played her hand badly by waiting too long, leaving the initiative to France and failing to extract any significant concessions in return for backing Mr. Draghi.

 Write to  Marcus Walker at marcus.walker@wsj.com 