Shorter is typically better. But it also can be confusing.

A case in point: smid.

Read the full  Investing in Funds report .

A number of financial firms have adopted "smid" in their fund names to indicate a focus on small to midsize companies, sometimes replacing a specific "small to mid" label. It's typically presented as "smid-cap" or "SMidCap," with "cap" an abbreviation for market capitalization. 

There's a very simple reason for the change. Fund managers and other professional investors "like to shorten our phrases" and have been saying smid for many years, says  Nathan Rowader, director of investments at Forward Management LLC. (Think of "forex" for "foreign exchange," for instance.)

Mr. Rowader's own firm has done some name tinkering.  Forward SMIDPlus ﻿, which he co-manages, was Forward Small to Mid Cap until a September 2010 change in its management and strategy.

This change didn't happen overnight. One of the first mutual funds to use the "smid" name was  Eaton Vance Atlanta Capital SMID-Cap, back in 2002.

At the time, some advisers and brokers weren't sure what to make of it, says  Chip Reed, one of the fund's managers. "There was a lot of confusion," he says, with advisers asking, "Is it small or is it mid?" and wondering where the fund would fit in a diversified portfolio.

Over time, the smid approach has worked its way through the universe of financial advisers and brokers. These days, fund officials say, most advisers and brokers are familiar with the smid approach and nomenclature. But individuals, probably not so much. 

"If I say 'smid' to my parents, they don't know what I'm talking about," says  Devin Dougherty, a product manager with Delaware Investments, which last year reshaped the midcap Delaware Growth Opportunities into  Delaware Smid Cap Growth.

In the popular press, "smid" is far more likely to show up in the sports pages than the business pages, with references to hockey player  Ladislav Smid, an Edmonton Oilers defenseman born in the Czech Republic.

Whatever they're called, though, funds that combine small and midcap stocks can make sense for both fund firms and investors, companies say. The managers don't have to automatically sell attractive companies as they graduate from small-cap to midcap size, for one thing. The firms can also manage more dollars in a smid strategy than one that is purely small-cap, since a small-stock fund's growth in assets can quickly make it difficult to buy and sell substantial positions in thinly traded small stocks. A single smid fund can replace separate small-cap and midcap funds in a portfolio or 401(k) plan.

To be sure, though, a shorter name isn't the only benefit from labeling some funds as "smid," notes Mr. Rowader of Forward Management. Under securities rules, a fund must generally invest the bulk of its assets in the type of securities cited in the name. His firm's lawyers said it would have been a problem to have "small to mid" wording in the name of the firm's smid fund, since in its revised approach Forward SMIDPlus gets its stock exposure through financial derivatives rather than by buying the actual stocks.

That's a non-issue using "smid" in the name, Mr. Rowader says: "Smid's not a real word, so it gives you some flexibility."

 Ms. Damato is a news editor for The Wall Street Journal, based in South Brunswick, N.J. Email her at karen.damato@wsj.com. 