NEW YORK—A federal prosecutor said that a former  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS


0.07
%




 director was part of an alleged insider-trading conspiracy with Galleon Group founder  Raj Rajaratnam.

The statements at a court hearing Friday were the first time federal prosecutors had publicly cited the involvement of the former Goldman director, Rajat Gupta, in the alleged scheme.

Earlier this past week, the Securities and Exchange Commission filed a civil administrative action against Mr. Gupta for allegedly sharing inside information with Mr. Rajaratnam when Mr. Gupta was a member of the boards of Goldman and Procter & Gamble Co.

Assistant U.S. Attorney  Jonathan Streeter said that "the government is going to show on at least two occasions that Mr. Gupta attended Goldman Sachs board meetings" and that "within minutes of the meetings, he called Mr. Raj Rajaratnam."

Following the calls, Mr. Rajaratnam bought or sold his Goldman stock, Mr. Streeter said.

The alleged inside information included details before the public announcement of a $5 billion investment by Warren Buffet's Berkshire Hathaway Inc. at the height of the financial crisis in September 2008 and Goldman's first reported loss as a public company in fall 2008. 

Mr. Rajaratnam allegedly bought "hundreds of thousands of shares" of Goldman Sachs within minutes of receiving the call regarding the Berkshire investment, Mr. Streeter said.

  John Dowd, Mr. Rajaratnam's lawyer, has said the SEC's administrative action was "simply an effort to destroy a favorable witness." In a letter to the SEC this past week, Mr. Dowd urged the regulator to delay bringing an action against Mr. Gupta because it could affect Mr. Rajaratnam's ability to have a fair trial and they had been preparing a trial subpoena "for Mr. Gupta to testify in the criminal case." It isn't clear if Mr. Gupta would testify at this point.

The revelation was part of a hearing over objections to wiretapped telephone calls that prosecutors intend to play at Mr. Rajaratnam's trial on conspiracy and securities fraud charges, which begins next week. Mr. Rajaratnam has denied wrongdoing. At least one call prosecutors intend to play was between Mr. Gupta and Mr. Rajaratnam, but occurred in July 2008 before the alleged leaks. Mr. Rajaratnam's lawyers have objected to that call being played at trial.

"These allegations first made by the SEC are totally baseless. Mr. Gupta's 40-year record of ethical conduct, integrity, and commitment to guarding his clients' confidences is beyond reproach," said  Gary Naftalis, Mr. Gupta's lawyer. "Mr. Gupta has done nothing wrong and is confident that these unfounded allegations will be rejected by any fair and impartial fact finder. There is no allegation that Mr. Gupta traded in any of these securities or shared in any profits as part of any quid pro quo. In fact, Mr. Gupta had lost his entire $10 million investment in the GB Voyager Fund managed by Rajaratnam at the time of these events, negating any motive to deviate from a lifetime of honesty and integrity."

Criminal complaints and developing disclosures in the Galleon insider trading case allege a far-reaching and complex scheme. Here, the known and alleged relationships.

Mr. Gupta, the former head of consulting firm McKinsey & Co., hasn't been charged with any criminal wrongdoing. 

The Wall Street Journal, citing people familiar with the matter, reported that  Lloyd C. Blankfein, Goldman's chief executive, has agreed to testify at the trial in order to establish that information about Goldman was shared with board members, including Mr. Gupta.

Raj Rajaratnam is among 26 people charged in broad criminal insider-trading probe. Nineteen people have pleaded guilty in the probe.

On Friday, prosecutors also gave a preview of their case, saying the first two witnesses will be a Federal Bureau of Investigation agent and  Anil Kumar, a former McKinsey consultant and a cooperating witness in the case. 

Prosecutors indicated that they planned to play recorded telephone conversations between Mr. Rajaratnam and Mr. Kumar, as well as conversations between Mr. Rajaratnam and his employees and with his younger brother,  Rengan Rajaratnam. 

Mr. Streeter, the prosecutor, said they intend to show at trial that Rengan Rajaratnam was a Galleon employee during the conspiracy and a co-conspirator. No criminal charges have been disclosed against him. 

 Write to  Chad Bray at chad.bray@dowjones.com 