  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS


0.28
%




 took no action against a high-profile board member for several months despite indications prosecutors were scrutinizing whether he had passed along inside information.

In testimony in the Galleon insider-trading trial, Goldman Chief Executive  Lloyd Blankfein said he had "an awareness of—I want to say inkling"—that the activities of the director,  Rajat Gupta, were under scrutiny by prosecutors in March 2010, when Goldman announced he wouldn't stand for re-election. Mr. Gupta stepped down as a Goldman director in May 2010.

Goldman first became aware Mr. Gupta might be involved in the Galleon investigation in December 2009, a person familiar with the matter said. Goldman asked Mr. Gupta and the government for more information but only became aware of the depth of Mr. Gupta's involvement in the probe after he left Goldman's board, the person said.

Mr. Blankfein declined to comment after his testimony, and a Goldman spokesman declined to comment on his behalf.

As a witness for the government, Mr. Blankfein testified that Mr. Gupta violated Goldman policies when he allegedly gave Galleon Group hedge-fund founder  Raj Rajaratnam information he learned during Goldman board meetings.

Prosecutors say Mr. Gupta is a co-conspirator in the insider-trading case. The Securities and Exchange Commission has alleged in a civil proceeding that Mr. Gupta passed inside information to Mr. Rajaratnam. Mr. Gupta hasn't been charged criminally; he has denied wrongdoing through his lawyer.

Mr. Rajaratnam faces fourteen counts of securities fraud in an insider-trading trial that is the largest in a generation and is in its third week of proceedings. Mr. Rajaratnam's lawyers have said he did nothing wrong and traded based on legitimate research, not secret tips.

If Goldman had discovered Mr. Gupta was the subject of a criminal proceeding, it would have had to disclose that information to investors in a regulatory filing if it was deemed to materially affect the director's abilities or integrity, according to securities laws. 

Smiling as he entered the courtroom and wearing a dark suit and blue tie, Mr. Blankfein explained to jurors that Galleon was a "very important" client at Goldman, bringing Goldman "millions" of dollars of business each year. 

At a lunch break when the jurors had left the courtroom, Mr. Blankfein headed toward Mr. Rajaratnam, shook his hand and exchanged words with his legal team. 

Goldman hasn't been accused of wrongdoing in the Galleon matter.

In the Gupta matter, Mr. Rajaratnam's lawyer grilled Mr. Blankfein on a March 19, 2010, news release by Goldman, saying Mr. Gupta was stepping down from the board. 

"Rajat has made important contributions to Goldman Sachs as a board member," Mr. Blankfein was quoted as saying in the release. "His independent advice, keen understanding of the issues and belief in our culture has had a tremendous impact on our firm." 

  John Dowd, Mr. Rajaratnam's lawyer, asked Mr. Blankfein: "At the time you made this statement, Mr. Blankfein, you were aware of the allegations made against Mr. Gupta by the government, correct?" 

"I knew there were some questions about Rajat's behavior. That's how I would say it," Mr. Blankfein responded. 

Mr. Blankfein then was asked if he was aware lawyers for Goldman "had looked into" questions about Mr. Gupta's activities in December 2009 and February 2010. 

After the government requested a conference with the judge, he abandoned that line of questioning. Mr. Blankfein didn't comment on those reviews. 

During that conference, prosecutors and Mr. Dowd discussed Goldman's knowledge of Mr. Gupta's activities. Mr. Dowd referenced a "report" to Mr. Blankfein from "counsel" created before March 2010 and which he referenced in his cross examination of Mr. Blankfein. Prosecutors said the issue of Goldman's knowledge was not relevant and that Goldman was not aware of a July 2008 call between Mr. Rajaratnam and Mr. Gupta in which they discussed information Mr. Gupta had learned during a Goldman board meeting.

When news first surfaced in The Wall Street Journal in April 2010 that prosecutors were examining the activities of Mr. Gupta in connection to the Galleon matter, Goldman officials said Mr. Gupta had told the firm he had decided to step down "because of other commitments." At the time, Goldman wouldn't say whether Mr. Gupta had told the firm about the government's interest in his activities.

In a March 22, 2010, court filing, the government told Mr. Rajaratnam's lawyers that its investigation involved trading in Goldman during the height of the 2008 financial crisis. The filing indicated the U.S. expected the investigation to lead to further evidence involving "additional uncharged co-conspirators."

In the civil SEC case filed earlier this month, regulators accused Mr. Gupta of giving Mr. Rajaratnam information about Goldman's earnings and a $5 billion investment in Goldman by Warren Buffett's  Berkshire Hathaway Inc. Mr. Gupta called Mr. Rajaratnam almost immediately after receiving such information through the board, regulators alleged.

On Friday, Mr. Gupta sued the SEC in a New York federal court, accusing regulators of violating his constitutional rights. He alleges the SEC's administrative action would deny him his right to a jury trial and other procedural safeguards available if the case had been brought in civil court. He hasn't been charged criminally. 

A lawyer for Mr. Gupta declined to comment Wednesday but has previously said the SEC's allegations are "baseless" and "unfounded." 

In his testimony, Mr. Blankfein at one point provoked laughter from the gallery when a prosecutor asked him why it was unusual that the company was losing money in the middle of the fourth quarter of 2008.

"We generally make money," he said, with a big grin.

Prosecutors have said Mr. Gupta improperly told Mr. Rajaratnam that Goldman was losing money in that quarter, allowing him to sell millions of dollars worth of Goldman stock before the share price dropped. Mr. Blankfein said investors had no idea about Goldman's performance at that moment. 

"It seemed to be a consensus, an agreement, that we were making money at that point," Mr. Blankfein said, "when in fact, we weren't." 

Mr. Blankfein was escorted in and out of the building by federal agents, who drove him out of an underground garage at the courthouse. News photographers briefly chased the car down the street after his testimony.

—Michael Rothfeld  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Susan Pulliam at susan.pulliam@wsj.com, Liz Rappaport at liz.rappaport@wsj.com and Chad Bray at chad.bray@dowjones.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications  Goldman Sachs Group Inc. did millions of dollars worth of business every year with the hedge fund Galleon. A previous version of this article incorrectly said it did billions of dollars of business with Galleon each year. 