BOGOTA–Colombia extradited one of the most sought-after alleged cocaine traffickers to Venezuela in a major victory for President Hugo Chavez over Washington, which had also requested the extradition. 

Walid Makled, known as "the Turk," controlled much of the cocaine shipped through Venezuela, according to U.S. officials. He was captured in August in a sweltering Colombian border town on a U.S. warrant. 

His case was especially important for the U.S. because of the alleged links that Mr. Makled has to top generals in Venezuela's armed forces who remain within President Chavez's inner circle. In a series of jailhouse interviews with local media, Mr. Makled said he built his billion-dollar drug shipping empire by paying off some 40 generals in the Venezuelan armed forces. 

On Monday, Mr. Makled calmly boarded a Venezuelan jet, wearing a blue blazer over a bulletproof vest, television images showed. Mr. Makled will now face charges of homicide, money laundering and narcotics trafficking in his native Venezuela. 

Mr. Makled, through his lawyer, has denied all the charges. 

"My client was eager to return to Venezuela to start the process of defending himself," said Miguel Angel Ramirez, Mr. Makled's lawyer in Colombia. "He wanted to be extradited to Venezuela instead of the United States." 

Mr. Makled allegedly started his criminal career hijacking trucks near the Colombian border and rapidly built a network of shipping firms, securing lucrative and important government concessions to run one of Venezuela's largest airports and its most important seaport. His operations were apparently at the center of Venezuela's thriving role as a cocaine transportation hub, with major shipments heading to Europe and the U.S. 

Venezuelan officials have declined to comment on Mr. Makled's accusations and it remains unclear what impact, if any, his testimony will have on the ranks of the Venezuelan government. President Chavez has dismissed Mr. Makled's statements as a U.S. plot to destabilize his socialist administration. 

The Makled case has become a scandal in Venezuela that could potentially cause political problems for Mr. Chavez, who is preparing for presidential elections next year. 

Several Venezuela observers believe that Mr. Chavez will attempt to keep Mr. Makled's testimony under wraps. In a diplomatic note to the Colombian government, Venezuela said it would respect Mr. Makled's rights to a fair trial and would protect his life. Yet Venezuelan courts and judges are widely considered to be loyal to Mr. Chavez, making it highly unlikely that any damning details will emerge from the Makled case. 

"The Venezuelan judiciary has been co-opted by the presidency and the Makled case will not receive a free and fair trial," said Joel Hirst, a fellow with the Council on Foreign Relations. 

Mr. Makled's extradition to Venezuela also marks a reversal for Washington's efforts to fight narcotics in the Andean region. The U.S had tagged Mr. Makled as one of the world's most powerful drug lords, but was not as quick as Venezuela in presenting its extradition request when he was detained last year. That delay was used by Colombia, Washington's closest ally in the region, to explain its decision to send Mr. Makled to Venezuela instead of the U.S. 

Colombia, which in the last few months has rebuilt its strained diplomatic ties with Venezuela, also argued that Mr. Makled faces charges of homicide in Venezuela, on top of money laundering and drug trafficking, which trump the U.S. accusations of cocaine trafficking. Many analysts say President Santos's decision to extradite Mr. Makled to Venezuela instead of to the U.S. has been a key factor in the improved relations between the two countries. 

The U.S. may not end up totally empty handed. Mr. Makled says, and U.S. officials confirm, that he met numerous times with U.S. law enforcement officials while in prison in Colombia. But it's difficult to calculate what information, if any, U.S. officials obtained from their meetings with the alleged drug trafficker. 



 Write to  Darcy Crowe at darcy.crowe@dowjones.com 