Reports of the death of U.S. manufacturing have been slightly exaggerated. Manufacturing still accounts for nearly one in 10 U.S. nonfarm jobs as measured by the government, and those jobs tend to pay much better than burger-flipping or barista gigs. After more than a decade of decline, the number of manufacturing workers in the U.S. is rising again, if modestly and perhaps only temporarily. Big companies, including Whirlpool, Caterpillar and Dow Chemical, are building high-tech factories in the U.S. Ford Motor is hiring thousands of U.S. workers.

Even so, we have given up a lot of our manufacturing capacity and expertise as global companies have rushed to expand in China, India, Brazil and other fast-growing economies. Between 1997 and 2009, we lost six million U.S. manufacturing jobs, or around a third of the total. Our smartest young people have tended to pursue such fields as law, marketing and finance rather than manufacturing, which is seen (wrongly) as a ticket to dullsville.

How much should we care? Plenty, says Andrew Liveris, chairman and chief executive of Dow Chemical. In "Make It in America," he calls for a national strategy to revive manufacturing. We need manufacturing jobs, he says, if we are to keep a growing population busy and start paying off our debts to the rest of the world. Some Americans imagine that we can thrive by continuing to dream up gadgets like iPhones and Kindles while letting the Chinese do all the tedious work of making the products themselves. Mr. Liveris disagrees. 

For one thing, where manufacturing goes, research and development tend to follow. It is easier for scientists to test out their notions if the manufacturing experts are next-door rather than on the other side of the world. Global companies are also dispersing their R&D labs around the world because they need to ingratiate themselves with national governments demanding technology in return for market access. 

 By Andrew N. Liveris  (Wiley, 208 pages, $24.95)

In any case, global companies can't afford to pass up the inventive talent available in China, India and other countries that produce top-notch engineers and scientists. In a recent meeting with analysts, 3M chief executive George Buckley said that he could never hope to find in America all the scientists and engineers he needs.

Not that we would want to keep all kinds of manufacturing in the U.S. It can be far more economic to do some sorts of production—especially the kind requiring lots of low- to medium-skill labor—in places with lower wage costs. And it would be unrealistic to expect to keep all high-tech manufacturing and R&D in the U.S.; global companies often find it advantageous to produce things close to buyers and suppliers.

But when U.S.-based firms move all their capacity in high-tech processes overseas, our country eventually loses some of the skills needed for whole groups of products. Mr. Liveris cites the Kindle. Amazon, he says, invented it but couldn't find all the screen-making expertise and capacity required to produce it in the U.S. and so had to have it manufactured in Taiwan. (An Amazon spokeswoman declined to discuss with me where the Kindle is made and why.) "Industries from solar panel technology to highly advanced computer circuitry—industries that were born in the U.S.—now exist predominantly elsewhere," Mr. Liveris laments.

Many Americans assume that manufacturing in the U.S. is a lost cause because our wages and environmental standards are higher than those in much of Asia and Latin America. But other high-wage nations that care about clean air and water—notably Japan, Germany and Switzerland—have kept strong manufacturing industries. The trick is to maintain productivity levels that make up for those high wages and to focus on relatively clean sorts of manufacturing.

The free market alone won't sort all this out for the best, Mr. Liveris says, though he would like to see more free-trade agreements, such as the one with South Korea now awaiting congressional approval. He thinks that the U.S. government needs to draw up a national strategy to encourage more manufacturing, especially in renewable energy and other "green" technologies. Among other things, he urges that we cut taxes for manufacturers—and make regulations more uniform—so that we become more competitive with Asia and Europe. He also wants to make the R&D tax credit permanent instead of dependent on renewal each year by Congress. (Wouldn't it be better just to junk all tax credits and make the tax rate as low as possible so that investment decisions could be made without distortion?)

Not least, Mr. Liveris would like see the federal government offer financial incentives to various companies—beyond what is already dangled by state and local agencies—to encourage manufacturers to build factories in the U.S. He says that other nations offer far more and that we need to pony up. He even wants a nonpartisan national "growth bank"—directed by industrialists, economists, scientists and engineers—to offer incentives to "businesses with a particular ability to create sustainable jobs and sustainable growth." One has to wonder whether such an outfit would succeed in picking winners.

Mr. Liveris doesn't shy away from proposing ideas that have defeated countless other reformers. For instance, he wants to overhaul our K-12 education system so that it will concentrate more on science, math and engineering. That promises to be a long struggle, he admits. "I pushed science at the dinner table with my kids," writes Mr. Liveris, who loved chemistry as a boy, "but none of them ended up going into engineering."

 Mr. Hagerty, based in Pittsburgh, covers manufacturing for The Wall Street Journal.  