MADISON, Wis.—Scott Walker broke with tradition by holding his January inauguration on the North Gallery of the state Capitol—far from a marble bust of a man with a sharp nose, defiant expression and thick head of upswept hair.

An aide to Mr. Walker said the new Republican governor wanted to be close to a replica of the state constitution, but the move also kept the bust of Robert "Fighting Bob" La Follette out of the public eye.

Two weeks of raucous protests over Mr. Walker's "budget repair" bill have paralyzed state government and thrust La Follette—and his progressive legacy—back on center stage.

Protesters' signs and online discussions have repeatedly invoked La Follette, a turn-of-the-20th century Wisconsin governor and U.S. senator. His bust has become a locus of the protest, with demonstrators draping flowers around its neck and festooning its pedestal with signs saying "Long Live La Follette" and "What Would Bob Do?" 

Dennis Dresang, a professor emeritus at La Follette's namesake Robert M. La Follette School of Public Affairs at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, has a ready answer: "He'd be standing with the protesters, screaming 'Right on!' "

 1848 State of Wisconsin established in same year as first successful strike by ship carpenters in Milwaukee.

 1886 Seven workers killed by State Militia while on march to establish the 8-hour day. 

 1900 Robert "Fighting Bob" La Follette elected governor; agenda includes the first workers' compensation system and minimum wage.

 1906 La Follette enters the Senate Iand champions child labor laws.

 1932 Precursor of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees Union founded in Madison.

 1946 Republican Joseph McCarthy elected senator from Wisconsinlaunches Senate hearings into supposed Communists in the government.

 1957 Democrat William Proxmire wins special election to fill McCarthy's seat; opposes Vietnam warand creates "Golden Fleece Award" for questionable spending.

 1959 Public Employee Collective Bargaining Act passed in Wisconsin — one of first in nation

 1986 Republican Tommy Thompson elected governor; reforms state welfare system and goes on to head U.S. Department of Health and Human services.

 2011 Republican Scott Walker supports bill stripping public-employee unions of most collective bargaining rights. 

Wisconsin is a bellwether state, where the liberal bastions of Milwaukee and Madison are evenly balanced by more conservative rural and suburban districts. It has picked the winner in 9 of the last 12 presidential elections, and when the state swings, it swings hard—electing a string of strong-willed and colorful legislators and governors who have long played an outsize role in national politics. The abolitionist movement took root in the state, and a rural schoolhouse in Ripon, Wis., is widely regarded as the birthplace of the Republican Party. 

La Follette, who started out as a Republican, became the personification of the Progressive movement, and his ideas paved the way for the New Deal policies of Democratic President Franklin D. Roosevelt. Today his legacy is revered on the left. Republicans also acknowledge the power of his will—if not his policies.

"We're happy he's from Wisconsin," said former four-term Republican Gov. Tommy G. Thompson. "But you have to distinguish the man from his policies of isolationism and being anticorporate."

That split is now playing out on the steps of the Capitol. Mr. Walker wants to eliminate most of the collective-bargaining rights for the state's 170,000 public employees. Protesters see the move as a betrayal of La Follette's legacy.

Born 155 years ago in tiny Primrose, outside Madison, La Follette came of age amid the rising corporate cronyism and income inequality of the Gilded Age. Short of stature, self-assured and possessed of a booming voice, he fell out with the Republican Party establishment and spent five years running for governor, still under the GOP banner. 

La Follette campaigned by railcar and horse cart, visiting 300 towns and delivering stump speeches that crystallized Progressive ideology: Government should be a force to stand up for the little guy. 

Elected governor in 1900, he pushed for workers' compensation and a minimum wage. He moved on to the U.S. Senate in 1906, where he opposed American involvement in World War I and backed child-labor laws and women's suffrage. 

"He began to put working people in the driver's seat," said Dave Obey, a liberal Democrat who served 40 years in Congress.

But since La Follette's time, conservative Republicans have also found electoral success in Wisconsin. In 1946, a rural conservative beat La Follette's son Robert Jr. by 5,000 votes in the Republican primary and became a senator. 

Joseph McCarthy was a Republican U.S. Senator from Wisconsin of little note until a 1950 speech in West Virginia, where he declared, "I have here in my hand a list of 205" Communists working for the State Department. He never proved his claims.

Following Mr. McCarthy's Senate censure and death in 1957, Wisconsin voters elected William Proxmire, a liberal Democrat who served 32 years. During his tenure, organized labor increasingly came to support the election of Democrats in Wisconsin. In 1959, the state passed a law allowing public employees to bargain collectively. 

Mr. Proxmire opposed the Vietnam War and lambasted wasteful spending on things like studies of why people fall in love and whether military personnel should carry umbrellas with his Golden Fleece Awards.

Mr. Thompson was elected governor in 1986—between two Democratic administrations—and pushed for a welfare overhaul and school choice.

In last fall's election, the pendulum swung again. Mr. Walker was chosen to replace a Democrat and both chambers of the legislature tipped into GOP hands.

At his inauguration, Mr. Walker literally turned his back on La Follette and invoked his political hero, Ronald Reagan. "What is failing us is not our people or our places," he said. "What is failing us is the expanse of government."

A few weeks later, Mr. Walker proposed eliminating most collective-bargaining rights for public unions. In response, 14 Democratic state senators left the state Feb. 17 to deny the Republicans a quorum and the ability to pass the bill.

Tens of thousands of protesters—many citing Fighting Bob as inspiration—have descended on the Capitol. Similar fights have broken out in Indiana and Ohio. 

Reince Priebus, former head of the state Republican Party and now chairman of the Republican National Committee, said Mr. Walker's plan was actually a continuation of the La Follette legacy.

"We have a long history of reform—La Follette, Tommy Thompson on welfare, and now Gov. Walker," he said. "The cheeseheads are at the center of the debate."

—Ilan Brat contributed to this article.

 Write to  Douglas Belkin at doug.belkin@wsj.com and Thomas M. Burton at tom.burton@wsj.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications  Dennis Dresang is a professor emeritus at the Robert M. La Follette School of Public Affairs at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. An earlier version of this article incorrectly called it the Robert M. La Follette Institute of Public Affairs.