Japanese stocks tumbled, but a huge action in the money market by the Bank of Japan sent the yen, which had rallied at the start of trading, falling as investors tried to gauge the impact of the earthquake and nuclear accidents in Japan.

The Nikkei Stock Average fell 5.2% at the open Monday, crossing the 10000 threshold on the belief the quake would slow the Japanese economy and hurt corporate profits.

The yen, which rallied after Friday's quake on the expectation companies would bring cash home and buy yen to help repair the damage, fells after the sharply after the Bank of Japan offered to inject a record 18 trillion yen (about $220 billion) into markets to secure confidence. The currency slipped following the action; the dollar rose to 82.20 yen, from 81.89 late Friday.

Some of Japan's iconic companies were hit hard, with Nissan Motor down 13%, while Tokyo Electric Power Co., the owner of the damaged nuclear power plants didn't trade at the open. The stock-market selling in Tokyo saw 32 of the 33 Topix subindexes lower. Only the construction subindex was higher, in anticipation of reconstruction efforts. 

The yen may be under further pressure in the coming weeks as the cost of the disaster weighs on government finances and investors start to doubt the currency's safe-haven status.

The reason for the rise in the yen—Japanese companies will need to buy yen with their overseas assets to cover the cost of the quake—will come up against weaker economic growth in Japan, the realization Japan's huge government debt will get bigger, and potential pressure from the government, which doesn't want the yen to rise further.

The impact on commodities could be mixed, with Japan's need for oil and natural gas to produce electricity to replace its damaged nuclear plants possibly offset by an overall decline in demand expected with the weaker economy. 

Most financial firms said their operations only suffered slightly from the quake, and they are expected to conduct business normally on Monday.

Traders who bid up the yen Friday followed the playbook from the 1995 Kobe earthquake, when the yen rose and ultimately hit an all-time high. Some analysts say Japanese firms may not need to repatriate huge sums of cash the way they did 16 years ago. And if the yen does strengthen significantly, Japan's central bank was prepared to protect the fortunes of the country's exporters. Shortly after the quake hit, the BOJ said it "will continue to do its utmost, including the provision of liquidity, to ensure the stability in financial markets and to secure the smooth settlement of funds, in the coming week." 

"Japanese authorities will not let the yen appreciate with speculative flows. I think they will be very decisive," said  Yuki Hashimoto, an analyst at Morgan Stanley Asia, in an e-mailed comment on Sunday. The yen is up slightly for the year and rose 12.8% against the dollar last year, making it harder for Japanese companies to export. A strong yen, however, could benefit Japan because imports, including oil and reconstruction materials, would be cheaper.

  Simon Derrick, a foreign-exchange analyst at Bank of New York Mellon in London, said Japan's damage, including to its nuclear plants, could force the government to raise large sums of cash by issuing bonds—a move that will hurt prices of existing Japanese debt and, by extension, the yen. 

That is because Japan is already carrying a debt burden equivalent to roughly 200% of its gross domestic product, the worst among industrialized countries. Investors around the globe have shown heightened fears about the perils of government debt this year. 

While investors have flocked to the Japanese yen as a safe haven amid troubles in the Middle East, this appeal could erode over time, Mr. Derrick said. "Every single currency that people want to buy has a fatal flaw." 

Stock traders didn't get as much time as currency traders to react to the earthquake before the market closed Friday, so selling pressure could be strong for several days.

Market sentiment may not be entirely negative, however, said  Nicholas Smith, director for equity research at MF Global FXA Securities: "The net effect might actually be positive for construction firms, since they will be tasked with putting Japan's infrastructure back together," he said. Among the winners could be  Sho-Bond Holdings
1414


1.54
%




 and  Obayashi Corp.
1802


0.11
%




 Early Monday, Obayashi didn't trade, for a lack of sellers.

—Brad Frischkorn contributed to this article.

 Write to  Neil Shah at neil.shah@dowjones.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications  The Bank of Japan injected cash into money markets to secured confidence in the financial system. A previous version of this article incorrectly said the central bank intervened in the foreign-exchange market.