TOKYO—Whatever the damage from the earthquake that struck Japan Friday—it's still too early to estimate—it might have been even worse had the country not bolstered preparedness in response to a 1995 quake that killed thousands in the western city of Kobe.



"Japan has spent a huge effort preparing for a destructive earthquake off the east coast and is better prepared than most countries in the world," said  Kevin McCue, a director at Australian Seismological Centre. While geological and geographical differences between the two quakes make direct comparisons impossible, initial reports of Friday's damage suggest that it may be less both in lives lost and economic impact.

Analysts say steps taken since the Kobe wake-up call range from using more shock-resistant construction methods to giving the country's self-defense forces authority to engage in disaster relief more quickly.  Kenichi Torii, a director and professor at the Center for Disaster Management Informatics Research at Ehime University, said there have also been efforts to raise public awareness on disaster management as well as a new earthquake-alert system.

Still, he said, "There is no 100% or perfection when it comes to determining what measures are sufficient." The interruption of train service that continued into the night in affected areas, for example, is to an extent unavoidable.

"It's impossible to establish a transportation system that will never come to a halt," he said. Improving public understanding of the steps to take when public transportation is unavailable is an area in which the country needs to do further work, he said.

In the Kobe earthquake, known in Japan as the great Hanshin earthquake after the afflicted area, highways collapsed and the port suffered heavy damage. The cost came to around 13 trillion yen ($158 billion at current exchange rates).

"Far too many of the high-speed expressways that should have been strong enough to resist the earthquake either collapsed or were mercilessly destroyed," a regional government website says, also noting "serious and extensive damage" to Kobe Port, subways and railways, including the bullet-train line.

While Friday's quake would inevitably be disruptive to the economy, said Macquarie Securities economist  Richard Jerram, the scope of the damage may be less than in the Kobe quake, thanks in part to steps taken since then. The Bank of Japan said Friday evening that when markets reopen next week it will be ready to secure stability, including through fund provision.

Another post-Kobe step seen as an advance in preparedness, despite a mixed record, is an early-warning system launched by the Japan Meteorological Agency in October 2007. The service provides brief advance warning by television and radio with the aim of giving people time to take cover and protect themselves before the earthquake actually strikes. A warning was issued shortly before the earthquake struck Friday and warnings continued to be issued for aftershocks throughout the evening.

 Write to  Andrew Monahan at andrew.monahan@dowjones.net 