Despite a more optimistic economic outlook and a stronger stock market, investors can't afford to sit back and relax, says  Richard Smith, a financial adviser from Richmond, Va. 

Read the full  Investing in Funds report .

"Investors really need to be more prepared for a higher frequency of financial shocks than we have seen in the past," says Mr. Smith, president of Capital Advisory Group LLC, which manages $1.1 billion in assets. 

While the U.S. and several foreign governments have taken a variety of steps to revive their economies, including flooding them with money, it isn't clear what will happen when that money is withdrawn, says Mr. Smith. 

He also says financial markets have become highly correlated in recent years, meaning a problem in any part of the world can hurt markets everywhere. "Nobody is insulated from these financial shocks no matter where they resonate," says Mr. Smith. "We can't let our guard down." 

In an attempt to shield his clients from these uncertainties, Mr. Smith invests a portion of their money with fund managers who have the flexibility to buy various types of investments, from stocks and bonds to gold and cash. He believes these managers can provide returns in both good and bad markets because they can move from one investment to another, depending on what's happening in the markets.

"We are in an environment where [flexible] managers can prosper," says Mr. Smith. He says the model of "buy, hold and pray" has become "an anachronism." 

In this column, we feature model portfolios from prominent financial advisers who invest in mutual funds and exchange-traded funds. Mr. Smith, 64 years old, founded Capital Advisory Group in 1983. For the firm's institutional and very wealthy clients, Mr. Smith uses some privately managed accounts, which are portfolios of stocks, bonds and other investments tailored to investors' needs. For individual clients with less than $500,000 in assets, Mr. Smith primarily uses funds and ETFs.

Some of the funds Mr. Smith uses aim to make money even in declining markets. They include an "absolute return" fund and a "managed futures" fund, which invests in derivatives of commodities and currencies, among other assets. 

Mr. Smith emphasizes appropriate tax management, which he says can add 0.5% to 1% annually to investors' returns over a 10-year period. One key measure he uses is tax-loss harvesting, in which investors sell a losing investment to book losses and reinvest that money in a similar fund to continue getting their market exposure. The losses can offset gains in other investments that would otherwise be subject to income tax. 

In comparison, attempts to get the right asset allocation and the right mix of money managers add much less value to portfolio returns, he says. 

Here Mr. Smith shares a balanced model portfolio meant for clients with less than $500,000 in assets who have a moderate risk appetite and an investment horizon of 10 years. The portfolio gained 13% in 2010 and around 4.3% annualized over the five years through Dec. 31, 2010, before deduction of the firm's advisory fees, which range from 1.25% to 0.2% annually, depending on portfolio size. 



 U.S. STOCKS: The portfolio has a 36% allocation to U.S. shares, mostly through funds in which managers bet on stocks they believe will beat a benchmark index. While academic literature often extols funds that simply provide the return of an index, Mr. Smith says such research is aimed at individual investors who don't have professional help. "For that audience, they're absolutely right," he says. "The key is to be able to discern [manager] skill."

Still, index-tracking funds have a place in his portfolios. He allocates 9% to one index fund— Schwab U.S. Large-Cap ETF, which tracks the Dow Jones U.S. Large-Cap Total Stock Market Index made up of around 750 stocks.

The firm has 12% of the portfolio in  Prudential Jennison Equity Opportunity. The fund's managers can invest in stocks of any size, making it a "nice fit into our equity module," says  Nick Zizzo, managing director, investment advisory services, at Capital Advisory Group. 

Ten percent goes to  JPMorgan U.S. Large Cap Core Plus, which aims to make money in part by betting against stocks that are losing value. The portfolio's small-company allocation is in  Touchstone Small Cap Core, at 5%. 

When selecting funds, Mr. Zizzo says, his firm looks "for a combination of managers that can capture or outperform the benchmark in good periods…or mitigate downside risk in bad markets." 

 FOREIGN STOCKS: These get a 9% allocation through three funds. 

  Manning & Napier World Opportunities, at 4%, and  Harbor International, at 3%, primarily buy stocks of foreign developed countries. However, the Manning & Napier fund has a third of its portfolio in medium-size foreign companies, while Harbor's investments are almost entirely in large-company stocks. "They're very complementary to each other," says Mr. Zizzo. 

For exposure to developing-country stocks, the firm allocates 2% to  Eaton Vance Parametric Structured Emerging Markets.

 BONDS: The firm believes that the fixed-income market is risky right now, because there is a good chance the Federal Reserve may raise interest rates to curb potential inflation. Bond prices fall when interest rates rise. 

Instead of making bets about which bonds will do well in this market environment, "we want a highly skilled multisector manager helping to manage that risk," says Mr. Smith. 

So, the majority of the 25% bond allocation in the portfolio goes to funds that give managers flexibility to buy different types of bonds, including low-quality bonds and foreign bonds. 

The advisers allocate 5% to  Pimco Unconstrained Bond, which can hold bonds of any duration and invest up to 50% of its portfolio in emerging markets. Ten percent goes to another multisector fund,  Loomis Sayles Bond, which currently has a third of its portfolio in low-quality or unrated bonds. This fund has "higher risk and a higher expected return," says Mr. Smith.

There is a 5% allocation to both  Pimco Total Return, which typically holds medium-term U.S. bonds, and  Vanguard Total Bond Market Index, which buys high-quality U.S. corporate and government bonds. 

 ALTERNATIVES: There is a 30% allocation to funds that can either invest in various asset classes or that aim to make money even in declining markets. Before 2008, just 10% of the portfolio was devoted to these types of investments.

Mr. Smith expects the six funds the advisers use to provide returns "somewhere between stocks and bonds" but with less correlation to the stock and bond markets. 

The advisers allocate 5% each to  Pimco All Asset All Authority and  IVA Worldwide, both of which can invest in stocks, bonds or commodities and can also hold large amounts of cash if the managers wish. Ten percent is in  RiverFront Moderate Growth & Income, a balanced fund that holds foreign bonds and master limited partnerships, among other investments. 

These three funds use different processes, "so their portfolios don't look the same at any point in time," says Mr. Smith. 

Other funds in the portfolio are meant to reduce risk. 

  MutualHedge Frontier Legends, at 4%, aims to make money in both rising and falling markets with lower volatility than the broad stock market, according to its prospectus. The fund follows a managed-futures strategy, investing in derivatives and fixed-income securities tied to currencies, interest rates, stock indexes and energy resources, among other investments. The portfolio also allocates 3% each to  Absolute Opportunities and  TFS Market Neutral. 

During the market downturn in 2008, some investors were disillusioned by the performance of such absolute-return and market-neutral funds. Mr. Smith, however, stands by them. He says some of these funds lost less than the average stock fund, and thus were relatively better. "What people expected was they wouldn't drop at all," he says. 

 Ms. Anand is a personal-finance columnist for The Wall Street Journal , based in New Delhi. Email: shefali.anand@wsj.com. 