 China is currently president of the United Nations Security Council. In some editions Tuesday, a World News article about the revolt in Libya incorrectly said Lebanon is the president.



BlockbusterInc. had a net loss from continuing operations of $64.8 million from Sept. 23, 2010, to Jan. 2, 2011, according to the government's bankruptcy-court representative. A March 10 Corporate News article about the company incorrectly said it posted the loss between November and January.



  Berkshire Hathaway Inc. will assume about $700 million of debt in its deal to acquire  Lubrizol Corp. A Marketplace article about the transaction in some editions Tuesday incorrectly gave the figure as $700,000. 



 A photo accompanying the continuation of a Weekend Investor article on Saturday about how to invest in emerging markets showed a Libyan rebel with an antiaircaft-missile launcher. The caption incorrectly described the weapon as a grenade launcher. 



 Sabah Hamamou is the deputy editor of the business section of Egypt's Al Ahram newspaper. A March 10 front-page article about revolts against the top ranks of many Egyptian institutions misspelled her surname as Hammamo and incorrectly called her a business reporter.

 A photo caption in Personal Journal on Tuesday with an article about houseplants incorrectly identified two University of Georgia professors conducting plant research. In the photo, Mussie Habteselassie appeared on the left, and Bodie Pennisi appeared on the right.



   Thomas Cameron , senior portfolio manager of Rising Dividend Growth Fund, says that if a company in the fund's portfolio reduces or eliminates its dividend, the fund decides that day if it will sell the holding. A Feb. 14 Fund Track column about the fund included a direct quotation from Mr. Cameron that the fund would sell the holding that day under such a scenario. Mr. Cameron now says that he was incorrect in his characterization of the firm's selling timeline.



 The 10-year Treasury note's yield was at 3.501% on March 7. The Credit Markets article on March 8 in some editions incorrectly said it was 3.510%.