Last month, on the first day of winter, a small group of Chinese huddled together at the Tianshan Cemetery on the outskirts of Beijing to lay to rest the ashes of investigative journalist and literary giant Liu Binyan, returned to his homeland five years after his death in the United States. But even as the ashes of the banished Liu were returned to Chinese soil, his courageous words remained in exile, a salient reminder of just how far China must go in its struggle for free speech and the rule of law.

Most conspicuously absent at the Dec. 22 ceremony were the words the writer had chosen for his epitaph: "The Chinese man who rests here did what he should have done, and said what he should have said." Even today, decades after Liu's writings doggedly exposed greed and corruption in the ranks of the Chinese Communist Party, these remorseless words were too much for China's leadership, and they were not permitted on Liu's headstone. 

As Liu Binyan's son, Liu Dahong, said to those who gathered last month: "The memorial stone standing before us today bears no words at all—and this stone without words takes a measure here and now of the distance that still separates us from a modern civilized society."

Liu Binyan struggled throughout his life for a fairer and more just society. Born in 1925, he was a devoted Marxist, and his convictions led him to join the underground Communist Party as a young man in 1943, as China was in the midst of civil war and fighting off an invading Japanese army. After the Communist Party rose to power in 1949, Liu joined the China Youth Daily newspaper and quickly distinguished himself with his works of meticulous "literary reportage," exposing injustices in Chinese society and mercilessly criticizing the party he had joined with such idealism years earlier.

In one bold piece, "The Inside Story of Our Newspaper," published in 1956, Liu Binyan painted an intimate portrait of press controls under the Communist Party and the frustrations facing journalists who tried to speak the truth. In the years that followed, Liu paid the price for his boldness. In 1957, he was denounced as a "rightist" and expelled from the Communist Party. He spent much of the next two decades in labor re-education camps, forced to repudiate his writings.

As China set off on the new path of "reform and opening" in 1978, Liu was exonerated and allowed to return to his work as a journalist, this time for the party's flagship People's Daily. It was during this period that he wrote his celebrated "People or Monsters," an expose of local corruption in northeastern China's Heilongjiang province.

Liu was denounced again in 1987 and expelled from the party following a crackdown on student pro-democracy demonstrators that also brought about the ouster of reform-minded Party General Secretary Hu Yaobang. What was to be a short visit to the United States in 1988 turned into permanent exile following the Tiananmen massacre the next year, during which Liu Binyan's stern criticism from afar rankled China's leadership.

The man who came to be known to many of the '80s generation as "China's conscience" continued to write from exile until his death in December 2005. But it is for his courageous work inside China that Liu Binyan is best remembered in his own country, where he remains for many journalists an enduring symbol of the possibility and power of truth-telling.

Liu Binyan's spirit lives on in the work of Chinese journalists today who push the bounds of government control, often at great risk, determinedly exposing injustices in Chinese society. Liu's living legacy could be glimpsed in the faces gathered at his grave in Beijing—the intrepid investigative reporter Lu Yuegang and the indomitable magazine editor Hu Shuli.

China's media landscape today is in many ways remarkably different from Liu's dispiriting portrait in "The Inside Story of Our Newspaper" 55 years ago. China is in the midst of what might be called an information upheaval, with a new competitive media industry giving rise to often surprising voices working persistently to carve out a new professional space, and a more engaged, Web-savvy population of information consumers.

But as "China's conscience" was returned to his native soil, a media blackout cast an all-too-familiar silence over this homecoming. China's glossy new media whispered not a word of Liu Binyan, and even the words he had chosen himself to set in stone were left to the private lips of his admirers. "I am confident," Liu Dahong told those who gathered, "that those who come after will some day be able to read these words of my father's, and that they will hear the stories that lie behind this monument."

 Mr. Bandurski is a researcher at the China Media Project at the University of Hong Kong. 