NEW DELHI – Indians are queuing up to book gold and silver for purchase during a Hindu festival considered auspicious to buy precious metals, encouraged by a price correction in the past few days, bullion dealers and jewelers said. 

The festival--Akshaya Trithiya, to be celebrated Friday--typically sees huge demand for gold and silver as many Hindus believe buying the metals on the day will multiply their wealth. 

India is the largest consumer of gold and imports 700-800 metric tons of the yellow metal a year. It also imports around 3,000 tons of silver. 

Parker Bullion Pvt. Ltd., which has retail outlets in five states including major bullion consumers Gujarat and Maharashtra, is witnessing "extraordinary demand" as the festival nears, the company's director  Vasu Acharya said. "It is more for silver, but the demand is quite strong even for gold." 

He said the number of clients who have made advance payments to avoid the last-day rush has increased to 700 from 300-400 last year. 

Still, some potential customers are holding off as they aren't sure whether the prices have bottomed out, market players said. 

"Traders and investors are buying in small lots. Many are staying away to avoid being scorched by any price plunge," said  Girish Choksi, a bullion dealer in the western city of Ahmedabad, a key bullion trading center. 

Gold prices fell to 22,300 rupees ($502.64) per 10 grams from 22,700 rupees over the past five days, while silver slid to 58,500 rupees a kilogram from 69,000 rupees in Ahmedabad. 

Many had initially halted purchases this week after Monday's sharp price fall, particularly of silver. But, renewed demand has emerged as the festival approached. 

"This correction has come in just before the festival and that should help," said Gnanaeskhar Thiagarajan, director of Commtrendz Research. "Such a fall has rarely happened in the past." 

He said all retailers may not be selling at lower prices as many had stocked up in advance for the festival, when prices were high. 

The price correction is healthy as "it will shake off speculators," Mr. Thiagarajan added. 

Hordes of investors had flocked to buy silver in April as the price of the white metal doubled in one year. Gold too experienced strong interest, as it returned 25%-30% in a year--higher than many other asset classes. 

The recent price fall and concerns over further declines will make traders and investors, as well as a handful of jewelry buyers, who usually buy during Akshaya Trithiya, cautious, said T.K Chandran, managing director of DKTM Jewellery Ltd., which has a chain of shops in southern India. 

Meanwhile a strike by state-run Air India's pilots, which entered its ninth day Thursday, has affected bullion availability in some places with Parker Bullion's Acharya saying his outlets weren't able to meet the entire demand. 

"Sometimes, when a client is asking for five kilos of silver, we are giving only three kilos," he said. "It's a kind of rationing that we are doing to keep as many happy." 

 Write to  Biman Mukherji at biman.mukherji@dowjones.com 