WASHINGTON—U.S. Commerce Secretary Gary Locke called Thursday for China to follow through on its pledges to open up its market to foreign firms, seeking to ensure that next week's state visit by Chinese President Hu Jintao leads to lasting results.

Mr. Locke, maintaining the nonconfrontational tone struck the previous day by Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner, said in prepared remarks to the U.S.-China Business Council that the two economic rivals would benefit by pursuing "cooperation over confrontation."

But the commerce secretary warned that the huge trade gap between the U.S. and China, which widened to $25.63 billion in November, in a reversal of recent improvements, isn't sustainable and could pose a threat to global stability and prosperity.

Mr. Locke didn't repeat Mr. Geithner's call for China to allow its exchange rate to appreciate more rapidly, but focused on the difficult business climate that many multinational companies operating in China see as the main obstacle to improving trade ties. He cited the "significant concerns" of U.S. firms operating in China, such as those that belong to the U.S.-China Business Council, about weak protection for intellectual property and discriminatory policies aimed at promoting Chinese domestic innovation.

"Ultimately, all the United States seeks is a level playing field for its companies, where the cost and quality of their products determines whether or not they win business," said Mr. Locke.

Bilateral trade talks in which Mr. Locke participated last month produced a range of commitments by China to eliminate regulatory barriers in sectors such as cellphones and wind farms, and to step up enforcement of rules against counterfeiting and software piracy.

But while Mr. Locke called the outcome of those talks "productive," he noted that similar promises made by China in the past had gone unfulfilled. This time, the agreements "must be turned into concrete action," he said.

Acknowledging the difficulty of gradually opening the world's second-largest economy, Mr. Locke said the reform process will require "constant vigilance" from Chinese government and business leaders as well as from foreign countries and companies.

Chinese leaders have recognized the need to move toward a more open, domestic-led economy, said Mr. Locke. And U.S. firms are eager to participate in joint ventures as long as China can meaningfully address concerns about intellectual-property protection, he said.

"But China's long-term success at addressing the concerns of international businesses will help determine whether it realizes its economic vision, a vision in which China is a leader in global innovation and a producer of higher-value goods and services," he said.

U.S. business concerns about pressure in China to share technologies were highlighted in Thursday's trade data, as the gap between imports and exports of advanced technology products with China jumped 30% in November to a new high of $10.93 billion.

"America's huge, skyrocketing high-tech trade deficit with China shows the price the country is paying for the massive and largely unregulated technology transfers by outsourcing U.S. multinational companies," said  Alan Tonelson, research fellow at the United States Business and Industry Council, a group of business executives that has long been critical of China's trade policies.

Mr. Locke welcomed the Chinese government's recent crackdown on intellectual-property theft, which has resulted in more than 4,000 arrests since November. But while describing the U.S. as a "very willing partner" in that effort, Mr. Locke said it must result in a meaningful outcome.

Chinese officials made further commitments in December to ensure that government agencies, at least, will only use legal software. But software makers complain that in the past, such promises haven't shown up in sales figures. The Business Software Alliance estimates that nearly 80% of software in China remains pirated. Every dollar of hardware sales in China generates just 8 cents in software sales, versus 88 cents in the U.S., according to Mr. Locke.