The only thing trickier than pitching jokes about diarrhea and raunchy sex to women is trying to sell a sentimental wedding flick to men. The creators of "Bridesmaids" must do both. 

The Judd Apatow-produced comedy, co-written by lead actress Kristen Wiig, presents a marketing conundrum for Universal Pictures as it tries to position this female-centric buddy comedy for a wide audience.

"We realize rated-R movies for women that are successes are few and far between," says Eddie Egan, Universal's president of marketing. But the studio is confident enough that it will play to both genders that it has held several hundred screenings across the country in hopes that word of mouth will prompt male viewers to show up.

The studio has two parallel campaigns. One, targeted at men, highlights "Hangover"-like gross-out scenes. The second shows Ms. Wiig's Annie, an unemployed loser picked to be her best friend's maid of honor, sharing genuine moments with her childhood friend.

"Getting the men in was something on our minds from the beginning," Ms. Wiig says on her way to a "Saturday Night Live" rehearsal. Initially, she didn't want to call the movie "Bridesmaids." Men wouldn't want to go. Mr. Apatow talked her into the current title. 

"We'd only call it that if we could get a really fun, ironic photo to go with it to tell the audience it's not Kate Hudson with her back to her best friend and 'Oh, high jinks are going to happen,' " says director Paul Feig. The poster instead shows the six women looking sexy, bedraggled and exhausted.

At the same time, Mr. Feig says, "if we pretend it's a guy's movie, we'll scare away the women." Lots of promotions and group discounts for women are planned, Mr. Egan says.

Mr. Feig says he looked to "The Devil Wears Prada" as an example of a comedy that seemed like it was about all things girly. After it opened, buzz spread that it was a workplace comedy appropriate for husbands or boyfriends. 

"Word of mouth is going to make or break us," Mr. Feig says. 

 Write to  Amy Chozick at amy.chozick@wsj.com 