LONDON—Factory orders across the euro zone rose much less than expected in January, with declines in France and Italy offsetting a rebound in Germany, data from the European Union's statistics agency showed Wednesday. 

Separately, consumer confidence in the 17 countries that use the euro deteriorated in March as unrest across the Arab world drove up oil prices and Japan was hit by a devastating earthquake, tsunami and fears of a nuclear disaster, official data showed. 

New industrial orders in the 17 countries that make up the currency area rose 0.1% from December and were 20.9% stronger than in January last year, before Estonia switched to the euro. 

Factory orders in Germany, Europe's biggest economy and main engine of growth, jumped 3.7% on a monthly basis in January following a 2.9% fall in December. But orders slumped 7.8% in France in January and dropped 1.5% in Italy. 

Orders were mixed across industrial sectors. On a monthly basis, orders for intermediate goods increased 4.4% and rose 2.8% for durable consumer goods, but orders for capital goods fell 2.6% and declined 1.3% for nondurable consumer goods. 

Excluding heavy transport equipment, a category that includes ships, trains and aircraft that tends to be volatile and with a limited impact on production, euro-zone factory orders rose 1.6% monthly and 22.4% annually, after increasing 1.8% and 19.4% in December. The Commission's preliminary, or flash, consumer-confidence indicator eased to minus 10.6 from minus 10 in February. 

  Peter Vanden Houte, an economist at ING, said he expected any detrimental impact to consumer confidence from the natural disasters and nuclear problems in Japan to fade quickly, but high oil costs could prove a more stubborn problem. 

"As the social unrest is unlikely to cool down very rapidly in Northern Africa and the Middle East, oil prices risk remaining high, puncturing the purchasing power of European consumers," he said in a note. 

Recent surveys of private-sector business activity by Markit suggest the euro-zone economy is growing at a quarterly rate of about 0.8% in the first quarter, a marked pickup from the 0.3% expansion seen in the final three months of 2010. 

But the recovery remains uneven with several euro-zone countries facing severe austerity measures to reduce their budget deficits. Although official data suggest euro-zone unemployment has peaked, it remains very high at 9.9% in January. 

The consumer confidence reading for the European Union as a whole also deteriorated slightly to minus 12.8 in March from minus 12.4 in February, the Commission said. 

 Write to  Nicholas Winning at nick.winning@dowjones.com 