ABBOTTABAD, Pakistan—Pakistan said Tuesday it had "concerns and reservations" about Washington's decision to attack and kill al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden deep inside Pakistan without seeking their permission or giving forewarning. 

"This event of unauthorized unilateral action cannot be taken as a rule," Pakistan's foreign ministry said in a statement.

The 1,000-word statement marked a change in tone from a shorter missive put out Monday after a helicopter-borne U.S. military team under the direction of the Central Intelligence Agency raided a house in the midsize town of Abbottabad where bin Laden had been living and killed him. 

On Monday, the Foreign Ministry said the operation was conducted by the U.S. and noted that Pakistan had been cooperative in intelligence-gathering in the past. But by Tuesday, faced with growing criticism at home that the raid violated national space, the ministry took a tougher stance. The U.S. action, the English-language version of the statement said, "shall not serve as a future precedent for any state, including the U.S."

The statement appeared an attempt to quiet mounting discontent among middle-class Pakistanis, many of whom are virulently anti-American, for what they see as a loss of face. Owais Khan, a lawyer in Abbottabad, said the bar association of the town had written a letter of protest to Army chief Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani and President Asif Ali Zardari to protest the U.S.'s unilateral action. "The act they have done is against the sovereignty of Pakistan," he said in an interview.

So far, Pakistan's powerful armed forces have remained quiet, allowing the civilian government to respond to bin Laden's death. 

A Pakistani civilian official said Tuesday no complaints have been lodged formally with the U.S. over the attack. The official said the Foreign Ministry statement was "something Pakistan has to say becasue of the domestic debate."

Pakistan's role in the intelligence gathering leading to bin Laden's death was limited, this official said. It remained unclear whether elements of the military or intelligence services had sheltered him. 

"At best it's incompetence," the official said. "At worst it's complicity."

The statement Tuesday praised the armed forces and intelligence agencies for playing "a pivotal role in breaking the back of al Qaeda and other terrorist organizations in Pakistan as well as around the world."

Photos from around the world.

 "Justice has been done" and more.

A look at Monday's front pages of U.S. newspapers on the news of Osama bin Laden's death.

On the ground

Diagram from the U.S. government

Photos inside and out

That statement and others in the release appeared designed to counter questions raised by U.S. and other officials since bin Laden's death about whether it was possible that Pakistan couldn't have been aware that bin Laden was living in Abbottabad near the Pakistan Military Academy.

Pakistani officials say thousands of their soldiers have been killed in a three-year war with the Pakistan Taliban and their al Qaeda allies in the northwestern borders with Afghanistan, with many more civilians dying in Pakistani cities in suicide bombings carried out by the Taliban as reprisals for the military campaign.

Pakistan argues it has spearheaded the arrest of senior al Qaeda leaders, including 9/11 mastermind Khalid Sheikh Mohammed in 2003 in Rawalpindi. It points to the arrest by Pakistani intelligence agents— also in Abbottabad, in January—of Indonesian al Qaeda militant Umar Patek.

The Foreign Ministry said it arrested a "high-value" al Qaeda target in the town in 2004. "The intelligence flow indicating some foreigners in the surroundings of Abbottabad continued til mid-April 2011," the statement said. 

But U.S. officials said Monday they are probing whether elements of Pakistan's military and intelligence agencies with Islamist sympathies may have played a role in shielding bin Laden from capture. 

Pakistan's Inter-Services Intelligence Directorate military spy agency denied on Monday that it shielded bin Laden or knew of his whereabouts, and called its lack of knowledge about his whereabouts an embarrassment.

The Foreign Ministry said Pakistan's intelligence agencies had been sharing information over the compound in which bin Laden was staying since 2009, but gave no further details. An ISI official said Monday the agency had been involved in elements of intelligence gathering, focusing on bin Laden's courier, which led to the compound but had no knowledge he was living there.

"It is important to highlight that taking advantage of much superior technological assets, CIA exploited the intelligence leads given by us to identify and reach Osama bin Laden," the statement said.

The ministry defended Pakistan against assertions that bin Laden's compound, with high walls and barbed wire, should have attracted notice. "Houses with such layout and structural details are not a rarity," it said. 

Some Pakistani critics have asked how the U.S. could fly in helicopters from Afghanistan without being intercepted by Pakistan. 

The Foreign Ministry said the U.S. helicopters employed the "latest technology" and also used "blind spots" in hilly terrain to avoid detection by Pakistani radar. Pakistan's air force scrambled jets within minutes of knowing about the incident, it added, though there was no confrontation between U.S. and Pakistani forces.

The statement also reiterated Pakistan's assertion that it had no prior knowledge of the attack.

 Write to  Tom Wright at tom.wright@wsj.com 