Promising to "reinvent government," Gov. Andrew Cuomo on Wednesday said he would guide the state out of the throes of fiscal waste and scandal and bring to an end what he described as an aberrant chapter of state history.



Delivering his first State of the State speech, Mr. Cuomo offered only a glimpse of what he's termed an "emergency" fiscal agenda. 

He underlined the need for a new collaborative process and incentives for fixing the problems, borrowing policy ideas from Wisconsin and the Obama administration. Mr. Cuomo promised a more efficient flow of public dollars, but he said little about what he intends to cut out of a sprawling government that's running out of cash. 

"The state of New York spends too much money. It is that blunt, and it is that simple," said Mr. Cuomo, a former state attorney general who took office on Saturday.

It was a speech that avoided direct confrontation and was well-received by lawmakers, labor unions and other interest groups. Mr. Cuomo said he wanted his first budget to be more of a product of brainstorming, not of clenched-fist negotiations. 

Whether Mr. Cuomo can avoid clashes with lawmakers was less clear. His plan to shutter some costly juvenile justice facilities, whose inmate populations have dwindled, drew a cold response from Senate Republicans, who represent upstate districts where many of the prisons are located.

Gov. Andrew Cuomo delivered his State of the State speech near the Capitol, straying away from Albany tradition and vowing to guide the state out of the throes of fiscal waste and scandal. Here's a look inside.

Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver and Republican Senate majority leader Dean Skelos were each invited by the governor to deliver short remarks before the speech.

In his remarks, Mr. Silver, a Manhattan Democrat, called for tighter rent regulations in New York City, an issue that wasn't raised in the governor's speech but could become a sticking point in budget talks. But Mr. Silver suggested room for compromise on Mr. Cuomo's signature issue, capping local property taxes. 

Praising President Barack Obama's Race to the Top funding competition for public education, Mr. Cuomo said he would steer $500 million in education aid through competitive grants. The money, amounting to about 1% of public-school spending, would reward districts that show improvements in student performance and efficiency.

And instead of imposing a specific budget for Medicaid, Mr. Cuomo said he would bring together interest groups to come up with a collaborative plan for an overhaul of the nation's most expensive public-health insurance program. It's a strategy that was recently used in Wisconsin.

"We are going to have to reinvent government. We are going to have to reorganize the agencies," Mr. Cuomo said. "We are going to redesign our approach because the old way wasn't working anyway, let's be honest."

In tone, presentation, and setting, the 47-minute speech was a departure from Albany tradition. He spoke from the stage of a conference arena, a more capacious and prosaic venue than the gilded Assembly chamber, where governors had previously given their speeches.

He stood in front of giant screens displaying a PowerPoint show, with slides of graphs, illustrations and snippets of text. And he spoke in a more conversational style, weaving in a few jokes, bringing to mind a corporate executive at a sales-pitch meeting.

When Mr. Cuomo spoke of the state "at a crossroads," the presentation showed a drawing of a crossroad. As the governor rolled off alarming statistics on spending, bar graphs and line charts flashed by. 

Criticizing Albany's notoriously protracted budget stand-offs, Mr. Cuomo compared legislative leaders and past governors to ships passing in the night. To illustrate the point, the PowerPoint showed a cartoon of three battleships floating in the sea. It then zoomed in on tiny figures commanding the ships, revealing the Photoshopped faces of Messrs. Cuomo, Skelos and Silver—each politician depicted in naval garb. The audience broke into laughs when a plane representing "special interests" swooped in and dropped missiles on Cuomo's ship.



Mr. Cuomo said the proliferation of state agencies, committees, task forces and local government units had resulted in a disorganized and costly mess. At the same time, he said he would form new councils and advisory groups to help map out his agenda. 

He said he's creating regional economic development councils that would compete for funds and coordinate job-creation programs. He's also forming a "Spending and Government Efficiency Commission" to draft a plan to consolidate and shrink the number of agencies, authorities and commissions by 20%.

Mr. Cuomo said he would put together a "Medicaid Redesign Team," composed of union leaders, hospital executives and lawmakers. The group, he said, would come up with a way to meet a cost-cutting target set in his budget. The group has less than three months to complete its task before the April 1 budget deadline.

"For us, the rubber will meet the road in the budget," said Elizabeth Lynam, director of state studies at the Citizens Budget Commission, a nonpartisan fiscal monitor. "He was effective in laying out the case to the public that we have some serious problems, but then we'll have to see how the numbers come together and how tough he's prepared to be."

Mr. Cuomo drew high marks from Mayor Michael Bloomberg, who said he saw in Mr. Cuomo's speech echoes of his own corporate leadership style. The governor is "approaching the challenge like a CEO," the mayor told reporters.

The governor spoke little about transit policy and higher education. In brief moments further into his speech, he called for passage of a bill to legalize gay marriage, repeating a campaign promise, and said he would set higher targets for awarding contracts to minority and women-owned businesses.

 Write to  Jacob Gershman at jacob.gershman@wsj.com 