In 1998, Poppa Neutrino floated across the Atlantic on a raft made of junk. 

He floated on another to Cuba in 2004, and last November he was shipwrecked on New York's Lake Champlain at the start of what was to be a trip circumnavigating the globe.

Mr. Neutrino, who was born William David Pearlman and died Sunday of heart failure at age 77, led a life nearly as free as the subatomic particle for which he named himself.

In a lifetime of traveling, Mr. Neutrino scrounged the little money he needed from a half-dozen occupations. He slept in the streets more than a few times, and avoided paying rent as if it were a plague.

"If you are not doing what you love at work, and you are under the rent thing, life is a trap," he told the New York Daily News in 1997. "This is a way out of the trap," he added, gesturing at his floating shack named Town Hall, moored free of charge in lower Manhattan.

It was in another jerry-built craft, the 51-foot, three-mast Son of Town Hall, that Mr. Neutrino succeeded in crossing the Atlantic, casting off from Newfoundland with his wife, two companions and three dogs. 

They survived 20-foot waves and Mr. Neutrino had a heart attack during the crossing. Passing cargo ships and the Irish navy resupplied them when they ran out of food. After two months at sea, the raft docked at an Irish fishing village.

From Ireland, Mr. Neutrino floated across the English Channel, up the Seine River to the heart of Paris.

"It seems to me we have broken the scrap barrier," Mr. Neutrino told reporters.

Mr. Neutrino's rambling ways dated to his childhood. His mother, a small-time gambler, seldom stayed anywhere long, and Mr. Neutrino dropped out of high school. He lied about his age to join the Army, and spent part of the early 1950s hanging out with Beatniks at North Beach in San Francisco. At times he worked (or claimed to have worked) as a pastor, a sign painter and a correspondent in the Vietnam War.

Married four times, Mr. Neutrino led his burgeoning family on journeys across the U.S. and through Mexico. To raise funds they learned to play on instruments from pawn shops and performed as The Flying Neutrinos.

One of the few places where the family stayed put was on a houseboat built of castoff wood and harbor debris, docked on the Manhattan waterfront starting in the late 1980s. Mr. Neutrino named it Town Hall, and waged a years-long battle with officials who wanted it removed.

Meanwhile, the family busked for a living in the subways. The Flying Neutrinos went on to recording success after Mr. Neutrino turned the band over to his oldest kids, Ingrid Lucia and Todd Londagin.

The Atlantic crossing was Mr. Neutrino's greatest achievement, memorialized on television by National Geographic, the documentary "Random Lunacy" and in a biography, "The Happiest Man in the World." But the voyage was hardly Mr. Neutrino's greatest ambition. This was to construct and run a floating orphanage that would travel to India and Brazil to take in street children. Like many of his schemes, the orphanage never materialized, but for Mr. Neutrino it was just a dream deferred.

Even as he faced heart troubles in recent years, Mr. Neutrino did anything but slow down. In 2007, he announced a bid for the U.S. presidency under the aegis of the Owl Party, which got its name, he told reporters, from being situated midway between the hawks and the doves.

Mr. Neutrino continued his waterborne ways, planning but not following through on a float to China. Last fall, he undertook a trip around the world aboard a new raft made of garbage, the Sea Owl. Casting off Nov. 7 with two companions from Burlington, Vt., he planned to float down the Hudson to the Atlantic Ocean.

But the weather didn't cooperate, and a storm drove the Sea Owl onto rocks after just 10 miles. It broke into pieces, and all aboard had to be rescued. 

Undeterred, Mr. Neutrino was laying plans for another float to Cuba in the weeks before his death, said his daughter Jessica Terrell. He had a novel in progress, and $4.44 in his bank account.

—Email remembrances@wsj.com 

 Write to  Stephen Miller at stephen.miller@wsj.com 