 BRUSSELS—The European Union will announce measures Friday to widen the scope of the bloc's sanctions on Libya that are almost certain to include a freeze of assets held in Europe by the country's sovereign-wealth fund and its central bank, senior European officials said. 

Under an agreement reached Tuesday, the sanctions will be broadened to apply beyond the top Libyan officials already affected by EU sanctions to assets those people "can access or somehow make use of," one official said. 

Unless there are unexpected last-minute objections, the sovereign-wealth fund, four other entities and another person will be added to the sanction list that now covers 26 people, the official said. 

A second official said Libya's central bank also will likely be on the list. He said the agreement was a "done deal." The officials asked not to be named because the agreement hasn't been formally approved.

The Libyan Investment Authority has upward of $60 billion in assets, including a combined 7.5% stake in Italian bank UniCredit S.p.a., a 3% stake in U.K.-based educational publisher Pearson PLC and a holding in Italian football club Juventus. 

The EU last week froze the assets of 26 Libyans, including Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi, his family and his close associates, and banned them from traveling to the bloc. It also prohibited the selling of weapons to Libya.

Last week's decision led to a split among EU governments between those like the U.K., which argued the sanctions covered the sovereign-wealth fund, and those like Italy, which said they didn't. 

Italian officials have said the issue was whether the sovereign-wealth fund and the central bank are mere extensions of Col. Gadhafi's regime, or autonomous institutions that ultimately belong to the Libyan people. 

Tuesday's move was delayed by Malta's objections to some technical details on how the sanctions would apply.

The EU moves go beyond United Nations sanctions agreed on last month. In the U.S., President Barack Obama signed an executive order freezing the assets of the central bank and sovereign-wealth fund, as well as those of Col. Gadhafi, his family members and senior officials. Treasury officials said the U.S. has frozen nearly $32 billion in government assets since the uprising began.

U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner met with German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schaeuble in Berlin on Tuesday and said afterward they had discussed the new sanctions. 

Libya will top the agenda of a summit Friday of the leaders of the bloc's 27 member states. Ahead of the summit, the European Commission, the EU's executive arm, proposed measures designed to boost North African economies and provide incentives for democracy.

Development, say EU officials, will help lead Egypt, Morocco, Tunisia, Algeria, and Libya toward stable democracies.

The specific proposals are familiar carrots for a soft power like Europe. For example, more tourist and business visas for North Africans, loans for roads and ports, and credit guarantees for European companies looking to invest in North Africa.

"The European Union has the experience and tools to help the countries in the region as they make the journey to deep democracy," said Catherine Ashton, the EU's top foreign-policy officer.

The EU already has trade agreements with Algeria, Morocco, Egypt and Tunisia. There are still some tariffs and quotas, notably on farm products, "but for the most part, the gates are open," says Taher El Sherif, director of the Egyptian-British Chamber of Commerce. 

Separately Tuesday, a senior EU diplomat said an official from Libya's foreign ministry has called for an independent investigation by the UN, and possibly the EU, into the violence in the country. The diplomat said European embassies still open in Libya supported an independent investigation. 

Libyan Foreign Minister Moussa Koussa repeated Monday evening his government's assertions that its military has acted within the law and hasn't been indiscriminately shooting at civilians. Mr. Koussa said that his government would welcome international fact-finding missions to investigate these allegations and that Libya was ready to extend full cooperation to any such team.

—John W. Miller in Brussels and Margaret Coker in Tripoli contributed to this article.

 Write to  Laurence Norman at laurence.norman@dowjones.com 