 Malaysia and the Philippines raised their benchmark rates by a quarter percentage point as inflation worries spread in Asia.  

 Indonesia's economy continued its robust expansion in the first quarter, raising the possibility of tightening monetary policy.  

 The ECB signaled a temporary pause in the path to higher rates, as problems along Europe's periphery worsen.  

 A global shortage of rare-earth elements that has driven up global prices more than tenfold since 2009 is likely to peak this year, Goldman Sachs analysts predicted. The market could be in surplus by 2013.  

 General Motors' first-quarter profit tripled on higher new car and asset sales, but China and other international operations weakened from a year ago.  

 Trading in San Miguel resumed after a three-week halt as the food-and-beverage company sold $900 million of stock and convertible bonds. The stock fell 28%.  

 Avon's internal probe into possible bribery of officials outside the U.S. has uncovered more potential wrongdoing, with evidence of improper payments to government officials found in several countries beyond the probe's original focus of China.  

 U.S. retailers posted strong sales in April, showing continued momentum with the aid of the Easter holiday, but economic uncertainties kept consumers cautious.  

 Lloyds Banking Group racked up a $4 billion loss in the first quarter, hammered by souring loans and the need to reimburse customers for improperly sold insurance products.  

 National Australia Bank beat expectations with a 22% rise in first-half cash profit, underpinned by lower charges for sour loans and big gains in market share.  

 Ventilators were switched on inside the highly radiated No. 1 reactor building at the crippled Fukushima Daiichi complex.  

 A Chinese official from a newly unveiled Internet regulator defended China's Internet controls, saying they are in line with efforts elsewhere to protect privacy and deal with such issues as obscenity and gambling.  

 Singapore elections are expected to be the most fiercely contested since independence in 1965, though gains for the opposition are far from assured.  

Bangladesh's highest court upheld the government's decision to remove Nobel laureate Muhammad Yunus from his pioneering microfinance agency Grameen Bank. 

Ugandan police arrested the leader of the country's second-largest opposition party for taking part in protests against high prices.