By Thomas Harris (1975)

I tend not to re-read books, but somehow this one draws me back again and again. One reason may be that Michael Lander, who pilots the TV blimp hovering above football stadiums, is Thomas Harris's most terrifying monster. Like Hannibal Lecter, another of the author's creations, Lander is brilliant, although instead of applying his considerable talents to serial murder and gourmet cannibalism, Lander devotes his genius to a simple yet eerily plausible plan to turn the blimp into a giant bomb that will kill tens of thousands, including the president, at the Super Bowl. For Lander, committing mass murder would be the final, desperate, seemingly inevitable act of a man whose pathology and biography Harris describes in detail; first, as an abused child, then as a cuckolded husband, and finally as a disfigured prisoner of war shunned by the military for cooperating with his North Vietnamese captors. Lander works in league with Palestinian terrorists, a conspiracy tracked by the book's hero, the formidable Mossad agent David Kabakov. That this exquisitely plotted novel's geopolitical context is the Arab-Israeli conflict gives it an unsettling relevance even now, 35 years after its publication.

By John Le Carré (2008)

For soldiers, spies and citizens alike, the war on terror is a landscape fraught with moral, legal and operational perils. For many writers of thrillers, these complexities are given short shrift, subordinated by a neat, reductive view of good and evil. Not so with John Le Carré. Set in Hamburg, "A Most Wanted Man" begins when Issa, a Russian-Chechen refugee bearing the physical and psychological scars of torture, hounds a young Turkish boxing champion and his mother for sanctuary. Tracking this would-be terrorist (but is he one or isn't he?) are German, American and British intelligence agents who are, by turns, ruthless and clueless, more prone to compete than cooperate with each other. Complicating matters: a hard-nosed female attorney who is blindly determined to defend Issa's rights against those willing to curtail them in the name of national security. In Le Carré's disturbing vision of the war on terror, no one is entirely good, no one entirely bad, and no one's motives are entirely pure.

By Vince Flynn (2007)

Like Jack Bauer, a government agent who came of age after the Twin Towers fell, Mitch Rapp has no truck with notions of moral relativism or with hand-wringing over excessive force used against terrorists. In Vince Flynn's fiction series, Rapp does whatever it takes to stop the bad guys, often defying petty bureaucrats and politicians who sometimes present as grave a threat to national security as the terrorists themselves. "Protect and Defend" posits a what-if scenario: the destruction of an Iranian nuclear facility by a deep-cover Israeli operative and an impossibly perilous aftermath that threatens to plunge the Middle East, and the U.S., into war. Rapp navigates the dangers with fearless ingenuity, a pure wish-fulfillment hero who defends America unapologetically—and entertainingly.

By Alex Berenson (2010)

A murder mystery wrapped in a post-9/11 thriller, this is the fourth installment in Alex Berenson's series about John Wells, a CIA agent whose conversion to Islam was initially a ploy to establish his cover but eventually took root during his decade-long infiltration of the Taliban. Wells is enlisted by the agency to investigate the murder of several Americans who were assigned to the Midnight House, a secret U.S. antiterrorism interrogation facility set up on a Polish military base. Berenson, who showed an eye for detail as a reporter covering the Iraq War for the New York Times, wrestles with the hard question at the center of his novel: Are there moral limits that those charged with keeping us safe dare not pass?

By William Goldman (1974)

The sadistic Nazi dentist Christian Szell truly stands as a monster for the ages. Long after the war, Szell leaves his lair in South America to come to New York, searching for a stash of diamonds. He stalks graduate student and marathon runner Tom "Babe" Levy on the mistaken assumption that he has information about the jewels. But Babe doesn't know the answer to Szell's repeated question—"Is it safe?"—which makes even more excruciating the now-famous torture scene. Opening the novel, as William Goldman does, with two parallel, seemingly unrelated stories produces an extraordinarily compelling narrative as you keep reading, desperate to find out how the two plotlines will converge. But the book's central power lies in the reader's awareness that Babe is not merely an innocent caught up in a terrifying chase—he is also an American Jew, matching wits with a manifestation of death-camp evil.

—Mr. Gordon, a screenwriter and producer, received a 2006 Emmy Award for Outstanding Dramatic Series as the executive producer of "24." His first novel, "Gideon's War" (Touchstone), has just been published.