  Ron Gonen was an M.B.A. student when he came up with the idea for Recyclebank—and seven years later, the company he founded by cleaning out his bank account has stopped an estimated billion pounds of waste from hitting landfills. Now in 29 states and the U.K., Recyclebank helps cities reduce landfill fees by weighing what residents recycle and awarding them points to spend at local merchants and big chains like Staples and Olive Garden. Cities pay Recyclebank for every ton of trash it diverts from landfills, and marketers buy ads on its website. In October, Mr. Gonen, 36 years old, turned over the corner office to  Jonathan Hsu, who previously led online-advertising firm 24/7 Real Media. Mr. Gonen then took up an environmental leadership fellowship at think-tank Aspen Institute and a teaching position at his alma mater, Columbia Business School.

Recyclebank, formally known as Recycle Rewards Inc., recently ranked No. 4 on the Journal's Top 50 Venture-Funded Companies list, and No. 1 on the Top 10 Clean-Tech Companies list.

Edited interview excerpts follow. 

 Q. How did you dream up Recyclebank? 

 A. I was having dinner with somebody I went to high school with, and he said: Would it be possible to reward people for recycling? I said: I can build a business model to do that. 

 Q. As a student, how did you get cities to take you seriously? 

 A. Successful entrepreneurial ventures are a combination of a great idea, a lot of hard work, really good people and luck. There was a front-page story in the Philadelphia Inquirer about how the city auditor had found that if they could increase their recycling rate to 35% they would save $17 million a year. I called up the recycling coordinator and said I can get you up to 35% and you only need to pay us out of the savings from landfill-disposal fees. He said: When can you be here? As soon as we did the pilot in Philadelphia, there were a lot of requests to do this in other cities. Everybody was struggling with low recycling rates and high disposal fees.

 Q. You invested your entire savings—where else did you find start-up funds? 

 A. Columbia put in $100,000 [via its Lang Fund, which invests in companies developed by students]. A recycling company in Philadelphia heard about what we were doing and invested $200,000. To do the pilot, we needed about $500,000 worth of recycling carts and equipment for the trucks.  Fred Keller [chief executive of Cascade Engineering Inc.] on a handshake gave me the carts and the equipment. Fred has since become a close friend and a mentor, and we have bought hundreds of thousands of carts from Cascade since that day. 

 Q. What have you learned about what it takes to succeed as an entrepreneur? 

 A. Don't be afraid to fail. You will fail on a weekly or daily basis. People ask me sometimes how did you raise money from Kleiner Perkins, which is the crème de la crème of venture capital [and initially invested $13 million in 2008]. And what I tell them is I had 99 people say no, and they were the hundredth. By the time I got in to see them, I was so well-prepared. You learn from people saying no by asking them why they didn't say yes.

 Q, What has been the biggest challenge? 

 A. When you're a company that has a very clear social mission that's completely intertwined with the profits of the business, that can be at odds sometimes with traditional venture capital. You have to understand the value that's being created on the environmental side and the community side, along with all the other traditional drivers. If you don't, you have the risk of steering the ship off course. 

 The Top 50 Venture-Backed Companies  

 Q. What led you to step aside as CEO? 

 A. I had this night where I was 35 and it was midnight. I was the last person in the office, and I'd been the first person in the office. I'd bought an apartment the year before. There was no furniture in the apartment. I had been doing this for six years, and I realized I could easily turn around five years from now and still be in the office and my apartment would still be unfurnished. I had gotten to a point where I was starting to lose perspective. I'd also felt I'd accomplished what I had wanted to accomplish. And some of our investors felt...it was time to bring somebody else in. 

 Q. What's next for Recyclebank?  

 A. Massively increasing our membership rolls. It's Jonathan's job to now really explode it, and also expand our ability to incentivize other forms of environmental behaviors. Companies that are in the energy space or in the transportation space are interested in us. 

 Q. What's your best advice for young entrepreneurs? 

 A. Four things. The three most important things I learned in business is No. 1 people, No. 2 people and No. 3 people. You can hire 100 great people, and if you have one person that isn't part of your value makeup or character chain, it can be very hurtful and harmful. And the fourth thing is don't be afraid to fail. Just go for it.