Director Bartlett Sher unwraps a cookie. He's just finished rehearsing the Act One finale of the Metropolitan Opera's new production of Rossini's "Le Comte Ory," a lesser-known bel canto work that he calls "a really great French pastry made by an incredible Italian chef." 

Tall and rumpled, he still has something of the Deadhead he once was about him—sleepy eyes, shaggy hair—belying the 52-year-old director's precision and intensity. Though Mr. Sher looks tired, there's none of the anxiety fogging the air that you'd expect in the run-up to a major opening. A singer shows her baby around to appreciative coos.

For all its daunting spectacle, Mr. Sher finds opera easier to direct than straight drama or musical theater. The resident director at Lincoln Center, Mr. Sher is best known to Broadway audiences for the 2008 Tony-winning revival of "South Pacific" and for his 2005 staging of "The Light in the Piazza." His acclaimed productions of plays like August Wilson's "Joe Turner's Come and Gone" and Clifford Odets's "Awake and Sing!" also earned him Tony nominations, but his last Broadway project, a musical adaptation of the Pedro Almodovar film, "Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown," closed early after tepid reviews.

Now, this time spent in a well-lit practice room with elegant Rossini melodies has the feeling of a recharge. There are luxuries in the rarified world of opera that plays and musicals don't always share. "Very few people really reach the level of accomplishment" involved in singing at the Met, he says. "It's a small, very powerful little group" who arrive for practice, perform their role for eight weeks and then take off again for Milan or Paris or Berlin. "It's like working with athletes," he adds. "You get them ready for the game."

His entry into opera was a 2003 Seattle Opera revival of Marvin David Levy's "Mourning Becomes Electra" that went on to the New York City Opera. Two productions at the Met followed, "Barber of Seville" and "Tales of Hoffman." Each showed Mr. Sher's flair for re-energizing familiar works without overstepping his role as what he calls "an interpreter." 

Since Mr. Sher doesn't read music, he approached "Le Comte Ory," as with any opera he directs, by listening to its greatest recordings alongside his longtime musical collaborator, Peter Still. Beforehand, Mr. Still developed a working script in both French and English. Then, as they compared the various past approaches to Rossini's Crusades-era romp, they annotated the script, teasing out the story and the subtext of the Count's disguised pursuit of the Countess Adèle. Mr. Sher calls the final product "a transcription of every moment" of the opera. Traditionalists might sniff, but by taking him "through the structure as deeply as possible," the process lets the director mine the narrative as much as the music. 

Although the opera is set during the Middle Ages, Mr. Sher's staging unfolds as a production in a nineteenth-century opera house from Rossini's time, within the Met. The "goofy theatrical devices" exist in service to the composer's "light and rewarding musical structure," he says.

Mezzo-soprano Joyce DiDonato, who sings the role of the Count's rival, Isolier, says Mr. Sher's vision is "very French, very intimate, very charming." For all the opera's humor, he always insists that they "play the truth, not the laugh," she says.

Juan Diego Flórez will play the title role, with Diana Damrau as Countess Adèle. The performance will be transmitted to movie theaters around the country on April 9 through the "Met: Live in HD" series.

In May, Mr. Sher will go on to premiere a new opera in London, followed by the opening of "South Pacific" at London's Barbican. In the meantime, he tears open the second cookie, a snack before the bigger meals ahead.