Japanese shares rebounded to lead most Asian markets higher Wednesday as stock valuations driven down by the hefty recent selloff attracted buyers despite fears about radiation levels at an earthquake-damaged nuclear complex.

Japan's top government spokesman said radiation levels again spiked Wednesday morning at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant, but added that they fell shortly afterward and declared there was no need to expand the evacuation area around the plant. Strong aftershocks and shortages of daily essentials also kept the nation on edge.

The Nikkei Stock Average, whose 11% drop Tuesday was its biggest in one day since October 2008, recouped some of those losses in finishing 5.7% higher.

"It appears that equity markets in the region have been hit so hard that they are oversold," said Macquarie Private Wealth division director Martin Lakos. "But the markets are going to react to whatever news comes out of Japan. This is about risk aversion rather than fundamental values or the impact on global growth."



Elsewhere, Australia's S&P/ASX 200 rose 0.7%, South Korea's Kospi advanced 1.8%, Hong Kong's Hang Seng index gained 0.1%, China's Shanghai Composite ended 1.2% higher and India's Sensex rose 1.1%.

Dow Jones Industrial Average futures added 26 points in screen trade.

"There appears to be some hedge-fund buybacks following [Tuesday's] panic-selling" in Japan, said Cosmo Securities equity strategist Toshikazu Horiuchi. But he cautioned, "unless the nuclear-power plant issues are resolved, the reconstruction efforts will not be able to start and only then can we gauge the impact [of the earthquake] on earnings."

Technology shares rebounded sharply after a punishing selloff earlier this week as investors shifted their attention to the earnings prospects of companies less affected by the earthquake, said Kenichi Hirano, operating officer at Tachibana Securities. Sony Corp. added 8.8% and Sharp Corp. rose 7.3%.

Hitachi Ltd. jumped 17% despite being known as a maker of nuclear power plants. "The earnings contributions from its nuclear-power business are relatively small," Mr. Hirano said.

Auto makers and tire makers soared, with Toyota Motor Corp. rising 9.1% and Mazda Motor Corp. adding 8.3%. Bridgestone Corp. advanced 7% as it restarted production at plants closed by power cuts.

"It will take time until we accurately know the impact on corporate earnings," said Naoteru Teraoka, general manager at Chuo Mitsui Asset Management, adding that a continuation of power cuts will have a longer-term impact on output.

Some analysts remained positive in their stocks' outlook. Those at Credit Suisse said they haven't altered their overweight view on Japanese equities and that after Tuesday's steep fall, shares were cheaper in Tokyo than in other global markets.

Tokyo Electric Power Co. was one company that didn't participate in the day's rally. Shares of Tepco, which owns and operates the damaged nuclear plant, fell 25% on top of their 42% plunge in the previous two sessions.

Drawing inspiration from the rebound in Tokyo, Australian uranium stocks also advanced, with Energy Resources of Australia Ltd. rising 10%, while Paladin Energy Ltd. climbed 14%, aided by Deutsche Bank's upgrade of the stock to Hold; Paladin had lost 31% in the previous two sessions.

Gains in Seoul were led by heavyweight technology and steel stocks, with Samsung Electronics Co. climbing 3% and Posco rising 2.3%.

But some construction stocks underperformed amid the unrest in the sector's key Mideast markets. Hyundai Engineering & Construction Co. added 0.5%, while GS Engineering & Construction Corp. fell 0.6%.

Elsewhere in the region, Taiwan's Taiex rose 1.1%, New Zealand's NZX 50 gained 0.4%, Indonesian shares rose 0.2%, Singapore shares gained 0.9% and Thailand's SET rose 0.5%, while Philippine shares—the lone holdout from the uptrend—finished 0.5% down.

"I think fund flows will keep moving from Japan to other markets in the region because after the disaster, Japan will need to import many, many products from the region to help restore the country," said Kim Eng Securities strategist Mayuree Chowvikran in Thailand.

In foreign-exchange trade, the U.S. dollar was at 80.89 yen, from 80.72 yen late Tuesday in New York, and at 0.9171 Swiss francs, from 0.9164 francs.

"The foreign-exchange markets continue to struggle to gauge the appropriate magnitude of response to the Japanese tragedy, with considerable uncertainty over the costs both in economic and human terms," Crédit Agricole said in a note to clients. "The situation remains highly fragile, even before we can begin to accurately assess the scale of the ramifications for the economy and markets."

The euro weakened after Moody's downgraded Portugal's long-term government debt, and was fetching $1.3970 from $1.4000, in addition to 112.96 yen from 113.00 yen.

Lead June Japanese government bond futures were down 0.56 at 139.72 points on the Nikkei's recovery. The yield on the 10-year cash JGB was up 0.015 percentage point at 1.225%.

Spot gold was at $1,400.30 per troy ounce, up $4.60 cents from its New York settlement Tuesday. Nymex April crude-oil futures were up $1.24 at $98.42 per barrel on Globex.