Manhattan federal prosecutors on Thursday accused two state legislators, a veteran lobbyist and the head of a $1 billion hospital network in a wide-ranging influence-peddling scheme.

The allegations, which stemmed from an earlier probe that sent a state lawmaker to prison, is the latest wave of corruption charges to spread over Albany. 

But the breadth of mischief described by prosecutors was eye-opening, involving interests from hospitals to beverage companies. 

State Sen. Carl Kruger and Assemblyman William Boyland Jr., both Democrats from Brooklyn, surrendered in Manhattan Federal Court. Six others, including the chief executive of MediSys, a network that includes several hospitals and one of the largest Medicaid managed care plans in the city, were charged in the alleged scheme.

Two state lawmakers and six others were charged Thursday in a bribery scheme that Manhattan U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara called 'an unholy alliance of politicians, lobbyists, and businessmen.' Here are some key points:

The defendants also included Richard Lipsky, a lobbyist and blogger best known for his trenchant critiques of the Bloomberg administration. Prosecutors say he was at the center of a bribery ring with a money trail that led straight to his home, where FBI agents found $102,000 squirreled away in his closet and $4,000 in "crisp" bills in his suit pocket.

"The crisis of corruption continues in Albany," said Preet Bharara, the Manhattan U.S. Attorney, whose office has convicted four state lawmakers of corruption since 2005.

Benjamin Brafman, an attorney for Mr. Kruger, said in a statement that the senator expected to be "fully vindicated" of the charges. Mr. Kruger, who after a hearing in Manhattan federal court, walked past a gaggle of media to step into a waiting car, declined to comment.

Mr. Boyland, the assemblyman, also declined comment on the way out of court. A lawyer representing him said he was "totally" innocent of the charges.

The case arose out of an earlier corruption probe of former Queens assemblyman, Anthony Seminerio, who died in January in federal prison.

Mr. Kruger and Mr. Boyland, like Mr. Seminerio, were charged with taking bribes from David Rosen, CEO of Queens-based MediSys Health Networks.

But the case spread beyond the health-care industry. 

Mr. Lipsky was accused of funneling roughly $252,000 of his lobbying fees to Mr. Kruger in exchange for the senator's help on a variety of issues affecting his clients, which included retailers and unions, supermarkets, beverage distributors, and developer Forest City Ratner. The complaint detailed a conversation caught on wiretap between a Forest City executive and Mr. Kruger about securing state money for development projects. The company was not accused of any wrongdoing.

A spokesman for Forest City Ratner, Joe DePlacso, said, "It did not come as a surprise that the head of government affairs at Forest City Ratner is speaking to elected officials." The company has ended Mr. Lipsky's contract. 

At the time the agents were searching Mr. Lipsky's home, 26 calls were placed from Mr. Kruger's phone to Mr. Lipsky's phone every few minutes from roughly 9:55 a.m. until 12:25 p.m., according to a complaint.

Mr. Lipsky allegedly funneled money to Mr. Kruger through bank accounts connected to an intimate friend of the senator, Dr. Michael Turano, a gynecologist from Mill Basin who was also charged.

Another of Mr. Lipsky's clients, John Catsimatidis, the supermarket mogul who operates the Gristedes chain, said Mr. Lipsky called him Wednesday night. "He said he was in trouble," Mr. Catsimatidis recounted.

Mr. Kruger, a veteran lawmaker who controlled the Senate's Finance Committee as recently as last year, is accused of soliciting bribes from Mr. Rosen and Robert Aquino, another defendant who ran the now-defunct Parkway Hospital in Queens. The hospital executives both wanted Mr. Kruger to help them gain control of two other bankrupt hospitals in Queens.

Prosecutors said a consultant, Solomon Kalish, was the conduit between Mr. Kruger and MediSys. 

Seminerio tried to extort bribes from Mr. Aquino, who refused to pay him. Instead, according to prosecutors, Mr. Aquino steered money to Mr. Kruger, using Mr. Kalish as a middle-man.

Mr. Rosen allegedly bought off Mr. Boyland, the son of a former assemblyman and sister of a former city council member, with a no-show consulting job that paid him $177,000. In exchange, according to the complaint, the lawmaker lobbied for money and tried to arrange a meeting with the state health commissioner.

Another defendant, Aaron Malinsky, was accused of bribing Kruger in connection with a Brooklyn development project.

—Eliot Brown and  Chris Herring  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Jacob Gershman at jacob.gershman@wsj.com 