MUMBAI -- Private equity firm India Value Fund Advisors Pvt. Ltd. has put on hold plans to find a strategic investor for Radio City, its FM radio channel, according to two people with direct knowledge of the matter. 

Several acquisitions of radio stations that are in the works face a similar fate because of the lack of clarity on a widely anticipated regulatory change that would allow radio networks to operate multiple frequencies in the same city, said industry analysts. 

India Value Fund has been in talks with several potential investors over the last nine months to explore a potential merger, including with Reliance Broadcast Network Ltd., the media services arm of the Anil Ambani-led Reliance Group that operates the radio station BIG 92.7 FM. 

A Reliance Broadcast spokesperson declined to comment. India Value Fund didn't respond. 

The regulatory change was expected ahead of the third phase of the rollout of private radio stations across the country. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting was expected to auction around 700 licences, mostly for stations in smaller cities and towns. There are around 250 stations in 91 cities. 

The third phase, however, has been delayed repeatedly and is yet to be launched. A high-level government panel was reported to have cleared the proposal for this phase in July 2010. The government also is evaluating the industry's suggestions to air news and current affairs. All these will impact the revenues of FM radio operators.

"India Value Fund has ben in talks with Reliance Broadcast for a merger, but it did not proceed" because the fund still is waiting for the launch of this phase three, said a person with direct knowledge of the matter who declined to be named. 

"There will be further potential for strategic deals once phase three comes in and provides a bigger and better platform," the person said. 

Another person, who didn't want to be identified, and with direct knowledge of the development said the government had said three months back that it would announce the new regulations in three weeks, but since nothing had happened and talks were suspended. 

"It is not possible to consider an acquisition until the regulations become clear," he added. 

Ashesh Jani, a partner at international audit and consulting firm Deloitte Haskins and Sells, said the industry would adopt a wait-and-watch approach for the time being. 

"There were several merger-and-acquisition deals on the cards, but they all are on the back burner now as several key changes are expected in the policy," he said, adding a deal between two radio networks at this point would have to be at the cost of giving up one of the brands.

Also, a separate legal battle is being fought over the royalty that radio networks have to pay to music companies for airing their content. On April 5, the Supreme Court vacated a stay, obtained in the Madras High Court, on the Copyright Board's decision directing radio networks to pay 2% of their revenues to music producers as royalty. The apex court asked the Madras High Court, which was originally hearing the case, to deliver its judgment on the case within two months.

Music companies, initially, charged a fixed royalty for FM radio operators. But these operators claimed the rates were above global benchmarks. 

The outcome of phase three of radio expansion in the country will depend on the court verdict s as it would have an impact on the revenue and profitability of radio companies. 

According to the 2011 edition of a report on the Indian media and entertainment industry released by industry lobby Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry and international audit and consulting firm KPMG, the radio industry in India generated advertising revenue of 10 billion rupees in 2010. The report estimates the industry will grow at 20% a year until 2015. 