NEW DELHI—India's central bank Tuesday said loans to microfinance institutions will only qualify as priority sectors loans if interest rates are capped at 26%, as part of a broader regulatory overhaul aimed at restructuring the industry after it was criticized for levying high charges from small borrowers. 

During its annual policy review, the Reserve Bank of India said that to qualify for priority loans, MFIs also needed to cap margins at 12%. The rule will also apply to non-banking financial companies, or NBFCs, which are functioning as MFIs, the RBI added.

The new regulatory framework comes in response to suggestions made by a panel headed by Y.H. Malegam. The panel had recommended an interest rate cap of 24% and a margin cap of 10% for MFIs with a loan portfolio of 1 billion rupees ($22.5 million) and 12% for smaller MFIs. 

In its policy review, the RBI also said only those loans that have been made to borrowers falling under certain low-income categories will be eligible for classification as priority sector lending. 

"Bank loans to all MFIs, including NBFCs working as MFIs on or after April 1, 2011, will be eligible for classification as priority sector loans under respective category of indirect finance only if the prescribed percentage of their total assets are in the nature of 'qualifying assets' and they adhere to the 'pricing of interest' guidelines to be issued in this regard," the RBI said. 

It also decided to set up a committee to re-examine the existing classification for priority sector lending and suggest revised guidelines. 

Microfinance lenders operate by borrowing from banks and usually lend sums of less than $200 to the poor who have limited access to the organized banking system and use the money to fund small business operations. 

However, MFIs have come under severe political criticism for sometimes charging interest rates as high as 40% and for allegedly using coercive methods to recover the money from borrowers. 

Following the outcry, the board of the central bank had late last year set up the Malegam panel to suggest long-term structural changes in the functioning of MFIs. 

Apart from recommending a cap on the margin and interest rates, the panel made several other recommendations such as bringing transparency in interest charges, lending by not more than two MFIs to individual borrowers, creation of a separate category of NBFCs operating in the microfinance sector to be designated as NBFC-MFIs and continuation of categorization of bank loans to MFIs complying with the regulation laid down for NBFC-MFIs under the priority sector. 

SKS Microfinance Ltd., the only listed MFI in India, said the RBI's decision to accept the Malegam panel recommendations will provide a boost to the microfinance sector. 

"We are particularly pleased to see that the RBI has re-affirmed priority sector status for microfinance and broadened some of the parameters, such as increasing the annual income limits for eligible households to 60,000 rupees for rural and 120,000 rupees for urban and semi-urban, increasing the interest cap and margin cap," it said in a statement. 

The sector suffered badly following the intense political heat over the lending practices that could push small borrowers into a debt trap. 

Andhra Pradesh province, which accounts for as much as 30% of the Indian MFI industry, had proposed regulations to register members of microfinance institutions and lower the interest rates. 

Conditions worsened after some politicians urged borrowers to stop paying back MFI companies. 

 Write to  Anant Vijay Kala at anant.kala@dowjones.com 