TOKYO—A cabinet shuffle by Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan on Friday gave a slight boost to his government's tepid approval ratings, providing some breathing space amid his continuing efforts to reform the country's economic and fiscal policy.

Mr. Kan initiated the cabinet change—the second since he took office in June—to placate increasingly cantankerous opposition parties in a divided parliament and to prevent a legislative impasse. 

But the prime minister also used the opportunity to buttress his economic policy team as he prepares for looming battles over his controversial policies. Among them are fiscal and social-security reform accompanied by increases in the broad sales tax and participation in a rigorous regional trade agreement that could wipe out much of the nation's already struggling farm sector.

Surprising many in his own party, Mr. Kan appointed as minister of economic and fiscal policy Kaoru Yosano, an independent who has in the past advocated raising the sales tax and potentially painful measures to rein in Japan's mammoth fiscal deficit. That position was vacated by Banri Kaieda, a supporter of trade liberalization, who has been given a new profile as minister of economy, trade and industry.

Local media polls on Sunday showed a small bounce in the government's already low approval ratings, with most newspapers showing a rise of between five and nine percentage points compared with previous surveys in December. The Nikkei business daily reported a five percentage point increase to 31%, while a poll by Kyodo News showed an 8.6 percentage point rise to 32.2%. 

Mr. Kan retained most other ministers in key positions, including Finance Minister Yoshihiko Noda, Foreign minister Seiji Maehara and Defense Minister Toshimi Kitazawa. 

The main opposition Liberal Democratic Party cricised the appointment of Mr. Yosano to the cabinet, with Nobuteru Ishihara, the leader of the LDP, calling for him to resign as a member of parliament over his decision to join the DPJ-led government.

Although Mr. Kan's policies also face strong opposition from many within his own party, the prime minister's renewed embrace of issues such as the consumption tax rise is welcomed by the business community. 

But it is far from certain the latest changes will help the prime minister regain his legislative initiative in parliament when lawmakers return Jan. 24 for a new session. Opposition parties, which together control one of the two chambers of parliament, are flexing their muscles to challenge a range of legislation, including the national budget and accompanying bills, for the fiscal year starting April 1. 

"I have implemented the latest cabinet change to build the strongest possible team to overcome Japan's crisis," Mr. Kan said at a news conference Friday evening. "I wasn't just thinking about surviving our party's crisis." 

However, Mr. Kan did need a cabinet shuffle to duck the attacks from opposition parties, which had demanded the dismissal of two cabinet members, including Mr. Kan's trusted aide, Yoshito Sengoku, over a territorial scuffle with China. 

After spending weeks mulling such a move, Mr. Kan decided to remove Mr. Sengoku as chief cabinet secretary Friday and to give him a senior party position. Yukio Edano, another lawmaker close to Mr. Kan, was asked to take up Mr. Sengoku's post in the cabinet. 

—Atsuko Fukase contributed to this article.

 Write to  Yuka Hayashi at yuka.hayashi@wsj.com 