TAMPA, Fla.—Until the Yankees learned of one of his idiosyncrasies, Rafael Soriano had been completely unobtrusive this spring.

Through Sunday, he had pitched just four innings against major-league teams. He hasn't talked to his new teammates much; in fact, he has rarely entered the home clubhouse at George F. Steinbrenner Field. 

Here was the Yankees' major off-season free-agent signee, their new setup man, the prospective successor to closer Mariano Rivera, and he may as well have been an invisible man for the past month.

His relative anonymity ended last week. After manager Joe Girardi scheduled Soriano, who signed a three-year, $35 million contract with the Yankees in January, to pitch Wednesday against the Baltimore Orioles, Soriano reminded Girardi and pitching coach Larry Rothschild of his personal policy.

During spring training, he prefers not to pitch against any intra-divisional teams for fear that he will reveal something to his most familiar opponents that they might use against him during the regular season. (The Orioles, like the Yankees, play in the American League's Eastern Division.) Instead, with Girardi's approval, Soriano threw 21 pitches in a minor-league game.

"Let me do my work. That's what I told the guy here," Soriano said, referring to Girardi. "I'm not saying I'll give you 100% because you cannot give your 100% all the time. I try, but let me do my work, and you'll see what I do this season."

In spring training, managers often adjust their rotations to avoid having certain starting pitchers face certain teams, but Girardi said he couldn't remember going through such machinations to accommodate a reliever. Soriano's unusual request, then, seemed a violation of proper decorum for a first-year, high-profile Yankee.

 He hasn't pitched in a meaningful game yet, and already he is making demands? The great Rivera doesn't make those sorts of demands. Who does Rafael Soriano think he is?  

 Of course, such questions will vanish should Soriano do his job well, and for this season, Soriano's baseline for success is simple: He must be a reliable bridge to Rivera—he of the five World Series rings, the 559 career saves, the respect and esteem he commands as the greatest final-inning pitcher the game has seen.

Though Soriano saved 45 games in 2010 as the Tampa Bay Rays' closer, moving to the less prestigious role of eighth-inning reliever does not bother him, he said. His contentment might have something to do with his contract: For a $1.5 million buyout, Soriano can opt out of the deal after either the 2011 or the 2012 season.

So assuming the Yankees do envision the 31-year-old Soriano as a viable replacement for Rivera, who turned 41 in November, it would be to their advantage to keep him as happy as possible. Girardi said that he didn't hesitate to let Soriano pitch in the minor-league game Wednesday, particularly since Soriano has followed his rule about not facing intra-divisional opponents for four years.

"It's understanding his desires and what he wants to do and how he wants to get ready and just not really changing the rules for him," Girardi said. "I mean, we send guys to minor-league games to pitch all the time. It's just a minor adjustment."

That the Yankees are wielding a former closer as a setup man for Rivera is not unprecedented. Soriano's predecessor in the role, Kerry Wood, collected 54 saves over the 2008 and 2009 seasons. Mike Stanton saved 27 games for the Atlanta Braves in 1993 before spending seven years in the Yankees' bullpen.

 "You have to close the door in the eighth inning, too," Rivera said. "That guy in front of you is as important as the other one in the ninth inning."

Here, Rivera's locker is next to Soriano's. When he has been in the clubhouse, Soriano has fumbled awkwardly with the earphones on his iPod and offered long, stone stares at the locker's back wall, but he has spoken little to the man sitting to his right.

"As a competitor, he's up there," Rivera said. "When you have guys like that, it's good. They don't say much, but when they go on the field, they give everything they've got."

Soriano said that he has given no thought to when or whether he might someday replace Rivera, whose contract expires after the 2012 season.

What Soriano has done is hold firm to his preseason routine. He didn't pitch Saturday against the Toronto Blue Jays, another AL East team, but did Sunday against the National League's Philadelphia Phillies. 

"I don't have to change nothing," he said.

 In the choice every new Yankee must make, the choice between deference and defiance, he already has staked out his position. 

 Write to  Mike Sielski at mike.sielski@wsj.com 