"How can we not be happy?"  Google CFO  Patrick Pichette asked rhetorically last week as the Internet search giant unveiled stellar earnings and revenue for the fourth quarter and full year 2010.

He got his answer: a swift $25 drop in Google's stock price. Shares closed Friday at $600.99. 

On the face of it, Google management and shareholders had plenty to celebrate. In the fourth quarter, sales surged 26%, while profits rose 29%—both above Wall Street's expectations. Growth in Google's core search business accelerated, and Mr. Pichette stressed that newer businesses in display and mobile search were "another growth engine" for the company. Analysts rushed to increase their one-year stock-price targets, with some going as high as $800.

So why the tepid response?

The elephant in the Google news briefing was barely mentioned: Facebook. Google's news came in the midst of Facebook's controversial private placement, in which  Goldman Sachs Group
GS


0.43
%




 and a Russian firm invested $500 million on terms that valued Facebook at $50 billion. But the metric that seems to have caught the attention of many investors is that Facebook surpassed Google as the most-visited website in the U.S.

In other words, Google's real competition isn't other search engines like  Microsoft's
MSFT


0.28
%




 Bing or  Yahoo.
YHOO


-0.48
%




 That war is largely over. Nor does Facebook currently face much of a threat from other social-networking sites. What is shaping up is a monumental Google-Facebook showdown to win the hearts, minds and wallets of Internet users world-wide. 

This apparently has been obvious for months in Silicon Valley, where the two companies have been in an arms race to hire talent. But the catalyst for this realization reaching a broader public seems to have been last week's surprise announcement that Google co-founder  Larry Page will replace  Eric Schmidt as chief executive. Under this scenario, the visionary Mr. Page rather than the seasoned manager Mr. Schmidt was urgently needed to combat the threat from Facebook, which is controlled by 26-year-old wunderkind  Mark Zuckerberg. Google couched the announcement in terms of management clarity and efficiency, but the real need is to re-establish the entrepreneurial drive that is propelling Facebook.

How will Google and Facebook compete? The goal of each is to be the point of entry for Web users, the theory being that whoever controls the gateway will deliver the most effective advertising platform. As I discovered in reporting last week's column, Facebook is so important to some users that it is on their computer screens 24 hours a day, seven days a week. I feel like I'm constantly using Google, but I don't sleep with it.

Exactly how this competition will unfold remains to be seen. Last week, Google co-founder  Sergey Brin remarked that what has been done already in Social Search, Google's social-networking feature, is "just the tip of the iceberg" and represents only "one percent of the capabilities that can be deployed in that realm." This is obviously one of the areas he will be targeting in his new role as head of strategic projects.

So does the rise of Facebook threaten Google's robust profit margins and its stock price?

Many investors seem to think so. But my sense is the competitive landscape is much more dynamic and complex. Google may be facing the first serious competition in its thus far charmed life, but this isn't necessarily bad for either Google or Facebook. The market isn't static. As Google's Mr. Pichette noted, there are "huge opportunities for innovation and growth at Google as well as the entire ecosystem."

As I said last week, I wish I were a Facebook shareholder, but I'm not a member of that exclusive circle. I have been a Google shareholder since its public offering, and in my experience, widespread doubts about Google often have been an opportunity to buy. 

For now, I say let the competition begin.

—James B. Stewart, a columnist for SmartMoney magazine and SmartMoney.com, writes weekly about his personal investing strategy. Unlike Dow Jones reporters, he may have positions in the stocks he writes about. For his past columns, see: www.smartmoney.com/commonsense.