JOHANNESBURG—South Africa's factory activity stumbled slightly in December, probably due to the slowing effect of public holidays, suggesting another interest rate cut this year isn't out of the question. 

Manufacturing is the economy's second largest sector and contracted sharply in the third quarter of this year, curbed by weak domestic demand and strength in the rand, which erodes the competitiveness of local exports. 

Also on Monday, Fitch Ratings raised South Africa's outlook to stable from negative, saying the country was emerging from the global recession more smoothly than anticipated, with credit fundamentals either in line with or better than its similarly rated peers. 

The country's purchasing-managers' index dipped to 51.7 index points in December from 52.9 in November, but remained above the neutral 50 point marking the cutoff between expansion and contraction. Economists had expected a modest increase. 

"It is plausible that there should be a temporary holiday-related slowdown in December," said  Razia Khan, Standard Chartered's regional research head for Africa. "But given the very tentative bounceback in the sector, concerns about the strength of the rand, and doubts about whether the good news from South Africa's key export markets can possibly last, there is likely to be some nervousness about this dip turning into something more long-lasting."

The rand scaled a three-year peak at 6.65 against the dollar at the end of last month but has since retreated to 6.92 against the dollar. 

Ahead of the Reserve Bank's monetary policy meeting this week, a more robust PMI print would have helped to rule out safely any new rate easing. This survey doesn't provide that reassurance, but on its own, is unlikely to be enough to suggest a resumption of rate cuts. 

Kagiso consultant  Theo Vorster said that the effect of the rand's gains during the month, the large number of public holidays and November's jump in the PMI would have all helped mute factory activity. "We expect it to remain above 50 and perhaps looking forward it might normalise to a higher number," he said. 

A breakdown of the PMI showed that business activity was little changed at 54.5 from 54.8 in October. But new sales orders slowed sharply to 53.2 from 56.5 in October. Purchasing managers remained fairly upbeat, with the index for expected business conditions dipping to 62.5 in December from 64.6 the previous month. 

But the employment component of the index sent a worrying signal, falling by 2.6 points to 45, and remaining below the critical 50 mark for an eighth consecutive month. 

Official data showed last week that manufacturing output quickened to 4.6% year-to-year in November from 2.3% in October, in line with a pickup in the PMI during the month. The index, a reliable health barometer for the sector, rose to 52.9 in November from 49.8 in October. 

The PMI survey is conducted monthly by the Bureau for Economic Research at the University of Stellenbosch, together with the Institute of Purchasing Managers in South Africa. 

Fitch rates South Africa's long-term foreign currency rating at triple-B plus or three notches above junk status. That's in-line with rating peer Standard and Poor's Corp., triple-B plus rating, although the outlook is negative. Meanwhile, Moody's Investors Service Inc. rate's South Africa one notch higher at A3. "The recovery is slightly faster than originally projected by the government and has aided fiscal consolidation," Fitch said. 

South Africa trimmed its budget deficit forecasts as faster growth boosted tax revenues. In 2010, the shortfall was lower than expected at 5.2% of gross domestic product and the Treasury expects it to narrow further this year to 4.6% and then fall to 3.9% by 2012. Fitch sees real gross-domestic product growth recovering to 2.8% in 2010, after falling 1.7% in 2009. 

"Monetary policy is supporting South Africa's economic recovery," Fitch said, noting that imbalances in the economy continue to improve. 

The South African Reserve Bank has cut lending rates by 6.5 percentage points since December 2008, but is expected to keep its key repo rate steady at 5.5% this week as inflation edges higher. 

—Clare Connaghan contributed to this article.