  Q: I am weeding out my closet, and I hope to resell some really good things from Chanel, Armani, Jil Sander and Prada, including some things that I never wore. I want to recover between 40% to 50% of their original price if I sell them on eBay. But my girlfriends tell me that I am being unrealistic. What do you think?   

—M.M., Winnetka, Ill.

A: "Like new" condition is always a plus for trendy designer clothes on the secondary market. But never forget that bargain-hunters are looking for an irresistible deal on what they will always regard as secondhand clothes. 

Think about each item's intrinsic value when you price it. Is the garment trendy enough that everyone is wearing it? What's the most you would pay for that item, without hesitation? Remember that store markdowns are ubiquitous enough that other shoppers may not be comparing your price to a garment's full original price.

One strategy to consider: At many sample sales, designers offer a group of items lumped into one price zone, sensing that the goods look more like bargains that way. Consider the range I often see at designer sample sales: day dresses for $200, cocktail dresses for $300 and blouses and sweaters for $60. One friend of mine has a closet full of second-hand designer shoes and boots—including a pair of Manolo Blahnik alligator slingbacks—all bought for between $100 and $350. Keep these thresholds in mind when you're pricing to sell. 

There are exceptional items that command higher prices at resale. I remember the designers at Proenza Schouler were bowled over when they discovered that their $49.99 bustier top—part of a limited-edition collection for Target—turned up on eBay for as much as $240. 

This was a case of supply and demand. The tops sold out in a few days on Target.com, prompting savvy re-sellers to scour outlying Target branches for those tops, especially in small sizes, which they then sold online. 

But that was a rare moment. In general, price your used fashions to move swiftly, so you can make room for the stuff you really want to wear.

—Email questions to askteri@wsj.com 

 Write to  Teri Agins at teri.agins@wsj.com 