College graduates continued to relocate to many fast-growing cities in the Sunbelt during the recession, a possible sign of the region's economic appeal, according to Census data released Tuesday. 

Among the top 10 metropolitan areas with the fastest average net growth in the number of arrivals with college degrees between 2007 and 2009, seven were in the south and southwest, including Austin, Texas, and Raleigh, N.C., according to an analysis of Census data by  William H. Frey, a demographer at the Brookings Institution in Washington, D.C. 

The new data mirror the trend in recent years of the South outpacing other parts of the nation in both migration and population growth.

Some shifts in the migration of individuals with bachelor's degrees are difficult to explain. The growth could reflect college-educated workers stuck in a particular area, Mr. Frey said, rather than lured elsewhere by better job prospects. The Census data measure the net number of migrants to and from metro areas. That means that in some cases growth reflects that fewer people are leaving than in the past—which could occur if workers are stuck in underwater mortgages or unable to relocate for other reasons. 

Meanwhile, a city with a major university, such as Austin, Texas, is likely to have lured workers as well as retained more graduates who couldn't find work elsewhere.

While the Sunbelt continues to outpace the nation in overall and percentage gains in college graduates, many other places saw the migration rate plunge as the real-estate bust led to big job losses. Between the two periods, for instance, Las Vegas; Tucson, Ariz.; Jacksonville, Fla.; and Phoenix all saw their migration rates tumble. 

Riverside, Calif., which has been battered by the housing bust, saw its growth rate tumble to 1.3% in 2007-2009 from 2.1% during 2005-2007. But as an affordable alternative to Los Angeles, Riverside still was among the nation's fastest gainers of college-educated migrants. 

College graduates, like the rest of the population, have been less mobile during the recession. But the relocation patterns of those who do move can signal a stronger job market. In Texas, for instance, where the unemployment rate was lower than the national average during the recession, four of the state's major metro areas were among the top 20 biggest magnets for college graduates from 2007-2009, according to Mr. Frey's data. 

Tuesday's data also showed the staying power among metro areas that have a reputation for being young and cool: Portland, Ore., for instance, actually saw growth of bachelor's-degree holders increase during the recession, even though Oregon was among the states hardest hit by the slump. The state had a 10.6% unemployment rate in November compared with 9.8% for the nation that month. 

The shaky job market in Portland didn't deter Jinae Szerensits, 33 years old, who moved to the city from Albuquerque in 2008 without a job and now works in marketing at a consulting firm. 

"I had a lot of friends already here," she says. 

 Write to  Conor Dougherty at conor.dougherty@wsj.com 