LONDON—U.K. Prime Minister David Cameron said Sunday that the government needs a broad settlement with banks over pay and lending, but in comments likely to irritate his junior coalition Liberal Democrats partners he said bankers are an "easy scapegoat" for the economic crisis. 

In a wide-ranging interview with the British Broadcasting Corp, Mr. Cameron was asked about reports that  Royal Bank of Scotland Group PLC Chief Executive  Stephen Hester could earn a £2.5 million ($3.9 million) bonus for 2010. 

The prime minister called the reports "speculation" and said no decision has been made. He said the government will use its role as majority stakeholder in RBS to ensure the bank isn't "leading the way" on large bonus payments. An RBS spokesman declined to comment on the Sunday Telegraph story.

 But Mr. Cameron said he wants successful U.K. banks and that the government needs a broad "settlement" with the banks, including a promise to reduce bonus payments this year. 

"What I want to see is socially responsible banks behaving responsibly, lower bonus pools than last year's, responsible levels of remuneration and proper agreements on lending for businesses large and small," he said. 

He said he won't "micromanage" the banks and insisted he doesn't want to "bash the banks over the head." 

"We need to recognize though that there are a lot of people to blame for the mess that we're in," he said, adding that bankers are "an easy scapegoat to pick." 

The government has repeatedly promised to crack down on banker bonuses and has hinted it could place fresh taxes on the banks if they don't behave responsibly over pay and lending. But while bonus payouts are likely to be lower than last year's, billions of pounds are expected to be paid. 

The issue is a key one for the beleaguered Liberal Democrats junior coalition party which has pledged a hard line on bank pay. Last year, Business Secretary Vince Cable attacked the "spivs and gamblers" in the banking sector. 

Mr. Cameron also expressed his strongest concerns yet about inflation pressures, saying the country mustn't return to the days when it had a constant "inflation problem." The prime minister reiterated that he believes in the independence of the Bank of England's Monetary Policy Committee but said recent inflation data are "concerning." 

"I think if you look at the recent figures they are concerning because they are well outside what the Bank of England is meant to deliver," he said. Mr. Cameron said he thinks BOE Governor Mervyn King is doing an excellent job. But he said he doesn't want to see the inflation specter returning in the U.K. economy. 

"I'm in no doubt that inflation is extremely harmful. It destroys people's savings," he said. "We don't want to go back to having an inflation problem as we had in the past." Mr. Cameron's comments drive in a different direction from much of what the government has said about monetary policy since taking office. 

Both Mr. Cameron and Treasury chief George Osborne said in their first months in charge that the current loose monetary policy would help soften the economic impact of the government's tough austerity measures. Mr. Osborne indicated last October that he won't stand in the way if the BOE decides to extend its bond-buying program. 

But there has been growing concern about inflation in recent weeks. In November, the annual rise in consumer prices accelerated to 3.3%, well above the Bank of England's 2% target. CPI has been at or above 3% since the start of 2010 and is expected to reach 4% later this year in part due to the increase in the value-added tax rate to 20% from 17.5% Jan 4. 

Despite that, the MPC has kept interest rates at historic lows and there is still support on the committee to expand the bond-buying program. However, one MPC member,  Andrew Sentance, is calling for gradual interest rate increases to contain future inflation pressures. 

Earlier this week, former Deputy Prime Minister Michael Heseltine, who is an adviser to Mr. Cameron and a leading figure in the prime minister's Conservative Party, warned of an impending "inflation problem." 

"I think that there is an inflation problem that hasn't yet emerged on a significant scale, but the government or Bank (of England) will have to take careful note of this," Mr. Heseltine told Channel 4 news. 

The BOE has said a series of individual factors is creating inflationary pressures, but it expects inflation to fall back over the next couple of years because of the slack in the economy. 

In the BBC interview Sunday, Mr. Cameron was also asked about one inflationary factor—rising fuel prices. Mr. Cameron said the price at the pump is "incredibly painful for families up and down the country" and reiterated the government is still mulling a price stabilization scheme that would lower fuel taxes as the oil price rose. 

But he said he doesn't want to "raise people's hopes too far" and acknowledged difficulties with the scheme. "We're going to look at it and there is a budget coming up," he said, referring to the March spending and tax statement. 

The Conservatives promised to implement a fuel duty stabilizer before the election but it wasn't included in the coalition agreement between the Conservative and Liberal Democrats parties which set out the government's program.

Mr. Cameron's comments come ahead of next Thursday's closely-watched by-election in the northwest of England. Two polls this weekend suggested the opposition Labour Party, which was ousted from power last May, is set for a comfortable win there in the first major political blow for the coalition government. 

The Liberal Democrats were initially thought to have a real chance of winning the seat but with the party at record lows in national polls, their odds now appear much taller. 

In Sunday's interview, Mr. Cameron acknowledged that 2011 will be a "difficult year" for the economy and that in this environment, he expects the public to give politicians "a good hard kick." 

He said there will be times when the Liberal Democrats "will have a tough time" and others when his Conservative Party will struggle. But he said the government will be judged on what it can achieve in the long term. 

Mr. Cameron issued a warning to trade unions not to leap on the coalition's political difficulties to try and derail the government's deep austerity measures. 

"The trade unions need to know they are not going to be able to push anyone around by holding this strike, or that strike or even a whole lot of strikes together. They can forget it. This government is a very strong government," he said. 

Meanwhile, Mr. Cameron moved to calm concerns on the right-wing of his Conservative Party by declaring that the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats will "absolutely" fight the next general election as separate parties. 

—Natasha Brereton and Vladimir Guevarra contributed to this article.

 Write to  Laurence Norman at laurence.norman@dowjones.com 

