A decorated Vietnam War veteran who worked for three U.S. presidents was found killed in a garbage dump in Wilmington, Del., police said Monday.

The body of John Wheeler, a 66-year-old defense consultant and advocate for Vietnam War veterans who worked for Presidents Ronald Reagan, George H.W. Bush and George W. Bush, was found Friday when a worker at the Cherry Island Landfill in Wilmington spotted a body falling from a garbage truck onto a pile of trash. 

Police said the medical examiner conducted an autopsy and ruled the death a homicide, but they didn't say how Mr. Wheeler died.

Investigators said the garbage truck had made 10 pickups that day, all in Newark, Del., about 12 miles from the New Castle, Del., home that Mr. Wheeler lived in with his wife, Katherine Klyce, 66. Ms. Klyce couldn't immediately be reached for comment.

Newark Police Department spokesman Lt. Mark Farrall said police believed Mr. Wheeler took a train from Washington, D.C., to the Amtrak station in Wilmington on Tuesday, although he didn't know what time Mr. Wheeler had been scheduled to arrive. He said Mr. Wheeler had not been reported as missing but added that the man's family was out of town. 

"At this point we don't have any suspects, we haven't determined a crime scene and we're still trying to put all the pieces together," Lt. Farrall said.

Robert Dill, a neighbor of Mr. Wheeler's in New Castle, said the victim didn't spend much time at home and was frequently shuttling between Delaware, Washington D.C. and New York. "He wasn't what I'd call a permanent resident in the neighborhood," Mr. Dill, 72, said.

Mr. Dill said Mr. Wheeler was a "peach of a guy who was obviously very brilliant, but not the type of guy who would overlord the brilliance on you."

He said Mr. Wheeler had been involved in an ongoing dispute over a neighbor's home-construction project. Lt. Farrall said investigators were aware of the dispute with the neighbor, but "it's not something they are focusing on at this point."

Mr. Wheeler, who graduated from the U.S. Military Academy at West Point and served as a staff officer in Vietnam, was the first chairman of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund, helping to create the black, stone wall that features the names of those killed during the Vietnam War. During the Reagan Administration, he worked on job placement for Vietnam veterans. Recently, he pushed to return Reserve Officers' Training Corps to elite universities, such as Harvard and Stanford.

"He played a very crucial role" in the veterans memorial, said the memorial fund's founder and president, Jan C. Scruggs. Mr. Scruggs added that Mr. Wheeler, who also earned a master's degree in business administration from Harvard Business School, "looked at the whole thing as a business problem."

Mr. Wheeler worked on George H.W. Bush's transition team. During the administration of George W. Bush, he worked as an assistant to the Secretary of the Air Force. At the time of his death, Mr. Wheeler was working as a defense consultant for Mitre Corp. of Bedford, Mass., and McLean, Va., a nonprofit that operates federally funded research and development centers.

—Tamer El-Ghobashy contributed to this article.