She may be the No. 1-ranked women's tennis player in the world, but  Caroline Wozniacki is not in an enviable position. She's had a rough start to the 2011 tennis season and she heads into the Australian Open seeking one critical thing that has eluded her thus far in her career: a Grand Slam title.

So far, 2011 hasn't started out looking as though it will be Ms. Wozniacki's year. In her preparation for the year's first Grand Slam, the 20-year-old from Denmark lost in exhibition matches to No. 2-ranked  Vera Zvonareva of Russia and No. 3-ranked  Kim Clijsters of Belgium before getting knocked out in her first match at the Medibank International Sydney Tennis Tournament.

Now she faces  Gisela Dulko of Argentina in the first round of the Australian Open, which Ms. Wozniacki concedes is no small task. Assuming she advances, Ms. Wozniacki could face Slovakia's Dominika Cibulkova, the player who took her down in the Medibank Open last week.

Thus far in her career, Ms. Wozniacki has yet to make it past the third round of the Australian Open. But even with all of that in mind, she doesn't sound worried. She's finally achieved her childhood dream of becoming the world's top-ranked player and she doesn't want to look too much further ahead.



In an interview over the telephone with Wall Street Journal reporter  Cynthia Koons, Ms. Wozniacki insists she hasn't examined her bracket beyond knowing who she's playing in the first round. Ms. Wozniacki also discussed her preparations for Australia and how a little bit of luck can help in a Grand Slam.

 The Wall Street Journal: Have you stepped up your training regimen after losing in the Medibank Open last week?

 Caroline Wozniacki: I just continued and played some practice sets, practice matches with the other girls. I feel like I'm in good form and I just want to keep on going.

 WSJ: Who do you think is your most formidable opponent on your side of the draw at this year's Open? How do you feel about opening up against Gisela Dulko?

 Ms. Wozniacki: I never look at the draw, I never look ahead. I just know who I'm playing in the first round. I know I'm play Gisela Dulko, which is a tough first round but I'm hopeful I can do well.

 WSJ: You have a losing record against all but one of the top-5 players right now. Are there ways that you have improved your game in order to beat them in this tournament?

 Ms. Wozniacki: I had a great year last year, I won six tournaments, and I won against a lot of the top players. I'm feeling confident.

 WSJ: How have you prepared for the potential scorching temperatures at Melbourne Park? 

 Ms. Wozniacki: It's pretty hot today. You just need to be prepared for it. I don't mind the…heat.

 WSJ: You've made it deep into several Grand Slam tournaments now. What do you think are the keys to making a run at the title here this year?

 Ms. Wozniacki: I definitely need to play well, I need to be consistent, I need to win seven matches. A little bit of luck helps and a draw that goes your way.

 WSJ: How confident are you this Open could be your first Grand Slam title? 

 Ms. Wozniacki: I'm feeling like I'm in good shape. I feel really good. I'm just looking at one match at a time.

 WSJ: What did your father, who coaches you, say to you after your losses at the Hong Kong Tennis Classic [to Ms. Zvonareva] and the Medibank Tennis Tournament? 

 Ms. Wozniacki: I've only played one real match this year, the others were just exhibition matches. You just want to work on some things and try different things on the court. I'm ready for the Australian Open.

 WSJ: Do you think it will it be tough to hold onto the number one ranking once Serena Williams returns? 

 Ms. Wozniacki: It's always tough to hold onto that No. 1 ranking, it doesn't matter if Serena is there. There are so many girls who want to reach that top spot. I'm just enjoying myself and doing my best.

 Write to  Cynthia Koons at cynthia.koons@wsj.com 