NEW YORK—High oil prices are threatening to disrupt a still-fragile global economic recovery, the chief economist of the International Energy Agency said Friday. 

"We are in the danger zone now with prices and how the economy is responding," said  Fatih Birol, head economist at the Paris-based group that represents major oil consumers. 

Mr. Birol called on the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to raise production at its planned June 8 meeting, warning that "we may see higher prices than we see now" otherwise.

His remarks are the latest salvo in a dialogue between OPEC and their biggest customers. OPEC members have resisted calls for more oil to reduce pressure on economies still in recovery from recession, but public posturing by both sides is increasing ahead of the group's meeting.

In an interview with Dow Jones Newswires, Mr. Birol said oil use is set to increase by as much as three million barrels a day over the next few months, and prices could march higher unless major producers pump out more crude. Refineries, now leaving a period of seasonal repairs, will soon process more oil to boost production of gasoline and other fuels before summer demand hits.

Oil futures are already at more than 2½-year highs, a level that has increased costs for businesses and strained consumers' budgets. U.S. retail gasoline prices are inching toward $4 a gallon on average and aren't expected to peak until the summer. 

Light, sweet crude for June delivery was up 62 cents, or 0.5%, at $113.48 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange in midafternoon trade. Brent crude on the ICE Futures Exchange traded up 48 cents to $125.50 a barrel.

Mr. Birol said Brent, Europe's main benchmark, more accurately reflects the cost of oil world-wide, as supply issues depress the value of Nymex-traded West Texas Intermediate crude.

Oil prices in recent months have responded to both supply disruptions and increasing demand from China and emerging markets. 

The loss of virtually all of Libya's crude amid a civil conflict there has kept oil traders on edge, as disruptions threaten to spread to other oil-exporting nations. 

Saudi Arabia, the world's largest oil exporter and OPEC's most influential member, has managed to avoid unrest. But stability has come at the cost of spending on improved social benefits, which has in turn has made the kingdom reliant on oil prices averaging at least $88 a barrel, according to a report by the Institute of International Finance. 

Saudi Arabia has in the past advocated for prices to remain between $70 and $80 a barrel.

Meanwhile, fuel use in China, Brazil and other regions continues to march higher. Mr. Birol said the strength of demand in these regions, and not the U.S., is crucial in determining oil's price.

"The U.S. is not the country which sets the tone for global oil demand growth," he said

While politicians and consumer groups in the U.S. have blamed speculation for the recent price rise, Mr. Birol said the market is providing an accurate price for oil given the current supply and demand outlook.

The reason for increased oil prices is relatively simple, according to the IEA economist.

"We need more oil," he said. 

—Sudeep Reddy contributed to this article.

 Write to  Jerry DiColo at jerry.dicolo@dowjones.com 

