The National Football League is in talks with pay-TV operators to distribute the NFL Network's programming over tablets and other computers, as the TV industry wrestles with the rise of digital media.

The NFL Network channel -- carried by  Comcast Corp.,  DirecTV Inc.,
DTV


0.08
%




 Dish Network,
DISH


-0.35
%




 Cox Communications,  Verizon Communications Inc.
VZ


-0.50
%




 and  AT&T Inc.
T


-1.07
%




 – carries live Thursday night games, as well as NFL RedZone, the Sunday roundup of scoring opportunities and highlights.

The NFL is seeking extra fees from those carriers to expand their offerings to tablets and computers, a person familiar with the matter said.

The effort is a tricky balancing act for the NFL, which has sold rights to similar content over smartphones, in addition to signing expensive deals for live games. 

"We are actively working on those discussions with our existing cable TV partners," said  Hans Schroeder, senior vice president of media business development for the NFL. "We hope to have a few partnerships that will be ready for kickoff."

A spokesman for DirecTV confirmed it is in talks with the NFL. Comcast also is in talks with the NFL, said a person familiar with the matter.

A Verizon spokewoman declined to comment specifically on tablet discussions, but said, "We talk about a lot of different things with the NFL." AT&T and Cox declined to comment.

Last March, Verizon signed a $720 million four-year deal with the NFL to be its official wireless partner and exclusive provider of video on smartphones. That deal covers live games on Thursday and Sunday, as well as the RedZone package, but doesn't include video rights for tablets. 

"We are looking for more way to add more live content for our fans that works for all of our partners," Mr. Schroeder said.

The discussions reflect recent moves by the NFL and other content providers to find a way to distribute TV programming to a growing array of devices while respecting agreements with existing broadcast and wireless partners. 

In April, ESPN launched apps for the iPhone and iPad that let authenticated customers of  Time Warner Cable,
TWC


1.36
%




 Verizon and Bright House Networks access to its channels on those devices at no extra cost.

The offering was made possible by landmark distribution deals the carriers reached with ESPN's parent,  Walt Disney Co.
DIS


0.30
%




, which included new digital streaming rights.

The industry uses the name "TV Everywhere" to describe that model of allowing confirmed subscribers to watch TV wherever they go, usually at no extra costs. It has been embraced by many companies in the television business as way to satisfy consumer demand for video entertainment online and on mobile devices while preserving lucrative subscription fees. 

TV Everywhere has been slow to gain traction, as programmers and distributors negotiate over content rights. Content providers would like to gain additional compensation from pay-TV providers for digital distribution rights, an effort resisted by some cable operators.

Time Warner Cable sparked controversy recently by launching an iPad app to let authenticated customers watch TV on  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.83
%




's popular tablet in the limited confines of their own homes. 

Early this month, Time Warner Cable rmoved a number of channels from the app after their owners objected. The company traded lawsuits with  Viacom Inc., which is trying to keep its programming off the app.

  Cablevision Systems
CVC


2.00
%




 followed up with an app that makes all its customers' programming available on the iPad within their homes, and Time Warner Cable plans to expand its app to nearly all channels in some of its major markets by year-end.

DirecTV lets its customers watch live NFL games on their computers and mobile devices through its Sunday Ticket To Go service, which requires subscribers to pay an additional $9.99 a month for five months on top of the $334.95 basic fee.

This month, the NFL released wireless apps for the iPad and iPhone, offering live coverage this week of the NFL draft. It is the first time the NFL has made live NFL video available on a tablet. The apps won't carry full broadcasts of live NFL Network games, however.‬

The NFL season is still at risk over a dispute between NFL players and team owners. Although a U.S. District Judge on April 25 ordered an immediate end to the NFL lockout, the threat still exists that the lockout could be reimposed.‬ ‪‬

 Write to  Nat Worden at nat.worden@dowjones.com 