PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla.—When Terry Collins explains his thinking on a particular subject, invariably, he will refer to something Jim Leyland once said or did.

He'll be talking about lineup construction and add, "Jim Leyland, he believed in the same thing." Or he'll be answering yet another question about his intensity and he'll bring up Leyland's demeanor. "I've seen this guy climb down some people's throats," he says.

More than anyone else, Leyland is the manager Collins has tried to emulate, sometimes successfully, sometimes not. It was Leyland, then as manager of the Pittsburgh Pirates, who gave Collins his first major-league coaching job in 1992.

When the Mets hired Collins as manager in November, he chose No. 10 for his uniform in honor of Leyland, who now manages the Detroit Tigers. And when the Tigers came here to play the Mets in an exhibition game Monday, it didn't take long for Collins and Leyland to find each other.

They spoke for roughly 20 minutes behind the batting cage before the game. And while Collins no longer leans on Leyland for advice, in many ways, he is still shaped by what he observed during his two years as Leyland's bullpen coach in Pittsburgh.

"His dealings with the players were so honest," Collins said. "I watched him communicate on a daily basis, and I probably didn't live up to that the way he did. But he gave me my chance when nobody else would."

They met in spring training in 1989. After several years managing in the Los Angeles Dodgers' farm system, Collins had just been hired to manage the Pirates' Triple-A Team. Leyland was in his fourth year as the Pirates' manager.

When they first shook hands, Leyland grumbled, "I don't know you, but I don't like you because you're a Dodger."

In time, though, Leyland would come to see a bit of himself in Collins. They were separated by only five years in age. Both had to overcome the disadvantage of not having played in the major leagues.

Leyland, a former catcher, never made it past Double-A. Collins, a former infielder, never advanced beyond Triple-A.

"When you're a former big-league player, you have to lose the players' respect," Leyland said. "But when you're a minor-league guy and never a player, you have to get the players' respect. That's the difference."

Leyland could not assume, then, that Collins would one day be a major-league manager. But he tried to groom him for the job. He would tell Collins to listen in on his post-game sessions with reporters, so he knew what dealing with the media would be like.

After the 1993 season, when Collins became a candidate for the Houston Astros' managerial job, Leyland met with him for several hours to help him prepare for the interview. Collins aced it.

"There wasn't one question they asked me that he didn't bring up," he said. "Not one."

In Pittsburgh, Collins watched the way Leyland handled players. He was there when Leyland infamously castigated Barry Bonds on the field one day during spring training in 1991, in full view of television cameras. And he saw how Bonds came to respect Leyland for it.

But during managerial stints in Houston and Anaheim, Collins found it difficult to communicate with players the way Leyland did.

"When times were going tough, I wanted to give them their space," Collins said. "I probably should have done more one-on-one stuff with certain guys, instead of taking it for granted that they're major-league players and they'll get through this stuff."

Then, as it always does, the conversation came back to Leyland. "I know he would have done more one-on-one things," Collins said.

 Write to  Brian Costa at brian.costa@wsj.com 