China Miéville is justly admired for his imaginative cityscapes. There is the floating city of Armada in "The Scar" (2002), the polluted, quasi-Victorian chaos of New Crebuzon in "Perdido Street Station" (2000), the jumble of jurisdictions in the odd Eastern European metropolis of "The City & the City" (2009). "Embassytown"  (Del Rey, 345 pages, $26) creates yet another memorable city, this time in a more recognizably science-fiction setting: a distant planet recently reached by human colonizers. Embassytown is their tenuous toe-hold in this new world.

The planet already has an intelligent native species, the Hosts, whose most distinctive feature is that each individual has two mouths. The words in their language have to be spoken simultaneously by one mind with two voices. The only way humans can deal with this is to create "doppels"—pairs of identical twins, or clones—who can synchronize their speech and thus serve as ambassadors.

Humans end up introducing the Hosts to a form of speech that the Hosts never knew was possible before: the lie. Further trouble brews when it turns out that a doppel whose halves speak slightly out of phase can act as a drug for the Hosts—addictive, destructive, eventually cataclysmic for the whole Host civilization and its human symbiote. Eventually we learn what happens when one member of a doppel dies: The half that is left, like Bren (once half of BrenDan), becomes a kind of amputee. An equivalent tragedy befalls the Hosts when some realize that the only way to escape the addictive drug of human speech is to mutilate themselves, becoming Surds, deaf beings outside language. 

"Embassytown" is, in its way, the story of a Fall. The winged Hosts are like angels exposed to a new original sin brought to them from outside by mysterious strangers with names like EzRa and CalVin. To some readers, this may seem philosophically very deep. But Mr. Mieville never really integrates the intellectual complexities with a compelling narrative. 

 By China Miéville  Del Rey: New York. $16

One problem is that the ideas that preoccupy the author here have to do with language itself. Language about language must always be in some sense secondhand, and the Host language is presented as essentially untranslatable. This makes the  goings-on in "Embassytown"—and the characters—hard to relate to. It's an old saying in science fiction that strange things happening to strange people in strange places is one strange too many. 

To see how good Miéville can be, take a look at "Kraken" (Del Rey, 528 pages, $16), now out in paperback. Unlike "Embassytown," "Kraken" starts with the familiar, but it rapidly shoots off sideways. Biologist Billy Harrow is leading a tour around the British Museum's Darwin Center when he is shocked to see that his prize exhibit, the Architeuthis, has gone missing. How can anyone just walk out with a 40-foot squid?

 By China Miéville  Del Rey: New York. $26 (tentative price)

Worse, the police who come to investigate aren't the regular police but a force that keeps watch over London's magical underworld—all the mages, monsters and dissident gods, or "divine vermin," that have been sucked into the museums of what was once the capital of a world empire.

Do not think Harry Potter. This Miéville universe is thoroughly sleazy, the magic gangmasters operating in the real-life back alleys and kebab houses of contemporary London. "Kraken" is a classic urban fantasy, mixing fairy tale with "Pulp Fiction." Its power comes from our own sense of all the things going on in a metropolis that we'll never understand. 