Lynn Hauldren lent a soft edge to a carpeting hard sell.

For millions of late-night TV viewers across the nation, Mr. Hauldren was the familiar Empire Today pitchman.

But despite his convincing warehouse uniform, Mr. Hauldren, who died Tuesday at age 89, wasn't the carpet professional the ads made him out to be.

"I don't own Empire carpets," He told the Chicago Tribune in 1997. "I can't install carpet. And I'm not even an actor."

What he lacked in qualifications, he more than made up for in sales ability. Over 35 years, he appeared in more than 1,000 ads, and Empire expanded to a national chain in over 35 metropolitan areas.

Mr. Hauldren's low-budget 30-second (and shorter) ads promised a next-day home sales visit, speedy installation, and low, low prices, followed by a catchy jingle that Mr. Hauldren composed and helped sing himself: "800-588-2300 Empire."

Once, he was shown stranded atop a stack of carpet rolls for the duration of a special sale. Other times, he appeared as Santa Claus or singing barbershop with a group of installers.

"Call Empire Today, Carpet Tomorrow," some ads promised.

A native of St. Louis, Mr. Hauldren fought in World War II and Korea, and then settled in Chicago, where he worked as an advertising copywriter. 

In the mid-1970s, he created a campaign for Empire Carpets, a medium-size company that mostly served the Chicago area. He was drafted by Empire's then-owner, Seymour Cohen, after several dozen auditions failed to produce a satisfactory "mascot," as Empire calls its spokesman. 

"Someone who writes and reads his own words is, in my opinion, more convincing than the actor who only reads lines," Mr. Cohen told the Chicago Tribune in 1997.

"Lynn came up with the Empire Man idea," Mr. Cohen said. "And it was strange enough to work."

In recent years, the ads became more professional, with actual actors playing Empire customers and Mr. Cohen portrayed as a computer-animated figure.

A group harmony singer from his youth, Mr. Hauldren recorded several albums with Chordiac Arrest, a barber-shop quartet in which he sang baritone. 

Interviewed by the Chicago Tribune in 2006, Mr. Hauldren said his home had wall-to-wall Empire carpet, but that the office he had used for 15 years still had the original carpeting.

"I know I should get new, but it's such a hassle," he said.

—Email remembrances@wsj.com

 Write to  Stephen Miller at stephen.miller@wsj.com 