BENGHAZI, Libya—Pro-Gadhafi forces dramatically escalated an air and ground bombardment of the rebel held city of  Ras Lanuf on Thursday, forcing rebel fighters to retreat from the strategic oil refinery city. 

Fighter jets dropped bombs, tanks rained down shells, while pro-Gadhafi fighters fired steady salvoes of Grad rockets on the town throughout the day, in what appeared to be a significant increase in the intensity of the government offensive against rebel fighters in the east. 

Fleeing fighters said they had spotted around 50 tanks on the town's outskirts before retreating early in the evening Thursday to a small village of Ajaila, about 75 kilometers east of Ras Lanuf.

"They bombed us with tanks, airplanes, missiles coming from every direction," said  Mahmoud Abdel Hamid, a 25-year-old fighter, who lay in the hospital on Thursday with multiple fractures in his right arm and shrapnel embedded in his face.

"We need international support, at least a no-fly zone. Why is the world not supporting us? Is this a sign that the world supports Gadhafi and doesn't support us?" Mr. Hamid wondered.

Col. Gadhafi's gains against rebels in Libya stand in contrast with a series of diplomatic setbacks Thursday, as the international community oncreased the pressure to stop him. France has formally recognized Libya's main opposition group, the U.S. said it will hold talks with the rebels, and European nations have extended sanctions on the Libyan government and its banks. 

European Union foreign ministers and North Atlantic Treaty Organization officials are holding meeting in Brussels to consider options for intervening in the conflict, including the creation of a no-fly zone.

U.S. intelligence agencies believe Mr. Gadhafi is unlikely to be pushed from power by rebels in the east alone because his forces have superior firepower, said James Clapper, the director of U.S. national intelligence. 

At a Senate Armed Services Committee hearing Thursday, Mr. Clapper said rebels faced a "tough row" because Mr. Gadhafi has surrounded himself with the "most luxuriously equipped and the best-trained" troops in the country, giving him "overwhelming power."

Saif al-islam, Gadhafis's son, said at a rally Thursday that 40,000 civilians have joined the fight against the rebels and vowed continued attacks. 

In another bed at the hospital, rebel fighter  Mustafa Ramadan, could only communicate by writing after a shell knocked him off his feet, slammed him into a car, and ruptured his ear drums, according to his account. 

"They just kept bombing and bombing and bombing again," he wrote. 

The stepped up bombardment of the city also forced medical staff at the town's hospital to evacuate along with patients to the hospital in Ajdabiya, a rebel controlled city about 120 east of the front lines. 

  Dr. Ahmed Hamad, a surgeon at the hospital in Ajdabiya, said casualties had doubled Thursday, with the hospital receiving about 50 to 60 cases throughout the day, compared with 20 to 30 a day in past days. 

"The injuries are different now," he said. "Before it was mostly bullet wounds, but now I'm seeing a lot of amputees, shrapnel wounds." 

A precise casualty count isn't available, but on Wednesday, medical officials in Benghazi said that they had tallied over 400 deaths in eastern Libya since the uprising began on Feb. 17. 

In Zawiya, a city of 200,000, was sealed off under a fifth day of a destructive siege, with conflicting reports of who was in control. A brigade led by one of Gadhafi's sons, Khamis, is believed to be leading the assault, shelling neighborhoods with tank and artillery fire from the outskirts and trying to push troops in to the city's central Martyrs Square where rebels had set up camp, the Associated Press reported.

The city hospital has been overwhelmed with dead and wounded and many houses have been damaged, according to residents who escaped the past two days, the AP said.

—Muneef Halawa in Ajdabiya, Sam Dagher in Tripoli and Adam Entous in Washington contributed to this article.

 Write to  Charles Levinson at charles.levinson@wsj.com 