BUDAPEST—Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orban—a contentious figure known for his unorthodox economic policies— pledged to push for closer integration in the euro area as his government takes up the rotating presidency of the European Union.

"Without fiscal unity, the currency is vulnerable," Mr. Orban said in an interview with The Wall Street Journal on Wednesday. "The euro must be defended or uncertainty about the EU will be widespread."

The tightest spending rules should apply to countries that use the euro and not to those with their own currencies, such as Hungary, the prime minister said. He said it wouldn't be "realistic" for Hungary to adopt the euro before the end of the decade, adding that today, "it is better not to be in." 

Estonia, which on Jan. 1 became the latest country to adopt the euro, is the "bravest nation" in the EU, he said.

The prime minister is being closely watched in his new role as the EU's public face for the next six months. Mr. Orban, who swept to power in Hungary after a landslide victory in April elections, fought with the EU and the International Monetary Fund, which rescued Hungary from insolvency in 2008, as he resisted their calls for spending cuts.

Mr. Orban is also advancing an ambitious and controversial agenda in Hungary: moving to rewrite the constitution; revamp the tax, pension and social-welfare systems; and rewrite the rules for the country's media.

The 48-year-old prime minister became famous as a student dissident calling for the removal of Soviet troops from his country in 1989. He says his political goal now is to complete the unfinished business of the country's peaceful anticommunist evolution—dismantling the last vestiges of what he considers a corrupt governing system still dominated by the old socialist elite.

"We made compromises that turned out to be bad or shortsighted," Mr. Orban said in the interview in his office in Hungary's ornate parliament building on the banks of the Danube. Now, Mr. Orban said, he wants to use his powerful legislative majority to remake politics. "I waited 20 years to have this moment."

Critics in Hungary and among its increasingly nervous neighbors say that in Mr. Orban's drive to concentrate power and stifle his detractors, he seems to be coming full circle, building an intolerant regime like the old totalitarian one he despised.

The flashpoint has been the new media law passed by parliament in late December that allows regulators to fine journalists for reporting that regulators deem "unbalanced" or "offensive."

"It's only one element of a broader development," said Guy Verhofstadt, leader of the European Parliament's Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe. Mr. Orban's Fidesz party, which has a two-thirds majority in parliament, "has become more and more a party of nationalist rhetoric. That's a dangerous evolution."

Mr. Orban dismissed such worries: "The rest of Europe sees the two-thirds majority as a danger. We see it as an opportunity. ...If a strong party respects the sharing of power, checks and balances, there is no danger."

 Read Viktor Orban's positions on the euro, relations with the central bank, Hungary's former communist leaders and more in edited excerpts from his interview with The Wall Street Journal. 

Mr. Orban said his government plans to announce a series of measures in February aimed at shrinking spending on pensions, unemployment benefits and state subsidies for drugs. He said the era of generous and long-lasting welfare benefits for the unemployed "is over." But he said he didn't yet have estimates for how much money these moves would save the government.

Markets have been hoping that the February initiatives will provide evidence of concrete and enduring cuts in state spending.

Last year, Mr. Orban scorned calls from the IMF and EU for serious cuts in state spending. Instead, he stuck to his election promises of no new austerity measures and moved to cut personal income taxes and lower tax rates on small and midsize businesses.

To pay for this and still meet EU-required budget-deficit targets, he has slapped hefty temporary taxes on a handful of industries whose major players are large, foreign companies. He has also diverted a huge sum of privately managed pension money back into state coffers.

Mr. Orban said his approach aims to spark growth and create jobs in an economy recovering from its worst recession since the end of communism in 1989. "It's legitimate for Hungary to have its own view, to think not just about budget deficits, but about long-term competitiveness," Mr. Orban said. Still, he acknowledged market pressures: "The fight for credibility is a constant fight."

He added that Hungary expects to reduce its outstanding public debt this year, in part by using the funds returned to state coffers from private pension managers. He also wants the central bank to return unspent funds from the IMF bailout.

Mr. Orban said the sectors selected for the temporary taxes were all service industries, saying the country's economic strategy is to "support investors who want to create jobs through manufacturing activities."

Investors have been skeptical. The cost of insuring Hungarian bonds against default has soared. Its debt is the world's ninth-riskiest—riskier than Iraq's. The main ratings agencies all rank Hungarian government debt one rung above junk-bond status.

 Write to  Gordon Fairclough at gordon.fairclough@wsj.com and Margit Feher at margit.feher@dowjones.com 