The Millrose Games is leaving Madison Square Garden next year for the Armory Track and Field Center in Washington Heights, ending a partnership with MSG that dates back to 1914. 

And not even Dr. Norbert Sander, the executive director of the Armory Foundation, could argue against the merits of Madison Square Garden—for virtually any event other than track and field.

"For entertainment it's the best arena in the world; for basketball, for hockey, for concerts, for the circus," Sander said. "But for track, for our sport, the Armory is the best place. And there really is no comparison."

The Armory, which seats a little more than 4,000, possesses an extensive and storied history within the track and field community.

In February, Olympic-medalist Bernard Lagat broke the American 2-mile record there, running it in eight minutes, 10.07 seconds. Afterward, he said "it was my dream to race here."

In January 2001, Alan Webb became the first American high-schooler to run a sub-four minute mile indoors, completing it in 3:59.86. In 1964, Bronx-native Bill McClellon broke the national high-school record in the high jump, clearing 6-7 ¾. In 1925, nine-time Olympic gold-medalist Paavo Nurmi set a world record of 5:33 in the 2,000 meters. And in 1926, DeHart Hubbard of Michigan set the world record in the long jump, leaping 24-7 ¼.

Ideally, Sander said, the Millrose Games will make these kinds of milestones a regular occurrence at the Armory once again.

"This is the place, the national center for indoor track," Sander said. 

The Armory Foundation officially announced the move Friday. By bringing the event uptown, it hopes to attract more high-caliber athletes to the 104-year-old meet by capitalizing on the Armory's extremely fast surface.

 USA Track and Field, the sport's governing body in the United States, opposes the move and will no longer serve as the event's primary sponsor.

 "We believe the Millrose Games should be at Madison Square Garden,'' said Ivan Cropper, a spokesman for USA Track and Field. "The two are made for each other."

The move coincides with a difficult period for Millrose, which has suffered from declining attendance and overall interest in recent years.