 (Le) Poisson Rouge  158 Bleecker St., (212) 228-4854  Through Jan. 15 

Marc Ribot's music is so wholeheartedly eclectic that the representatives of the various musical "teams"—rock, country, blues, pop—could hold an NFL-style draft in which they all try to recruit him. (You'll hear all those strains running through his latest album, "Silent Movies.") Accordingly, Mr. Ribot's current month-long "residency" at (Le) Poisson Rouge should encompass all of these facets: Each Wednesday will open with a solo set, followed by sets with, respectively, Sun Ship, a trio celebrating the '60s avant-garde of John Coltrane and Albert Ayler, co-starring bassist Henry Grimes (Jan. 12); the Young Philadelphians, formed in the spirit of both '70s electric funk and Ornette Coleman's Prime Time (Jan. 19); and Mr. Ribot's experimental trio Ceramic Dog (Jan. 26).

It isn't that the guitar is a bastard stepchild in jazz—not exactly. There are probably as many great jazz guitarists as there are trombonists. It's just that the guitar doesn't dominate in jazz the way it does in blues, country and pop. It's altogether logical, then, that the major guitarists of the contemporary era would draw heavily on those other musics; they are, in a sense, inherently eclectic by the very nature of their instrument. 

Yet although Mr. Ribot refuses to pledge total allegiance to any one style, it's apparent that he's a jazz guy first. Even in a completely solo set, he is able to illustrate the range of his music. For the first of his four Wednesdays at (Le) Poisson Rouge, he began with a diverse mix, from Thelonious Monk's "Ask Me Now," to a semi-classical work by the Haitian composer and guitarist Frantz Casseus (who was also one of Mr. Ribot's mentors), to "Sun Ship," a hard-hitting piece from John Coltrane's descent into the extreme avant-garde. Of these, the Monk tune was the closest thing to an expected number from a mainstream jazz musician, and Mr. Ribot played it with Monk's characteristic combination of emotion and antic wit.

During the set, which stretched from 10 p.m. to almost 1 a.m., Mr. Ribot emphasized the Latin side of his legacy (the same he brought out on two of his better known albums, "Muy Divertido!" and "The Prosthetic Cubans," both done with the band Los Cubanos Postizos). He guest starred with two South American ensembles: Cotito, a trio built around the celebrated Peruvian percussionist and singer Juan Medrano Cotito, who plays cajón, followed by the Colombian group La Cumbiamba eNeYe (aka La Cumbiamba NY).

Mr. Ribot totally integrated himself into the Cotito trio, which otherwise consisted of electric guitar and bass—becoming, in effect, a perfect fourth wheel. The Cumbiamba group was an altogether different proposition: This 11 piece unit is primarily percussion, and what melody it played was more implicit than explicit; there were two long flutes, but most of the time, what tune there was was supplied by the band's unison chanting (including a young girl who seemed to function as cheerleader) and a lead singer with a rather bold but harsh baritone voice. As the primary string player in the ensemble, Mr. Ribot was a welcome addition.

Overall, Mr. Ribot's work is less moody and gothic than his colleague Bill Frisell, especially in person. For a musician who has made albums with titles like "Requiem For What's-His-Name," "Exercises in Futility" and even "Yo! I Killed Your God," his music is generally upbeat and even cheerful. Mr. Ribot's playing on the new album is altogether fine and mellow, but in person, especially at (Le) Poisson Rouge, is much more rough and jangling, filled with tense, dissonant notes and vivid dynamics —like a sculpture or mosaic made out of bright, jagged shards of broken glass. 

 The Oak Room (at the Algonquin Hotel)  59 W. 44th St., (212) 840-6800  Through Jan. 15 

"New York," says singer-pianist Eric Comstock, "is a conundrum, wrapped in a riddle, wrapped in a knish." His most valuable tool in looking for the heart of the Metropolis is a medley, and in "Helluva Town: A New York Soundtrack," he and his wife, singer Barbara Fasano, take it to a whole other level. The duo's masterful way of combining one song with another is better described as "layering," and is almost a form of recomposition, taking bits and pieces of various tunes and assembling something that is just about entirely new. In addressing the widest range of musical styles—from Horace Silver's stealth blues, "Strollin'," to two gloriously ersatz Latin songs by Harry Warren—they vividly illuminate the miraculous diversity that is Fun City. The occasional topical update, as in "Ben Bernanke's looks give me a thrill," doesn't hurt, either.

 Jazz Standard  116 E. 27th St., (212) 576-2232  Through Sunday 

Terence Blanchard is an outstanding trumpeter, but the main reason I look forward to his recordings and appearances is to hear his new tunes. He is a first-rate composer, whether writing for the movie screen or his own quintet (or, better yet, some combination of both). The high point of his opening set on Wednesday was "Touched By an Angel," a long, intricate work from his current album, "Choices." Perhaps not a ballad in the truest sense, it was, nonetheless, soft enough and slow enough to command attention in a setting where you're usually accustomed to hearing blasts of bebop. Primarily a showcase for pianist Fabian Almazan, it also featured generous spots for the composer's own trumpet as well as longtime tenor-sax collaborator Brice Winston. On top of that, it amounted to one of the finest examples of drumming I've ever heard from Kendrick Scott, playing gently but firmly, holding the whole thing together.

  Frederick P. Rose Hall   Broadway at 60th Street  Tuesday 

Where emerging players and ensembles are the primary focus of the Winter Jazzfest, the National Endowment for the Arts events celebrate those venerated veterans who have already cast a giant shadow on American music. This certainly applies to Johnny Mandel, Dave Liebman and the highly accomplished producer Orrin Keepnews—plus at least three members of the Marsalis family, which is being honored as a unit. The central Jazz Masters concert is sold out, but it's going to be both webcast and broadcast, as will a much anticipated panel discussion on Monday afternoon, moderated by the NEA's A.B. Spellman (author of the brilliant "Four Lives in the Bebop Business"). Considering that Messrs. Liebman, Keepnews, Mandel, and Wynton Marsalis all have strong opinions and know how to talk the talk and walk the walk, it should be more like a verbal jam session than a typical seminar

 Various locations  For Information: www.winterjazzfest.com  

After six years, it's become a tradition: January is the time to overdose on exciting new jazz—even more than usual in this most musical of cities. The Association of Performing Arts Presenters conference is the motivating force behind dozens of shows this weekend, with the central jazz event being the Winter Jazzfest, consisting of more than 40 bands (Lord knows how many individual musicians), three clubs, and two nights. At the top of my list: clarinetist Don Byron's New Gospel Quintet, Steve Coleman's Five Elements, emerging vocalist Gregory Porter, and a new large-format collaboration between saxophonist J.D. Allen and conductor ("conductionist") Butch Morris called VisionFugitive. Although the Fest primarily celebrates young and "cutting edge" talent, one obvious highlight is the classic Chico Hamilton Quintet, led by the veteran 89-year-old drum master.