The first official tally from southern Sudan's referendum on independence showed Friday that voters were nearly unanimous in their desire to separate from the North, setting the head of the southern government on a difficult path toward founding Africa's newest nation.

Salva Kiir, the southern Sudan government's president, saw his region through this month's referendum. His likely reward will be running a destitute country, under lofty expectations.

Mr. Kiir is credited with bringing about the peaceful vote following five years of negotiations with Sudan's northern government. The two sides—which have fought two wars in two decades believed to have left more than 2 million dead—agreed to set aside differences so that 3.9 million voters could cast ballots on whether to become a separate state.

So far, 98.6% of voters have chosen secession, according to results published Friday on the website of the Southern Sudan Referendum Commission in Khartoum. All votes cast outside of Sudan and those from eligible southerners living in the north have been tallied, as well as 83% of the votes from the south, according to the referendum commission's site. The final result isn't expected until February. 

Earlier this week, the commission's branch in the southern city of Juba reported 95% of voters there sought succession. 

The nearly unanimous results are in line with expectations. The right to vote was determined along ethnic and residential lines, basically insuring those who had been the subjects of decades of slave raids, massacres and neglect from the northern government would be those casting ballots. The Carter Center, the main international observer group, called the vote credible.

Through it all, said one Western diplomat, Mr. Kiir's biggest concern has been that the referendum wouldn't happen. His next biggest concern, this person said, was that it would—leaving him to rebuild a devastated economy and battered infrastructure, as "president of a country in name only."

About 90% of the south's population lives on less than $1 a day. Though the region is rich in oil, southern Sudan has little running water, few paved roads and bare-bones health care.

But expectations among southern Sudanese for their new country have soared. Independence is seen among many as a panacea for poverty and repression by Sudan's government in the northern city of Khartoum.

"The propaganda that we cannot govern ourselves is baseless," said John Alphones, a 30-year-old accountant. "We will achieve democracy and economic progress and respect the rights of everybody."

There is a lot riding on Mr. Kiir, a 59-year-old former rebel often seen wearing a black cowboy hat. Any leader who can build democratic institutions and develops the country is likely to lure investment dollars from regional powers including Kenya and Uganda, and bolster its relationship with China, which already is invested in Sudanese oil. But Africa has also had a history of liberation presidents who have become mired in allegations of corruption as they have sought to cling to power.

The U.S. and European countries want to ensure southern Sudan succeeds, and Mr. Kiir is seen as a key to the new nation's future, say analysts. "He has done an effective job at keeping the ship afloat and keeping everyone moving in the right direction," said Zach Vertin, a Sudan analyst at the International Crisis Group in Nairobi.

When he took office in 2005 as the head of the newly autonomous southern Sudan region, Mr. Kiir said the area was "starting from zero."

It hasn't advance much since then. Oil reserves aren't expected to last more than a couple decades, so the government plans to invest in agriculture and train subsistence farmers. Low education levels have hobbled efforts to cultivate government officials to administer the new state."The referendum is not the end of a journey, but rather the beginning of a new one," Mr. Kiir said in remarks at his presidential palace on the eve of the vote.

As a young man, Mr. Kiir joined the south's first rebel movement, the Anyanya. Composed of southerners who are mostly black and Christian or animist, it fought those in the largely Arab, Muslim north. 

When a peace deal was signed with the north in 1972, calm briefly returned to Sudan. Mr. Kiir joined Sudan's national army. But he left in 1983 to re-join the rebellion. The southern army, known as the Sudan People's Liberation Army, formed the armed wing of what would become the south's ruling party.

In early 2005, the movement's leader, John Garang, signed a peace deal with the north that ended the war and paved the way for the independence vote. Mr. Garang died later that year in a helicopter accident, and Mr. Kiir was pushed to the forefront of the independence movement.

In elections in April, Mr. Kiir, who had until then governed by appointment, was elected president of the south with 93% of the regional votes. The vote was marred by allegations of rigging and violence against opposition-party members, according to international observers.

Mr. Kiir has presided over a government whose officials are driven around Juba in shiny SUVs, in stark contrast with residents who walk or herd cattle through the streets. 

Mr. Kiir maintains the vote was fair. He has advocated "zero tolerance" for corruption and promoted press freedom.

His political opponents are already angling for his office, with some eager for fresh presidential elections once the country becomes independent. No date has been set for such a vote.

Mr. Kiir's government should establish an appropriate transition period that would lead to new elections, says Hon. Onyoti Adifo Nyikwech, head of the south's main opposition party. "If they cling to power, nobody will accept that," he said.