WASHINGTON -- Four Republican state attorneys general said Tuesday they oppose forcing banks to reduce the value of loans for troubled homeowners as part of a state-led mortgage-servicing settlement proposal. 

The officials -- Kenneth Cuccinelli of Virgina, Greg Abbott of Texas, Pam Bondi of Florida and Alan Wilson of South Carolina -- sent a letter Tuesday to Iowa Attorney General Tom Miller, a Democrat spearheading the 50-state effort. 

Earlier this month, state attorneys general and federal agencies delivered to banks a 27-page set of proposed rules to reshape the way mortgage servicers deal with troubled borrowers, a response to the foreclosure-document problems that erupted into public view last fall. State officials allege that mortgage companies broke state laws when handling foreclosures. 

As part of a potential proposal to settle those allegations, officials have also been discussing financial penalties, including fines or requirements for banks to write down more than $20 billion in loan balances for homeowner borrowers that owe more on their properties than their homes are worth. 

The Republican attorneys general, however, object to that idea. In the letter, they argue that loan assistance is largely unrelated to the foreclosure-document issue. 

"We believe that the states' settlement proposal should focus on the alleged misconduct that prompted our investigation," they wrote. "To the extent loan modification proposals should be included at all, they should be limited in scope and only address unlawful conduct at issue in this investigation -- such as banks' improper handling of loan modification applications." 

The attorneys general, however, suggested that they support other reforms that could be mandated in a settlement. 

They wrote that they were "deeply troubled" by revelations of dubious practices in the mortgage-servicing industry, including the use of so-called "robo-signers" who signed documents without personally verifying their content and banks' failure to provide proper documentation when foreclosing on homeowners. 

"The states are poised to address unacceptable and unlawful practices that were widespread within the nation's largest mortgage servicers," they wrote. 

Geoff Greenwood, a spokesman for Mr. Miller, said the Iowa attorney general "appreciates all input" on the issue. 

"While we may have some disagreements on exactly how to solve these very complicated problems, we all agree that we need to work together to address them as we prepare to negotiate face-to-face with the nation's largest servicers," Mr. Greenwood said. 