Nikki Cascone, 38 years old, opened Octavia's Porch in the East Village and Michael Psilakis, 42, launched Fish Tag on the Upper West Side within days of each other. Both chefs are borrowing from the Jewish canon without going kosher. They've modernized kreplach and smoked fish, giving buzz to Bubbe's best.

—Melanie Grayce West

    

 The concept: A global bistro adapted to Jewish culture. "Maybe people have been a little bit afraid to do Jewish food unless they went deli," said Ms. Cascone.

 On the menu: Challah, "schmears," chicken liver salad, brisket and latkes. Gefilte fish, which the chef compares to fish mousse, gets a good dose of lime and fresh horseradish. Kreplach, traditionally placed in soup, are here prepared in a pan with onions and garlic and served with a sweet soy sauce. 

 To drink: A pickle martini and a boozy egg cream. 

 The cool factor: "Making chicken liver salad cool is a challenge," said Ms. Cascone. "I couldn't sell it in my last restaurant and now I can't keep it in stock here. I guess I just had to add red grapes, celery and matzo."

 Local influences: Russ & Daughters and Second Avenue Deli. Putting the restaurant close to the Lower East Side was a "no brainer," she said. "It was important for the integrity." 



 Octavia's Porch, 40 Ave. B; 212-677-4096    

 The concept: A wine bar and fish restaurant with a Jewish appetizing menu. All of the dishes are to be "completed" with a drink. Heavy on the cheese and charcuterie offerings, so apparently there's no problem mixing milk and meat.

 On the menu: Five types of salmon, a smoked tuna and a sablefish. Greek yogurt substitutes for sour cream, grilled bread instead of bagels.

 To drink: A monstrous drink menu with vintage Champagne to Swiss Absinthe, but pastrami salmon is suggestively paired with Reposado Tequila and a French Cabernet Franc.

 The cool factor: Smoked fish is prettily plated on a cake stand and made to look "sexy," said Mr. Psilakis.

 Local influences: Russ & Daughters and Barney Greengrass. The Upper West Side "is a very Jewish neighborhood," he added, meaning he doesn't need to explain what everything is.

 Fish Tag, 222 W. 79 St.; 212-362-7470 