Indorama Ventures PCL has been on a global spending spree. The Bangkok-based company is the world's largest manufacturer of polyethylene terephthalate, better known as PET, which is used by bottlers, and supplies the material for brands like Coca-Cola and Pepsi.

Armed with $30 million handed him from his father, now Indorama Chief Executive  Aloke Lohia came to Thailand from Indonesia in 1988 and set up a chemical business on the advice of a Burmese friend of his father. 

But Mr. Lohia's big break came when he established a PET resin business in Thailand in 1995. Two years later, Thailand devalued the baht. Indorama—which reaped the bulk of its earnings in U.S. dollars—took advantage by acquiring other businesses around Thailand.

The company listed on the Stock Exchange of Thailand last February and became one of Thailand's largest listed companies, with a market capitalization of 196.11 billion Thai baht ($6.43 billion). 

For the first nine months of the year, it posted profit of 6.55 billion baht, up 90% from a year earlier, on 73.43 billion baht in revenue. 

In the past two months it has unveiled a slew of deals, including paying $420 million to acquire assets in South Carolina then owned by an arm of Koch Industries Inc., along with its Latin American polyester resins and staple business in Mexico.

Indorama has also announced plans to acquire a plant in China, several PET businesses in Poland and Indonesia and said it will spend $1.2 billion on two polyester plants in India and the Middle East.

Mr. Lohia, an Indian national, says Indorama will invest $3.8 billion by 2014—up from the previously planned $2 billion—as it ramps up production capacity to 10 million metric tons from 3.5 million tons.

Mr. Lohia, 52 years old, was raised in India but spent 10 years working in Indonesia with his father and brother. 

Excerpts:



 WSJ: Have you been surprised by the rapid growth in recent years? 

 Mr: Lohia: In 2002 we looked back and we said…"Okay, we've got four businesses. We've got the chemical business, we've got the wool business, we have a resin business and then we have this polyester fiber business. Now where are we going?" This is probably the first time we sat down in an organized manner with the team and said, "Okay, where are we going?" So far we have just grabbed onto things that came our way.

The team made a vision that by 2010 we would be among the top five producers of PET resin in the world. We in 2006 had already done everything that we had targeted to do by 2010. So that gave us a lot of confidence that our view of the business was correct.



 WSJ: How have you managed the baht's sharp gains?

 Mr. Lohia: We basically use a natural hedge. The Asian business is the only one which has a Thai baht element in it. The U.S. business is all dollars, in Europe everything is in euros. The Asian business is a dollar business but based in Thailand, so what we do is we have dollar borrowings to hedge that position. So it's basically nicely hedged. Two-thirds of the business is a natural hedge, one third is hedged through currencies.



 WSJ: Where is your focus now? 

 Mr. Lohia:  Future growth for us would come from emerging markets. China, India, other parts of Asia, some parts of east Europe, former [Commonwealth of Independent States] countries, Brazil, Mexico. So the lesser-developed countries, that's where the growth is and that's where our focus of growth is. 



 WSJ: Do you expect more expansion in China?

 Mr. Lohia: We do expect more expansion in China. And we are also very keen to expand in India because that's the other big market where we are not present. In China, now we have a foothold. I'm sure that foothold is going to lead to bigger things.



 WSJ: So further acquisitions in China are more likely than in India?

 Mr. Lohia: In China, a lot more fragmented businesses got built in 2002, and at that time they were building a lot of capacity. Not all of them were successful. So there are opportunities in China where you can go and acquire. In India, there weren't that many build-ups, so there isn't a distress opportunity in India.



 WSJ: You mentioned Brazil. What sort of opportunities do you see there?

 Mr. Lohia: One is that we are now tapping into that market through the plant we acquired in Mexico, so we will be present in the Latin American market through that.

At the moment, all our free stock is petroleum-based. We are looking at the ethanol side of Brazil, and ethanol can be converted into plastic. So we are looking if we can have a good tie-up on the ethanol side and then convert it into what they call a bioplastic which is much greener than a petrol-based [plastic].

We would like to partner with somebody who has ethanol availability. 



 WSJ: In terms of Latin America, Europe, the U.S. and Asia, which region offers the greatest opportunities in terms of growth?

 Mr. Lohia: Asia at the moment has the biggest opportunity to grow because we're relatively small in polyester and PET in Asia. And it's a growing region for us, so this has maximum potential for us.…

 The Middle East and Africa don't have much polyester at the moment, so there will be a lot of future growth.