PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti—The return of deposed dictator Jean-Claude "Baby Doc" Duvalier after a nearly 25-year absence threatens to further destabilize Haiti's already chaotic politics and complicate the country's efforts to recover from a devastating earthquake, a cholera epidemic and violently contested elections.

Mr. Duvalier's intentions remained unknown Monday, a day after his return from a long exile in France. 

"I'm not here for politics," Mr. Duvalier told Radio Caraïbes, a local station. "I'm here for the reconstruction of Haiti." 

He postponed until Tuesday a news conference originally scheduled for Monday. 

Haiti's former dictator Jean-Claude Duvalier unexpectedly returned to the country after nearly 25 years in exile.

Mr. Duvalier is traveling on an expired Haitian diplomatic passport and has a flight back to France booked on Thursday, France's ambassador to Haiti, Didier Le Bret, said in an interview. 

Mr. Le Bret dismissed theories swirling around the Haitian capital Monday that France hadn't renewed Mr. Duvalier's residency permit in order to force him to go to Haiti. The ambassador said France had immediately notified the Haitian government after learning the former dictator had boarded a flight bound for Port-au-Prince from the French Caribbean island of Guadalupe on Sunday. 

Haitian officials have had little to say on Mr. Duvalier's return and his chaotic reception at the Port-au-Prince airport, where he was greeted Sunday by hundreds of supporters as well as hundreds of political opponents before speeding away in an SUV to a luxury hotel in the hills above the capital. 

"He is a Haitian and as such, he is free to return home," said Prime Minister Jean-Max Bellerive in an email earlier Sunday. "I'm not aware he has presently any political activities."

President René Préval, a political foe of Mr. Duvalier, hasn't commented on the former dictator's return. Three years ago, Mr. Préval said that Mr. Duvalier could return to Haiti, but that he would have to face charges of embezzling millions of dollars and charges in connection with the murders of many Haitians. But Mr. Duvalier's current legal situation in Haiti is unclear. 

Human-rights groups and ordinary Haitians are calling for Mr. Duvalier, 59 years old, to face justice for a series of human-rights violations that took place during his 15 years at the helm of the Western Hemisphere's poorest country. 

Human-rights groups have called for his arrest. 

Mr. Duvalier was forced out in 1986 following massive street demonstrations and amid U.S. pressure, and went into exile in France.

"I am angry. I am going to the prosecutor's office to file a complaint against Jean-Claude for crimes against humanity, torture, false arrest, forced exile, and destruction of private property," said Michèle Montas, a prominent Haitian journalist and owner of a station whose staff of more than 30 people all were detained after a protest in 1980. "We were all arrested." 

Ms. Montas, who now works for the United Nations, said she was investigating how she could file a complaint in the name of one of her reporters who was tortured and killed two years later, allegedly by Haiti's secret police, as well as students who were gunned down during an antigovernment protest in 1985.

His return comes as Haiti tries to sort out its political future after disputed presidential elections in November ended in rioting and widespread charges of fraud when electoral authorities declared that Jude Celestin, who has the backing of Mr. Préval, had placed second, behind former first lady Mirlande Manigat, and just ahead of crooner Michel Martelly. 

The protests led the Organization of American States to send a team of election specialists who recommended that Mr. Celestin be dropped from the second round in favor of Mr. Martelly. President Préval has said he has "reservations" about the report, which he received last week. The decision about whether Mr. Martelly or Mr. Celestin will advance to the second round, originally scheduled for Jan. 16, must be made by Haitian electoral authorities. 

OAS Secretary General José Miguel Insulza was in Port-au-Prince on Monday to discuss the situation with Mr. Préval and other Haitian officials. Many observers fear the unsettled political situation could continue to delay billions of dollars in aid promised by the international community to help Haiti recover from the earthquake that killed more than 230,000 people a year ago. 

Mr. Duvalier appears to have little political support, says a senior Haitian government official. Last year only about 100 supporters, most of them elderly, turned out to demonstrate in memory of Mr. Duvalier's father, François "Papa Doc" Duvalier, who took power in 1957 and ruled as "president for life" until succeeded by his son in 1971, the official said. During their 29-year rule, first François Duvalier and then his son terrorized Haiti, using a paramilitary group called the Ton Ton Macoutes to kill and torture opponents. Haitians danced in the streets after Mr. Duvalier was forced out in 1986. The men also looted millions from the national treasury, according to Haitian officials. 

The return of Mr. Duvalier caught most Haitians by surprise. It also raised alarm that his return would anger supporters of his political foe, former President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, and that they now will demand Mr. Aristide's return. Deposed in 2004, Mr. Aristide, a divisive figure who still commands strong popular support, lives in exile in South Africa. 

"It will make Lavalas [Aristide supporters] furious, and that would be real trouble," said  Robert Fatton, a Haiti expert at the University of Virginia. 

Mr. Duvalier had been living quietly in France in a three-room apartment. 

In 2007, Haiti initiated legal action against him in Port-au-Prince, part of an effort to recover about $5 million in his Swiss bank accounts that had been frozen by the Swiss government. Last year, just hours before the earthquake struck on Jan. 12, 2010, a Swiss appellate court ruled that the statute of limitations on the case had run out and awarded Mr. Duvalier the money.

Embarrassed by the court's ruling, the Swiss government nevertheless has continued its freeze on Mr. Duvalier's funds. Last January, Mr. Duvalier said in a statement emailed to The Wall Street Journal that he intended to "use every possible recourse" to fight the legal decision. 

Analysts said Mr. Duvalier's unexpected return was the last thing Haiti needed. "This country doesn't get a break," said Michael Shifter, president of Inter-American Dialogue, a Washington-based think tank. "The country's politics are so unsettled and unpredictable that its very difficult to overcome its past." 

 Write to  José de Córdoba at jose.decordoba@wsj.com and David Gauthier-Villars at David.Gauthier-Villars@wsj.com 