TRIPOLI, Libya—Inside Col. Moammar Gadhafi's Bab Azizya residential complex, where a building was struck this weekend by coalition fighter jets, stands another, older ruin. 

See some key dates in Col. Gadhafi's nearly 42-year reign.

It is a previous home of Col. Gadhafi, struck by U.S. airstrikes in 1986 after Libya was implicated in a deadly Berlin discotheque bombing. The damaged home has been kept intact as a "house of perseverance" and a monument to Libyan defiance against the attack. In front stands a statue of a fist crushing a U.S. fighter plane. It was here, when Libya's anti-Gadhafi demonstrations first turned violent, that Col. Gadhafi angrily rallied his supporters on television to pursue his enemies "from house to house."

The coalition airstrikes against Libyan military targets that started this weekend were aimed at preventing Col. Gadhafi from finishing off opposition groups in the east and in other pockets around Libya. Among the targets hit was a building in Bab Azizya, Col. Gadhafi's residence-cum-military barrack, that officials said was used for administrative purposes. 

If Col. Gadhafi's past serves as a guide, the international attacks will set the leader's resolve to fight back at any cost against enemies inside the country and out. "The more you challenge him, the more he'll dig in," said George Joffe, a Libya expert at Cambridge University.

The offensive also appears to have fed Col. Gadhafi's view of himself as a champion of the masses across the world. 

"You have given me a historic opportunity to be at the helm of a popular global revolution to confront you and defeat you," he said in an audio address on state television Sunday. "We are preparing for a long and glorious war."

Track the latest events in Libya.

The Libyan crisis, which has evolved from peaceful anti-regime protests into a full-scale armed insurrection after the regime's brutal crackdown on protesters, has entered its second month. It is the most serious challenge, by far, to Col. Gadhafi's rule of more than 41 years.

Born in 1942 near the coastal city of Sirte to a Bedouin family from the Gadhadfa tribe, Col. Gadhafi was profoundly influenced in his youth by Arab nationalism, Gamal Abdel-Nasser's rise to power in Egypt in 1952 and the Arab-Israeli wars.

He pursued a military career, and in 1969 led a group of officers in a largely bloodless coup that ousted Libya's King Idris. Eight years later, he turned Libya into a Jamahiriya, or rule by the masses, based on the so-called Third Universal Theory outlined in his Green Book. But much of the real power remained in the hands of Col. Gadhafi and members of his family and inner circle.

Although Col. Gadhafi adopted grandiose titles over the years—"Imam of all Muslims," "Dean of Arab Rulers," "King of Africa's Kings"—he still views himself first as the torchbearer and guardian of a revolution that has put Libya on the map. His primary title is Leader and Guide of the Revolution of Libya. 

At pro-Gadhafi rallies, there is an oft-repeated chant: "Allah, Moammar and Libya." That he comes after God, but before Libya, reinforces the idea that without him, there is no Libya.

The loyalty of the people who have remained around him will now be tested. "For those that are close to him, it's a day of reckoning," said Mansour el-Kikhia, a U.S.-based Libyan dissident and political science professor at the University of Texas-San Antonio. 

Col. Gadhafi's children—some of whom have crucial roles in the security apparatus or wield significant economic power—have put aside past differences. His most prominent son, Seif el-Islam, who had previously championed reform and dialogue with foreign-based Libyan opposition, has joined the battle for the regime's survival, especially as its voice in the international media. Another son, Khamis, heads one of the country's best-trained and equipped fighting forces.

Although the regime has in recent days sent confusing signals—with senior government and military officials contradicting Col. Gadhafi's unflinchingly hard-line rhetoric by offering conciliatory gestures to rebels and the West—many see this as tactical, not a sign of rifts. "He's a survivalist" who will use any means to maintain power, said Mr. Kikhia.

The current standoff has deepened the country's old east-west rift and could exacerbate tribal feuds as one segment of the population welcomes Western intervention. 

"The danger for Libya to fall into a civil war for years to come is real," Moussa Ibrahim, a Libyan government spokesman in Tripoli, warned Monday.  

The Libyan leader has whipped up public anger, mainly in the western half of the country, by portraying rebels as "eastern secessionists" and "traitors." These secessionists, he has maintained, are manipulated by exiled opposition figures and Libyan members of al Qaeda, in conspiracy with Arab countries and the West—especially the U.S., Britain and France—who want to cripple the country and steal its oil riches.

Such rifts could haunt Libya no matter what the outcome on the battlefield.

"The wound will not heal so easily and may lead to the most dangerous thing—partition," said Ramadan Breki, an executive with the Ghad media group, which is funded by Seif Gadhafi. Mr. Breki, a native of the rebel bastion Benghazi, decamped to Tripoli because of his loyalties.

Some of the regime's most prominent ideologues have suggested that bloodshed would resuscitate the ideals of the 1969 revolution and strengthen Libya.

Rajab Abu-Dabbous, a philosopher and one of Col. Gadhafi's confidantes, blamed the current troubles on the "haphazard and misguided" reforms initiated by Seif Gadhafi at the start of Libya's period of détente with the West in 2003.

Col. Gadhafi has long justified his actions as a necessary means of preserving and propagating the values of the 1969 revolution. Such moments have only grown more intense in times of crisis. In 1986, President Ronald Reagan launched air strikes against Col. Gadhafi after the Libyan leader was implicated in the Berlin bombing, which killed two U.S. servicemen, among others. In 1993, international sanctions were imposed on Libya after Col. Gadhafi refused to hand over Libyans involved in the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103. 

"You are confronting a mute rock," said Col. Gadhafi about himself in a speech last month. "A solid rock on which America's fleets crashed." 

 Write to  Sam Dagher at sam.dagher@wsj.com 