  Review's essay by Amy Chua has generated more than 5,700 comments on the Journal's website, more than any other article in the history of WSJ.com. Here is a selection: 

 Alistair Nichols: All that rote learning and drilling isn't conducive to developing creative thinking abilities; and avoidance of sleepovers, school plays, sports, etc. doesn't make them very team-oriented—a real drawback in the modern world.… I think there has to be a middle way. Unfortunately, this article doesn't promote a balanced approach. Western parents who adopt the Chinese approach in its entirety will come to rue the day. 

 Cam Nguyen: While I applaud Asian parents for expecting the most of their children, I believe that the problem with this type of strict Asian parenting is that the fear of failure and the constant need to excel lead to children who are risk-averse. They stick to tried-and-true professions and never fully expand their abilities in different directions. This has resulted in an Asian society that follows the lead of American ingenuity. Sure, there may be more failures in America but those who achieve, achieve in such a spectacular manner that it creates opportunities for others.

 Wendy Morris: My mother was an Irish immigrant to the U.S. in the early 1960s. She was determined that her two American-born children were not going to waste any advantage offered to them by this great country, particularly higher educational opportunities. In my culture, it was assumed that children came out of the womb strong enough to have high goals set for them, to meet these goals and to be corrected when they failed to meet them. My mother shares many characteristics with the Chinese mothers. There comes a time when each child has to decide whether to be ordinary in life or to be something more. Your parents help you see that you can be extraordinary.

 Barbara Chalef: It's well past time to acknowledge that learning is hard work and that feelings of self-worth are not just one's due, but come from mastering academics, a sport, music or one's craft (theater, music, art), etc. Also, the ancient Greeks had a good idea: A healthy body enhances a healthy mind. If American mothers are too lax, then Chinese mothers are too severe. There has to be a middle ground that enables physical, intellectual, emotional and social growth.

 Jennifer Wong: As a first generation American-born Chinese, I found this article full of humor and satire, as it fully hits the nail on the head regarding my and my brother's upbringing, as well as my cousins'…. My mother's mother was even harder on her than she was on me. Life was extremely difficult in Hong Kong during her childhood, and my grandmother wanted my mother to have the opportunities that she could not have.

 Jonathan Zhang: While reading this, I prayed that this was some kind of satire. As a Chinese-American teenager, I know this article is unrepresentative of Chinese parents. Sure, a lot of Chinese parents do put more emphasis on education, but a vast majority aren't demonic and inhuman like Ms. Chua. Yes, they do let me go to sleepovers, and they didn't slit my throat when I couldn't play Rachmaninoff at age 5. 

 Richard Mango: Active parenting is not child abuse. The majority of today's children are allowed to run amok, and the results are visible and audible every time you go out in public. Is it extreme? Perhaps to some. I'm familiar with a Catholic-school education, where nuns routinely beat us with pointers or yardsticks and the principal had the "board of education" in her office: It was a paddle that looked like a cricket bat. The brothers in high school followed suit.... This woman certainly has very high goals, but I don't think that's wrong.

 Margo Miller: Apart from its cruelty, the piano anecdote shows that Ms. Chua has a profound lack of knowledge of how one learns a skill that involves muscle memory. First, taking a break is not a bad thing when practicing a difficult section of a piece. When you return to it, be it an hour later or the next day, often you'll find you're a little bit better, that your muscle memory is taking hold, and this is encouraging. Continuing to practice in frustration, especially when that practice is being imposed from outside, results in less progress for most people. 

 John Sweeney: I am a teacher of English-as-a-second-language students from all over the world.... My students from China, Korea and Japan say that though some of the parents back home work and tutor their students, many just push them to work but don't work with them. They also felt that Ms. Chua's comment about enforced instrumental choices of piano and violin was not accurate and that many play other instruments. (How is music a more expressive art form than drama? Could this be a cultural preference?)

Though I know we could work harder, I still feel that there is a need for dignity and self-respect, which is often overlooked in Ms. Chua's philosophy.

 Sophie Zarya: Controversy sells, and that really is all this piece is about. There is not, and never will be, a manual on parenting, as parenting is not a controlled experiment that can be tested and retested. Just read up on parenting recommendations from the "experts," and it is obvious that no one really knows what is best. Not too long ago, pediatricians recommended that parents should avoid being overly affectionate, one kiss a year should be sufficient.... I have a parenting book from China that encourages putting children in front of the TV to build their concentration skills.

Every child is different, and parents have different needs, abilities, backgrounds, cultures. I think we should accept that Ms. Chua has her way and we can adopt it if we agree; if not, parent the way you believe is best for your child and his or her unique needs and disposition.

 Thomas Lyon: I think this article nailed some very important flaws we "Westerners" have. I am a 17-year-old kid, and when I first read the article I told myself this lady was crazy. But as I read on, I began to think. My dad is much the same way as Ms. Chua.

 Q Zhou: Thank goodness not all Chinese parents are like Ms. Chua (maybe the dialectics/balance of Yin and Yang worked a little on some Chinese?).... Be very clear about your position with your kid and do not let the stereotype (or people like Ms. Chua) "raise" (or should I say "harm"?) your child and your relation with your child.

 David Sumner: Sadly, Americans have become consumed with the idea that their children should never experience an uncomfortable moment. Thankfully, Chinese mothers embrace the opposite line of thinking. This is good news as the world will continue to need strong, intelligent people to lead it, and Americans are in a race to abandon that role, while doling out trophies to their kids for participation and fretting over the emotional impact of suggesting that their kids do their homework as opposed to playing videogames.

 Gregory Wilde: I give most of the credit for the way that our three kids turned out to my wife. I would put my kids and their accomplishments up against those of any Asian or other ethnic group's family. I'll skip the details, but suffice to say that they are grown, established in their careers and off the charts.

So to the point: My wife and I never took the extreme measures of Ms. Chua. There are, however, some things we did that may benefit other parents. Praise for positive behavior and accomplishment is very important. We provided a safe and quiet environment free of cursing or display of any sort of negative habits like smoking or drinking. My wife was always home to greet them after school. She would ask for details about their day. All three kids played sports and did other extra-curriculars. Reading is very important.

 Kelvin Mao: What Ms. Chua is conveniently omitting are the "failed experiments." I suppose I should first mention that I am a 41-year-old Chinese male whose parents immigrated to the U.S. in the 1960s. I was born in the U.S. and raised with the "Chinese method" outlined in the article. 

Unfortunately, this subject is not so cut-and-dry as to say the "Chinese Mom" way is the best or that it's too harsh. I will say that having parents who spent their childhood starving in mainland China and hiding in the mountains from the Japanese during World War II, now as an adult I certainly have a different perspective and understanding of what was motivating them to raise the strongest, most capable children that they could. I just think the methodology could use some streamlining.

And in case anyone was curious, neither the piano nor the violin stuck for me, and I've played team sports from high school to this day.

 Alan Yu: In China, if you say Western education has a lot of advantages and the Chinese education system needs to learn from the American-Western one, you would probably hear very little noise. China has sent a lot of people to the U.S. to learn from every aspect of America, and Chinese schools have undertaken a lot of reforms and changes combining the merits of both Western and Eastern educational methods. It's a very normal thing to talk about learning from the Western world. But when a Yale professor like Ms. Chua tries to show off her so-called Chinese Mother way, it stirs up such a backlash from Western readers.

Most Chinese people believe in balance. The balanced way must be the best. 