They are two men patrolling the same position in the same city, but standing in different places. One is a former phenom having a snappy revival that might get him shipped out of town. The other is an aging icon muddying through in an unremarkable start—and he's not going anywhere.

Derek Jeter and Jose Reyes are shortstops separated by more than the East River. They play baseball with different speeds and styles and are nine years apart.

 By the time a teenaged Reyes cracked the Mets' lineup, Jeter had already won four World Series and had solidified his place alongside the whispered names of other Pinstripe legends.

But both men have been faces for their franchises. Jeter is the buzz-cutted anachronism, polite but private, still a mystery despite all those clutch hits and consistent seasons. Reyes is the electric, switch-hitting flurry who, with David Wright, was supposed to be the foundation for a decade of greatness in Queens.

Reyes now finds himself marooned on a very different club. The Mets are in financial crisis and not expected to contend, despite a charming recent six-game win streak. The future is not now, and Reyes is a free agent-to-be who might bring a pack of prospects in a trade. There are reportedly several teams interested, including the defending champion San Francisco Giants, for whom Reyes almost appeared to be auditioning this week, reaching base six straight times on Tuesday and slapping a two-run triple during Thursday's 5-2 Mets win. 

He is brightness in a bleak spring, playing with an energy that reminds Mets fans why they first fell in love. Reyes has even imported the Texas Rangers-style "Claw" arm signal to galvanize his teammates and Citi Field diehards after a great play.

Still, the Mets must consider the benefits of moving on. Trading Reyes would hurt, but it's a much less awkward scenario than what's building in the Bronx.

Jeter is struggling again, unable to rebound from last year's weary performance at the plate, the worst of his career. His swing is stripped of pop; Mr. November is now Mr. Ground Ball. He's batting .250—not terrible—but the averageness unnerves Yankee fans. For this, the Bombers paid $51 million for three more years?

So far, Yankee manager Joe Girardi has refused to drop Jeter from a top slot in the lineup, vowing patience. It's unusual.

 Today it's fashionable for coaches and franchises to be uncharitable toward underperforming veterans. Stars are only as valuable as they are right now. 

Better to be cold-blooded and let a beloved contributor go than to be slowed by sentimental attachment.

But Girardi isn't judging Jeter by a game, or a month. He admits concern about the impact a plunge in the order might have upon the Yankee captain.

 "In everything I do, I consider people's feelings," the manager said the other day.

Girardi's restraint will surely be criticized as timidity. But one could also argue he's showing Jeter the dignity the Yankees did not display this winter, when they let the shortstop's contract negotiations grow snippy and undignified.

It's a headache that's not going away, and there's no tidy solution. As Jeter sat on Thursday, his replacement, Eduardo Nunez, allowed two errors in a 6-3 loss.

Could Reyes and Jeter ever be intertwined?

 Because this is New York, home of Crazy Unfounded Speculation, there has been babbling that with a little creative engineering, or free-agent bucks, Reyes could become a Yankee shortstop, and Jeter would find his way to the outfield. 

At the moment, that sounds laughable and remote, hard to imagine. For now, these are two distinct stories at short, heading in separate directions.