SAN FRANCISCO—A prosecutor in the criminal case against Barry Bonds said Tuesday that people close to the retired baseball slugger would testify that he knowingly used steroids and that his anatomy changed as a result.

Jurors will hear this testimony from Mr. Bonds's former friend and business partner, and an ex-girlfriend, Assistant U.S. Attorney Matthew Parella said in his opening statement in U.S. District Court. Mr. Bonds is on trial for allegedly lying to a grand jury about steroid use. 

An attorney for Mr. Bonds,  Allen Ruby, countered that Mr. Bonds testified truthfully when he told a grand jury in 2003 that he never knowingly used steroids. Mr. Ruby said the government's witnesses were unreliable, and had grudges against Mr. Bonds.

The statements came on the second day of a long-awaited trial. Mr. Bonds was indicted in 2007 on charges of lying when he said he never knowingly used steroids, never accepted human growth hormone from a personal trainer and never allowed anyone other than doctors to inject him.

The case has been delayed for years as the prosecution and the defense argued over the admissability of evidence. Prosecutors wanted Mr. Bonds's trainer, Greg Anderson, to testify about substances he provided to Mr. Bonds, but Mr. Andersen has refused and has spent time in jail as a result.

Mr. Anderson on Tuesday told U.S. District Judge Susan Illston that he still wouldn't testify. The judge held Mr. Anderson in contempt and ordered him into federal custody. His lawyer said the order to jail him would be appealed.

The prosecutor, Mr. Parella, said Tuesday that federal agents investigating a Bay Area steroid distributor in 2003 called Mr. Bonds and other athletes before a grand jury as witnesses. The witnesses had immunity from prosecution for testimony they gave there, and were asked whether they were given steroids—including substances known as "The Clear" and "The Cream"—by people associated with the Bay Area Laboratory Cooperative, known as Balco.

Mr. Bonds told the grand jury he never knowingly took steroids. He acknowledged being given substances by his trainer, Mr. Anderson, but said he believed The Clear was flax-seed oil and The Cream arthritis cream.

"All he had to do was tell the truth but he couldn't do it," said Mr. Parella. He called Mr. Bonds's explanation "utterly ridiculous." 

Mr. Parella also showed a slide of a magazine ad for a company associated with Balco, featuring Mr. Bonds, Balco proprietor Victor Conte and Mr. Anderson. The ad, Mr. Parella said, had been fished from a Balco garbage can by a federal investigator. He said it showed "the three musketeers of Balco."

That characterization prompted an objection from Mr. Bonds's lawyer, Mr. Ruby.

In his own opening statement, Mr. Ruby said Mr. Bonds was truthful before the grand jury. "Barry answered every question. He told the truth. He did his best," said Mr. Ruby. 

Mr. Ruby said that while Mr. Bonds "acknowledged again and again that he received The Clear and The Cream from Mr. Anderson," no one knew what the substances actually were when Mr. Bonds took them.

Mr. Ruby said two key witnesses against Mr. Bonds—former friend and business partner Steve Hoskins and ex-girlfriend Kimberly Bell—had personal feuds with Mr. Bonds. 

 Write to  Justin Scheck at justin.scheck@wsj.com 