President Barack Obama placed a wreath in honor of those lost on Sept. 11, 2001, during a silent ceremony inside the footprints of the World Trade Center towers Thursday, surrounded by first responders in formal uniforms, elected officials and the families of those who lost loved ones in the terrorist attacks nearly a decade ago. 

The visit, aimed at creating a sense of closure for Americans following the death of Osama bin Laden in a U.S. military operation Sunday, was Mr. Obama's first to the site since becoming president.

"We don't forget," the president said following the wreath-laying ceremony.

Bill Hallam, a Californian in town on vacation, said he had come to Ground Zero with his wife to pay their respect to the victims. "I'm crying," he said after the ceremony. Wiping away tears, he said, "I'm not celebrating as much as I'm grieving what's been lost here."

Following the brief ceremony, Mr. Obama greeted the families of some 9/11 victims. The atmosphere was solemn but upbeat as he hugged everyone participating in the memorial. The president then left the memorial site for a private meeting with the families. There were no formal remarks at the ceremony.

Earlier Thursday, Mr. Obama stopped at an iconic firehouse in Midtown that had lost 15 men during the Sept. 11 attacks. He joined the firefighters for lunch, accompanied by former New York Mayor  Rudy Giuliani.

"What happened on Sunday, because of the courage of our military and the outstanding work of our intelligence, sent a message around the world, but also sent a message here back home that when we say we will never forget," the president told firefighters at Engine 54, "we mean what we say -- that our commitment to making sure that justice is done is something that transcended politics, transcended party."

"I just want to let you know that you're always going to have a president and an administration who's got your back the way you've got the backs of the people of New York over these last many years," he said. 

  Peter Kontos said he lost his friend's uncle and 20 clients in the attack on the World Trade Center. The 40-year-old Nordstrom employee visited the site Thursday to place a bouquet of flowers after the president left.

"If he had made a speech that would've made the event political," Mr. Kontos said, "but it was private and dignified."

The crowd around the edges of the World Trade Center site stood in place hoping to catch a glimpse of the president as he left the site. As motorcycles led the president's black limousine away, the crowd roared and waved flags. "I saw him," said  Fay Reynolds, 47, from Flatbush, Brooklyn. "I saw my president! I'm so proud."

 Write to  Aaron Rutkoff at aaron.rutkoff@wsj.com 