When it comes to their own skin care, most men are still stuck in the Stone Age. A typical regimen might consist of a quick splash of water, shaving cream, and—if they're especially invested in holding off the signs of aging—perhaps some drugstore moisturizer. I've been more invested than most guys thanks to on-and-off breakouts since my teenage years. After my skin cleared up I settled into using just slightly more than the bare minimum: an inexpensive organic cleanser from Whole Foods and an organic moisturizer from Stella McCartney's unisex Care line. I had no plans to change my routine, my logic running along the lines of "if it ain't broke, don't fix it." Then I turned 32.

After spending much of last summer in the sun, I saw something alarming in the mirror—a few lines running across my forehead. At the first sign of a wrinkle, all the fuss about aging (and antiaging products) made instant sense, and I found myself wishing I had listened to my mother's exhortations to slather on sunblock. Resolved to invest more energy in self-preservation, possibly with the help of some magical elixirs of youth, I decided to investigate my options.

There are signs that the prospect of looking forever young is beginning to be as attractive to men as it is to women. The market for high-end men's skin-care products, though still in its infancy, has grown exponentially over the past five years.

According to the research firm NPD, men's skin care sold in U.S. fine department stores generated $33.5 million last year, an increase of 7.6% in dollar sales from 2009. Brands catering exclusively to men, such as Jack Black and Zirh, have introduced products that incorporate advanced ingredients like watermelon extract and peptides. And companies like Organic Pharmacy, a cult favorite of women, have expanded their lineups to include products specifically formulated for men.

When it comes to marketing luxury skin-care products, abstruse scientific arcana can be a seductive selling point for men. Brands like La Mer and Perricone MD apply a high-tech approach to engineering their unisex products, allocating much of their budget toward developing patented ingredients which they believe can slow, or in some cases reverse, the effects of aging. The investment pays off—purchases by men comprise approximately 20% of both La Mer's and Perricone MD's revenue without any special effort on their part to target male consumers. Though their products are not geared toward a specific gender, certain formulas are particularly advantageous for male skin. Andy Bevacqua, vice president of research and development at La Mer, observes that "most men irritate their face every day by shaving. No matter how delicately they shave, in addition to dead skin cells, they're also exfoliating live ones." From his point of view, it's most important to soothe and calm inflammation, which in turn can cause larger pores, greater sebum production, wrinkles and sagging skin. Crème de la Mer's trademarked fermented kelp "miracle broth" (developed by NASA scientist Max Huber, to help heal his severe chemical burns) attempts to do just that.

Nicholas Perricone also identifies inflammation as the key issue in the fight against aging and cellular damage. His product line is rooted in the theory that low-grade inflammation, often at a microscopic level, is responsible in large part for increased degeneration of organ systems. Dr. Perricone doesn't develop products specifically for men or women because, in his words, "the problems are the same. Health is health"—but he does distinguish between products' potential benefits. In the case of his new antiaging cream, Acyl-Glutathione, Dr. Perricone describes its mechanism as "delivering the chief antioxidant to cells in a way that has never been done before. If you're a man, secondary sexual characteristics will be emphasized, a squarer jaw, firmer skin"—all of which sounds good to me!

High-tech ingredients aside, my generation has grown up with an eco-conscious mandate that has become a natural default for both men and women when evaluating products. To that end, three brands—Aesop, Ole Henriksen and Organic Pharmacy—go out of their way to spotlight their holistic credentials. Organic Pharmacy's formulations are free of artificial preservatives, colorants, fragrances and petrochemicals, and its website provides an encyclopedic list of various common and carcinogenic chemicals to look out for on other product labels. Aesop doesn't claim to be organic, but plant essences, such as parsley seed, play an important role in the line. Celebrity skin guru Ole Henriksen places equal emphasis on science and nature, mixing some high-tech ingredients like saccharide isomerate, which helps to regulate moisture and reduce dryness, with a long list of unusual natural ones, including African red tea.

After surveying the landscape, I was daunted by the seemingly endless potential combinations but curious to test some products out. I settled on a two-week regimen that seemed best suited to my part oily/part dry skin, the winter weather and those pesky forehead lines: Aesop's Fabulous Face Cleanser, Ole Henriksen's Grease Relief toner, Crème de La Mer and Perricone MD's Acyl-Glutathione. In the first week, I noticed enough of a difference to make me a cautious convert: My skin tone was smoother, blotchy patches from a painful shave calmed down within minutes, and a few pimples disappeared after a couple days, instead of lingering. Using four products on a daily basis was a pain, but weighed against the prospect of wrinkles multiplying, it wasn't as much of an imposition.

Two weeks in, the results were less dramatic, which might only have been a sign of the dire straits my skin was in prior to beginning the test drive.

The lines on my forehead hadn't disappeared, but I wanted to believe they were less noticeable. At the risk of sounding like I've been brainwashed by a marketing department, the most obvious difference was that my skin was radiant. Even after an insomniac night, I still looked well-rested. I wasn't sure how to evaluate my own success so I reached out to Ole Henriksen to better understand what is reasonable to expect from these products. (About to turn 60, Mr. Henriksen looks a decade younger, a walking advertisement for his product line.) He wrote back, opining that, "it's all about natural, healthy skin with flexibility and good tone. Expression lines look good in a man's face...it's important that a man not aim to look like a male Barbie doll." I don't think I have to worry about being called Ken anytime soon, and, as flattering as it would be, I don't expect to be carded at the liquor store. I am, however, happy to report that when an acquaintance asked my age the other day and I told her I was almost 33, she smiled and told me I don't look a day over 30.



This Perricone MD cream delivers a derivative of glutathione, a naturally occurring antioxidant that decreases with age, to boost aging defenses. $175, qvc.com  



 Aloe and sandalwood extracts soothe skin without controversial parabens and phthalates. $40, theorganicpharmacy.com   



 This serum claims to deploy peptides—amino acids that function as messengers in skin—to reduce wrinkles. $40, getjackblack.com  



An essential (and often neglected) step in controlling oily skin, toner helps to absorb sebum and minimize pores. $21, olehenriksen.com  



This low-foaming face wash combats excess sebum—an oily substance that lubricates skin, but can also block pores.$51, aesop.com  



This legendary moisturizer has a rich, highly emollient texture that works well for dry skin and harsh winter climates.$250, cremedelamer.com  