If you're age 70½ or older, the tax bill enacted Dec. 17 contains some good news: Uncle Sam is temporarily resurrecting a popular tax break available to those who make charitable donations from their individual retirement accounts in 2011. The benefit can also be used retroactively for 2010 -- but only if the charitable donation is made by the end of January.

Under the new tax law, IRA owners 70[frac12] or older can donate up to $100,000 a year from their accounts to one or more charities. The donations count toward withdrawals those in this age bracket are required to take each year from an IRA.

Because Congress enacted the law so late in 2010, it is allowing taxpayers who make charitable donations from IRAs in January to treat the gift as if it had occurred in 2010. However, if you took a mandatory IRA withdrawal in 2010, you can't retroactively claim this tax break for that money.

Under the tax break, which was first enacted in 2006 and resurrected in 2008 only to lapse again after 2009, a donor receives no tax deduction for a charitable contribution. However, the taxpayer doesn't have to include the IRA withdrawal in his or her taxable income.

"Everybody who is charitably inclined will fare better," says  Ed Slott, an IRA consultant in Rockville Centre, N.Y.

To see why, consider what would happen with a $10,000 donation to your alma mater. If you don't itemize your deductions, you would normally get no tax break for the gift. But under the new law, the $10,000 will not be included in your income. Assuming you're in the 25% tax bracket, that would save you $2,500.

If you do itemize, you won't be entitled to a deduction. But the $10,000 IRA withdrawal won't inflate your taxable income, either. By not adding $10,000 to your income, it may help you keep your adjusted gross income below the thresholds at which you would lose some of your deductions and other tax benefits based on income or become subject to higher Medicare premiums and taxes on your Social Security benefits.

To take advantage of this provision, instruct your IRA custodian to issue a check directly to a "public" charity. Private foundations, donor-advised funds, supporting organizations and charitable gift annuities don't count, says Mr. Slott. The charity must acknowledge the gift in writing.

Aside from a traditional IRA, you can make donations from a SEP or SIMPLE IRA, provided no contributions are made to those accounts in the year of the gift, says Mr. Slott. Those who make donations from 401(k)s can't take advantage of the provision, he adds. (Withdrawals from Roth IRAs already are tax-free.)

Some states don't allow residents to take deductions for charitable gifts on their state income-tax returns, says  Blanche Lark Christerson, a managing director at Deutsche Bank Private Wealth Management. Residents of those states would still have to pay state income tax on donations from an IRA.

—Email: next@wsj.com 