  Raj Rajaratnam never spoke during his seven-week insider-trading trial, but his voice echoed through the courtroom. 

The man on the wiretapped tape recordings didn't speak much either. He grunted through conversations with his sources, rarely giving any tidbits in return for stock tips that would earn him millions. But when he did speak, Mr. Rajaratnam was ruthless, competitive and driven by ego. He frequently manipulated his sources for information.

Ultimately the jury was left with a one-dimensional view of a trader who would do anything to win and didn't view the people he spoke to as anything more than a source for stock tips.

In one call, he pushed for inside tips from a former McKinsey & Co. partner, and then turned around and berated him to others. In another, he played one-up-manship with one of his longest-running sources, refusing to give into the idea that she was better at gathering information on stocks. 

After receiving inside information from the McKinsey partner,  Anil Kumar, Mr. Rajaratnam derided him to another source. In a July 29, 2008, call with former  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS


0.38
%




 director  Rajat Gupta, Mr. Rajaratnam criticizes Mr. Kumar's aptitude for doing investment deals. "I'm getting a feeling that he's trying to, just...be a mini-Rajat, right?" Mr. Rajaratnam says on the tape. "Without bringing anything new to the party, right?"

Mr. Kumar had testified that Mr. Rajaratnam had given him more than $2 million through offshore accounts for inside information on McKinsey clients. "Honestly, Rajat, I'm giving him a million dollars a year for doing literally nothing," Mr. Rajaratnam told Mr. Gupta on the July 2008 call.

Mr. Kumar, 52 years old, pleaded guilty to conspiracy and securities fraud. McKinsey has said Mr. Kumar had violated the firm's "culture, values and policies."

The phrase that jurors heard most frequently from Mr. Rajaratnam was "right, right, right" as he waited for his sources, who were generally eager to please, to provide more information.

The image of Mr. Rajaratnam created by the calls is in contrast to his garrulous public persona as a smooth-talking, savvy stock trader widely known on Wall Street. At Galleon, he led a boisterous morning stock meeting where traders picked apart ideas, and Mr. Rajaratnam always had the last word. He was a master networker who built an unrivaled network of sources even before he launched his hedge fund.

He got his start as a tech analyst in Silicon Valley, where he stood out among his more geeky colleagues because of his Sri Lankan upbringing. He would regale contacts with stories of how his family dodged bullets during battles with Tamil rebels during the country's civil war. During his time as head of Galleon, he oversaw a culture in which pranks and jokes were used as a way to blow off steam in the high-pressure environment of a top hedge fund. He once offered $5,000 to anyone who would agree to be shocked by a "Taser" stun gun. 

But during the trial, his tape-recorded voice betrayed none of that. 

Instead, jurors heard him bearing down on his brother  Rengan, urging him to pump information from a source. In the call, Raj Rajaratnam urged his younger brother to "get him and then have access to, you know, be able to chat with him, and if he is a little dirty, right?" Mr. Rajaratnam says.

Jurors heard Mr. Rajaratnam berate people even though prosecutors say he received inside information from them. In a May 28, 2008, call, Mr. Rajaratnam gossiped with Mr. Kumar about how Mr. Gupta had overextended himself with corporate board positions and other responsibilities. "You know that his family suffers," Mr. Rajaratnam said on the tape. "I asked him, 'So are you outsourcing your wedding, or how are you doing it?' " Mr. Gupta's daughter was married a few months later, according to online photos of the event.Mr. Gupta is fighting civil regulatory charges that he provided inside information to Mr. Rajaratnam.

But Mr. Rajaratnam's ego came into full view in calls with  Danielle Chiesi. The calls showed Mr. Rajaratnam not only wanted to glean information from Ms. Chiesi but that he could beat her at the game of getting an information edge on stocks. 

During one call, on Sept. 23, 2008, in which Ms. Chiesi and Mr. Rajaratnam swapped information about  Advanced Micro Devices Inc.,
AMD


-4.39
%




 Mr. Rajaratnam sought to show his co-conspirator that he had better information than she did about AMD. 

"I know, babe, look, I never say you're not the best. It is hard to compete with you, but one day I will surpass you," Ms. Chiesi said. 

"I wanted to compete with you in your home yard, in your backyard," Mr. Rajaratnam replied. 

"Right? This is AMD. IBM I can't crack, I must, I must admit, I must defer to you on IBM," Mr. Rajaratnam continued. 

"And Akamai too," Ms Chiesi said.

"Akamai too, but AMD, bring it on, baby," Mr. Rajaratnam said. 

Ms. Chiesi has pleaded guilty to insider and is awaiting sentencing. She didn't testify at the trial.

 Write to  Susan Pulliam at susan.pulliam@wsj.com and Michael Siconolfi at michael.siconolfi@wsj.com 