PARIS—In the 16th century, just as firearms were about to render it obsolete on the battlefield, armor reached its zenith as ceremonial male plumage for European royalty. Kings and counts, emperors and electors in their precisely made-to-measure, sumptuously decorated parade-dress suits of iron and steel were ambulatory artworks, and often so were their steeds. "Under the Aegis of Mars: The Armor of European Princes," at the Musée de l'Armée brings together, for the first time ever, an extraordinary array of armor made in 16th-century French and Flemish workshops for royal courts across the continent, along with the drawings and tools used in their decoration. The works come from the museum's own rich collection of ancient arms and armor, and from other museums in Europe and the U.S., notably Dresden's Rüstkammer and the Staatliche Graphische Sammlung in Munich. 

The beautifully presented exhibit begins with smaller pieces of armor, shields and helmets, some together with the original drawings for their mythological and historical motifs—Neptune and Hercules, Trojan heroes, fantastic animals and grotesques, sometimes enveloped in swirls of foliage. The metal is almost always iron, formed by armorers and worked by goldsmiths—repoussé, engraved, etched, chiseled, polished, blackened, gilded, inlaid with silver and gold, even enameled in brilliant colors like the helmet and shield of France's Charles IX. The screeching Chimera crowning one black and gold helmet is a full-fledged sculpture of ferocious beauty.

Although the artistry and craftsmanship throughout the show is breathtaking, only a few artists' names are known. 

In 1565, Eliseus Libaerts, a Flemish goldsmith working in the French Mannerist style, created a horse-and-rider ensemble for Erik XIV of Sweden, who never got to wear his splendiferous outfit. The ship taking Libaerts and the armor to Sweden was captured by Danes and diverted to Copenhagen, where the artist spent four years working for the Danish King. 

In the 17th century the Elector of Saxony in Dresden bought the ensemble; it was shipped to Moscow by the Soviet army during World War II, returned to the Dresden museum in 1958, and—with the added wow factor of crimson and canary-yellow plumes—it's currently the centerpiece of the show's superb second half: a 30-meter-long procession of standing armor and accoutrements.

 Until June 26 

  www.invalides.org   

 Write to  Judy Fayard at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 