With shoulder pads and tape strewn all over the floor, the stunning upset of the Patriots in the books and the Jets' AFC-title-game ticket officially punched, Jerricho Cotchery stood in the chaos of the visitors' locker room at Gillette Stadium and felt safe admitting it: he and fellow receiver Santonio Holmes had been late to their meeting with the quarterbacks Saturday night.

Because they were watching the Steelers game.

Nine months and exactly one week ago, the Steelers sent Mr. Holmes to the Jets, dumping him after one too many off-the-field incidents. Now, this Sunday, he'll become the first-ever Super Bowl MVP to face his old team in a conference title game.

"To be able to win the AFC Championship game and go to the Super Bowl on that field? For him it would probably be a dream come true," running back LaDainian Tomlinson said, imagining his own situation were he to face the Chargers, who dealt him last year. "This has to be huge."

Steady and generally not demonstrative, Mr. Holmes gave hint to that in the aftermath of the Jets' 28-21 win Sunday night in Foxborough. As the Jets came off the field and through the Gillette Stadium tunnel, Mr. Tomlinson heard the Jets' fans' chants of "LT! LT! LT!" and thumped his chest repeatedly. Linebacker Bart Scott flung his arms out and weaved liked a jet plane. Jason Taylor stuck his pointer finger in the air, clenched his fist and let loose a primal, "Yes!" twice.

 Then there was Mr. Holmes, a player former Ohio State teammate and current Jet teammate Nick Mangold called "always cool," pushing his 5-foot-11 frame up the sides of the tunnel to high-five green-clad fans.

"No question, I was watching for those guys," he said later, sitting in the locker room and acknowledging that, as Mr. Cotchery said, he was glued to the Steelers' 31-24 comeback victory over the Ravens Saturday evening. "No question I want to see those guys."

Mr. Holmes had just finished out a now-customary big-play game for the Jets. In the third quarter, right after the Patriots had methodically marched down the field and pulled to within 14-11, he made a gorgeous play on a third-down pass, perfectly dragging his two feet inside the left back corner of end zone for a seven-yard touchdown. 

On that play, quarterback Mark Sanchez was looking for matchups and picked the one that's quickly become one of his favorites. Mr. Holmes, in what has also become an "always" practice, credited Mr. Sanchez for a "beautiful pass."

For four years, Mr. Holmes was making plays just like that on Heinz Field. The Steelers let him go in April, though, just as the league handed down a four-game suspension for violating its substance-abuse policy. All the Steelers got in return for the 25th overall pick in the 2006 draft was the Jets' fifth-round pick. They eventually traded that for 29-year old cornerback Bryant McFadden and a 2010 sixth-round pick, Central Michigan receiver Antonio Brown.

But Mr. Holmes said wanting to see the Steelers again isn't about avenging the move, or proving the trade was a mistake. The Jets already went out to Pittsburgh last month and won 22-17 in a game that had three ties and two lead changes.

"Never even cared about that," he said Sunday night, sitting quietly on a stool in the Jets' locker room. "The situation was given, opportunity was presented. I'm taking advantage of what I got right now." 

The reason he wants to be in Pittsburgh, he said, is, "I know what their defense is all about. I know how I can help my team exploit their defense, and we're going to use every bit of it this week."

And so this week, he said, there won't be any late meetings. 

"He's a Jet now," said receiver Brad Smith. "He'll be focused on us."

 Write to  Aditi Kinkhabwala at aditi.kinkhabwala@wsj.com 