In the past, songwriter Colin Meloy has steered his band the Decemberists through challenging conceptual waters, using intricate rock suites to sing about nautical quests and ghostly characters. On the new "The King Is Dead," he intentionally avoids excess. Critics have praised its homey Americana touch and R.E.M.-like jangle, as in the song "Down by the Water," the band's highest-charting radio single to date.

 This isn't the kind of intricate concept album you've made in the past, but is there any sort of narrative idea that ties the songs together? 

Nothing as concrete as a narrative. Like a short story collection or any record, you'd hope that the songs were connected in some way, through mood or the environment. I think of it being of a piece, but there's no overarching concept.

 Some of the songs seem to be self-contained stories. Are there any characters that took shape?  

If there is a dominant voice, it would be my own. There's a couple songs, including "January Hymn" and "June Hymn," that are as naked a first-person meditation as I've ever written.

 That's funny. Having come to know you musically as a storyteller, I just assumed that even in the first-person songs you were playing the role of someone else. 

There's definitely voices that are not my own, such as on "Rox in the Box" and "Dear Avery." But others are influenced by my own observations. The first song ["Don't Carry It All"] is sort of about understanding one's environment in respect to one's neighbors, or understanding where the sun is in the sky as you're learning the lay of the land in a new place. It was written after my wife and I moved outside Portland, out of town and up in the woods. We were trying to figure out where to put garden plots.

 How'd the garden turn out? 

We had a super rainy spring. And there were certain things that don't take well to cold weather, like tomatoes. And I think there was a blight on the potatoes, but the cucumbers did great. We were kept in cucumbers.

 Do you do any research for your songwriting, in the way that a novelist might? 

Some people would label me as a historical songwriter, but if you really dug into it, I have basically a 12-year-old's knowledge of history, and I just handchoose the coolest parts. That said, "Rox in the Box" came out of a book about the labor disputes in Butte, Mont., in the 1910s.

 Usually artists start simple and get more outlandish with their album concepts as their careers progress. Seems like you're doing the reverse. 

Dipping our toes into concept stuff started early, and I think we did it at first because we thought it was funny. Whether the world gets the joke remains to be seen. Even my own bandmates get a little bit flummoxed. 

 There is a bit of a double standard. Many critics applauded your ambitions with "Hazards of Love," but with this new record, some are saying they're relieved that you're taking a simpler approach. 

I do think this record is as defined by anything on it and where it was recorded as it is by the record that came before it. They've become these weird siblings in a way. 

 By adopting this more direct approach, did you learn anything about yourself as a songwriter? 

I'm a real fan of things that are immersive and require a little bit more work from a reader or listener. That's what was driving the more epic stuff. It was also coming out of a time when I was a little cynical about being a professional musician. Being on a major label [EMI's Capitol Records] and the expectations put on you by your label and your bandmates, in some respects "Hazards of Love" was me testing the boundaries. I think there was a certain amount of wanting to scuttle the ship.

 The rap on major labels is that they want every act to turn out commercial hits. If that was the case you would have been dropped long ago. 

Maybe in my cynical fog I wanted to have more of a battle. Bless their hearts, they were nothing but supportive and willing to sweat this out. That said, I think there was a sigh of relief heaved from that tower in Los Angeles [because of the new album's straightforward style].

 Songs such as "Down by the Water" have a real R.E.M. feel. In fact it features R.E.M. guitarist Peter Buck. Before you recruited him, did you have any impulse to disguise the influence a bit? 

I don't feel any reason to cover my tracks. There are several other songs from our catalog that you could say the same thing about. I've been writing fake R.E.M. songs my entire life. This batch was no different, and in some ways I was trying to get back to that. Part of it's just selfish: I want to be in a band with Peter Buck. 

 Country folk singer Gillian Welch accompanies you on much of the album. How did that come about?  

Having grown up listening to what I refer to as blue-state country, or hippie country rock like Neil Young and Emmylou Harris and Marshall Tucker Band, that vocabulary is in my bones. They were borrowing from Nashville, marrying a male and female voice high in the mix, so each song sounds like a duet. I always thought it would be fun to try that. 

 You have a book for kids coming out called "Wildwood," illustrated by your wife Carson Ellis. Do you write prose in the same way you write lyrics?  

I don't think two things could be more different. Writing songs is more visceral. You're following impulses, whereas writing prose is like whittling a giant log down to a toothpick. Every day you have to put in your six or seven hours and eventually you will have just created this thing, where with a song you can sit down and sometimes write one in five minutes. It's more dependent on the mood. I might have a song fragment but I won't touch it because if you're not in the right head space you might make some bad decisions. If I've been slaving over a verse for even a half hour I know to walk away. Writing songs is like handling meat. Mess with it too long and it loses its freshness. It's about getting the meat straight from the butcher to the grill. In writing prose I'm just shoving my hand into hamburger all day long.

 Write to  John Jurgensen at john.jurgensen@wsj.com 