A bill that would make it easier to fire ineffective teachers statewide and allow Mayor-elect Rahm Emanuel to lengthen the Chicago school day passed the Illinois House on Thursday, even as the state's three teachers' unions withdrew support at the last minute.

The bill passed with 112 yes votes, 1 no and 1 present. It heads to the desk of Gov. Pat Quinn, who supports it.

The measure is one of the most far-reaching overhauls of teacher tenure and bargaining rights in a state where Democrats control both the legislature and the governor's office. It's similar to laws passed in many Republican-controlled states, including Indiana and Florida.

The bill would link teacher tenure to student achievement, base layoffs on performance instead of seniority and make it easier to dismiss ineffective teachers. 

It also would give Chicago's mayor power to lengthen the school day. Chicago teachers could strike only if 75% of members vote to do so—up from 51% of votes cast. That change would make it more difficult for Chicago teachers to strike if Mr. Emanuel lengthens the school day and they cannot agree on compensation for the extra time.

The measure initially drew the support of the state's three teachers' unions, the business community and education-advocacy groups. 

But a few weeks after it passed the Senate on a 59-0 vote, the Chicago Teachers Union charged the bill had been altered late in the process without its knowledge. Union leaders objected to passages in the bill that would curb their bargaining rights and limit their ability to call a strike.

The Chicago union pulled its support of the bill this week, as did the Illinois Federation of Teachers. The Illinois Education Association, another union, took a neutral position.

Mr. Emanuel said in a statement that the bill's passage was "a historic victory for students in Chicago and across the state. The new law paves the way to a longer school day that offers adequate instructional time for Chicago's children." 

Lawmakers were pursuing passage of a separate "trailer" bill intended to help defuse the dispute. But it wasn't clear whether agreement could be reached on that measure.

Dave Comerford, spokesman for the Illinois Federation of Teachers, said union officials were "working with all the stakeholders to finalize language" for the trailer bill. 

 Write to  Stephanie Banchero at stephanie.banchero@wsj.com 