With 6.1 seconds to go in a tie game in Memphis earlier this month, Carmelo Anthony, the Knicks' newest superstar, caught a pass 18 feet from the basket and swung the ball high over his head.

Memphis's Tony Allen, considered an elite defender, had a plan. His hands were down low and he would put his body into Anthony's, forcing Anthony to dribble and then hope to contest his drive toward the basket. 

Instead, Anthony never drove. He chaotically waved the ball above his head for two seconds, then began what opposing players say is the rarest of moves in the NBA: the jab step. Anthony faked going forward, then took one giant step to his left, dribbled once and had gained enough separation from Allen to sink a 19-foot jump shot. Half a second remained on the clock. The Knicks won 110-108. 

Since arriving in New York, Anthony has done what he was brought in to do. He's scored points, and lots of them—averaging 25 points per game, the fifth-most in the NBA. But so far, those points have not resulted in enough victories for the Knicks, who are 7-10 since he arrived in a trade from the Denver Nuggets.

As criticism mounts about Anthony's style clashing with Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni's offensive philosophy, it seems clear that he may never fit into the run-and-gun style the Knicks used before the trade.

There is mounting evidence that in order for Anthony's game to be preserved, the offense may need to slow down. Still, there is no denying his offensive skills.

With the best first step in the game, according to Indiana Pacers swingman Dahntay Jones, and leaping ability that is most amazing that Grizzlies forward Shane Battier has seen, Anthony specializes in what Knicks assistant Herb Williams calls "a lost art." 

In recent years, mid-range games in the NBA have gone the way of short shorts and the flat top as relics of a bygone era. Anthony is a rare exception. He has taken 397 two-point shots from beyond 16 feet, the third-most in the league.

According to Synergy Sports, a company that charts every NBA play, Anthony utilizes an "isolation" style of play, or a one-on-one game, 35% of the time, which is the most among NBA players who receive regular playing time. 

Defenders paint Anthony as a scoring phenomenon. At 6-foot-8, Anthony has the best moves in the game, Jones says, because of the boundless possibilities his mix of speed and size create. "He's taller than most, so he can shoot over people. If you're bigger than him, he can go around you. His first step is number one because of the size and strength that goes along with it. It may not look like it, but he's extremely quick and he gets to wherever he wants to all of the time."

Given his vast repertoire of tricks, there is no typical experience for defenders, according to Bill Walker, the Knicks swingman who has guarded Anthony in games as an opponent and as a teammate in practice. 

Walker's approach is simple: "First of all," he says. "You pray you have help behind you." 

From there, Anthony will either turn as soon as he gets the entry pass, or he will hesitate for a brief second—a pause that is so effective and worrying to defenders that Walker calls it "amazing." 

 Then, when he's facing you in a one-on-one play, Walker says it usually goes like this: He'll use his footwork to do a jab step in as many as three directions, he'll bring his body down low or up high. By that time, Walker says, you are frozen. Anthony will end the possession, mercifully, after that by taking the shot or diving into you and drawing a foul. Near the basket, he'll use a spin move. 

"He really has millions of moves," Walker said. "His arsenal is limitless."

To make matters worse for defenders, Anthony excels at drawing fouls—then making free throws. Anthony shoots eight free throws a game, the seventh- most in the NBA, and makes 83.3% of them, something Battier says "wears teams down." 

Williams, who played in the NBA from 1981 to 1999, said that Anthony's arsenal of mid-range moves is so rare that he can't be compared to any current player—the closest comparison, he says, is Marques Johnson, the 6-foot-7 swingman who played in five All-Star games in the early 1980s. 

Williams says Anthony is the best player in the NBA from mid-range because "any movement he does, the defense has to bite....So it's tough when he gets the ball in close. You can't play him."

Theories abound about why Anthony's style is so rare, but none in the NBA claim to have any definitive conclusions. 

"It's the evolution of a guy who is a high-volume scorer. You don't see medium or low scorers with a jab step because most coaches will yell at you if you try to take that shot," Battier said. "He's a high-volume scorer. He's proven he can make it, so he gets a pass." 

Anthony said he began to develop that style as a senior in high school. He studied tape of 6-foot-7 forward Glenn Robinson, who averaged 20.7 points per game over his career with a similar arsenal of moves. 

The other player Anthony studied was Bernard King, a Knicks star from 1982-1987. The comparisons between the two have stuck. On Wednesday night, with King sitting courtside and Orlando Magic forward Quentin Richardson guarding Anthony, Richardson yelled over to King, "This guy plays like you!"

Anthony jokes that he developed the moves with longevity in mind, to possibly avoid the bumps and bruises that come with driving to the basket, but he said it came naturally to him. 

"For the most part," he said. "It's just something that a lot of people at my position don't have and a lot of people, period, don't have. There's no mid-range games...That's my thing. It all depends on whether I miss or make the shot."

Anthony Carter, Anthony's teammate on the Denver Nuggets for four seasons before coming to New York with him, said Anthony's game evolved in the middle of his NBA career, when he played mostly near the basket. Carter said that when he played against Anthony in their meetings before becoming teammates in 2007, Anthony's effective began to dwindle when teams double- and triple-teamed him. "He had to figure out another way, and now that mid-range is just unbelievable," Carter said. 

So with such an impressive array of moves comes the debate about how to stop him. 

Battier said Anthony's weakness is his jump shot off the dribble, which is a pretty strong weak point, Battier admits. This season, according to Synergy, Anthony made 43.4% of his shots off the dribble. Battier says that Anthony is effective driving to his left or right, which is not the case for a vast majority of scorers.

Jones said there's no clear way to guard Anthony, only to hope he misses shots, or, in extreme situations "show him a crowd" by throwing more than one defender at him. Williams said that's a misguided endeavor, since Anthony plays so far from the basket that double-teaming him would leave a player open near the basket. 

"But when he gets hot," Jones said. "I've seen him make all of those contested jump shots. I've seen people who, well, they're helpless."

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 

Of the NBA's leading scorers, none play in isolation situations as much as Carmelo Anthony of the Knick.



Source: Synergy Sports