These are bountiful days for the formerly arid New York City basketball scene. The Knicks are finally noisy, even if they can't stop Cleveland or Indiana. St. John's is in the NCAA Tournament, even if they're worried about the loss of senior D.J. Kennedy. The men's tournament also features Long Island University and St. Peter's of Jersey City, and on the women's side, Rutgers, Princeton, Marist and St. John's. 

There have also been unconfirmed reports that Princeton's men's team qualified by beating an on-line school located just outside of Boston.

If you want to further stretch the geographic definition of New York City, you can throw in the UConn men and women, plus Hartford's women's team. Syracuse? Sure. How about those crazy Nets? They've won five in row, including a Monday thumping of the Celtics.

While we're piling on the bandwagons, let's just add another team to quietly keep an eye on: the Denver Nuggets.

Colorado's a little remote, yes. But you'll recognize some of the characters on this powder blue outfit. Four of them were members of the New York Knicks traded to Denver in the Carmelo Anthony deal: 

Raymond Felton, Wilson Chandler, Danilo Gallinari, and Timofey Mozgov.

Oh right, those guys. The late paragraphs of Carmelo mania, swept away in the frenzy over New York's glossy new hire. It was easy to overlook them, the way Anthony's name dominated the transaction. Even Chauncey Billups seemed like an afterthought in the afterglow.

The Nuggets, meanwhile, played it humble. There was a somber press conference in which Denver vice-president of basketball operations Masai Urjiri said his team "got killed" on the deal and Nuggets president Josh Kroenke apologized to Billups, a beloved Colorado native.



But Kroenke also offered a flicker of optimism. "I think our fans will hopefully be pleasantly surprised with the guys we're bringing in."

"We really like Danilo, we love Chandler, we love Felton," Urjiri added. "Mozgov has great upside..."

It was an admirable attempt at positivity, even if there are few phrases less inspiring than "Mozgov has great upside.''

Denver was portrayed as the latest Cleveland, another city abandoned by a star player it raised and adored.

But a funny thing has happened on the way to the Western Conference basement. The Nuggets have gone 8-2 since the Carmelo deal, sit at 40-27 and are in fifth place in the conference playoff standings. While Gallinari recovers from a toe injury, and Mozgov tries to find a route off the bench, early season Garden favorites Felton and Chandler are playing key roles (21 and 22 respectively on Monday against New Orleans.)

The Knicks, meanwhile, have shown thrilling flashes, but have also been prone to mind-numbing losses. After back-to-back stumbles to Indiana, they are 6-6 since Anthony arrived in town.

Is there a Knicks fan who hasn't looked upon Denver's surge with a certain bemusement? Denver is playing with new energy and a vastly improved defense. Head coach George Karl just signed an extension. The day his Mavericks thwapped New York, Dallas owner Mark Cuban announced that Denver had "hit a home run" on the Anthony deal.

The big news out of New York, meanwhile, has been the announcement of a 49% average ticket-price hike for next season. But there is no looking back. New York was desperate for a superstar, and would surely make the deal again. The Knicks should make the playoffs, and the city's basketball recovery continues. Gradually.

In the meantime, some forgotten friends are prospering in the mountains. 

 Write to  Jason Gay at jason.gay@wsj.com 