TOKYO—Japan's new trade and industry minister said the government will seek further reduction in the nation's corporate tax rate even after a planned 5% cut is implemented, as part of its effort to buttress private companies against accelerating competition from rival nations like South Korea.

Such a cut is likely to be considered as part of a broad overhaul of the tax and social security systems, which the government hopes to put together as soon as the fiscal year staring April 2012, Banri Kaieda said in an interview. The changes, currently under heated debate, are aimed at curbing snowballing fiscal deficit and finding funds to pay for surging pension costs.

A further cut in the corporate tax rate, he said, is the government's "basic position." He added: "At this point, we just don't know when exactly that will happen and by how many percentage points it should be lowered. We need to see the impact of the coming 5% cut, too."

Responding to calls from private companies, the government of Prime Minister Naoto Kan decided last year to lower Japan's effective corporate tax rate to 35% from the current 40%. The change should take effect later this year, if the ruling party manages to pass its latest tax-reform bill, a challenge given the increasingly contentious stance of the opposition party in a divided parliament.

Mr. Kaieda was appointed minister of economy, trade and industry this month as part of Mr. Kan's cabinet reshuffle ahead of a new parliament session starting Monday. The former economic commentator had served a short stint as minister for economy and fiscal policy before the latest cabinet change.

"We wish we could cut the tax more drastically, but we can't ignore our extremely tough fiscal conditions either," he said.

Separately, the government Friday upgraded its assessment of the economy for the first time in seven months, saying it shows signs of picking up as China's rapid growth and a recovery in the U.S. help support demand for Japanese exports. 

The Cabinet Office also raised its view of prices, saying corporate goods prices are "mildly increasing" and, even though consumer prices continue to fall, their rate of decline is "moderating." 

Mr. Kaieda, asked if further cuts should bring Japan's corporate tax rate to match the 24% level in rival South Korea, said that wasn't necessarily needed, given different business environments in the two nations, including different levels of geopolitical risks.

While mulling further cuts in the broader tax rate, the government plans to offer a special corporate tax rate of 28.5% to certain foreign companies later this year as part of a package of steps aimed at luring companies into making new investments in Japan.

"We are trying to get companies to build research and development facilities in Japan or convince them to set up new regional headquarters here," the minister said.

As domestic markets in Japan continue to slump due to a stubborn economic malaise and a shrinking population, there has been an exodus of foreign companies out of Japan in recent years, with many moving their regional headquarters to cities like Hong Kong and Singapore. Last year, more than 130 companies closed their shops in Japan, compared with roughly 100 that set up new operations here.

Mr. Kaieda, who also oversees energy policy, said after winning a major contract in Vietnam recently, Japan will now focus on Turkey and Jordan as the next targets for sales of nuclear power plants.

Exports of infrastructure technologies such as nuclear power plants and high-speed rail systems are part of the government's broader economic growth strategy. Senior government officials, including Mr. Kaieda's predecessors, made repeated trips abroad in recent months to play salesmen to Japanese companies hoping to win orders. Tokyo also sweetened terms of public financing to aid these projects.

Thanks to such efforts, Japan scored its first big win in November with a deal to build a nuclear power plant in Vietnam. The contract calls for a Japanese consortium to build two reactors in the southeastern Vietnamese province of Ninh Thuan.

The new focus in the Middle East puts Japan in direct competition with South Korea, which in 2009 was awarded a $20.4 billion contract to build four nuclear power stations in the United Arab Emirates.

Japanese officials believe the nation has a strong chance of winning a new contract in Turkey where its expertise in fortifying reactors against earthquakes will come in handy.

In Jordan, the government's Atomic Energy Commission said in December that a joint venture between France's Areva and Japan's Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd. were among the bidders for its new power plant project.

Mr. Kaieda said Japan aims to win contracts by offering not only plants but also "operations, maintenance and expert education support" as it aims to win contracts in Turkey and Jordan.

 Write to  Yuka Hayashi at yuka.hayashi@wsj.com and Mari Iwata at mari.iwata@dowjones.com 