  (See Corrections & Amplifications item below.)  

Two weeks ago, Lou Carnesecca had dinner in Queens with a few friends from his old St. John's teams, reminiscing with players from as far back as the starry '84, '85, and '86 seasons.

There was just one thing they wanted to talk about.

"Wall Street," said the 86-year-old former St. John's coach.

Kidding.

"We were talking about the games, naturally," Mr. Carnesecca said.

They're not the only ones. On Monday, St. John's (10-4, 3-1 Big East) received four points in the Associated Press Top 25 poll, fresh off a five-game winning streak that included an electrifying upset of then-No. 13 Georgetown at Madison Square Garden.

Tickets for the Red Storm's game against No. 1 Duke at the end of the month are reselling for up to $2,500 on some ticket sites. Cab drivers and FedEx delivery men have stopped head coach Steve Lavin in the street, while the win against Georgetown prompted nearly 200 text messages—the most Mr. Lavin said he's received since his hiring was announced in March. He even received a voice mail from Reggie Jackson.

"That was a surreal moment," Mr. Lavin said.

On Wednesday night, St. John's will host No. 4 Syracuse (16-0, 3-0) at Madison Square Garden, with tip-off set for 7 p.m. 

The game should help resolve a question: Is St. John's really this good, or is New York simply that starved for a stellar season?

The Red Storm's five-game win streak was snapped Saturday night, when Notre Dame dealt the team its first conference loss, a 76-61 shellacking. Early season blips included consecutive losses to St. Bonaventure and Fordham (which won two games last year).

If nothing else, Wednesday night should help determine whether this year's team is closer to the last St. John's squad to receive top 25 votes — the 2009-10 team that ended up 17-16 — or the heirs to the teams of Ron Artest and Chris Mullin that captured the imagination of New York City.

Mr. Carnesecca knows what he believes. "This club reminded me of when we had Artest and that group — the way they handle the ball," he said. In previous years, "sometimes it's like taking a sleeping pill at some of these games," Mr. Carnesecca said. "This particular group has that ability to excite people."

Players agreed. 

In his first seasons at St. John's, "it would maybe be more opponent fans than our fans at the Garden," said senior guard Paris Horne. Now, he said, "the atmosphere was definitely different."

Mr. Horne and his fellow seniors are part of the reason New York is having the debate at all. 

When Mr. Lavin was first hired, many of the early headlines centered on the program's future promise, as he reeled in a recruiting class that is ranked third in the nation by ESPN. But the flip side of that story was a potentially challenging fact: he inherited 10 seniors recruited by someone else.

As a class, they had struggled in the closing minutes of games their previous seasons, squandering leads and failing to get critical stops. Last year, 11 of St. John's 16 losses were by 10 points or fewer; the team held second-half leads in seven of its 12 Big East losses. 

Before the season started, the seniors met and discussed the future. They vowed to muscle their way back into the St. John's story line.

"If we want to do this, nobody's going to take us there but ourselves," senior Justin Burrell said they told each other. "We have to go out there and take this into our own hands to make it happen."

Over the summer, the players trained in the gym and scrimmaged on their own, determined to impress a new coach, anxious that they might be swept aside as a new coaching staff focused on a fresh start. 

"I think it finally hit me. I'm coming into my senior year and it's the last go-round for me and some of my teammates," said Justin Brownlee. "We all kind of pushed each other."

They found a partner in Mr. Lavin, who had no intention of declaring his first season in New York a wash. He carefully built relationships with the seniors over the spring and summer, going for long walks in Central Park or Gramercy, having lunches and dinners, and texting as he was out on recruiting trips.

"You can't accelerate or try to rush the relationship aspect with your players when you come in and take over for a coach who's been fired," said Mr. Lavin, who noted he had experienced the situation from the other side after being fired from UCLA in 2003. "You have a sense of urgency because the season's upcoming, but trying too hard as a stepfather is the worst thing you can do." 

After disintegrating in the second half against Fordham, Mr. Lavin led a "fiery" post-game meeting where he tackled the issue head on. This season "was not about the recruiting," he remembered telling them. 

"I don't know if you want to call it smelling salts, but I had to put a jolt into them," he said. "The expectation is to be successful now."

Despite fears that two straight losses could summon ghosts from last season, Mr. Lavin found a glimmer of hope in the Fordham loss—in the first half he had finally glimpsed what the team was capable of. "It was really interesting experience for me, really unique in coaching for me—while we lost the game I had this kind of elated feeling." 

He shared the feeling with his staff who "thought I was crazy. But I began to see for the first time we could really do something special."

 Over the next five games, St. John's strung together its strongest run of the season, with four seniors averaging in double digits. Overall, the Red Storm shot 52.3% from the field (after shooting 45% in the first eight games).

The improvement in free throw shooting was even more stark. Before the streak, the Red Storm shot only 63.2%; but in the five games following the Fordham loss they inflated the number to 76.5%, with senior Dwight Hardy shooting 94.7% (36 of 38). 

"The seniors you know give us the experience, the resolve, the tenacity that we need to be successful," Mr. Lavin said. "So there's a sense of purpose."

Questions linger about the team's ability to play consistently. But Mr. Carnesecca was unfazed even by the team's recent stumble against Notre Dame, where they shot a dismal 38.2% "Every team goes through that, especially in the Big East. You're not going to go through unscathed," he said. 

Instead, he invoked the Syracuse-St. John's matchups of old, including the 14-foot jump shot with eight seconds left by Ron Rowan in 1986 that gave St. John's its first lead of the Big East championship game. The championship was sealed as Walter Berry soared toward the basket to smack away Dwayne "Pearl" Washington's shot at the buzzer.

"It was like Superman," Mr. Carnesecca said. 

Wednesday's game against Syracuse—which is off to the second-best start in program history— may require similar heroics. But the seniors said they were undaunted. "We've been through the wars in the other seasons that we've been here," Mr. Horne said. "We're really hungry to win games.''

He paused. "We want to leave a legacy," he said.

 Corrections & Amplifications:  In the five games following the St. John's basketball team's loss to Fordham, senior Dwight Hardy made 36 of 38 free throws. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said he made 36 of 28.