Brisbane residents face a massive, costly rebuilding task after floods swamped thousands of homes in Australia's third-largest city, adding to the mounting cost of the deluge across Queensland.





Estimates for the cost of cleanup throughout the region hit by floods exceeded 15 billion Australian dollars (US$14.9 billion).

On Thursday, workers began the slow process of pumping water out of underground parking lots across the city's business district. Others attempted to retrieve abandoned cars in streets caked with a thick layer of brown mud discharged by the overflowing Brisbane River.

In an evacuation center at Brisbane's Royal National Association, one of five refuge sites across the city, around 700 people slept on air mattresses or huddled around a television. Red Cross, military and other aid workers dealt with inquiries while local charities handed out food.

State Premier Anna Bligh said that reconstruction of the region was of a "postwar" proportion, with 20,000 homes flooded in the city and 5,000 businesses inundated with water. The floods have killed at least 25 people in the state and displaced thousands.

"No one knows what's going on," said Rocky O'Gilvie, 43 years old, pondering his future after his home in the Rocklea district of the city was destroyed, forcing him to the evacuation center.

Queensland police have formed an antilooting squad for flood-struck Brisbane and the nearby town of Ipswich. Authorities said that while there have been only a handful of reports of looting, the 200-strong force was deployed as a pre-emptive measure.

Disease is a further risk for Queenslanders as stagnant water gathers and rivers fill with dead livestock and debris.

"There is the distinct possibility of very serious infection," said Andrew Laming, a federal opposition health spokesman. "We are seeing a combination of infected waters, mosquito-borne illnesses and others yet to be determined."

The government had gauged the cost of rebuilding at A$5 billion, but this figure doesn't include the increased devastation that has now destroyed homes and hundreds of private businesses in the state's capital. In the past two days, some bridges and waterways in Brisbane's central business district have been devastated by the flooding and in several cases washed away.

When including the cost of rebuilding ports throughout Queensland, northern New South Wales and parts of Brisbane, the eventual cost to the economy could hit A$13 billion, according to estimates from J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. Add in unforeseen losses to revenue and the rebuilding hit to be felt by the state's booming mining industry, and the total cost could reach more than A$15 billion.

"The cost of the current disruption to lives and economic activity will be vastly exceeded by the rebuilding of homes, business premises and infrastructure," said  Paul Brennan, senior economist with Citigroup in Sydney. 

To be sure, after the initial hit,Mr. Brennan noted that the rebuilding effort will be costly at first but over time will add to the country's economic growth, though inflation is also likely to surge.

The devastation well exceeds the record Brisbane flooding of 1974, which had an inflation-adjusted cost of about A$4 billion..High estimates put the flooding damage at a cost of about 1% of Australia's total gross domestic product. Hurricane Katrina hit about 0.65% of U.S. GDP in 2005.The federal government is expected to foot about 75% of the disaster recovery bill, with the state government's funding body, Queensland Treasury Corp., picking up the rest.The corporation's head of financial markets, Richard Jackson, said the flooding has pushed the Treasury Corp. to operate out of its disaster recovery site outside the city. 

Adding to the problems of cleaning up, rescue services may face an unseen threat after worried residents reported sightings of bull sharks swimming in the murky floodwaters.

 Write to  Enda Curran at enda.curran@dowjones.com and Geoffrey Rogow at geoffrey.rogow@dowjones.com 