WASHINGTON—The U.S. mining regulatory agency on Monday proposed a new rule that would make it easier to close mines that have a pattern of health and safety violations. 

The proposed rule would remove barriers to enforcement against mine operators who chronically break health and safety rules, allowing the Mine Safety and Health Administration to move more quickly in identifying and acting on a pattern of violations. 

"As I've said many times before, the current [pattern-of-violation] system is broken, and this regulation is the next critical step in reforming the enforcement program under the existing statute," said Joseph A. Main, assistant U.S. secretary of labor for mine safety and health. 

The Mine Safety and Health Administration has faced criticism for not using its full authority to regulate mines following a fatal explosion at  Massey Energy Co.'s Upper Big Branch coal mine last April. 

One part of that authority empowers the agency to stop operations at a mine or part of a mine where it identifies recurring conditions that could lead to serious injury or illness. The Mine Safety and Health Administration has never done so using the current law. Meanwhile, operators have been able to delay that process by drawing out legal appeals to existing violations. 

The proposed rule would allow the MSHA to consider pending and final violations in deciding whether an operator has a pattern of safety problems. The agency would maintain a public database of violations and could issue a "pattern of violations" notice without warning. Then, if another violation occurs, the MSHA could bar workers from entering the affected part of the mine until it is fully inspected and found to be violation-free. 

The United Mine Workers of America said it supports the rules "in principal" but that safety standards should be "written in stone." 

"Regulations are just words written on paper," UMWA International President Cecil E. Roberts said. "To become something that is followed—something that saves lives—they have to be enforced." 

The National Mining Association had no immediate comment on the proposed rule Monday. The industry group has argued that new rules aren't needed because the MSHA has enough authority under existing law. 

The proposed rule also would encourage mining companies to develop health and safety plans that address violations at their mines. The MSHA said that, among other criteria, it will consider whether companies have such a plan when deciding where to apply the new rule. 

Legislation changing the "pattern of violations" rule was considered by Congress last year, but didn't pass. This year, Sen. Jay Rockefeller (D., W.Va.) introduced another bill that would revise the process. But the MSHA is moving forward on its own. On Monday, Mr. Main said the agency has enough authority under current law to make the changes it is proposing. 

The agency will seek public comments on the proposal from Feb. 2 to April 4.

 Write to  Ryan Tracy at ryan.tracy@dowjones.com 

