DAVOS, Switzerland—Discussions are under way on an initiative that would allow the Greek government to buy back debt with help from the European bailout fund, Greece's finance minister said Friday, amid signs that Europe is preparing a far-reaching solution to the country's debt problems. 

"It is one of the ideas that are on the table," Finance Minister George Papaconstantinou said in an interview. "It deserves to be discussed, together with other ideas, but there is no specific plan at this point." 

Since late last year, European governments have been discussing plans to beef up Europe's new, emergency-financing mechanism, the European Financial Stability Facility, to lend money to euro-zone countries in need of cheap loans. 

Under the scenario now being discussed, the EFSF, which has a triple-A credit rating, would borrow from the international markets and lend money to Greece. The loan would be given at a rate significantly below what Greece—now rated at junk status by all three of the world's leading ratings agencies—would pay on the markets. 

With that money, Athens would be able to buy back an estimated €50 billion to €60 billion in Greek government bonds thought to be held by the European Central Bank, which bought the debt on the secondary market as part of a program to support the Greek bond market. 

An alternative scenario would involve Greece issuing the debt directly, but backed with a guarantee from the EFSF. Either way, Athens would pay only about 70% of the face value of the bonds, effectively retiring its debt at a 30% discount. The ECB, which paid the sharply discounted market price for the bonds, in theory should get back more or less what it paid for them. 

"It now looks like there is the political will in the euro zone to deal more drastically with the Greek debt because it will become simply unmanageable if nothing is done," a senior official in a euro-zone government said. 

In May, Greece narrowly avoided default with the help of a €110 billion bailout from the European Union and the International Monetary Fund. In exchange, Greece promised sweeping economic overhauls and to cut its budget deficit from 15.4% of gross domestic product in 2009 to below 3% by 2014. 

However, continued jitters over Greece's giant debt burden—expected to peak at 158% of GDP by 2013—have kept yields on Greek bonds at prohibitively high levels, making it impossible for Greece to re-enter the bond market. 

In addition to the buy-back initiative, Europe is also looking at other measures to ease the interest payments on Greece's debt. Those include extending the repayment period on the EU and IMF loan—pushing it out by several years, to 2024—and lowering the official interest rate, currently about 5%, that Greece now pays on that loan. 

"Anything below 5% [interest rate] on our total debt will make the debt sustainable," Mr. Papaconstantinou said. "This is why it is critical for us, in the current discussions, that the lending conditions of the EU and IMF package are revisited as part of the overall EFSF package." 

Speaking on the sidelines of the World Economic Forum, Mr. Papaconstantinou reaffirmed plans for Greece to re-enter the bond markets later this year after being frozen out for much of 2010 because of prohibitively high borrowing costs.

However, he said any plans to re-enter the bond markets would depend on Greece's European partners reaching an agreement on the scope and powers of the EFSF—which is expected at an EU summit in late March. 

Since September, Greece has issued short-term T-bills at almost monthly auctions, but hasn't issued longer-dated paper since April last year. 

"We still would like to come back into the market, as a seller, before the end of the year," Mr. Papaconstantinou said. "Of course for that, market conditions would have to change quite a lot in the next few months, and I hope that they will after the comprehensive package that we are all talking about is finalized and agreed." 

—Alkman Granitsas in Athens contributed to this article.