The Tribeca Film Festival on Monday announced 44 films that will make up the first half of its 10th anniversary feature slate. The 2011 festival, which will run from April 20 to May 1, will present these selections in two competitive sections, World Narrative and World Documentary, as well as a new section called Viewpoints. 

"We wanted to create a space for films that we really feel have a specific point of view in terms of the filmmaker's style," said David Kwok, the festival's director of programming. The new category represents an effort to streamline the festival, combining the themes of three previous sections (Encounters, Discovery and Showcase).

With films from 32 countries (including one of the first features made in Rwanda) and 43 world premieres, the festival emphasizes discovery. Audiences can expect to see more household names in the Cinemania and Spotlight sections, which will be announced next week. The first half of the festival's lineup is meant to be exploratory.

"We're not a niche festival," Mr. Kwok said. "We go about it and see what's out there." Some notable finds, he said, include "Flowers of Evil," a French-made feature about a romance between an Algerian-French bellman and an exiled Iranian student that makes use of YouTube videos from the Iranian protests in its story. "Gnarr," from Iceland, follows the unlikely saga of Jon Gnarr, a comedian whose stunt campaign wins him the job of Reykjavik's mayor. "Lotus Eaters," from British director Alexandra McGuinness, takes a stylized, fictional black-and-white glimpse at the spoiled rich kids of London's elite.

More topically, there are multiple selections from or about the Middle East, including "Cairo Exit," which follows the plight of a pregnant teenager of the Coptic Orthodox Christian faith, who plots to run off with her Muslim boyfriend. The Swedish documentary "Love During Wartime" tells the love story of an Israeli dancer and a Palestinian artist whose marriage mandates their exile.

Included, for the first time, are four films developed or funded through the festival's nonprofit Tribeca Film Institute. Those selections include Dennis Lee's "Jesus Henry Christ," with Toni Collette and Michael Sheen as parents of a hyper-precocious Petri-dish child.

The festival announced some new prizes for this year. Awards for best new director in narrative and documentary categories will be open to any filmmakers making their North American premieres with their debut feature films. There also will be prizes for cinematography, screenwriting and editing. "We've shown in the last 10 years that we can launch a film," Mr. Kwok said. "Now we want to give it that extra kick to move it into the marketplace."

Tickets will be $16 for evening and weekend screenings, and $8 for daytime weekday and late-night screenings. Advance selection ticket packages and passes went on sale for American Express cardmembers on Monday, and will go on sale next Monday for the general public. They can be purchased online at tribecafilm.com, or by phone (866) 941- 3378.

Last week, the festival announced that the world premiere of Cameron Crowe's documentary "The Union" will open the event, with a free performance by the film's subject, Elton John, to follow the film. The outdoor screening is scheduled for April 20 at the North Cove at the World Financial Plaza. Founded by Jane Rosenthal, Robert De Niro and Craig Hatkoff in 2001 following the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center, the festival aims to bolster the economic and cultural revitalization of lower Manhattan. Since its inaugural edition in 2002, it has screened more than 1,100 films.