 North Andover, Mass.  

Notwithstanding his status as America's greatest thinker on crime, punishment and social order, James Q. Wilson's toleration for minor deviancies, his own and other's, is notable. 

In the garage of his light-filled suburban home sits a feral-looking BMW M3—a V8 monster that Mr. Wilson assures me will get a workout on the local roads as soon as the weather improves. If past is prologue, this will provide an opportunity for the white-haired and grandfatherly Mr. Wilson to get to know the local police. Too, he freely admits that his young career, at a crucial point, was advanced by a "white lie"—though, it should hastily be added, not a lie perpetrated by himself.

Mr. Wilson is most famous for the phrase "broken windows," but he is quick to point out that it didn't originate with him. Philip Zimbardo of Stanford conducted an experiment in which he found that a car parked on a sedate street in a middle-class New York neighborhood would sit unvandalized for days—that is, until Mr. Zimbardo himself came back with a hammer and broke the first window.

"Out of this," says Mr. Wilson, "we coined the phrase 'broken windows,' suggesting public order is a fragile thing, and if you don't fix the first broken window, soon all the windows will be broken."

By "we," he means that much of the legwork for his now-famous article in the March 1982 issue of the Atlantic Monthly was done by his co-author, George Kelling, then the research director of the Police Foundation. At the foundation, Messrs. Kelling and Wilson had sponsored a series of experiments, one of which, conducted in Newark, N.J, sought to find out if increasing officer foot patrols in high-crime neighborhoods would bring down the crime rate. 

As Mr. Wilson tells it: "We interviewed several police chiefs and they laughed at the idea. 'It's absurd,' they said. We did the experiment. George Kelling ran it. And we found that the police chiefs were exactly right. It didn't drive down the crime rate—but the people loved it. It reintroduced a sense of order. It gave them a sense that the police and the good guys were in control of their neighborhood."

The resulting article, "Broken Windows," had a "galvanic effect" on police departments around the country. For decades, departments had fielded complaints from the public about broken streetlights and unfilled potholes, only to respond that these weren't "police matters." Now the cops started to see things differently. "The broken windows idea affected the police long before there was any data showing it actually had an impact on crime rates," says Mr. Wilson. "It affected them, I think, because it gave them a way of responding to some of the most common requests they get when they go out and meet with the community in church basements."

The foremost practitioner, at least by reputation, was New York City's former police commissioner, William Bratton, appointed by Mayor Rudy Giuliani. He was known to distribute copies of the article from his brief case. But Mr. Wilson, with a modesty that seems as much a product of his native empiricism as his demeanor, says today: "The biggest change in policing in this country that's occurred is usually associated with Bill Bratton. That's a correct association. He made a huge difference. But people misstate what the change was. They say he adopted the 'broken windows' theory. Well I'm not sure he did, and if he did, I'm not sure it made much difference to the crime rate. What he really did, his fundamental contribution, was to persuade the police that your job is not to make arrests. Your job is to prevent crime. You will not be rewarded for having more arrests, but for bringing down crime. That was the fundamental change."

Certain Bratton tactics in New York were clearly inspired by broken windows thinking, such as curbing "squeegee men"—panhandlers at intersections who washed your windshield and demanded payment whether you had agreed or not. Other tactics were inspired by a straightforward goal of reducing crime. Plainclothes officers who specialized in stopping and frisking people who might be carrying illegal guns were given considerable latitude to pursue their craft. "They took thousands of guns off the street," says Mr. Wilson, helping to reduce the city's murder rate dramatically.

It's now clear that a long and mysterious decline in America's serious crime rate began just about the time the article appeared. Like a true conservative, though, Mr. Wilson doubts government policies, including his own contributions, were all that important. Better policing and greater use of prison may have played a role, but he is convinced the major factor lies elsewhere. He believes "cultural change" was the important variable, albeit in a fashion he's still puzzling over.



Mr. Wilson was raised in Southern California, becoming the first in his family to go to college. As he tells the story, one summer he was learning to fix carburetors in his father's auto-repair shop. His high-school English teacher stopped by to suggest he consider going to college. In fact, the teacher had set the ball rolling with a "white lie"—he had written to the admissions office of the nearby University of Redlands to say that young Wilson had received a scholarship to Yale but the university could snag him if it acted quickly with a generous offer of its own.

There had been no scholarship from Yale. He says now that at the time he didn't even know where Yale was. But for his teacher's subterfuge, he jokes, "I would today be out of work because cars no longer have carburetors. I would be living on food stamps."

Academic life agreed with him, and on graduation he decided he wanted to pursue a career "teaching in a small California college." He was told he needed a degree from an "eastern" graduate school—the University of Chicago was about as "eastern" as he could stomach. "I entered a "standard-issue liberal and came out a conservative," he says. "And I never took a course with Milton Friedman, so you can't blame him."

Perhaps he was not as malleable as he lets on. Looking back on the experiences and attitudes that shaped his own thinking, he says, "The great cultural event of my life was the Second World War. When it ended I was only 14 years old. But I know how this country was during the war: utterly preoccupied with the war; with trivial exceptions, no dissent. Everybody worked at it. You bought war bonds. You donated aluminum and grease to collection points at your junior high school. The taxes went up dramatically. It was a moment in which, if you were my age, it defined your outlook on the world. Then the '60s came along and the Vietnam War just about tore the country apart. And now all wars tear the country apart. This is a change for me that is very hard to adapt to."

He does not say that dissenting from the nation's wars is wrong. He does not say that the country is wrong to be confused, uncertain and perhaps even a bit depressed about the difficulty of knowing which wars must be fought. But one net effect of the 1960s spillover, he believes, was the nation's skyrocketing crime rate.

Today, he says, we know a great deal about the genetic and familial factors that help determine why some are criminals and some aren't—a subject covered in his magisterial book, "Crime and Human Nature," written with Richard Herrnstein. We know that, in good times and bad, and in all countries, the majority of crime is committed by a small minority of young men. A landmark study by Marvin Wolfgang, for instance, showed that 6% of 18-year-olds were responsible for 52% of the crime committed by the cohort.

In the 1960s, the baby boom obviously enlarged the number of male teenagers, but what also changed conspicuously was the type of crimes they committed, from petty theft and the like to more serious crimes, such as armed robbery, grand larceny and homicide.

"So there was cultural change as well as a numerical change, and what caused the culture change? Whatever it was, it was powerful. I think it's best summarized by saying people abandoned the idea that self-control was the standard by which life should be led. That's my rough summary of what the '60s meant. And today I'm willing to guess that's less common today. But how do I prove that? I have no idea."

Well, he's working on it—keep an eye out for an article in Manhattan Institute's City Journal that should appear in the next few months. He points to some of the ideas he's percolating. America in recent decades has undergone something of a religious awakening. Alas, Census surveys don't ask about religious practice, making it hard to know the impact on the relevant age and ethnic groups.

Another factor is gang life. Not all gangs are crime-oriented—some exist to provide personal security to fatherless boys in neighborhoods full of fatherless boys, Mr. Wilson says. Nonetheless, gangs had a major part in rising crime rates. Has their role now changed? He'd like to know.

Drug-taking may also have declined as one generation witnessed the ravages of the crack wars on another. "Unfortunately," he says, "it's not a lasting learning experience," and it may reverse itself with the next generation.

Mr. Wilson is clearly not retired in a conventional sense, even as he and wife, Roberta, have put down stakes in what calls itself a "retirement community" here. He taught at Harvard until 1987, then held posts at UCLA and Pepperdine and lived in Malibu. He now holds a clutch of impressive titles at Boston College. He and his wife had hoped their children would eventually follow when the parents moved west, but the parental conspiracy failed and so Mr. and Mrs. Wilson recently moved back to blustery New England to be near their children and grandchildren. Of the younger generation, Mr. Wilson says, "They feel a legal obligation to live within 30 minutes of Fenway Park."

Along with writing his 14 books, Mr. Wilson has held numerous government posts, including a seminal appointment to LBJ's crime commission. The job that seems to most light up his eyes today, however, was his six years on President Reagan's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board. 

As the social scientist on the panel, his specialty was "human intelligence" at a time when the CIA was reluctantly discovering that it was beset with double agents and moles. All 24 of the CIA's "assets" in Cuba, he recalls, had been working for Fidel Castro, with a Cuban newspaper even running photos of government officials picking up materials from the agency's supposedly secret dead-drops. Mr. Wilson promptly drafted a report suggesting the CIA stop promoting its officers for merely recruiting assets and instead promote them for recruiting "good" assets. 

He serves today on a board helping FBI Director Robert Mueller reorient the FBI toward domestic counterterrorism—a job Mr. Wilson considers only half-done and vitally important to preventing another catastrophic terrorist attack. "You have to develop assets, you have to figure out how to get close to 19-year-old homegrown terrorists who develop strange ideas," he says. "The New York Police Department does a very good job of this. I hope other cities are doing as well. The FBI is getting much better at these things, but has a way to go."



In his illustrious career, only one academic title seems to have eluded him: scuba-diving instructor at Tufts, a job he sought, he says, because it would have amused him to list the credential on the "flyleaf of my next book." Not that he was unqualified. A decade ago he led a group of divers to explore the Japanese fleet at the bottom of Truk Lagoon. Ever the social scientist, he brought back more than just remarkable snapshots. When the U.S. government took over the island from the Japanese after the war, it so surfeited the locals with food aid that "they forgot how to fish or grow crops." The men devoted themselves instead to moonshine, until the island's women put their foot down, banning booze for both native and tourist consumption.

One of Mr. Wilson's diving party, a female physician from the U.S., was waylaid on arrival and asked to explain the bottles in her luggage. "She told them these were medical supplies in case of emergencies. Well, the medical supplies consisted entirely of ethyl alcohol," he says with an uproarious laugh.

The professor of crime never loses his delight in a little deviancy.

 Mr. Jenkins writes the Journal's Business World column. 