BERLIN—Germany's Free Democratic Party shuffled its lineup of government ministers, the latest attempt by the junior partner in Chancellor Angela Merkel's center-right coalition to reverse a precipitous decline in its approval ratings.

Under a new hierarchy party leaders agreed to Tuesday, Philipp Rösler, a 38-year-old physician and health minister since 2009, will replace Rainer Brüderle as economics minister. Mr. Brüderle, a 65-year-old party stalwart with strong support among the FDP's base, will leave the government to become the FDP's leader in parliament.

The latest changes come amid worsening poll numbers that have left the business-friendly party increasingly marginalized. Opinion polls conducted in recent weeks by the Forsa institute show support for the FDP hovering around 4%, below the 5% threshold necessary to take seats in parliament. 

That is a far cry from the 15% of the vote the FDP won in national elections in 2009. In regional elections in March, the FDP failed to win 5% of the vote in two states, forcing them out of those legislatures. In Baden-Württemberg, their poor showing helped bring down almost six decades of conservative rule.

The economics ministry will give Mr. Rösler, who was tapped last month to replace Guido Westerwelle as the FDP's new leader, more public visibility and influence in shaping key federal policy decisions, including Germany's response to the euro-zone's debt crisis. 

Mr. Rösler is expected to be formally named party leader at an FDP convention on Friday. 

The euro crisis is central to the Free Democrats' struggles. German contributions to bailouts for Greece and Ireland, and an expected package for Portugal, have put pressure on the federal budget, leaving no room for tax cuts that the FDP had promised voters. Mr. Westerwelle, the departing leader, failed to stop back-bench FDP parliamentarians from speaking out against many of those aid agreements as he consistently backed Ms. Merkel's plans.

Mr. Rosler, one of several younger politicians the FDP is betting on to rejuvenate its fortunes, was adopted as an infant from an orphanage in Vietnam and grew up in Germany. He served in the German military before turning to professional politics in 2003. 

"I have a clear vision for how I, together with my colleagues, will lead the FDP out of this difficult situation," Mr. Rösler said Tuesday after his fellow FDP leaders endorsed plans to give him the economics ministry and the vice chancellorship. 

The party gained a spot at the head of the economics ministry as part of negotiations to form a coalition with Ms. Merkel's Christian Democratic Union in 2009. Though the economics minister's portfolio—overseeing trade relations and serving as a liason between the government and industry—plays to the FDP's core pro-business priorities, the post isn't nearly as powerful as the finance ministry, which oversees the budget and fiscal policy. 

A rudderless FDP doesn't directly threaten Ms. Merkel's government. The coalition's mandate to rule is sound even after some embarrassing losses in regional elections earlier this year, analysts say. Yet the FDP's increasingly stringent tone on bailouts could complicate Germany's negotiations with its euro-zone partners just as Greece's deepening fiscal woes threaten to push the tenor of the bloc's debt crisis back up to a frenetic pitch.

"It could be more difficult for Ms. Merkel if the FDP doesn't succeed in strengthening its authority on core issues and broaden its appeal," said  Oskar Niedermayer, a political scientist at Berlin's Free University.

 Write to  Patrick McGroarty at patrick.mcgroarty@dowjones.com and Bernd Radowitz at bernd.radowitz@dowjones.com 