MUMBAI – The founders of  Patni Computer Systems Ltd. and private equity firm General Atlantic LLC. are set to sign a deal Monday to sell their controlling stake in the company for a little less than $1 billion to a consortium of  iGATE Corp. and Apax Partners LLP., three people familiar with the matter said. 

The iGATE-Apax consortium has bid 503.5 rupees a share for the combined 63% stake in the Indian technology company being sold by its founding Patni family and General Atlantic, two of the people told Dow Jones Newswires Friday. 

The bid values Patni Computer at about 65.95 billion ($1.45 billion). A 63% stake would cost the iGATE-Apax pair about 41.55 billion rupees ($915.32 million) at this price. 

Shares of Patni Computer closed down 0.7% at 460.1 rupees on the Bombay Stock Exchange Friday. The Mumbai market ended the day 2.4% lower. 

The potential deal would be one of the largest acquisitions in India's outsourcing industry in recent years. The last major deal was in 2009 when Tech Mahindra Ltd. purchased a 31% stake in Satyam Computer Services Ltd., valuing the fraud-hit software company at $1.13 billion. 

A meeting of the sellers on Jan. 3 had ended inconclusively as the tax implications of the deal had to be ironed out, two of the people had then said. 

Friday, a third person said that the Jan. 10 meeting will consider the changes made by the iGATE-Apax consortium in its proposal to address the tax issues. 

One of the three people said the deal has now been structured in such a way that the members of the Patni family and General Atlantic will pay taxes in India and the U.S. on completion. The person also said that the new deal structure is more tax efficient. 

Moreover, iGATE-Apax are not paying a non-compete fee to Patni's founders as part of the deal, he added. 

A new owner of the outsourcing pioneer is likely to capitalize on a demand revival for outsourcing services after Indian software firms were hit hard by 2008's recession-led cutback in technology spending. 

Sources had told Dow Jones Newswires in November that the Patni brothers-- Ashok Kumar Patni, Gajendra Kumar Patni and  Narendra Kumar Patni--want to sell their stake of about 46% in the technology company, while General Atlantic wants to sell its holding of about 17%. 

The consortium, if successful, will need to make a mandatory open offer for a further 20% stake in Patni Computer under Indian takeover rules. The rules require any acquirer of more than 15% in a company to make an open offer. 

Analysts say the Patni family wants to exit the company in order to monetize its holdings and diversify assets beyond a sector that remains exposed to a weak global economy, while General Atlantic's investment has gone beyond its timeline. It bought into Patni Computer in 2002. 

An email sent to  Narendra Patni and  Abhay Havaldar, managing director of General Atlantic in Mumbai, went unanswered. 

Patni Computer has lagged behind more recent entrants to the outsourcing business, such as  Infosys Technologies Ltd.,  Wipro Ltd. and old rival Tata Consultancy Services Ltd., in benefiting from the boom in services since 1999, when western firms employed cheap Indian programmers to rewrite their software ahead of the new millennium. 

 Write to  Bijou George at bijou.george@dowjones.com 