NEW YORK—The falcons at John F. Kennedy International Airport are out of work. From early May through September for 15 years, they've been swooping and stooping around the runways, scaring off gulls and geese that might otherwise get sucked into jet engines. This year the falcons won't be flying. JFK has canceled their contract. 

John Kellermann is unemployed, too. He was the airport's head falconer. One dismal Sunday morning, he was standing as close as he could to his old workplace, on a clam-strewn shore in Far Rockaway.

"See where those brant are going?" Mr. Kellermann said. A flock of small geese was pumping westward above Jamaica Bay. "They're heading right out over the airport."

In the distance, as a Korean Air jet thundered toward takeoff, the geese crossed one of aviation's more bizarre dividing lines—out of a national bird sanctuary and smack into a busy flight path.

The awkwardness of its location led JFK to become the first and only commercial airport in the U.S. ever to try falconry. The idea was to teach the local birds nesting in the sanctuary that a flight over the airport fence might turn them into lunch for a bird of prey.

Falconers became fixtures at JFK, roaming it with lots of publicity. That was before the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey's latest budget crisis. Now JFK's operator has cut short by a year its $3 million, five-year contract with Falcon Environmental Services Inc., of Ontario. It's negotiating (without bids) to award the job of banishing birds to the U.S. Department of Agriculture.

The USDA doesn't employ falcons. Its main technique for getting rid of birds from airports isn't shooing but shooting—with shotguns.

"Falconry is just expensive," says Martin Lowney, director of the USDA's wildlife-control service for New York state. "Compared to falconry, shooting is more economical and more effective."

Mr. Lowney confirmed the talks but wouldn't name the USDA's price. The Port Authority didn't return calls seeking comment. Meanwhile, apart from causing occasional crashes, birds are doing $715 million in damage to airplanes every year, the Federal Aviation Administration estimates. From 2000 to 2008, birds were to blame for 30 accidents recorded at JFK, more than at any other airport in the country. 

Falcons, some think, are worth the extra expense—John Tanacredi for one. For 24 years, until 2002, he was an ecologist for the National Park Service, stationed in Jamaica Bay's bird sanctuary.

"Remove falconry? That's the most asinine thing they can do," says Mr. Tanacredi, who left the park service and now teaches at Dowling College on Long Island. "You're near a refuge. Extraordinary efforts need to be made."

The park service "has no position" on that, a spokeswoman says. All the same, bureaucracies have been squabbling over JFK's birds since 1975, when a DC-10 hit some gulls and ditched in Jamaica Bay.

The bay, once a sewage sump, came to life in the past 40 years. As flights into JFK multiplied, so did a colony of laughing gulls in a marsh at the foot of a runway. In 1991, the Port Authority brought in the USDA to rid the airport of gulls. The USDA shot 14,886 that year. Aircraft bird strikes dropped to 60, from 135 in 1990.

In 1993, an animal-protection group sued to stop the shooting until an environmental impact statement weighed other ideas. The statement, prepared in 1994 by the USDA, wrote off falconry as "unfeasible and ineffective." It also made JFK hire a biologist to oversee bird control. Steve Garber got the job—and hired a falconer anyway. 

Trying out falcons and shotguns together in 1996, he tallied a further drop in bird-plane collisions. "We trained birds to fly around the airport, not over it," says Mr. Garber, now a wildlife consultant. "You don't train a bird to do anything by shooting it." 

But in 1998, a USDA study—its only study ever at JFK—found the opposite: Falcons produced "no difference in the strike rate."

Missing in both cases, Mr. Garber and Mr. Tanacredi suggest, was a scientific control—a situation where falcons work on their own, without guns. Seneca Meadows is a place like that: 290 miles from JFK, it's New York state's biggest garbage dump.

Falcon Environmental, JFK's contractor, went to work there in 2005. At the time, 50,000 Finger Lakes gulls visited daily.

"It was like living in a snow globe," Carrie Rokitka was saying on a wet day at the dump. Ms. Rokitka, 34 years old, stood on a fragrant hill with a falcon named Molly perched on her gloved hand. Trucks were unloading below. Just a few gulls wheeled overhead. 

Ms. Rokitka removed Molly's hood. The falcon took off and soared. Seconds later, the gulls were scattering.

"You see the results," Ms. Rokitka said. She flew falcons at JFK before moving upstate to keep gulls from dropping chicken bones on farms. "You might say JFK had a higher purpose," she added.

Back on Jamaica Bay's shore, John Kellermann, who is 48, was having similar thoughts. He worked as a New York City policeman for 20 years, running "buy and bust" drug operations. Then he retired and joined the bird-disaster-prevention patrol at the airport.

"Suppose gulls are clamming, dropping clams on the runway to open them," he said. "You put up a falcon and they clear out. I know it works. It's like putting a shark in the water at the beach."

Even after the USDA questioned falcons' value in 1998, JFK flew falcons for 12 more years. Then, last December, the department produced a new report. It was largely about culling geese after US Airways Flight 1549 ditched in the Hudson River in 2009. But again, the USDA deemed falconry too costly—and again cited its 1998 study as proof. 

This time, though, JFK has shot down falconry for keeps, and left Mr. Kellermann looking for a job.

"I miss the airport," he said as an osprey sailed by on course for the control tower. "But I'd work in a garbage dump if I could. I loved working with those birds."

 Write to  Barry Newman at barry.newman@wsj.com 