New York's week of contemporary art auctions came to an upbeat close Friday, with collectors taking home more than $700 million of new art at Sotheby's, Christie's and Phillips de Pury & Co. The total trounced the previous week's $400 million series of Impressionist and modern sales and highlighted the leading role contemporary sales are playing in the overall recovery of the art market.

The field of contemporary art is perennially volatile, stocked with artists whose claims to historical significance aren't yet firmly fixed. The risks of this arena were a turn-off during recession, but now adrenaline seems to be pumping back: This week alone, a half-dozen works sold for over $20 million apiece.

Andy Warhol was the week's unrivaled star. His Pop silkscreens from 1963-64 garnered the top prices at each of the three houses, with Christie's getting $38.4 million for his "Self-Portrait"; Phillips $27 million for "Liz No. 5"; and Sotheby's $20.2 million for "Sixteen Jackies." In several cases, the auction houses had locked in guaranteed bidders beforehand; that involves asking bidders to pledge an undisclosed sum for a work in exchange for a cut of any additional profits should another bidder offer more.

One fresh Warhol twist: Bidders paid greater attention to his later, lower-profile series of shadowy abstracts. His 1978 "Shadow-Red" sold for $4.8 million at Sotheby's, more than five times its high estimate. Donald Bryant, a Napa Valley winery owner and Museum of Modern Art trustee, shrugged upon losing out: "Too rich for my blood."

More bidders were also vying for Warhol's later collaborative paintings with the much younger Jean-Michel Basquiat: On Thursday, a phone bidder paid $7 million for their 1985 "Third Eye," priced to sell for up to $3 million.

Among other artists, Wayne Thiebaud's sweet-shop paintings at Sotheby's, including his $2.7 million "Candies," drew Japanese buyers, while Chinese and Taiwanese who have bought Warhol in the past added pieces by Jeff Koons and relative newcomer Mark Bradford. Israelis, venturing beyond recent favorites such as Marc Chagall, took home pieces like John Chamberlain's untitled $602,500 sculpture at Sotheby's.

Colorful abstract paintings by Bay Area painter Richard Diebenkorn and Japanese artist Yayoi Kusama fared well, as did conceptual sculptures like Félix González-Torres's "Untitled (Aparicion)," a $1.6 million stack of papers printed to look like a partly sunny sky.

Among the unsold works were Tom Wesselman's Pop collages and Willem de Kooning's swirling abstracts. One exception: television-commercial producer Stavros Merjos got into a bidding war on Wednesday over de Kooning's "Woman and Child" (1967-68) and wound up paying Christie's $6.5 million for it, over its $5.5 million high estimate.

 Write to  Kelly Crow at kelly.crow@wsj.com 