OTTAWA—Will Canadians be able to maintain their living standards when they retire? Probably not, according to a recent study. 

With the share of private-sector workers with pension coverage on the decline and government benefits for seniors lagging earnings growth, Canadians now in their 20s and early 30s face a bleak retirement. 

C.D. Howe Institute, a think-tank that has published several other reports on pensions, found in the study that the proportion of Canadians who won't have the financial resources to replace 75% of pre-retirement consumption could increase to more than two in five over the next 40 years, from about one in six currently. 

Richer Canadians are most at risk as they rely most on voluntary savings in retirement. But even poorer ones—who, because of government benefits, are generally protected against substantial declines in living standards—will also likely be affected, it said. 

The report comes amid concerns Canadians aren't saving enough for retirement, and as household balance sheets become increasingly stretched. 

Pensions were the key topic on the agenda at a recent meeting of federal and provincial finance ministers, where they agreed in principle to create pooled registered pension plans that small-business employees and the self-employed can participate in. 

The traditional yardstick has been that Canadians may need 60%-70% of what they had been earning during their working lives to live comfortably in retirement. But with people living longer, many argue the figure could be as high as 75%-85%. 

Canada's retirement system has generally supported postretirement consumption relatively well, and only about 16% of recent retirees "are in circumstances that imply a substantial reduction in their standard of living after retirement," the C.D. Howe Institute report said. On average, public pensions, registered savings plans and home equity have allowed recent retirees to maintain their average work-life standards of living when they retire. 

But the picture for the future is different. The proportion of newly retired individuals unable to replace at least three-quarters of their average pre-retirement consumption could nearly triple over the next 40 years, the report said. 

"If current trends persist, by the 2046-50 period, about 45% of workers currently aged between 25 and 30 years would not meet our 75% threshold—a jump of nearly 30 percentage points from those who reached retirement in the last five years," it warned. 

It estimated that one in five newly retired seniors in the lowest 20% earnings spectrum won't meet the 75% consumption replacement target by 2046-50. The figure is much higher for those in the top 20%: the study said more than 50% of those retiring after 2025, and almost 70% of those retiring in 2050, won't meet the 75% benchmark. 

"These numbers are large enough to justify a conclusion that in order to maintain their standard of living in retirement, many workers may require a better balance between consumption before and after retirement," the report said. 

Those in their late 20s and early 30s will have the greatest need in this regard. 

"The level of retirement preparedness of a large number of working Canadians, particularly in the younger generations, exposes them to a significant risk of lower living standards in retirement," the report said. "Policymakers and private pension providers alike should direct their attention to reforms that can mitigate this risk." 

 Write to  Nirmala Menon at Nirmala.Menon@dowjones.com 