The U.S. government is in danger of reaching its self-imposed "debt ceiling." The potential results for investors: anything from falling short-term interest rates to spiking long-term rates and a weakening dollar—or even all three. 

First, some background. The national debt is fast approaching $14.3 trillion, the limit established by Congress last year. It is a technical matter, but it could have real-world implications: Congress will have to raise the limit sometime this spring or the government won't be able to issue new bonds, putting it at risk of defaulting on its obligations. 

Usually this is perfunctory—the debt ceiling has been raised 80 times since 1940, most recently last February. 

But hard political lines are being drawn now, with Republicans demanding spending cuts and Democrats saying the debt limit shouldn't be tied to budget negotiations.

The U.S. is only about $335 billion away from the debt ceiling, and on Jan. 6 Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner estimated the ceiling would be reached between March 31 and May 16. 

The debate comes at an inopportune time. With investors fixated on the growing debt woes of Greece, Ireland and Portugal, a protracted battle over the debt ceiling in the U.S. could unnerve the markets, causing a rise in the yields investors demand to hold U.S. Treasury securities, according to  Katherine Klingensmith, a strategist at UBS Wealth Management Research.

The last time the U.S. faced a debt-ceiling crisis of this magnitude was in 1996. In just a month's time, the yield on the 10-year Treasury rose nearly a full percentage point, from 5.58% to 6.46%, as the political parties wrangled over how to fix the problem.

Even if the debt ceiling is reached this time, the Treasury has tools at its disposal to keep the government from defaulting on its obligations, though they aren't unlimited. It can stop issuing bonds that don't go directly to the market and exist primarily in accounting ledgers, including those that would go to the so-called G-fund—a money-market fund in government retirement plans—and the Civil Service Retirement Fund. 

Treasury also can wind down the Supplemental Financing Program, which was instituted during the early stages of the financial crisis to help the Fed manage its balance sheet by having Treasury issue short-term government debt and parking the proceeds at the Fed. 

All told, those steps could free up $450 billion in borrowing power. "There's a lot of maneuvering Treasury can do to get to July or August," says  David Greenlaw, chief U.S. fixed-income economist at Morgan Stanley.

Some market watchers don't expect the debt ceiling to become a major issue. Since both political parties know that failure to raise the ceiling could unnecessarily roil the markets and eventually lead to default, many market watchers expect a deal to get done before it becomes a problem.

"Investors are more worried about Portugal than the debt ceiling now in the U.S.," says  Jeffrey Rubin, director of research at Birinyi Associates Inc. "It's almost a given that it will be passed."

But the longer the debate continues, the greater the risk that the markets will take notice. "There's a lot of complacency right now," says  Aneta Markowska, a senior U.S. economist at Société Générale. "If we're into April and Treasury has exhausted other methods to buy time, then at that point it would become a big risk for the market."

The fallout could be greater now than in the past. In 1996, the debt-ceiling flap came as the Fed was in the process of lowering interest rates from 6% on July 5, 1995 to 5.25% by Jan. 31, 1996, boosting the desirability of U.S. bonds. Now short-term rates are as low as they can go, and 10-year Treasury yields have gained 1.03 percentage points since Oct. 8. 

The holders of U.S. debt, meanwhile, are different today. Back then Japan, the United Kingdom and Germany—in that order—were the biggest international holders of U.S. debt. Now it is China, Japan and the U.K. That makes it difficult to predict what the market reaction will be. 

"This is so unprecedented," says  Aaron Gurwitz, chief investment officer at Barclays Wealth. "If it becomes more of an issue, it hastens the day when people will no longer rely on the dollar as a haven."

One possible outcome could sting holders of short-term bonds and money-market funds. Winding down the Supplemental Financing Program would pull about $200 billion in short-term government debt from the market, about 10% of its total. That debt is primarily bought by a captive audience—money-market funds or those who need to use the bills as collateral in other debt markets. 

The immediate consequence: Short-term rates would fall even lower than they are now, as investors chase fewer securities, forcing prices up. That, in turn, would reduce opportunities for investors who typically roll over their short-term holdings as they expire.

When Treasury last took this step, in September 2009, three-month rates fell to 0.02% on Nov. 19 from an already low 0.13% on Sept. 15. 

"I would not be surprised if sometime between now and the end of the month they stop issuing SFP bills," says  Alex Roever, head of short-term fixed income strategy for J.P. Morgan Securities LLC. 

The best move for investors, Mr. Gurwitz says, would be to diversify their holdings of dollar-denominated securities to include other developed nations, including Canada and the U.K., and stable emerging markets.

 Write to  Ben Levisohn at ben.levisohn@wsj.com 