A bluff-top house overlooking the ocean in Montecito, Calif., near Santa Barbara, has sold for $27 million.

The seller of the home, which was not on the market, was Carole Gaba, who owned it through a trust. Her recently deceased husband, Harold Gaba, co-owned Concord Music Group, which later became part of Village Roadshow Entertainment Group, whose credits include the films "Gran Torino" and "Happy Feet." The 1.4-acre property has a four-bedroom, 4,200-square-foot house built in 1915, according to public records. It is near Ty Warner's property. The buyer was a trust; Barton Clemens Jr., the trustee of that trust, declined to identify the trust's beneficiary. 

  Randy Solakian of Coldwell Banker was involved in the deal. 

Broadway producer Jon Platt is asking $13 million for his Frank Gehry-designed home in Los Angeles.

The four-time Tony Award winner, whose latest musical, "The Book of Mormon," opens Saturday, bought the Brentwood house, above, in 2006. The house was built in 1989, and Mr. Platt spent several years restoring and renovating it, with input from Mr. Gehry. The property houses a "village" of irregular structures, including one with a three-story skylit space. The property has a reflecting pond, an Olympic-length lap pool and an orchard. 

Mr. Platt, whose credits include "Angels in America," said in a statement that he has always maintained that "one isn't so much the owner of a Gehry house as its steward." Aaron Kirman and Jeff Hyland of Hilton & Hyland, a Christie's affiliate, have the listing. 

Dennis Quaid has bought a lakefront home with a helipad in Austin, Texas, for $8.5 million.

The actor has said in the past that he and his wife want to raise their children in her hometown of Austin. The home measures about 12,500 square feet and sits on nearly half an acre, according to public records. It was built in 1970 but remodeled recently, and connects to Lake Austin, where it has a boat dock, via a bridge over a street. Photographs show a fountain in the driveway and a pool.

The house was not on the market. Coldwell Banker United's  Marielle Quaid, Mr. Quaid's sister-in-law, represented Mr. Quaid;  Eric Moreland of Moreland Properties represented the seller. 

Earlier this month, Mr. Quaid put his eight-bedroom, nine-bath home on two acres in the Los Angeles neighborhood of Pacific Palisades on the market for $16.9 million.  Kathrin Nicholson of Westside Estate Agency has that listing. 

—Juliet Chung

—Email: privateproperties@wsj.com