If you weren't there, what you need to realize about the 1960s is that much of it actually happened in the '70s—from clothes to music, and especially art.

In New York, for example, newly graduated art students began to gravitate downtown, lured by low rents and lofts, neglecting big spaces that had ceased to have their industrial functions. While Andy Warhol was holding court at the Factory at Union Square and Max's Kansas City, the new avant-garde of painters, dancers, musicians and filmmakers were colonizing the area south of Houston Street—SoHo. Its denizens cared and were worried about Vietnam, the draft, the Civil Rights Movement, and burgeoning feminism. They distrusted the gallery system, recording and movie industries, and saw themselves as a politicized part of a counterculture—accepting the music, drugs, dress and sexual behavior of their peers, but capable of joining together, for example, to fight the expansion of an eight-lane motorway that would have demolished their neighborhood.

Three shows have just opened in London that capture the countercultural spirit, not just of these times, but (perhaps surprisingly) of an earlier era as well.

The Barbican Art Gallery has mounted an extraordinarily ambitious show of what resulted from this, "Laurie Anderson, Trisha Brown, Gordon Matta-Clark: Pioneers of the Downtown Scene, New York, 1970s." It's ambitious because all three, who were friends, veered off in the direction of performance, which I suppose can be seen as the quintessential art form of these years; and dancers perform three of (now internationally celebrated) choreographer Trisha Brown's wonderfully weird works every day until the show ends on May 22. These include her astonishing 1971 piece, "Walking on the Wall."

Matta-Clark (who died in 1978) was fascinating, and has the lion's share of this exhibition. The neglected son of a Chilean Surrealist painter and godchild of Marcel Duchamp, he followed his father in studying architecture, an interest revealed in many of the works displayed here. (The sole flaw in this large show is that so much of the work on the walls is, by its very nature, documentation rather than the work itself.) In 1971, a true innovator in connecting food and art, Matta-Clark started the famous restaurant "Food" on Prince Street, with really appetizing-looking dishes such as sashimi and bouillabaisse on the menu really appetizing-looking dishes such as "gazpacho" and "bouillabaisse" on the menu with "used car stew" and "liver dumpling stew and Alka Seltzer."

Laurie Anderson trained as a violinist, began a pre-med course, shifted to art history and initiated several street-based works before recording "O Superman" in 1980 and achieving number two on the British pop charts. She's collaborated with everyone from Wim Wenders to Robert LePage. Here she's represented by loads of clever sound pieces and has remade her zany, zooming 1977-78 piece, "The Electric Chair." 

With some of her best work made in the same period, the American feminist artist and activist Nancy Spero (1926-2009) is being shown by the Serpentine Gallery (until May 2) in an adaptation of the show initiated by the Centre Pompidou in Paris. Spero created her own visual language, in which the units were not only pained-looking faces, often with protruding tongues, but also quotations from everything from mythology and Etruscan frescos to fashion magazines. 

She and her husband, painter Leon Golub, spent a good deal of time in France. She rejected the most important American post-War art movements of Abstract Expressionism and Pop as much, I'd guess, for their domination by male artists as because she was trained in the figurative tradition, and fascinated by what she discovered in ethnographic museums. Spero was fired up by the Vietnam War, but it is obvious to the viewer that she really regarded all war as just another aspect of the bad influence of maleness.

As you enter the Serpentine, you see her "Maypole Take No Prisoners II" (2008). Suspended from the central pole that stretches up into a round skylight are colored ribbons and lengths of chain, each ending in one of her (mostly) pained faces. The piece has a paradoxically celebratory feeling. Her epic work, "Azur" (2002) fills the central room with its 39 panels of collaged, hand-printed and painted paper, some depicting figures familiar from her other work, from stylized classical friezes to photographed picketers. The colors are so vivid and lush that I found the work almost decorative—pretty. 

The National Gallery is also contributing to our knowledge of less known or under-estimated American artists with a Room 1 show "An American Experiment: George Bellow and the Ashcan Painters" until May 30. The Ashcan school was a loose group of painters, who flourished in the early years of the 20th century, and took their name from their realist attitude to their subjects, such as the poorer neighborhoods of New York. Many had backgrounds as newspaper illustrators, and had studied with Robert Henri (1865-1929) at the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts, and followed him when he moved to New York.

They had in common that they were in rebellion against the dominant school of Impressionism, with its light colors and genteel subjects. The Ashcanners liked somber, darker hues and darker, urban subject matter. Poverty and prostitutes were more in their line than picnics and women with parasols. However, this very attractive National Gallery show, somewhat under-represents the gritty side of the group.

Their most prominent painter, George Bellows (1882-1925), is best known for his later, sweaty boxing scenes. But he first attracted notice for some of the paintings of the type in this show, wonderful depictions of New York in the snow, with their strong lighting and vivid contrasts of the textures of the blue/white snow with the grimy city. Among the seven paintings by Bellows is the 1909 "Nude Girl, Miss Leslie Hall," a sexy big woman, whose bulk he lovingly emphasizes. In the 1910s he began to paint non-urban landscapes, with some terrific views of the palisades of the Hudson. 

Oddly, the best of Bellow shown here has affinities to Impressionism. The vivid palette of his "The Big Dory" (1913) and its dramatic lighting are untypical of the Ashcan school. However, its forward movement and attention to the costume and muscular detail of the workmen, while only rapidly sketching their faces, is echoed here in the work of his teacher. Henri's charming 1910 portrait of a child-homage to the inspiration of Frans Hals, "Dutch Joe (Jopie van Slouten)," is painted entirely with rapid, rough brushstrokes.

 Write to  Paul Levy at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 