SEOUL—Hana Financial Group Inc. Chairman  Kim Seung-yu on Friday said the lender is considering its options for the proposed 4.69 trillion won ($4.31 billion) acquisition of Lone Star Funds' 51% stake in Korea Exchange Bank in an effort to keep the deal alive despite a major regulatory setback. 

The Financial Services Commission on Thursday said it likely won't be able to rule on the deal by a May 24 deadline because of a procedural issue over whether Lone Star is qualified to be KEB's largest shareholder. Either party can walk away from the deal if the transaction isn't completed by that date. 

"There's about 10 days left," Mr. Kim said, "so both sides are discussing what good options there may be for the deal." 

Hana's shares fell 15% to 37,850 won ($34.78)—the lowest since late November—in reaction to the FSC ruling, as investors worry the deal is on the verge of collapse. Acquiring KEB would help Hana compete with rivals like  Woori Finance Holdings Co.,  KB Financial Group Inc. and  Shinhan Financial Group Co., and Hana's strong retail-banking business will be complemented well by KEB's strength in foreign exchange and corporate financing. 

Speaking to Dow Jones Newswires, the executive said Hana remains focused on trying to find a way to make the deal happen despite the regulatory setback, and added that it isn't considering a bid for the South Korean government's 57% stake in Woori Finance Holdings Co. that is expected to be put up for sale again as early as next week. 

After a meeting with the board of directors later Friday, Mr. Kim said that if needed, he is willing to meet with Lone Star Chairman  John Grayken to find a solution, including extending the deadline. He declined to disclose the duration of the extension that the firm might seek. 

"I believed that (a Hana-KEB tie-up) was the best possible combination," Mr. Kim said. "I thought KEB had the infrastructure to help Hana expand abroad, and I still believe this. KEB is still valuable." 

When asked whether Hana might return excess capital it has raised to finance the transaction to shareholders should it fail to close the KEB deal, the executive said on separate occasions that the firm would consider paying a dividend as well as a share buyback. 

The company could also consider acquiring a bank overseas or strengthening its non-banking operations with the excess capital if the KEB deal collapses, Kim said.

Mr. Kim said he will brief the board of directors later Friday and discuss how to proceed with the deal. 

Hana was considered the most likely bidder for Woori last year when the government launched the stake sale, as the combination would have allowed Hana to leapfrog other rivals and become the dominant Korean bank. But Hana surprised the market by striking a deal with Lone Star in November. 

The deal was widely expected to be approved in March, and officials at the FSC had acknowledged as much at the time. But that changed when the local Supreme Court overturned a Seoul High Court decision to acquit Lone Star on charges of market manipulation and sent it back to the High Court for a new verdict. A guilty verdict would mean Lone Star is unfit to be KEB's largest shareholder, which complicates the deal. 

Lone Star has been fighting charges that it and its employees manipulated the stock price of KEB's then-listed credit-card unit in 2003 in order to engineer a cheaper merger between it and the bank. The Supreme Court's decision subsequently threw the deal into a limbo, with the FSC refusing to rule on whether to allow Hana's acquisition of the KEB stake until it can rule on Lone Star's standing. The regulator also didn't give any guidelines on when it might be able to rule. 

While analysts say the deal may be in jeopardy, some say that Hana and Lone Star may look to extend the deadline in order to keep the deal alive. 

"The problem stems from Lone Star's qualification, and the fund will have a tough time finding a new buyer unless there's a final ruling from the courts...and Hana's 14,250 won per share offer will still be attractive from Lone Star's perspective," Daishin Securities said in a report. 

 Write to  Se Young Lee at vincent.lee@dowjones.com 