A new estimate of the economic damage wrought by the Japan disaster put the figure as high as $300 billion, while insurers continued to offer early estimates of their exposure.

On Monday, disaster-modeling company Risk Management Solutions Inc. estimated the earthquake and tsunami will lead to economic losses of $200 billion to $300 billion.

Analysts expect about 10% to 20% of the economic cost of the earthquake to be borne by private insurers and reinsurers, most of which have enough capital to withstand the losses. Still, with economic losses potentially exceeding $200 billion, the event would still be one of the costliest disasters in history for the insurance industry. 

  Swiss Re said Monday it expects claims costs of $1.2 billion from the earthquake and tsunami in Japan, but cautioned that its estimate is subject to a higher-than-usual degree of uncertainty and may need to be adjusted as the extent of the insured losses becomes clearer. 

The reinsurance company said the incident at the Fukushima nuclear power plant is unlikely to result in a significant direct loss for the non-life insurance industry. Earthquake and tsunami damage for nuclear facilities in Japan is largely provided by the government.

  American International Group Inc.
AIG


1.02
%




 last Friday estimated its property and casualty business would have to pay $700 million in claims arising from the Japan earthquake and tsunami, excluding $500 million in catastrophe reserves its Japanese operations earlier established for earthquake damage to people's homes. 

  Munich Re,
MURGY


0.37
%




 the world's largest reinsurance company by premiums, and  Hannover Re
HVRRY


-0.60
%




 both said on Monday that it was too early to provide an estimate. French reinsurer Scor SE has said its pretax losses will likely be less than 185 million ($262.1 million).

  Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway Inc., which has an agreement to assume a 20% share of Swiss Re's world-wide property and casualty business, is likely to face claims from the Japanese quake. In addition to the Swiss Re deal, Berkshire's two large reinsurance businesses are likely to have exposures from Japanese disaster coverage they sold. The Omaha, Neb., conglomerate so far hasn't provided estimates of its quake-related claims but is expected to disclose them when it reports first-quarter results.

Analysts from Barclays Capital said Berkshire is likely to see a $1 billion to $2 billion impact, a loss the cash-rich company can easily absorb.

In recent days, estimates have emerged concerning the impact of the country's travails elsewhere. 

The World Bank warned this week that Japan's disaster could cause exports from developing nations in East Asia to slow by as much as 1.5% as manufacturers in those countries suffer from supply-chain disruptions. Korean firms are facing higher prices for memory chips and exporters of cars in Thailand say current supplies of components imported from Japan will last through April, the World Bank said. 

  General Motors Co.
GM


-0.85
%




's South Korean unit said Monday that it will reduce production to prepare for a possible shortage of key components, following a similar decision by Renault SA's Korean subsidiary.

In addition, one-fourth of the region's long-term debt is denominated in yen, and appreciation of the yen increases the cost of servicing that debt, the World Bank report said. 

On a brighter note for the insurance industry, the events in Japan may mark a turning point for reinsurers, which for several years have suffered from declining prices for the cover they provide. 

"This event could stabilize reinsurance pricing in the months ahead as reinsurers' capital and capacity has been reduced by a string of catastrophic events during the past six months," said ratings firm Moody's Investors Service in a recent report. 

Moody's anticipates strong reinsurance-market conditions in Japan for renewals at the start of April, as well as in Australia and New Zealand, where renewals occur midyear. The rater also said that share buybacks among global reinsurers, which were heavy during 2010, will grind to a virtual halt as companies preserve capital for the coming Atlantic hurricane season. 

—Ulrike Dauer, Art Mooradian , Erik Holm and Matt Jarzemsky contributed to this article.

 Write to  Anita Greil at anita.greil@dowjones.com, Shai Oster at shai.oster@wsj.com and Serena Ng at serena.ng@wsj.com 