ROME—Col. Moammar Gadhafi stepped up his calls for opposition forces to surrender in an interview published on Tuesday by an Italian newspaper in which the Libyan strongman also dismissed pressure from French President Nicolas Sarkozy as a sign of "mental disorder" in the French leader.

In the interview published by Il Giornale, which is owned by the family of Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, Col. Gadhafi struck a defiant tone, seemingly emboldened by the inroads his troops have recently made in pushing rebel forces back to their strongholds in eastern Libya. The interview couldn't be independently verified.

"They have no hope. The cause for them is lost by now. There are only two possibilities: to surrender or to escape," Col. Gadhafi was quoted as saying in the interview, which the newspaper said took place inside the fortified compound of Bab al Azizia in Tripoli.

Col. Gadhafi also lashed back at European leaders who have recently imposed economic sanctions on Libya, freezing Libyan assets across Europe, including stakes in European companies held by the Libyan Central Bank and the country's sovereign wealth fund. France has formally recognized the sovereignty of a main rebel group based in Benghazi, and Mr. Sarkozy has urged the United Nations to pass a resolution to take military action against the regime.

"I think Mr. Sarkozy has a problem of mental disorder. He has said things that can only come from a madman," Col. Gadhafi was quoted as saying. A spokesman for Mr. Sarkozy declined to comment.

Col. Gadhafi also said he felt betrayed by European leaders who denounced his crackdown after years of courting his regime for access to Libyan oil fields.

"I'm really shocked by the conduct of my European friends," Col. Gadhafi said, adding that European opposition to his regime had "endangered and damaged a series of major accords regarding security and economic cooperation."

Libya has long been a pillar of Italy's economy, supplying Italians with a quarter of their oil and 10% of their natural gas. Libya's central bank and sovereign wealth fund, the Libyan Investment Authority, have also taken large stakes in Italian companies, including Italy's biggest bank,  UniCredit
UNCFF


-1.02
%




 SpA. In 2008, Mr. Berlusconi traveled to Libya to apologize for Italy's colonial rule of the North African country and signed the so-called "friendship treaty" that pledged $5 billion in reparations to Libya.

Col. Gadhafi said his once-close relationship with Mr. Berlusconi had frayed, adding he was no longer in contact with the Italian premier. When asked about the future of Libya's ties to Italian oil giant  Eni SpA, which has been the biggest foreign oil company operating in the North African country for decades, Col. Gadhafi said the "Libyan people will reassess these economic and financial ties."