Robert and Nancy Schulman make no niceties: They reward progress, not need. 

The couple this year are giving $250,000 to a number of New York City foster care and domestic violence organizations for two programs aimed at one goal: getting people to become productive members of their communities. 

More than a decade ago, Ms. Schulman, a psychologist and social worker, began leading support groups for domestic-violence victims. After selling his asset management business in New York in 2000, her husband wanted in on the project. In 2005, the couple founded a charity called Of Home, Family and Future, which gives grants to women and children who were affected by domestic violence. 

They bought a three-family home in Westchester for domestic-violence survivors and their children to live there for up to five years. 

"We were clear that this was not a shelter. This was a step beyond that," Mr. Schulman says. "Our approach is to fund a small number of people, and invest enough resources to help them change their lives."

Now the couple are looking to use a similar incentive-based program to help children in foster care graduate from college. 

"Only 2% of kids in foster care complete a college education," Mr. Schulman says. "We're trying to change the odds." 

They say that without additional monetary and mentoring support, children in foster care tend to drop out of community college or leave state or city colleges by Thanksgiving of their first year at school. 

"We don't accept government money so we don't have to go through the bureaucratic nightmare of getting money and Rob and I pay all of the program's administrative costs so all the money goes to the kids," Ms. Schulman says. 

The couple have formed partnerships with foster-care agencies and other social services groups in New York to identify students headed to college but in need of extra support to cover books, computers and other expenses. 

Once the students are at college, the couple pair them with volunteer mentors whose jobs is to offer advice, help the students with academics and doling out money awarded by the Schulmans. 

"Give them someone who has money and they'll develop a relationship with that person," Mr. Schulman says. "They think they're working the system, we think they're falling into our plan."

The Schulmans spend $8,000 to $12,000 a year per student and are currently working with 10 students, two of whom are on track to graduate next year. 

So far, foster-care agencies say their plan seems to be working. 

"The system spends a ton of money and time when kids are in our care and then wave goodbye," says Bill Baccaglini, CEO of the New York Foundling, a nonprofit foster-care agency with about 1,000 children in boarding care. 

Mr. Baccaglini is working with the Schulmans to support two students under care at the New York Foundling who attend the State University of New York at Old Westbury College and Sullivan Community College in Loch Sheldrake, N.Y. 

"This is where the system has to go," he says. "Without this kind of extra support these kids are going to wind up back in the same communities that gave rise to behavior in first place."

 Write to  Shelly Banjo at shelly.banjo@wsj.com 