NEW DELHI – India's Ministry of Environment & Forests Tuesday said it may approve Lavasa Corp.'s housing project on certain conditions--despite alleging there have been grave violations of environmental laws--raising hopes construction of the township could resume at some point. 

The environment ministry's signal that it is willing to approve the project will be welcomed in corporate India, which has become increasingly concerned about the rejection of previously approved projects in a country where poor infrastructure is weighing on economic growth. 

On top of existing obstacles to development, from corruption to land acquisition problems, the sudden and strict application of India's environmental laws--sometimes retroactively--risked bringing infrastructure development in India to a virtual standstill. 

In addition to Lavasa, environment minister Jairam Ramesh has stalled U.K. firm Vedanta's proposed bauxite mining operation and ordered fresh scrutiny of a $12 billion steel plant planned by South Korean firm Posco. 

On Nov. 25, the Ministry of Environment asked Lavasa to stop work on the 5,000 acre luxury residential and commercial project near India's financial hub of Mumbai, citing environmental violations. Lavasa subsequently challenged the order in the Bombay High Court. 

The ministry's report, submitted to the High Court Tuesday, gives Lavasa founder Hindustan Construction Ltd. room to negotiate the penalties imposed on it. However, the environment ministry has sought a continuation of the stay on work until Lavasa meets its conditions. 

The environment ministry said the project has led to the cutting off of hills in the area and the disruption of water flows. However, given the investment committed to Lavasa and employment creation, it could clear the project if Lavasa pays a "substantial penalty". 

Apart from a penalty, the ministry has also asked Lavasa to set up a fund, to be called the Environmental Restoration Fund, with a "sufficiently large corpus" endowed by Lavasa, which would be run by an independent body under the supervision of the environment ministry. The ministry also wants "stringent" terms and conditions imposed on further development. 

While the environment ministry broadly outlined the strings attached to the project's approval, it didn't spell out the size of the penalty or the environmental fund. 

Dismissing Lavasa's charges of dishonest intentions, the report said the action on Lavasa was proposed "without personal bias or prejudice to concerned individuals." 

In a statement, Lavasa said the ministry's report was more about a jurisdiction tussle between the provincial government of Maharashtra, where the project is situated, and the federal government, rather than substantive environmental concerns. 

Lavasa said in a statement the environment ministry didn't apply objective norms to evaluate the project and ignored data provided by the company on steps taken to protect the environment. The statement said the ministry's report magnified minor environmental flaws. 

It added that the company's lawyers are studying the environment ministry's report and would advise the company on options available to it in the case. 

 Write to  Prasenjit Bhattacharya at prasenjit.bhattacharya@dowjones.com and Geeta Anand at geeta.anand@wsj.com 