NEWARK—Not even $100 million can add extra urgency to the process of finding this city's next schools chief. 

Gov. Chris Christie said Thursday that a superintendent for the state's largest school system won't be named until May—nine months after he first announced his search. May also marks nearly nine months since the founder of Facebook, Mark Zuckerberg, pledged $100 million to help turn the troubled school system around. 

Mr. Christie vowed that he wouldn't pick a "go along to get along leader" and that the new chief would "send a strong signal to the community" that major changes are in store for the school system, where per-pupil spending is about $22,000 for the 40,000 students and about half the city's children don't graduate from high school. 

Parents are "sick and tired of the lousy schools they have to send their children to," the governor said at the Ann Street School, which he said his father attended in the 1940s.

The governor and the state's acting education commissioner,  Christopher Cerf, denied that they were behind schedule in picking a superintendent. "The biggest challenge is to make sure we have someone who is not an incrementalist but someone who understands the skills and has the transformative instincts commensurate with the size of the challenge," Mr. Cerf said. 

The job carries challenges unusual to other superintendencies in cities across the country. The state took control of Newark schools 15 years ago, so, Mr. Christie—not Newark's mayor nor a local school board—will be the superintendent's boss. 

"If I were a superintendent candidate, I would be concerned about this governance framework," said  Shavar Jeffries, president of the local school advisory board. "Because inherent to takeover is a tension between where the state is coming from and where the community and parents are." 

Mr. Jeffries knows well how challenging the community tension has been. At a recent forum, which was attended by Mr. Cerf, he asked parents who were yelling at each other over allocating district space to charter schools "not to act like gangsters" and implored them to be respectful of opposing opinions. 

The new superintendent will need to garner community support for bold changes in a city that is often resistant to change, especially since much of that change will now be driven by Mr. Zuckerberg's $100 million, plus another $100 million in matching funds that Newark Mayor  Cory Booker is raising from other wealthy donors—a fact that some residents are wary about. 

"Newark is for good or ill the crown jewel of education reform in New Jersey and that focus is perceived both positively and negatively by Newark residents," said  Derrell Bradford, executive director of Excellent Education for Everyone, an advocacy group that favors vouchers and charter schools and is based in Newark. "There are families who have had long dysfunctional relationships with neighborhood schools. Sure, people want them better, but they don't want them different." 

There is fear about the control of the process by "outsiders"—from the governor to Mr. Zuckerberg to other donors like  Bill Gates—said  Patrick McGuinn, associate professor of political science and education at Drew University, Madison, N.J. Any potential candidates likely recognize that if officials "don't open the process up a bit more and get some buy-in from local stakeholders,...the process and the new superintendent will be viewed as illegitimate," he said. 

The governor wouldn't say how many candidates were being interviewed, but he did say the process involves introducing potential candidates to many community leaders and is ongoing, including during this weekend. 

Months ago,  John King, the deputy commissioner of education in New York, turned down the offer to lead Newark schools, even after  Oprah Winfrey called him at home to urge him to take the job. 

In addition to developing a strategic plan to spend Mr. Zuckerberg's $100 million and the additional $100 million, the new superintendent needs to negotiate a new teacher's contract, which expired last summer. 

"This is the longest we've gone without a contract," said Newark Teachers Union President  Joseph Del Grosso. 