With about 50% of companies already reporting, fourth-quarter profits for the biggest U.S. corporations have been exceptionally strong and 2010 is poised to deliver the third-best full-year gain since 1998—with sharp advances in the telecommunications and energy sectors and a rebound in financial services.

Excluding financial companies, whose losses in 2009 skewed results, weighted earnings for the companies in the Standard & Poor's 500 Index are up 17% on an as-reported basis for companies representing 54% of the group's market value. 

Unlike the initial period of the recovery, when cost cutting strongly boosted profits, the results suggest a solid pickup in spending by businesses and consumers. Sales for the group rose about 9% from a year ago, according to S&P. Job cuts continue to be critical under tight expense controls.

Bolstered by exports and consumer spending, overall U.S. fourth-quarter sales excluding inventories jumped by 7.1%, according to a report Friday by the U.S. Commerce Department. The gain far outpaced the 0.9% increase in the third quarter.

Combined with a decline in imports, "we have a healthier mix" ahead in 2011 for economic performance, said  Brian Jones, an economist at investment bank Société Générale. 

S&P now forecasts fourth-quarter earnings will rise about 32% over a year ago when all 500 companies report, more than three times as fast as its forecast at the outset of this reporting season. Profits then were seen rising 9.8%, with sales expected to be up 6%, according to S&P. 

At roughly this point a year ago, about half-way through earnings season, corporate profits excluding the banks were running about 47% higher than the year-earlier period. Sales growth a year ago was about 5.9%. But at that point, the recovery was just beginning and comparisons were off much lower earnings.

For 2010, S&P estimates profit growth will be about 51%, a percentage gain surpassed only by the previous year's record 243% jump and a 77% gain in 2003, according to S&P.

Financial companies are enjoying the biggest jump in profit gains, albeit over a quarter in 2009 where they as a group lost money, according to S&P. Telecommunications companies that have reported so far saw profits rise 58%; materials companies including steel, mining and chemicals are up 45% and energy concerns are up 40%. For instance,  Chevron Corp.'s
CVX


-0.09
%




 fourth-quarter profit rose 72% on higher oil prices and better refining margins. 

Banks benefited this quarter from greatly diminished write-downs, and less cash set aside for loan losses, and in some cases cash actually released from money previously set aside to cover losses. For instance,  U.S. Bancorp reported fourth-quarter profit of $974 million, up from $602 million a year ago, as cash it had set aside for loan losses declined by 34%. 

The biggest laggards include utilities, down 18%, and health-care companies, down 17%. Columbus, Ohio, utility  American Electric Power Co.
AEP


0.20
%




 posted a 26% decline in profit due to a required refund to customers and employee-severance costs. Pharmaceutical companies are facing patent expirations, slowdown in health-care spending, price cuts in Europe and tougher regulatory hurdles for new products.

One trend that marked 2010 results and continues to crop up this year: job cuts. Drug maker  Abbott Laboratories
ABT


-0.92
%




 last week said it would cut 2% of its work force, or 1,900 jobs, while home-improvement retailer  Lowe's
LOW


-0.28
%




 Cos. said it is eliminating roughly 1,700 store-management positions and hiring 8,000 to 10,000 part-time hourly employees to man the sales floor during weekends.  Boeing Co.
BA


-0.37
%




, struggling to get a new jet into production, said it will lay off 1,100 workers. 

Already this year, 11 banks have closed their doors, on top of 157 banks last year, adding to industry unemployment rolls as new owners consolidate. Meanwhile, several big banks, including  State Street Corp.
STT


0.39
%




 and  American Express Co.
AXP


0.04
%




, also have recently announced layoffs or intentions to cut jobs. 

The sharp rise in energy and raw-materials costs in recent months has only begun to impact results. Companies from  Ford Motor Co.
F


-0.27
%




 to  Colgate-Palmolive Co.
CL


-0.39
%




 say rising commodities prices hit their final-quarter performance and are expected to play a bigger role in results this year.  Delta Air Lines Inc.,
DAL


-1.60
%




 stung by higher jet-fuel prices last quarter, said fuel will be its "biggest issue" this year. Industrial equipment maker  Parker Hannifin Corp.
PH


-0.59
%




 also cited rising costs "across the board" in its fourth-quarter results. 

  Procter & Gamble Co.
PG


-0.14
%




 expects rising costs will cut about $1 billion from earnings in its current fiscal year ending June 30, double the impact it expected at the start of the fiscal year. Commodity costs were up 6% from the previous quarter and 20% higher than a year ago, Chief Executive  Bob McDonald said Thursday.

Grocery-store operator  Supervalu Inc.
SVU


-0.37
%




 has been struggling with rising food costs, and finally said it plans to pass price increases along to its customers. At the same time, it's cutting overhead by closing underperforming stores and cutting corporate staff.

Colgate-Palmolive now expects commodities costs will rise between 8% and 10% in 2011; in October, it projected an increase between 4% and 6% this year. To compensate, the company will continue with its "overhead reduction initiatives," and forecasts prices rising between 1% and 2%. Pricing, Chief Executive  Ian Cook said on a conference call, will be "consistent with what we see happening in the marketplace."

 The Upshot comments on corporate earning trends. 

 Write to  John Shipman at john.shipman@dowjones.com and Paul Vigna at paul.vigna@dowjones.com 