NEW DELHI – Former actress J. Jayalalithaa was set to return to power as chief minister of India's southern state of Tamil Nadu, as voters delivered a setback to the nation's ruling Congress Party and its regional ally, the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam party, according to Indian news channels and Election Commission data.

Ms. Jayalalitha's All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam, or AIADMK party, is set to win a convincing victory, displacing 86-year-old chief minister and DMK leader M. Karunanidhi. The election was widely viewed as a referendum on the DMK and Congress amid a high-profile corruption scandal that has rocked the national government. 

A former DMK minister in the central government was charged by authorities for allegedly favoring some companies in a 2008 mobile phone spectrum sale. Mr. Karunanidhi's daughter Kanimozhi, a member of parliament, has also been charged in the investigation. Both have denied any wrongdoing.

The telecom scandal has paralyzed the Congress party-led central government, stalling all significant legislative activity in New Delhi, and has highlighted risks for Prime Minister Manmohan Singh in relying on the support of outside parties like the DMK to stay in power.

  A Refresher for J. Jayalalithaa on Good Governance  

Congress party spokesman  Manish Tiwari said the results in Tamil Nadu can't be totally attributed to the corruption scandal. "Reducing an election down to one issue would be an oversimplification of the entire process," Mr. Tiwari told NDTV news channel. "There has been a revolving door of alliance governments coming in an out" in Tamil Nadu, he said.

Tamil Nadu is one of India's better-performing states, having grown at a faster rate than the national average for several years. But the current government's popularity waned amid voter concerns about law and order, major electricity shortages in some parts of the state and corruption.

"The people were totally disgusted with the DMK government and they were just waiting for a chance to vent their anger," Ms. Jayalalithaa said in her victory speech to supporters, after waiting for firecrackers in the background to stop bursting. "Once they got the opportunity they showed their anger and resentment in no uncertain terms."

M. Thambi Durai, an AIADMK spokesman, said Ms. Jayalalitha's government will focus on restoring public safety, increasing power supply and improving the state's finances. He said the party expects to form the government on its own, without any need for alliance partners. "We will be focused on the development of the state," Mr. Durai said. "Ours is always a corruption-free regime."

Both leading regional parties turned to populism in their campaigning, promising voters an array of freebies, including blenders, wet grinders, goats, laptops and even gold necklaces. 

Ms. Jayalalithaa, 63, had railed against such populism in 2006, when the DMK's handout of color TVs to voters helped propel it to power. But this time, she embraced it, even going on her party-controlled TV network to read out the list of goodies voters would receive if she came into power. 

Now, Ms. Jayalalithaa will have to deliver all those handouts, at a potentially high cost to the state exchequer.

—Prabha Natarajan contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Amol Sharma at amol.sharma@wsj.com 