MANAMA, Bahrain—U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert Gates made a surprise stop in Bahrain on Friday, landing on a day of huge political protests against a regime that has been a longtime U.S. ally.

Mr. Gates' visit—intended as a show of support for Bahrain's beleaguered royal king—was instantly complicated by the protests, in which police fired tear gas and rubber bullets to break up tens of thousands of protesters. Hundreds were injured.

During his visit to the Gulf monarchy, the defense secretary is expected to take on an unusual diplomatic role, delivering a message of support to the ruling family while encouraging leaders to engage in dialogue with the opposition.

The visit comes as the Obama administration reacts to popular unrest that has already unseated governments in Tunisia and Egypt and sparked an internal war in Libya. On Thursday, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said she would pay visits next week to Tunisia and Egypt to express the administration's support for the "transition to a genuine democracy" in those countries. She also said she would meet with representatives of Libyan rebel groups.

Mr. Gates is also expected to pay visits around the region over next several weeks. "This is going to be the only stop in the region on this particular trip," said Pentagon spokesman Geoff Morrell. "But the secretary wishes to and is planning to call upon other governments in this region in the weeks ahead and have similar discussions with their leadership as well." 

Bahrain is the headquarters of the U.S. Navy's Fifth Fleet, and it is seen by U.S. officials as a key counterweight against Iran. 

"Bahrain is a frontline state in a regional competition with Iran," said a senior defense official. "It's a very, very important strategic partner." 

Friday's demonstrations were just the latest in weeks of protests that pit Shiite demonstrators against the Sunni ruling family. King Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa of Bahrain and Crown Prince Sheikh Salman bin Hamad al-Khalifa have offered to open dialogue with opposition groups, a move U.S. officials say has potential to ease tensions. 

"The administration's judgment is that the path toward stability is to get out ahead of the calls for reform," said the senior defense official.

Unrest in Bahrain has underscored regional fears about wider sectarian unrest. Nearby Saudi Arabia, for instance, has not seen large-scale protests, but smaller demonstrations have occurred in the east, where the country's Shiite minority is concentrated. On Thursday, police in the east fired live ammunition into the air to disperse Shiite protesters.

Mr. Gates's Bahrain visit also reflects the administration's delicate balancing act in the region—showing support to key regional allies while encouraging regimes to engage the opposition. After protests in Bahrain took a bloody turn, leaving seven demonstrators dead, the administration condemned the violence and called for restraint.

While U.S. officials are skeptical about claims that Iran is behind the demonstrations, they do see potential for Iran to reap strategic dividends from regional unrest. 

"We are concerned that the longer this crisis prolongs, the more an opportunity there might be for Iran to create mischief," the senior defense official said. "I don't think we see them as the hidden hand behind this." 

Assistant Secretary of State Jeffrey Feltman recently concluded a week-long visit to the kingdom, but Mr. Gates is the first U.S. cabinet secretary to visit Bahrain since the region-wide crisis began.