 Chicago 

The trick to presenting a very familiar work like Gilbert and Sullivan's "The Mikado" (1885) is to make the audience see and hear it as if for the first time. Lyric Opera of Chicago accomplishes that with its new production. The stage director, Gary Griffin, the associate artistic director of Chicago Shakespeare Theater, and the conductor, Andrew Davis, the music director of Lyric Opera, take this comic masterpiece seriously, casting it with real voices and banning all mugging. Though Mr. Davis's tempi are a trifle slow, the trade-off is the chance to really hear all of Gilbert's brilliant dialogue and lyrics, and to focus on the operetta as something more than an antic romp.

"The Mikado" satirizes Victorian politics, attitudes and culture, placing them in what was then an exotic and colorful location, Japan. Mark Thompson's sets and costumes suggest a more modern, Westernized Japan—that of 1922—in which the members of the men's chorus wear the garb of the London gentleman (complete with derbies, spats and rolled umbrellas) and the dignitaries Pish-Tush and Pooh-Bah are kitted out in striped trousers and top hats. The ladies are also modernized, with 1920s dresses in flowing fabrics, or schoolgirl uniforms complete with hockey sticks. Japanese influence on Western fashion can be seen in a gorgeous pink bath kimono for the ingenue Yum-Yum, and sumptuous embroidered cloaks and turbans for the ferocious Katisha. 

 Lyric Opera of Chicago  Through Jan. 21 

This blurring of the line between East and West, also seen in the set, a wooden platform with sliding screens—prettily lit by Christine Binder—makes the satire more immediate.

Mr. Griffin's precise directing animates and explicates the convoluted plot, which hinges on a government decree that the punishment for flirting is death. Posturing public officials, romantic attachments real and imagined, and the corrupt machinery of the state are all given free rein, and Mr. Griffin's choices demonstrate what's at stake, no matter how absurd. The vanity and venality of Pooh-Bah, holder of almost every official post (played with great authority by Andrew Shore, who speaks with a different accent or articulation for each), makes any threat to the status quo that much more worrying. As Ko-Ko, the Lord High Executioner, obliged to woo and win the terrible Katisha if he is not to perish by boiling oil or molten lead, Neal Davies gives his courtship speech a Shakespearean gravity, and brings a heartfelt intensity to the absurdly pathetic "Tit-Willow." The singers are miked only for the dialogue, but their excellent diction makes the supertitles unnecessary, bringing out mad rhymes like "You very imperfect ablutioner" for "The Lord High Executioner."

The rest of the singers are equally inspired and vocally fine. Toby Spence's bright tenor gives a blithe cluelessness to Nanki-Poo, the Mikado's son. Soprano Andriana Chuchman makes his beloved Yum-Yum a butterfly with a spine of steel. Philip Kraus and Katharine Goeldner bring appropriate snark to Pish-Tush and Pitti-Sing. 

The big guns in this cast are James Morris—a famous Wotan—as the Mikado and Stephanie Blythe as Katisha. Just the casting of Mr. Morris is funny, and his stiff, nonwinking demeanor as the Mikado, detailing how to make "the punishment fit the crime," makes him even funnier. Ms. Blythe, whose voice sounds bigger than everyone else's combined, brings grand passion to Katisha, giving this usually ridiculous character surprising depth. By the time she and Ko-Ko deliver their bloodthirsty duet, "There is beauty in the bellow of the blast," they really seem like soul mates. The chorus has embraced the musical style and drill-team precision of the staging. 

Mr. Davis brings out all the wit and detail in Sullivan's orchestration, and he shapes the singing so that everything—from the delicate madrigal "Brightly dawns our wedding day" to the speedy ensemble patter that ends "I am so proud" to Katisha's grand opera arias—sounds authentic but new. I found myself laughing at a strategically placed French horn moment or a subtle articulation in a vocal line as well as at a funny lyric or piece of stage business. Although the staging is not particularly traditional, the production recalls Mike Leigh's great film "Topsy-Turvy," the story of how "The Mikado" was written and produced. It has that same sense of discovery, wonder and fun.

 Ms. Waleson writes about opera for the Journal.  