BAGHDAD—Iraq issued an unusual high state of alert here Tuesday in response to a wave of assassinations targeting Iraqi security-force members and government employees.

Ten officials have been killed and four injured since Jan. 1 by assailants with silencer-equipped handguns, in what security officials described as a stepped-up campaign by "terror and organized crime" groups.

Baghdad provincial Gov. Salah Abdul-Razzaq convened an emergency meeting Tuesday of the city's top police commanders and members of a special security task force responsible for the capital, known as the Baghdad Operations Command. 

On Monday, Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki ordered an ad hoc security committee, made up of senior commanders, to investigate the assassinations and to take unspecified preventive measures.

In the latest attack, the spokesman for the Ministry of Interior, Brig. Gen. Alaa al-Taiee, was wounded Monday evening when gunmen opened fire on his vehicle after it passed a security checkpoint in the center of the capital, near Baghdad University, according to a senior officer at the ministry. Gen. Taiee was in stable condition, according to the official.

"We are in a state of high alert and security preparedness in Baghdad to prevent more assassinations," said Mr. Abdul-Razzaq, the Baghdad province governor, after his emergency meeting. 

Mr. Abdul-Razzaq said additional security forces and checkpoints were being mobilized throughout Baghdad, a city of more than five million. He said a number of suspects, including some members of the security forces, have been arrested in connection with the killings.

Among those killed since Saturday in shootings throughout Baghdad were eight Iraqi army and police officers, a municipal engineer and a government lawyer, according to security officials.

The assassination of security officials using pistols has been steadily rising since last year. Authorities appeared to have been taken aback by the intensity and timing of the latest campaign at the start of the new year, following the establishment of a new government in late December. Mr. Maliki has yet to name new ministers for the crucial defense and interior portfolios.

The government has blamed similar assassinations on a mix of insurgent groups, criminal gangs and political opponents. U.S. military commanders have previously said the targeted assassination of security and government officials were signs of a resilient insurgency determined to erode public confidence in the security forces. They have said these insurgents have resorted to more discreet methods—including silencers and "sticky" bombs, which are magnetically attached to cars—after suffering significant setbacks in their capacity in recent years.

U.S. military officials believe Shiite groups backed by Iran, Sunni groups tied to Saddam Hussein's ousted regime and al Qaeda, as well as some political groups are all competing with each other for dominance ahead of the scheduled withdrawal of all remaining U.S. soldiers from Iraq by the end of this year.

The flurry of assassinations comes amid fresh U.S. casualties in Iraq. The U.S. military said this week that two of its soldiers were killed by insurgents on Sunday. Iraq Body Count, a nonprofit organization, said 4,017 Iraqi civilians and 408 members of the country's security forces were killed in 2010—the lowest annual death toll since the U.S.-led invasion in 2003.

But the group, which uses media reports as one of its sources, said 2010 saw the smallest year-on-year reduction in casualty figures, suggesting "a persistent low-level conflict in Iraq that will continue to kill civilians at a similar rate for years to come." Officials at the ministries of defense, health and interior all declined to provide the government's own tally of the death toll in 2010.

—Munaf Ammar, Ali A. Nabhan and Jabbar Yaseen  contributed to this article.