BANGALORE – India's Ranbaxy Laboratories Ltd. Tuesday posted a smaller-than-expected 68% drop in its first-quarter net profit, and an analyst said this was because of strong margins from the U.S. sales of a generic drug to treat Alzheimer's disease. 

Net profit for the quarter through March fell to 3.04 billion rupees ($68 million) from 9.61 billion rupees a year earlier, comfortably exceeding the average estimate of 1.83 billion rupees in a poll of seven analysts. 

The company benefited from a sharp decline in tax expenses--to 782 million rupees from 4.52 billion rupees a year earlier. 

Consolidated sales at the unit of Japan's Daiichi Sankyo Co. fell 14% to 21.43 billion rupees from 24.81 billion rupees, almost in line with the forecast of 21.48 billion rupees.

Analysts were expecting profit to fall as the year-earlier quarter had benefited both from a foreign-exchange gain and high margins associated with exclusive U.S. sales of a generic version of GlaxoSmithKline PLC's anti-herpes medicine, Valtrex. The results come after a surprise net loss in the October-December quarter due to a goodwill impairment charge. 

The company benefited from exclusive U.S. sales of a generic version of Eisai Co.'s Aricept--the drug to treat Alzheimer's disease--though not as much as Valtrex fattened its margin in the year-earlier period. 

Still, generic Aricept's contribution was better than estimates. 

"Generic Aricept realizations have surprised on the upside in this [first] quarter," said Sushant Dalmia, an analyst at Mumbai-based PINC Research. 

The analyst estimated that the drug added about $70 million to Ranbaxy's sales in the past quarter. 

Total U.S. sales in the quarter were 7.02 billion rupees. The company didn't provide a comparable figure for the last fiscal year. 

Ranbaxy expects to get sales exclusivity--given for six months to the first company successfully challenging a patented drug in the U.S.--for a generic version of Pfizer Inc.'s blockbuster cholesterol-lowering drug Lipitor. It is targeting a November launch of generic Lipitor under the terms of a 2008 agreement with Pfizer to resolve patent litigation. 

But the company's entitlement to the exclusivity has been clouded by U.S. Food and Drug Administration's accusations in 2009 that a Ranbaxy manufacturing plant in India submitted false and unreliable data in its drug applications to the agency. 

The agency has subjected the company's drug applications to special scrutiny after the allegations. Ranbaxy has disputed the charges, but has cooperated with the regulator to resolve the issues. 

The company also faces a sales ban in the U.S. for some of its products due to quality control issues at two of its India plants. 

"The company continues to co-operate with the U.S. FDA and the Department of Justice for a comprehensive solution to address its regulatory issues," Ranbaxy said in a statement Tuesday. 

Ranbaxy said it is negotiating with the justice department and has given a settlement offer to resolve all outstanding matters. 

It added that the settlement is conditional on the successful negotiation of several administrative actions by the FDA and that it hasn't made any provisions in its consolidated results as there is significant uncertainty regarding the outcome of the developments. 

Ranbaxy shares saw a sharp sell-off last week after Fortune magazine, citing unnamed sources, said the company may have to pay more than $1 billion in fines and other payments to resolve its regulatory issues. 

 Write to  Rumman Ahmed at rumman.ahmed@dowjones.com 