 Pakistan's foreign secretary said the U.S. would face "disastrous consequences" if it carried out any more unilateral raids similar to the one that killed Osama bin Laden, and knocked back U.S. government allegations that the country had been sheltering the former al Qaeda chief. 

Foreign Secretary Salman Bashir, in the first detailed public comments on the raid by a Pakistani official, said Pakistan's military had immediately scrambled F-16 planes once they became aware of the attack on the compound in Abbottabad, but they had arrived on the scene only after U.S. helicopters had left.



 U.S. involvement in Indonesia and the Philippines shows that, despite its problems in Pakistan, Washington can and does cultivate successful partnerships on other crucial fronts in its campaign against Islamist terror groups. 

The key difference in Southeast Asia, security officials say, is that these countries welcomed U.S. help in tackling significant homegrown terrorist threats that jeopardized their own security. 



 Mixing memorial and gladness, U.S. President Barack Obama marked the killing of Osama bin Laden at the spot where the terrorist leader left his greatest carnage, laying a wreath at the World Trade Center site in New York to remember the victims of Sept. 11, 2001. 



 European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet signaled a temporary pause in the ECB's path toward higher interest rates, a sign of caution as officials confront mounting problems along Europe's periphery.  

Trichet rejected speculation in financial markets that Greece will have to restructure its government debt, saying that scenario "is not in the cards" and that Athens must stick to its deficit-reduction targets. 



The Bank of England's Monetary Policy Committee left its key interest rate unchanged at a record low of 0.5% after a string of disappointing economic data, and left its program of asset purchases unchanged at £200 billion ($330 billion).



 Growth in the U.K.'s private sector slowed sharply in April, suggesting the economy lost momentum as it moved into the second quarter of the year and reducing the likelihood of a near-term rise in interest rates. 

Financial information company Markit's purchasing-managers indexes showed sharply lower growth in the services, manufacturing and construction sectors. 

 Britons cast ballots in local elections and in an electoral-reform referendum, with both votes expected to deliver the same result: a setback for the Liberal Democrats, the junior partner to the Conservatives in the U.K.'s coalition government.  



 Portugal's €78 billion ($115.69 billion) financial bailout will allow the country to exit debt markets for a few years, while forcing it to make economic reforms that will boost long-term growth, officials involved in the deal said.  

Acting Finance Minister Fernando Teixeira dos Santos said budget cuts demanded by the European Union and the International Monetary Fund in exchange for the three-year aid package would likely cause the country's economy to contract by around 2% in 2011 and 2012.



Spain sold €3.35 billion ($4.97 billion) of its five-year benchmark bond at funding costs below secondary-market yield levels. Demand was supported by the relative value versus other Spanish bonds and better sentiment toward non-triple A-rated sovereigns created by Portugal's €78 billion bailout agreement. 



Former Parmalat chief executive Calisto Tanzi was arrested and jailed Thursday, a day after he lost a final appeal against an Italian prison sentence over one of Europe's biggest fraud scandals, police said.



 Iceland would be better off staying out of the European Union because joining could damage its vital fishing industry, among other things, Finance Minister Steingrimur Sigfusson said, adding that he sees the euro zone shaking off its current debt problems. 



 Turkey's election campaign threatened to fuel a deep rift with the country's large Kurdish minority, as Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan accused the main Kurdish political party of involvement in an armed attack on his campaign bus convoy that killed a policeman and left another in critical condition. 



 New claims for jobless benefits surged last week to their highest level since last summer, providing another sign of the economy's struggle to create jobs. 

Separately, U.S. productivity slowed in the first quarter as the economic recovery stumbled and labor costs started to rise again.



 Republican leaders and the White House are discussing a deal that would enact strict deficit targets and some spending cuts to win Republican votes for lifting the ceiling on how much the federal government can borrow. 

The deal would defer contentious decisions about Medicare, Medicaid and taxes until after the 2012 elections. 



 Ventilators were switched on inside Japan's highly radiated No. 1 reactor building at the crippled Fukushima Daiichi complex after workers entered the building for the first time since it was damaged by a hydrogen explosion the day after the March 11 disasters.  

The latest repair work aims to reduce airborne radiation at the building so that plant operator Tokyo Electric Power can install permanent cooling equipment, crucial to bringing the overheating in the reactors to a safe, so-called cold shutdown. 

Separately, Tepco filed a report to Japan's Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency that concludes the containment vessel of the No. 1 reactor is strong enough to withstand being flooded with water to cool it down.



 An official from China's new Internet regulator defended the nation's Internet controls from critics, saying they are in line with efforts elsewhere to protect privacy and block obscenity, gambling and other activities.  

 Singapore's elections on Saturday are expected to be the most fiercely contested since the city-state became independent in 1965, though gains for the opposition are far from assured.  



Bangladesh's highest court upheld the government's decision to remove Nobel laureate Muhammad Yunus from his pioneering microfinance agency Grameen Bank, ending his decades of leadership at the bank he set up to lend money to the poor. 



 Syria's military said it had started to withdraw from the besieged town of Deraa, but residents of the southern city said tanks, troops and snipers still restricted their movement. 

Security forces also broadened their effort to stifle the protest movement against the regime of President Bashar al-Assad, by raiding a Damascus suburb.



An Egyptian court sentenced the former interior minister who oversaw the expansion of the Mubarak regime's vast security apparatus to 12 years in jail for corruption.



 The U.S. is moving to free up more than $30 billion in frozen Libyan assets to help fund opposition forces fighting Col. Moammar Gadhafi, U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said, in a move that could greatly bolster a world-wide effort to finance Libya's struggling rebel movement. 

The U.K. expelled two diplomats from the Libyan embassy in London for intimidating opposition supporters in Britain, a person familiar with the matter said. The Foreign & Commonwealth Office announced it had expelled the diplomats but declined to specify why.



 Claude Stanley Choules, the last known combat veteran of the First World War, died in Perth at the age of 110. The British-born Choules spent more than 40 years in the Royal Navy.  