Most of the plastic piping laid along the Gulf Coast to protect against last year's oil spill is gone, but thousands of heavy metal anchors used to keep that boom in place now may litter the seafloor. 

Fishermen have complained that the anchors—which weigh between 20 and 75 pounds apiece—are snagging their gear. The federal government and  BP PLC worry, though, that yanking them up could intensify erosion and tear holes in subsea pipelines.

So starting Saturday, government and BP officials plan to start experimenting with sonar, magnets and other means to find and retrieve buried anchors without doing more environmental harm. 

The anchors broke free from the boom during storms and when people moved the boom to let boats pass, authorities say. The lost anchors mark the latest unintended environmental consequence of last year's massive effort to prevent the spilled oil from washing ashore, especially along the Louisiana coast.

The Coast Guard said it has told BP to start trying to get the anchors out safely, after the fishermen's complaints. Curtis Thomas, a BP spokesman, said the company hasn't verified any instances of lost anchors ripping fishing nets.

"People want us to remove the anchors simply because we put them there," he said. Still, "it may very well be more beneficial to leave them in place." The cost of such a removal effort isn't clear, but BP would have to foot the bill. 

About 2,500 miles of boom were laid along the Gulf Coast during the spill, including about 680 miles of boom that used the anchors, authorities say. Ropes connected the boom to anchors, which dug into the seafloor. But officials disagree about how many anchors are still in the sea floor.

BP's Mr. Thomas said some 30,000 anchors were installed along the Gulf Coast, and that between 1,500 and 3,000 may still be in the water. Garret Graves, chairman of Louisiana's Coastal Protection and Restoration Authority, said the number of lost anchors is higher: about 3,500 off the coast of Louisiana's St. Bernard Parish alone.

In the experiment starting Saturday, officials will bury anchors off St. Bernard Parish—where a particularly large amount of boom was laid—and then try to find them and pull them out. If they come up with a tactic that works, they will start removing lost anchors along the parish, and then along the entire Louisiana coast. 

Mr. Graves said BP officials resisted the state's call to remove the anchors. The possibility of snagging pipelines "is a very, very real concern," he said, but the anchors "are a safety risk, and they have to be removed." Part of the reason some of the anchors came loose from the boom, he said, was that BP contractors, particularly in the early days of the spill, used improper rope and knots to secure them.

Mr. Thomas, the BP spokesman, said he didn't think there was any problem with the rope or knots. And he stressed it isn't clear whether the anchors will be removed—only that officials will test what they can do without threatening further environmental damage. "We will not try to remove the anchors if it will cause more harm than good," he said.

 Write to  Jeffrey Ball at jeffrey.ball@wsj.com 