What do Eric Holder and Yasser Arafat have in common?

No, the attorney general (unlike his boss) has not won a Nobel Peace Prize. And at a youthful 60, he should have quite a few years before he makes the inevitable transition to stable condition.

In an interview with the BBC, Holder says the killing of Osama bin Laden was "not an assassination." That much is true; it was the legitimate killing of an unlawful enemy combatant. But Holder means something different. In the BBC interview, he claims, as the Beeb puts it, that "the operation was a 'kill or capture mission' and that Bin Laden's surrender would have been accepted if offered."

"If the possibility had existed, if there was the possibility of a feasible surrender, that would have occurred," Holder says. "But their protection, that is the protection of the force that went into that compound, was I think uppermost in our minds."

Sounds reasonable enough. But read this report from the Washington Post, March 16, 2010:

At the time, the administration was planning to move Khalid Sheikh Mohammad and other top terrorists from Guantanamo Bay to New York for trial in a civilian court. Culberson wanted to know in which venue the administration intended to try bin Laden if he was captured. Holder declined to answer on the ground that "the possibility just simply does not exist."

Do not be misled by the rhetorical consistency between the two Holder statements. Yes, in both the congressional testimony and the BBC interview Holder denies the existence of the possibility of taking bin Laden alive. But the meaning of that denial is quite different in 2011 than in 2010.

Now, it is a factual claim about bin Laden's behavior when U.S. servicemen confronted him. Last year, there was no way for Holder to know the circumstances of that confrontation, except inasmuch as he was privy to the administration's planning for it. Thus his 2010 denial of the possibility that bin Laden would be captured alive has to be understood as a statement of policy--one that contradicts what he now says the policy was.

Perhaps there's an explanation. Maybe sometime after Holder's testimony, the administration developed a contingency plan in case bin Laden surrendered, having realized that it would be legally problematic to kill him if that happened. 

More likely, though, Holder is just changing his story to suit his audience. Which brings us back to Arafat, who was notorious for conciliating in English while inciting violence in Arabic. Holder seems to be doing the same thing--telling one story in English and the other in British, while forgetting that the two tongues are mutually intelligible. He is two attorneys general in one divided by a common language!

  What Do Terrorists Want?   The Associated Press reports that Osama bin Laden left behind a "personal, handwritten journal" and a "massive collection of computer files" that are now in U.S. hands. "Intelligence officials say it will take weeks, if not months, to go through them," the AP adds noting:

Either they were authorized to talk publicly about everything but their own names or our intelligence officials are incredibly loose-lipped, because reports on this stuff are all over the news media. We were intrigued by this one from the Christian Science Monitor:

Hey wait, haven't we been hearing for years that bin Laden wanted the U.S. to increase its presence over there? We could have sworn we read just last week that "Osama bin Laden's motivation . . . was to draw the U.S. and the West into a prolonged war--an actual war in Afghanistan, and a broader global war with Islam."

Where did we hear that again? Oh yeah, from Radley Balko at Reason, in an article titled "Osama Won" in which he also scolded Americans for celebrating bin Laden's death instead of being "appropriate" and reacting with "solemn and somber appreciation."

All we can say is: Woo-hoo! Wrong again, Balko! U-S-A! U-S-A!

  Obama Comes Around, Maybe   Yesterday we faulted President Obama's prospective new "Muslim outreach" effort because, among other reasons, "the White House is still debating . . . whether Mr. Obama should lay out a concrete plan for revitalizing the stalled Arab-Israeli peace process," according to the report in The Wall Street Journal.

A day behind the Journal, the New York Times has a follow-up report, and it suggests the administration has moved in the right direction:

Imagine how much trouble the administration would have avoided if it had been this quick to follow our advice for the past 2½ years.

  Common Wisdom   "Common" is the stage name of Ronnie Lashin Lynn Jr., a rapper who was invited to the White House as part of Michelle Obama's poetry evening yesterday. We hadn't written about the kerfuffle that ensued because it seemed overblown to us, and Jon Stewart, of all people, convinced us our instinct was right.

Then we saw a post by The Atlantic's Ta-Nehisi Coates, who is exasperated by the hullabaloo. Coates quotes a David White, who feels the same way:

When we read this, we recognized the feeling. It was similar to our reaction when we read this bit from Robert Reich, the former labor secretary:

Romney isn't our favorite candidate either, but come on! Can't Reich criticize his onetime would-be rival (Reich lost the Democratic primary for Massachusetts governor in 2002) without the racial imaginings? Does he realize how stupid this sounds?

As for the Common kerfuffle, we wonder if people have mixed him up with Common Cause, which actually does have a history of hateful rhetoric.

  Bermuda 1, New York 0   This one put a smile on our face. Here's a story from Monday's New York Times:

The Royal Gazette, which touts itself as "Bermuda's most trusted source for news & information," fires back today:

Sure enough, PropertyCasualty360.com, a website published by the trade journal National Underwriter, reports that "the Times' captive, named Midtown Insurance Co., is listed as a consolidated subsidiary of The New York Times Co. in its 10-Q filing for the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, filed Nov. 8, 2007 for the period ending Nov. 30, 2007."

  Metaphor Alert   "But there is a very large fly in this ointment; or, put another way, a very large shoe that has yet to drop. The Democrats have not yet proposed a budget. President Obama did deliver a FY 2012 budget, but it was dead on arrival as it did nothing whatever to deal with the looming budget crisis. It was the equivalent of punting on first down."--PowerLineBlog.com, May 11

  Out on a Limb   "MSNBC Contributor Fineman: Was 'Mistake' for Obama to Urge Voters to Judge Him on His Performance in Office"--headline, NewsBusters.org, May 11

 Life Imitates the Onion 

  'We Need to Shut Up and Move On'   "Preview: Shut Up & Dance"--headline, Philadelphia Magazine website, May 12 

  Steal This Book   "Denmark Plans to Reinstate Guards at Borders"--headline, The Wall Street Journal, May 12

  Egghead Wanted   "Egg Farmers Launch Canada's First Academic Chair of Poultry Welfare"--headline, Globe and Mail (Toronto), May 12

  The Lonely Lives of Scientists   "Scientists Plan to Chat With Dolphins"--headline, WSJ.com, May 12

  Hey, Kids! What Time Is It?   "Post-bin Laden, It's Time to End the Threat of Nuclear Terrorism for Good"--headline, Puffington Host, May 12

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

 Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  Look Out Below!   "Donald Trump Lets His Hair Down"--headline, RollingStone.com, May 11

  It's Always in the Last Place You Look   "From the Plaza Hotel to Starbucks, Illicit Acts Find New Home"--headline, The Wall Street Journal, May 12

  Everything Seemingly Is Spinning Out of Control   "Barack Obama Action Figure Styled as Rambo, Navy SEAL Team Six"--headline, Courier-Mail (Brisbane, Australia), May 12

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  Where's No Labels When You Need Them?   If you live in Brazil, your government wants to get into your pants, AdAge.com reports:

We hope America's nanny-state wackos don't get wind of this awful idea. It isn't hard to imagine Mike Bloomberg mandating no-smoking labels on intimate apparel, or Michelle Obama imposing antiobesity warnings on larger-size drawers.

On the other hand, the Daily Caller quotes Sen. James Inhofe of Oklahoma, who's seen the posthumous Osama bin Laden photos, as saying "that bin Laden was in his underwear at the time of his death." Who knows how many lives might have been saved with the right warning label?

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Ethel Fenig, Ed Grinberg, Terry Holmes, Michael Segal, James McIree, Kyle Gibbons, Peter Shalen, Michele Schiesser, Hillel Markowitz, Scott Siegel, Herbert Sorock, Miguel Rakiewicz, David Hallstrom, Rod Pennington, Zack Russ, Mark Finkelstein, Robert Firriolo, Kyle Kyllan, Tom Elia, John Grant, Bruce Goldman and John Bobek. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)