When we write, we work with what? Words. 

Wow—nine straight words beginning with W. "Just virtuosity," as the card shark played by Charles Coburn says in "The Lady Eve" after showing off an especially nifty false shuffle. "You don't really need it." 

What I was doing was playing around. Anyone who undertakes the literary grind had better like playing around with words. Letters, even: W, for example, though L and K are catchier. L leads you in and K connects. Why do you think young people say "like" so much?

Somebody informed me recently that the key to every art, from writing to gardening to sculpture, is creativity. I beg to differ. Sculpture, I told this person (although sculpture is something I know nothing about), is for people who like playing around with granite or automobile bumpers or quantities of chewed gum or whatever. Gardening is for people who like playing around with bulbs and dirt. Writing is for people who like playing around with words—like "bulbs" and, let's say, "loam."

I don't mean playing around with words as an end in itself. I like a writer who gets off on words, but not one who gets off on getting off on words. That writer is out to impress more than to express. That writer is like (see what I mean about "like"?) a bullfighter who pays more attention to his cape than to the bull.

But the cape and the sword and the little hat are what the bullfighter has to work with. (I think it's the hat that really outrages the bull: "This is the kind of hat you wear to play around with a bull?") The bull is what is on the writer's mind, in the writer's heart, in the writer's sights. But words are what it takes to get at the bull. 

Or is "get at" exactly what I want? It's pithy, but maybe I want "get across" instead. Or how about some locution that both gets at and gets across the whole concept of getting at and getting across? "Get down"? No, that's coming on all retro-rocker. "The get"? No, that has connotations of talk-show booking, Orthodox Jewish divorce and tennis-shot returns. The more you try to pin a word down, the more you realize that it has its own cape, sword and little hat.

For instance, I just looked up "like" in the Oxford English Dictionary online. "Like" goes back to, like (OK, circa), the year 888. To play around with a word like "like" is an honor and a privilege, like shooting hoops with Bob Cousy, Nate ''Tiny" Archibald, Chris Paul or any number of other relatively short, quick basketball greats in between. It's from the ancient root "lîko," meaning body or form. Hmm. The game is afoot!

Or am I getting too much into, like, etymology? I used to find pretexts—no, grounds—for playing around with words by writing about rafting through rain forests, prodding Ku Kluxers, drinking with Steelers, delving into my childhood, cooking up an imaginary marriage. Lately I have been going boldly into dictionaries.

But another bull (perhaps from the same root as "bellow" and "bell") is bound to turn up in my workroom. And I won't be dazzling him with creativity. I'll be trying to put him into words, holding him at bay with ones that aren't quite right until I can nail him—or, better, catch his likeness—with the words that, without making a big deal of it, go "bingo": We've got your bull right here.

—Mr. Blount is the author, most recently, of "Alphabetter Juice: The Joy of Text."