Over the past four years, the NHL's Winter Classic, the annual outdoor game played every January, has become the league's marquee event. It is broadcast near New Year's Day on NBC with as many as 70,000 in attendance. Last year's game was the highest-rated regular-season hockey game in 36 years, according to the league. 

But in a move that surely won't go over well with hockey-loving New Yorkers, two people familiar with the league's thinking said Friday the leading candidate for next year's Winter Classic is Philadelphia. 

It wasn't a total snub. These people said the leading candidate to play the Flyers in Philadelphia's Citizens Bank Park is the New York Rangers. But if this decision stands, Philadelphia will join Buffalo, Chicago, Boston and Pittsburgh as cities with the distinction of hosting this event before the Big Apple.

To be fair, the teams that have hosted this game (the Sabres, Blackhawks, Bruins and Penguins) have all been significantly better than New York's teams. Philadelphia's Flyers are no exception: they lost to Chicago in last year's Stanley Cup Finals and had the second best record in the Eastern Conference this year. The Rangers, the No. 8 seed, crapped out in the first round of the playoffs. 

But Philadelphia's advantage is still surprising given efforts by at least one New York team to land the game. The Mets took NHL officials for a tour of Citi Field last year. David Howard, the team's executive vice-president of business operations, said the hockey poobahs were "very impressed" and that Mets CEO Jeff Wilpon and NHL commissioner Gary Bettman "touched base" in the last few weeks. 

Andrew Brent, a spokesman for Mayor Michael Bloomberg said, "We'd love it to take place in New York." 

So let's get down to brass tacks: If Citi Field isn't good enough for the NHL, where should the game be played? 

Yankee Stadium is likely out, since the building will host the annual Pinstripe Bowl on December 30. New Meadowlands Stadium may not fly, either: the Giants host the Dallas Cowboys on Jan. 1. So here's a helpful suggestion: maybe the Winter Classic doesn't have to be in an outdoor stadium after all. An NHL rink is 85 feet wide by 200 feet long, meaning you can't fit it just anywhere. But the city does have some tantalizing outdoor spaces that would give the NHL the spectacle it seems to crave. The Brooklyn Bridge, anyone? 

—Michael Saul contributed to this article 

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com and Mike Sielski at mike.sielski@wsj.com 