Five states in India are going to the polls this month, highlighting the political competition in the world's most populous democracy. In West Bengal, for instance, observers expect a 13-year-old political party, the Trinamool Congress, to end 34 years of Communist Party rule. Voters will have to wait till next month for the election results, but it's already clear that robust political contests help some parts of India develop faster than others.

A new report "Economic Freedom of the States of India, 2011," published last month in association with libertarian-leaning organizations, takes a look at this state-level phenomenon. The authors rank 20 of India's 28 states on criteria such as the size of government, legal structure and regulations, using 2005-09 data. 

Tamil Nadu, with a politically conscious electorate that keeps turning regional parties in and out of power and ensures property-rights protection, ranks as the freest state in India. The western state of Gujarat, whose chief minister Narendra Modi of the Bharatiya Janata Party has earned plaudits from businessmen for his efficient governance and minimal regulations, comes second. Both states have been growing at or near double digit rates.

The role of politics in promoting growth is evident, both from the data and from recent experience. Andhra Pradesh in the south improved the fastest among the 20 surveyed states, surging from seventh place in 2005 to third in 2009, because its chief minister trimmed waste, brought in the private sector for infrastructure projects and tackled security threats from Maoists. Better governed states will steal ahead, judging by the way the Tata conglomerate moved its car factory from West Bengal to Gujarat in 2008. The north-central state of Bihar, hitherto considered the backwater of India, has begun to attract investment under the leadership of Nitish Kumar, who hails from a local party.

Of course, political decision-making isn't the only determinant for the wealth of states; accidents of history and other larger forces matter too. Gujarat has been blessed with natural harbors and a pro-business culture, while the ferment in Tamil Nadu's politics can be traced back to pre-independence social movements. One factor outside states' control is national-level policy: West Bengal and Gujarat wouldn't be jostling for investment if New Delhi hadn't liberalized in the 1990s.

Nevertheless, it's an underappreciated fact that once New Delhi embarked on the first generation of reforms within its purview—opening up to external trade and capital—some of the burden of liberalizing domestic markets has fallen on state governments. As the authors note, states can do a lot when it comes to land and labor. 

Witness Gujarat, where last week, Mr. Modi launched a voucher program targeted at vocational training, a missing piece in India's education jigsaw puzzle. Both Gujarat and the Trinamool Congress in West Bengal are now floating new ideas on land acquisition, the third rail of Indian politics. If they succeed, these states could turn out to be laboratories for India-wide policy.

All of this underscores the importance of—and scope for—decentralization by New Delhi. This means allowing states a greater share of tax revenue to build rural roads, and not interfering in the way they develop their natural resources. In the past year, the national government has meddled with the Orissa state government's mining decisions and is now contemplating a new country-wide mining bill.

Prime Minister Manmohan Singh's government has been stalling on national-level reforms, and has looked weak battling graft allegations. If New Delhi is unable to be the standard-bearer of reforms, it should at least let states compete among themselves for that title.