PITTSBURGH—Jets coach Rex Ryan flung his headset in disgust as time ticked away on his team's season at Heinz Field on Sunday night. It was a visceral reaction in the wake of something that surprised him, enraged him: The Pittsburgh Steelers had converted a key third down to seal their 24-19 victory in the AFC Championship Game. And Mr. Ryan, bold and animated throughout the season, was consistent to the bitter end.



He had expected his defense—his hallmark—to hold up in that sort of situation. It was his belief in his players that had motivated them since the start of training camp, when he boldly predicted that he would escort them to the Jets' first Super Bowl appearance in 42 years. On Sunday night, though, that belief was shaken. He fell short, and so did his team.

Looking back, the Jets' loss to the Steelers had more to do with their late-season swoon than with their sloppy first half. The team had come out "flat," according to cornerback Darrelle Revis, spotting the Steelers an early 24-point lead. It was the Jets' third road playoff game in three weeks, and this was asking a lot—even of a confident bunch coming off victories over the Indianapolis Colts and New England Patriots.

If those games emboldened the Jets, then they also seemed to leave them tired, spent. It had been an emotional and physical slog through the postseason. As the AFC's second seed, the Steelers (14-5) had been awarded a first-round bye. As the sixth seed, the Jets (13-6) had to hit the road.

"I think if you get a bye, you're fresher for these third games," Mr. Ryan said. "I mean, it's as simple as that. That's a fact. But to get to that, you have to earn that bye week. We didn't earn it. We had to go with the long, tough road, and we came up short again."

The Jets closed out the regular season by losing three of their final five games, and it wound up costing them. Running back LaDainian Tomlinson had looked so strong in the Jets' first two playoff games, rushing for 125 yards on 26 carries, apparently re-energized after sitting out the Jets' regular-season finale against the Buffalo Bills. But against the Steelers, he labored for 16 yards on nine carries—and came up just shy of the goal line on fourth-and-goal from the Steelers' 1-yard line in the second half.

 His postseason was a microcosm of his regular season: strong at the start, slow at the finish.

Remarkably, the Jets still had one last opportunity to get the ball back late in the fourth quarter. All they needed to do was stop Steelers quarterback Ben Roethlisberger on third-and-6. 

Mr. Revis said the defensive line got good pressure on Mr. Roethlisberger and forced him to scramble, but this is where he tends to do some of his best work.

 Mr. Revis could sense this as Mr. Roethlisberger unleashed a throw off one foot, zinging a pass to Antonio Brown for a 14-yard completion. Mr. Roethlisberger ran out the rest of the clock, and the grim reality set in on the Jets' sideline.

"It's the worst," quarterback Mark Sanchez said. "You want to go down swinging. You want to go down throwing, at least giving your guys a chance. That's all I was really thinking: 'Just get the ball back…and we'll take a shot.' It's hard to see that happen."

Football is a raw sport, and it can reduce the strongest men to emotional wrecks. In the locker room after the game, there was anger from wide receiver Santonio Holmes, who groused about his playing time.

 There were tears from linebacker Jason Taylor, who criticized his own production—"I felt like I still needed to do more," he said—and contemplated retirement after 14 seasons.

As for Mr. Ryan, if anyone expected him to be cowed by defeat, they were in for a surprise. He was more than just the same ol' Rex during his postgame press conference.

 He was Rex Ryan with an edge, which is saying something. He not only re-stated his familiar goal—Super Bowl or bust—and railed at those who dared to criticize his approach.

On Monday, Mr. Ryan softened his tone, saying his comments were "ridiculous," coming in the heat of the moment. 

But the fact remains that Mr. Ryan has set a high bar for this team—the highest bar. Next time around, the Jets could make things easier on themselves by taking care of business during the regular season.

"We have ourselves to blame," Mr. Ryan said. "We've got to find a way to win our division.''