Some of the best-performing markets of 2010 have started the new year with a disconcerting, inflation-inspired selloff.

Stocks in emerging markets from India across Southeast Asia have taken their lumps the last few days as investors worry that central banks in the region will need to fight inflation with a battery of interest-rate increases that will temper growth in coming months.

"You can't have erosion of purchasing power and hope growth will remain. The two are pretty inconsistent," says  Sanjay Mathur, an economist for Royal Bank of Scotland in Singapore.

India's Sensex, which closed 2010 near its record high reached in November, fell for the sixth session in the row and is off 6.2% this year on expectations that the Reserve Bank of India would resume its campaign of rate increases to fight food-price-driven inflation.

Indonesian stocks continued their slide Tuesday, with the benchmark Jakarta Stock Exchange Composite off 0.7% after falling 4.2% Monday. It has now fallen nearly 7% since the start of the year as investors fret that the central bank has failed to address inflation. The Philippines' PSE Composite Index fell nearly 2% Tuesday and is down 4% for the year. 

Thailand stocks were down for the third straight trading day.

Investors say the mini-correction could have more to go. Foreign investors poured billions of dollars into these markets in recent months hoping to capitalize on the stronger economic growth there, compared to the U.S., Europe and Japan. 

There are signs that foreign money is beginning to retreat.

In India, foreign institutional investors were net stock sellers in the four trading sessions through Tuesday, pulling out $520 million, according to data from the Securities and Exchange Board of India.

In contrast, foreign investors had poured nearly $29 billion into Indian stocks in 2010.

"Since the beginning of this year, there are two to three things that are making foreign institutional investors nervous," says  Nirmal Jain, chairman of financial-services firm India Infoline Group. These include India's elevated stock valuations, high interest rates that could damp capital expenditures by companies, and rising inflation, Mr. Jain says. In the week ended Dec. 25, India's wholesale-price index for food articles rose 18.3% from a year earlier, faster than analysts expected. 

"The Reserve Bank of India has been behind the curve" in tempering inflation, says  Emil Wolter, Singapore-based head of regional strategy for Asian equities at Royal Bank of Scotland Asia. Mr. Wolter expects Indian stocks to perform less well than other Asian markets, particularly China, this year.

In South America, worries about inflation have also been rising, though stock markets there have been mixed. While Mexico and Chile stock markets have dropped, Brazil, Argentina and Venezuela have also risen slightly. Mexico's benchmark index, which ended 2010 at a fresh record high, has slipped 0.9%, while Chile's index is off 1.4%.

As for Southeast Asian markets, "we think the volatility will continue," says Grace Tam, vice president of investment services at J.P. Morgan Asset Management in Hong Kong. "The valuations are no longer cheap for places like Indonesia and India. They are actually a bit expensive." 

It has been a remarkable run for these markets since the depths of the global financial crisis. Benchmark indexes in Indonesia and the Philippines rose 40% last year. Indian stocks rose 17% and hit an all-time high in early November. Since then, India's Sensex is off 8.6%.

"For the smaller markets such as the Philippines and Indonesia, they are sold off because they've done very well last year and it's very tempting for investors to take profit. The inflation scare is the catalyst for that selling," says  Lim Fang Suan, a portfolio manager at Lion Global Investors in Singapore.

Not all stock trading in the region has been orderly. In Bangladesh, rioting broke out after the market swooned more than 20% since the start of the year, including a 9% fall on Monday. 

Bangladesh was one of the best-performing markets in 2010, up 80% by some measures, attracting tens of thousands of new investors. The central bank there raised interest rates to cool the economy in December.

Tuesday, the Dhaka Stock Exchange General Index rebounded from Monday's drop, rallying more than 15%. Authorities there revised a rule to allow brokers to increase the amount of money they can lend to clients with shares as collateral, a move some say helped propel the market higher, according to  Saad Ahmad, managing director of Dhaka-based brokerage DSFM Securities Ltd.

  A.A. Moniruzzaman, managing director of Mika Securities Ltd. in Dhaka, says there were hardly any sellers in the markets Tuesday. He says investors could be buying now because stocks have fallen so much already.

—Anirban Roy in New Delhi and Jonathan Cheng in New York contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Alex Frangos at alex.frangos@wsj.com and Shefali Anand at shefali.anand@wsj.com 