VALLEJO, Calif.—City leaders say they expect Vallejo to emerge from bankruptcy protection by July as settlement talks with its creditors near final agreement, in a case being closely watched by the municipal-bond industry and by financially stricken cities across the country. 

Vallejo, which filed for Chapter 9 protection in 2008, represents the biggest municipal bankruptcy in California since Orange County filed in 1994 and one of the largest in U.S. history. 

In January, the city of 120,000 people some 30 miles northeast of San Francisco submitted a plan to exit from bankruptcy and began negotiating on a debt restructuring with major creditors. City leaders secured deals with Vallejo's largest debt holder—Union Bank of San Francisco—and bond insurer National Public Finance Guarantee Corp. 

 Vallejo, Calif., hopes to emerge from bankruptcy soon. Other troubled municipalities:  

 Jefferson County, Ala.: Trying to avoid bankruptcy; grappling with $3.2 billion in sewer debt

 Central Falls, R.I.: Overseen by a state official since last year.

 Harrisburg, Pa.: Narrowly averted debt default last year when state infused cash; faces $288 million in debt from an incinerator project

 Hamtramck, Mich.: Talk of bankruptcy receded after city collected $3.2 million in March from settlement with Detroit.

Officials faced pushback from lawyers representing city-worker retirees and some city unions, who objected to early versions of the plan because they lacked details on how some creditors would be treated. But recently the groups indicated they approve of the measures.

"We're satisfied with progress so far," said Kelly Woodruff, an attorney representing two city unions.

Under the plan, city employees will maintain their current pay and no additional jobs will be cut. But health-care benefits will be reduced for Vallejo's more than 400 city-worker retirees and surviving spouses, with the city contributing about $300 a month to premiums, down from about $1,500 for some retirees. Current pension payouts will remain in place.

In the years leading up to the filing, the city's expenses grew 11% annually while revenue rose only 3%. Vallejo was also saddled with contracts with its police and fire unions whose salary and benefits took up more than 70% of the city's $65 million budget. 

Those public-safety workers whose pay and benefits make up more than 70% of the city's general-fund budget of about $65 million this fiscal year, took a big hit from the bankruptcy. The city scaled down its police force from a high of more than 150 officers to 90 today, and it closed three fire stations and cut the number of firefighters to 70 from more than 120. Funding for libraries, recreation centers and a convention center was also reduced.

In 2009, city leaders reached new agreements with the police, fire and management unions that reduced pension benefits for new employees, among other cuts. Last year, the city reached similar agreements with the union representing administrative workers.

Original bondholders have emerged from the reorganization unscathed, with the city having either repaid much of this debt or pledged to continue repayment. But Union Bank, owed about $50 million after guaranteeing debt repayment to investors, will receive 40% less than this amount under the settlement. Lawyers representing Union Bank declined to return emails and phone calls seeking comment. 

National Public Finance Guarantee fared better, securing a deal allowing the insurer to continue to receive payment of nearly $5 million in debt owed, but over an extended period of time. The insurer also reached an agreement in a dispute with the city and California to guarantee that, in the event of a Vallejo default, the insurer would receive payment from state vehicle-license feeshanded down to cities. 

"We are pleased to have reached an agreement," said Kevin Brown, a spokesman for National Public Finance.

Dave Millican, Vallejo's interim finance director, said, "We've turned the corner because our creditors realize it's unlikely they will be able to get more money from the city." 

 Creditors became pragmatic after U.S Bankruptcy Judge Michael McManus in the Eastern District of California said he wouldn't force more concessions from Vallejo, Mr. Millican said.

Marc Levinson, Vallejo's bankruptcy attorney, said the city's ordeal was a cautionary tale for municipalities seeking an exit from financial troubles. The bankruptcy had cost Vallejo more than $9 million, largely from legal fees, he said, and services had been severely curtailed.

Lawyers representing retirees and unions attempted to fight the settlement plans, arguing that guarantees from Vallejo to continue pension payouts and payments to bondholders indicated funds were still available, according to court documents. Retirees wanted to reinstate benefits, while unions pursued funds lost in a fight over labor contracts. 

Vallejo is expected to submit a final exit strategy, incorporating deals reached with creditors, by mid-May and a hearing for a final vote is expected in late June. 

 The plan calls for the city to defer debt repayments from its general fund until 2013. It also calls for some employees and retirees to be paid just 5% to 20% of some other claims, such as workers' compensation, out of a $6 million fund over two years.The city set aside money from its reserves to establish the fund.

 Write to  Bobby White at bobby.white@wsj.com 