MUMBAI -- Hong Kong-based NewQuest Capital Partners intends to focus on buying assets of other private equity firms in India at a time when many companies by these funds have delayed public offer plans.

NewQuest was spun off from the Asian private equity business of  Bank of America
BAC


3.56
%




 Merrill Lynch. Mr. Massara, who headed that team, said the new team raised a $400 million NewQuest Asia Fund I and used a part of it to buy Bank of America's Asian portfolio last month.

The fund intends to deploy its first fund within the next 18 months.

"Rather than providing primary growth capital to companies, which is the lion's share of private equity deals in Asia, what we are trying to focus on is a large untapped market, which is simply buying secondary shares from investors, whether in a single-asset situation or a portfolio," said  Darren Massara, managing director of NewQuest.

These funds have invested nearly $150 billion in some 5,000 deals in Asia, he said, adding an estimated 20% of investors are interested in monetizing their investments. Across Asia, it would mean investors in some 1,000 transactions are willing to sell assets worth $30 billion.

"Even if India is 30% of that total, you can see the kind of opportunities that exist," Mr. Massara said.

Private equity firms typically exit when portfolio companies sell shares to the public, but many have deferred plans this year because of a poorly performing stock market. The benchmark Sensex index of the Bombay Stock Exchange has shed 10% since the begining of this year. This further opens up the so-called secondary market, in which these funds sell their holdings in a company to another private equity firm.

Such deals need not necessarily be at a discount and could even yield twice the money invested, Mr. Massara said.

In 2011, there have been seven such deals worth $240.49 million in India so far. This is after the 23 such deals worth $201.18 million in 2010, increasing from eight deals worth $93.17 million in 2009, according to VCCEdge, a financial research platform.

"The opportunities to do a secondary deal in case of [limited partners or those who invest in PE funds] have definitely increased in India, especially when such limited partners are investment banks which are looking to exit the business," said  Muneesh Chawla, managing director at Mumbai-based private equity firm Blue River Capital Advisors (India) Ltd. "Such funds thus give limited partners a lot flexibility in terms of early liquidity. In India several such deals have happened."

  Vikram Utamsingh, executive director and head of the private equity group at KPMG India Pvt. Ltd., agreed, but cautioned: "I don't see a market where domestic limited partners will sell to international limited partners because the structure and approach to private equity of domestic limited partners are different from international limited partners."

Paul Capital, which has invested in NewQuest, will also look to use the fund as a "general partner for hire". General partners manage investments of limited partners in a fund.

"In the past three-and-a-half years, since we have opened our Asia operations, we have had to turn down many offers to acquire portfolios because there was no manager in place," said  Jason Sambanju, managing director of Paul Capital. "To work alongside NewQuest helps us pursue these opportunities, which we otherwise wouldn't have been able to do."