DAVOS, Switzerland—With the risks of a double-dip recession apparently receding in most parts of the world, another economic challenge is emerging: inflation.

Rising prices for food, energy and other commodities are reducing the disposable incomes of poor people across the planet, providing a trigger for street protests in North Africa and posing a deep conundrum for policy makers world-wide. 

It is one of the issues on the agenda of the World Economic Forum in Davos that wasn't around last year. Though the phenomenon hits the hardest in poor countries, where people spend most of their incomes on food and to a lesser extent energy, it is also a worry in countries such as the U.K.

New British data this week showed the economy didn't grow in the fourth quarter even as inflation has accelerated. That raises the specter of stagflation—high inflation and low growth—that last hit Britain in the 1970s, economists say.

In the euro zone, rising prices could lead the European Central Bank to increase interest rates, intensifying pressures on weak economies such as Greece and Ireland that use the common currency. On Wednesday, new data showed the prices of German imports rose at their fastest clip for two decades.

Simon Johnson, a professor at Massachusetts Institute of Technology and a former chief economist at the International Monetary Fund, said the only major country where commodity-price inflation isn't an important concern is the U.S., because imported food accounts for a tiny proportion of U.S. consumer spending.

And, while inflation hits the poor and those on fixed incomes, it can have benefits. 

"For the U.K., it's the escape hatch," said Mr. Johnson. Inflation lessens the burden of repaying Britain's heavy government debts. Moreover, for now, interest rates on government debts remain low—10-year U.K. bonds were yielding 3.7% Wednesday, exactly the same as consumer-price inflation in 2010—suggesting investors don't believe the authorities will let inflation rip.

In poorer countries, the disadvantages are more evident. In Tunisia, Algeria and Egypt, rises in food prices—such as a 30% increase in cooking oil in Algeria—have sparked street protests. Rising food prices heighten financial pressures on governments in the region because they are often direct buyers of commodities such as wheat, sugar and coffee, and they subsidize prices, said Francis Ghilès, a senior research fellow at the CIDOB Foundation in Barcelona.

In India, the chief executives of some of the country's largest companies cited rising food prices as a problem because they hurt the poorer sections of India's population and could translate into political uncertainty. 

"Inflation is really our key priority...it's top of the government's priority," said  Azim Premji, chairman of one of India's largest technology companies  Wipro Ltd. He said he hoped that government support programs for the poor would help unrest from growing in the country's rural population. 

"What keeps me awake [at night] is that India Inc. can price itself out of the market because our costs seem to be running higher than [they] should," says  C.P. Gurnani, chief executive of technology company Mahindra Satyam, referring to the global technology and outsourcing market. "My highest costs are my employee costs." 

Zhu Min, a Chinese economist who advises the International Monetary Fund, told a panel that higher food costs would have a significant impact in China and India. Food accounts for 47% of the basket of products that make up India's consumer-price index and 34% of China's. He said the world was experiencing a three-speed economic recovery, with advanced economies likely to grow at just over 2.5% in 2011 and the emerging economies at just under 7%, with the U.S. in between, growing at 3%.

Nouriel Roubini, a professor at New York University's Stern School of Business, said political instability deriving from higher food and energy and commodity prices could hurt world growth.

Consumer prices are moving unevenly across the world. See inflation rates across 50 countries.

However, Mr. Roubini, a noted bear at recent meetings here, said he now sees the risks between economic growth and contraction evenly balanced.

On the upside, he said, there is a stronger economic recovery in emerging markets; the risk of a double-dip recession has receded, except in parts of Europe; and corporate balance sheets are strong. But on the downside, he said, public and private sectors are still trying to cut debts in the advanced economies, a threat to growth. Also undermining the positive outlook is possible sovereign default in the euro zone. 

"Some countries are effectively insolvent," Mr. Roubini said, noting Greece's debt is soon expected to exceed 150% of its annual output.

In the U.S., worries centered on high unemployment, a housing market where prices were again pitching downward, and the weak condition of the finances of some state and local governments.

Big trade imbalances—China's surplus and America's large deficits—were still large. This increased the risk that "currency wars" could intensify, as countries tried to keep down the value of their currencies to spur their own exports, which could in turn lead to trade protectionism. 

In some emerging economies, there was also a danger of bubbles, Mr. Roubini said.

 Write to  Stephen Fidler at stephen.fidler@wsj.com and Anjali Cordeiro at anjali.cordeiro@dowjones.com 