Investors looking for clues on who will drive off with  NYSE Euronext can learn from last year's dustup over  Dollar Thrifty Automotive.

When  Hertz Global Holdings
HTZ


-0.26
%




 agreed to acquire Dollar Thrifty last April, the latter's shareholders were incensed by the low price. Meanwhile, rival  Avis Budget Group
CAR


0.92
%




 realized the combination posed a dangerous competitive threat and launched a higher bid, ginning up anger among Dollar Thrifty shareholders. Five months later, they vetoed the Hertz deal.

Despite the very different industries, there are parallels with NYSE. 

Like Avis, the tandem of  Nasdaq OMX Group
NDAQ


0.02
%




 and  IntercontinentalExchange
ICE


0.34
%




 is making a weak offer to rile NYSE shareholders who think their shares are worth more than Deutsche Börse's agreed deal. Like Dollar Thrifty, NYSE is sticking with the lower bid, refusing to meet with its hostile suitor and dismissing the supposedly better offer as unacceptable. Like Hertz, Deutsche Börse is, for now, refusing to sweeten its offer. 

Both examples share a crucial wild card: regulatory risk. And that is one reason why Nasdaq's offer is weak. Take the $350 million reverse breakup fee that Nasdaq has offered to protect NYSE shareholders if their deal is blocked by regulators. The fee expires next March, quite possibly before any regulatory resolution that would allow NYSE shareholders to collect. A cautionary tale: Avis is still waiting for regulatory approval to acquire Dollar Thrifty, though it has been a year since it first filed the paperwork. 

Not that the Deutsche Börse offer has great protections for NYSE shareholders, either: It has no reverse breakup fee.

NYSE shareholders also should examine the tender offer that Nasdaq has announced. It has conditions that make it more a gesture than a reality. Significantly, Nasdaq won't follow through on the offer until the NYSE board dumps poison-pill provisions it can use to block a hostile bidder. That makes sense from Nasdaq's point of view, but is a reminder that the interlopers ultimately will need the NYSE board's support to succeed. Not incidentally, Avis also said it would "commence an exchange offer." Seven months later, it hasn't followed through.

The price premium Nasdaq is offering also has started melting away. As Deutsche Börse shares have risen in dollar terms, the premium offered by Nasdaq over the Deutsche Börse offer has shrunk to 11% from 19%. Will NYSE shareholders trade a bird in hand if Nasdaq isn't offering significantly more in the bush? 

As with the Dollar Thrifty fight, the battle for NYSE is likely heading toward a burst of activity in the weeks leading up to the vote. Nasdaq probably will sweeten its offer, as Avis did. Deutsche Börse, like Hertz, probably will have to improve its own, potentially by allowing NYSE to pay a special dividend. 

Whatever happens, Deutsche Börse may not have matched Nasdaq's price by the time of the vote, leading to a game of chicken with NYSE shareholders. 

Last year, Hertz played and lost. Dollar Thrifty shareholders were confident to reject the offer, in part because their business was improving fast. Indeed, since rejecting Hertz, the shares are up 40%. Come July, NYSE shareholders may have to ask themselves, do they feel so lucky?

 Write to  Rolfe Winkler at rolfe.winkler@wsj.com 