Senior U.S. defense officials tried to lower expectations of an international military intervention in Libya, as rebels, fighting off a key offensive by forces loyal to Col. Moammar Gadhafi, called for foreign airstrikes.

Defense Secretary Robert Gates, testifying before Congress, criticized "loose talk" about any military intervention in Libya, where military rebels and civilian opponents of the government are trying to topple Col. Gadhafi.

The U.S. and allies have discussed the prospect of imposing a no-fly zone over the North African country to prevent Col. Gadhafi from using air forces to strike at protesters. But Mr. Gates on Wednesday made clear the U.S. military would have to launch pre-emptive strikes to destroy Libya's air defenses if President Barack Obama ordered the imposition of a no-fly zone, 

"Let's just call a spade a spade," Mr. Gates said. "A no-fly zone begins with an attack on Libya."

Mr. Gates's words were the strongest public indication of skepticism within the administration about establishing a no-fly zone, especially without broad international support.

In recent days, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has spoken supportively of a no-fly zone. Asked about the apparent contradiction between Mr. Gates's comments and Mrs. Clinton's remarks, Jay Carney, the White House spokesman, said Wednesday that the no-fly zone is being "actively considered."

"The fact that the no-fly zone idea is complex does not mean it's not on the table," Mr. Carney said. "So there is not a contradiction between what Secretary Clinton said and Secretary Gates said."

Administration officials have cast a no-fly zone as an option of last resort, suggesting that, at least privately, there appeared to be little difference in the White House and Pentagon assessments of the situation.

Arab foreign ministers meeting in Cairo, however, said Wednesday they were contemplating supporting a no-fly zone, according to news agency reports. "Arab countries cannot watch with their hands tied in the face of the bloodshed that the Libyan people are facing," the ministers said.

Track events day by day.

See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

A look at the economic and political status of selected countries facing unrest in North Africa and the Middle East.

On Wednesday morning, pro-Gadhafi forces moved into the oil refinery city of Brega, seizing the airport and oil refinery on the city's western edge, according to residents. Fighter jets launched airstrikes against rebel forces in the city and in the area of the rebel-held city of Ajdabiya, home to a large rebel-controlled arms depot. 

With reinforcements from Benghazi, about 125 miles from Brega, and Ajdabiya, about 40 miles away, the rebel forces pushed out the pro-Gadhafi fighters, according to rebels and witnesses. Doctors reported at least four dead. 

It was the first major battle between regime loyalists and rebel fighters in the east of the country since the last of Mr. Gadhafi's forces fled eastern Libya or defected to the rebels ten days earlier.

Leaders from the self-appointed provisional rebel government in the eastern city of Benghazi on Wednesday called for airstrikes by outside powers against foreign mercenaries, which rebel leaders accuse Col. Gadhafi of using in his struggle to put down the rebellion. Rebel leaders appeared to be looking to avoid calling for airstrikes against fellow Libyans.

U.S. military officials said imposing an international no-fly zone looks unlikely, especially with support appearing to decline among allies in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. 

On Monday, British Prime Minister David Cameron spoke enthusiastically about the idea, but on Tuesday senior British officials, facing skepticism from the U.S. and France, tempered their support.

U.S. military officials said if evidence grows that Col. Gadhafi is using airstrikes, especially against unarmed protesters, international support for a no-fly zone could shift. 

For now, the most likely military intervention is a humanitarian relief effort in the eastern part of the country, the rebels' stronghold. The Pentagon has sent two ships and a large contingent of U.S. Marines to the Mediterranean Sea. U.S. troops landing there would require air cover from American fighter planes, but face less of a threat from air defenses based in the western part of the country.

Col. Gadhafi, in a nearly three-hour televised address Wednesday, warned that thousands of Libyans would die if foreign forces intervene in the conflict.

He invited the U.N. to send investigators to Libya, and appealed to President Barack Obama to change his stance. "Let them come to Libya and verify the situation but if they are determined to go after us then we accept the challenge," he said. "We'll then distribute weapons to one, two or three million people, and it will be another Vietnam. We do not care."

The beleaguered Libyan leader, speaking to an audience that included dozens of his core supporters, ambassadors and foreign media, also offered concessions, including a blanket amnesty to rebels if they laid down their weapons. He said that for the time being he was willing to give negotiations that would be spearheaded by tribal elders and religious figures a chance. Col. Gadhafi also dangled financial incentives to his opponents. He said Benghazi, the rebel-controlled eastern city that has long been a center of opposition to his government, was missing out on 20 billion dinars ($16.89 billion) in development funds that had been earmarked for it. Rebels have complained that Col. Gadhafi has deprived them of their due share of oil revenue.

Mr. Gates noted that last weekend's United Nations Security Council resolution imposing sanctions on Libya didn't authorize the use of force. 

Russia, which has a veto on the U.N. Security Council, has said it opposes such a move. Turkey, a NATO member, has also expressed objections. Italy has said it would require a U.N. resolution, while Britain has said it would need "very strong international backing."

The lack of a U.N. mandate wouldn't necessarily stop the U.S. and allies from imposing a no-fly zone: There was no explicit mandate for the no-fly zone operated by U.S., British and, for a time, French aircraft, over the north and south of Iraq from 1992 to 2003. But it would likely prevent NATO from mounting such an operation, as it did over Bosnia from 1993-95.

—Sam Dagher in Tripoli and Joe Lauria at the U.N. contributed to this article.

 Write to  Charles Levinson at charles.levinson@wsj.com and Stephen Fidler at stephen.fidler@wsj.com 