Next to California, New York may be the country's biggest fiscal basket case. It faces a $10 billion deficit, exploding pension liabilities and weak job growth. The good news is that the Empire State's new governor, Andrew Cuomo, at least seems to have a proper grasp of the dire situation.

"The state of New York spends too much money," said Mr. Cuomo in his state of the state address Wednesday. "It is that blunt and that simple." The Democratic governor, who was elected in a landslide last year against a weak Republican opponent, backed up his assertion with hard data. "We have the worst business tax climate in the nation, period," he said. "Our taxes are 66% higher than the national average." He said that between 1994 and 2009, inflation was about 2.7% per year, but "Medicaid went up over 5% per year and education went up over 6% per year. We just can't afford those rates of increase."

Mr. Cuomo then took the argument a step further. "Not only do we spend too much, but we get too little in return," he said. "We spend more money on education than any state in the nation and we are 34 in terms of results. We spend more money on Medicaid than any other state in the nation and we are number 21 in results. We spend about $1.6 billion per year in economic development and we are number 50 in terms of results."

Mr. Cuomo, the son of former New York Governor Mario Cuomo, said the state needs to be transformed. "We are going to start by transforming New York's economy," he promised, because "what made New York the Empire State was not a large government complex. It was a vibrant private sector that was creating great jobs." He said that "at the heart of this state is business" and "we have to put up a sign that says New York is open for business."

Robert Ward of the Albany-based Rockefeller Institute, a state think tank, was impressed by what he heard. "From a fiscal conservative or libertarian view, the rhetoric was the best perhaps ever," he said. "[Former Governor] George Pataki's rhetoric was always good, but Andrew seems more convincing. And he's a more forceful character." The concern, said Mr. Ward, is that he's not said "anything specific about how he's going to balance the budget without [higher] taxes or borrowing."

Unfortunately, Mr. Cuomo's plans for facilitating change don't involve cutting taxes or regulations. Instead he wants to create "economic regional councils all across the state" that will establish "public/private sector partnerships" to focus on creating jobs. Mr. Cuomo did, however, intimate that he won't raise taxes. "The property taxes in New York are killing New Yorkers," he said. "Thirteen of the sixteen highest tax counties are in New York." The governor said that "we have to hold the line on taxes for now and reduce taxes in the future" because "New York has no future as the tax capital of the nation. Our young people will not stay. Our business will not come. This has to change."