LONDON—Activity in the euro zone's manufacturing sector increased more rapidly than first estimated in December, with factories in Spain and Ireland starting to catch up with those in Germany and France. 

Markit Economics Monday said the headline measure from its monthly survey of purchasing managers at factories across the currency area rose to 57.1 from 55.3 in November. 

The preliminary estimate for the Purchasing Managers Index released last month recorded a rise to 56.8. A reading above 50.0 indicates that activity in the sector is increasing. 

German manufacturing activity was once again the strongest in the euro zone, with the PMI rising to 60.7 from 58.1 in November, its highest level since July. Italy's manufacturing PMI rose to 54.7 from 52.9, while the PMI for France's manufacturing sector fell to 57.2 from 57.9. 

But there are signs that some of the euro zone's weaker economies are beginning to share in the manufacturing expansion. Ireland's PMI rose for the third straight month, to 52.2 from 51.2 in November, while Spain's PMI rose to 51.5 from 50.0. However, activity continued to decline in Greece, where the PMI fell to 43.1 from 43.9 in November, its lowest level since August. 

"Germany remained the star performer, seeing near-record growth, followed by France, where the PMI slipped only slightly from November's ten-year peak," said Chris Williamson, an economist at Markit. 

"However, welcome signs of recoveries were also evident in the periphery, where export sales helped boost output growth in all cases except Greece, where the rate of decline at least moderated." 

The expansion in the euro zone's manufacturing activity appears set to continue, with new orders growing at the fastest rate since April, led by Germany, the Netherlands, Austria and France. Export orders increased at the fastest pace for seven months, with the expansion particularly rapid in Germany and France. 

"Robust orders and rising backlogs of work bode well for euro-zone manufacturing activity early in 2011," said Howard Archer, an economist at Global Insight. Manufacturing firms are responding by hiring workers, with jobs growth at its highest since October 2000, although job losses continued in Spain and Greece. 

