'The Real Housewives of Orange County" has spawned six other series since it began in 2006, each of them featuring supposedly prominent women in some city or locale—New York, Atlanta, New Jersey, Washington, D.C., Beverly Hills and, now, Miami—ostensibly living la vida loca we all would if we could. But no excess is ever grotesque enough, for Bravo or for the audience. So each addition to the franchise has introduced people and behavior that seem more mean, stupid, sleazy or delusional.

What was outrageous six years ago—some vulgar words are still bleeped, but there are many more of them today—no longer carries easy thrills. The bikini-waxing-appointment sound effects of the old "O.C." now seem tame. Pole-dancing parties and ladies as dumb as posts are yesterday's amusements. "Housewives" viewers now expect a toxic stew of mental illness, deadbeats, criminal records, recklessly poor parenting and at least the threat of painful physical violence. 

 The Real Housewives of Orange County  Sundays at 10 p.m. ET on Bravo

Even so, the relatively tame "Orange County," which began its sixth season this month, set the standard for all that has followed. Physically, that means injected lips the size of shad roe and eyes that appear to have been frozen open by repeated applications of a cattle prod. Bosoms must have the heft and shape of B-52 missiles, skirts must be worn tight and short, and the heels on shoes (ideally wrapping the foot and ankle like Spartan sandals) can never, ever be too high. 

The Goldilocks look is not mandatory, but it helps. Over the years, featured brunettes on "Orange County" have dropped like flies. Even flaxen locks may not be enough anymore. The latest addition to the show is introduced grasping an assault rifle: "I'm hot, I'm blond, I can rapid fire." In an unrelated update, the O.C. ladies finally have a pet lesbian, too.

Among more staple fare: At least one woman on every show must have a gay male "best friend," ideally a hairdresser who makes house calls and reinforces one's basest instincts while the styling wand heats up. There's a sameness about other accessories, too. In Housewivesland, dogs are small; kids are rude and on heroin or some other path to perdition; and men tend come in only a few basic models: control freak, leech, loser—or payer of alimony. 

Yet the primary targets for scorn are women, and since these shows are equal-opportunity humiliators, virtually everyone comes off badly at some point. Those who want to survive on the show learn what it takes to get camera time. What editor could ignore the O.C.'s opulently buxom Christian Alexis telling us that "God is my savior, my husband is my king, and my body..." It's sinful all right.

While trash-talking is now the signature mode of all "Housewives," not all labels are insults—especially when they're coming from the mouth of a newly liberated woman, like impending O.C. divorcee Tamra: "Now that I am a free bitch I feel like I am my own person." Then there's the O.C.'s perky vixen Gretchen, whom we met in season four as the girlfriend of an older man with leukemia; he died after showering her with gifts that included a huge diamond ring and a Harley. A tearful Gretchen spent the next season mourning her lover and defending herself against accusations of gold-diggerism. Now, though, she styles that episode in her life as a dating tragedy of female-identity loss: "I'm not going to allow a man to ever put me in that position again." 

Where does Bravo find these characters? Not all are hired for their freak-show appeal, like the Salahi couple who were being filmed for the D.C. "Housewives" as they were famously "crashing" a White House state dinner. Some cast members have fascinating pedigrees. The doyenne of the Miami "Housewives" is Lea Black, who is married to lawyer Roy Black. Their story begins in Texas in 1991, when she was a juror at William Kennedy Smith's trial for rape and Mr. Black was on the defense team. "I was sequestered," Ms. Black explains, but a few months after Mr. Smith was acquitted, she "ran into" Mr. Black and the rest is history. 

Over the years, viewer scorn has hailed down on many housewives, but most have learned to brazen it out, or to suck it up in public mea culpas after which they are, at least briefly, redeemed. And even fleeting fame pays well these days. In another age, some of these women might have been lucky to end up as Hollywood Squares or in "Airplane!" movie cameos. Today, not everyone can be, like Atlanta's NeNe Leakes, on "Celebrity Apprentice." But there are paid mall and party appearances or recording contracts on offer. And QVC, where Bravo housewives can leverage their 15 minutes of fame by flogging clothing, jewelry and makeup so average folk in the hinterlands can get their 15 minutes of fame by proxy. 

What's next? Nobody has hooked up with a serial killer yet. But there's always more raunch possible, as with the Miami housewives who recently were depicted at a fashion show ogling male body parts in tight bathing suits with a gusto that would not seem out of place in a gay bar. Yet when all is said and done, true sensual sexiness is in short supply on these shows. Beneath their Swarovski crystals and spangled dresses, a lot of the ladies are looking as tired as saloon girls on the late shift. 

Maybe that was always the goal, though. The glamour vibe, like so much else on the shows, is mostly an illusion. Is the franchise's premise of having good fun celebrating female foibles and empowerment a pretense, too? The cast members may be outfitted and painted like a drag queen's cheerful dream of womanhood. But an odor of misogyny is in the air. As if watching these shows has made us complicit in someone else's contempt for the female of the species. 