 Nintendo's president acknowledged the company's health warning for its new 3-D game machine could hurt sales, but said the 3DS isn't a "dangerous" product. He said the warning was meant to be a precautionary measure to inform customers and also fend off possible litigation.  

 The new year is off to a rough start for European markets, and strategists expect more trouble as governments prepare to tap the bond markets to borrow money.  

 One of China's biggest cities, Chongqing, is finalizing plans for a new tax on high-end residential real estate, Xinhua reported.  

 Agricultural Bank of China and China Minsheng Banking plan to raise up to $11 billion from the domestic market as they prepare for stricter rules on capital. 

 Samsung and LG are placing big bets this year on different techniques for watching 3-D TVs, setting up a race that could determine the future of the product.  

 Facebook gave the clearest sign yet that it is preparing to take itself public in 2012, revealing new details in a document sent to certain potential investors.  

 Renault's chief operating officer said the company had been the victim of "an organized international network" in the corporate espionage case linked to its electric-vehicle program.  

 Apple watchers say Verizon Wireless could generate sales of 9 million to 12 million iPhones in the U.S. this year.  

 The global aluminum market is poised to rally further as critical end markets such as transportation and housing improve.  

 Oil producers on Alaska's North Slope were told to cut output by 95%, after a leak was discovered at a pump station.  

 Duke Energy is close to a deal to buy Progress Energy in an all-stock merger that would value its smaller rival at over $13 billion.  

 Resona will sell stock to raise about $7.2 billion as the Japanese bank seeks to repay public funds it borrowed. 

 Carlyle Group is seeking to raise as much as $1.79 billion by selling part of its stake in China Pacific Insurance.  

 Robert Gates arrived in Beijing for talks aimed at smoothing the U.S.-China military relationship. Military experts said it was no accident that fresh video and images of China's supposed stealth fighter appeared online just ahead of the U.S. defense secretary's visit.  

 Thailand's prime minister announced welfare spending projects aimed at bridging social divides.  

 Tens of thousands of Islamists rallied in Karachi in support of Pakistan's blasphemy laws.  

Israel began construction of a controversial Jewish housing complex in the heart of predominantly Palestinian East Jerusalem.

Anti-American Shiite cleric Sadr backed the new Iraqi government in a homecoming speech and said he will give the U.S. a chance to withdraw remaining troops from Iraq by year-end.

 U.S. commanders in Afghanistan are seeking ways to maintain the level of combat troops there, even as they plan to cut the overall number of U.S. personnel.  

Chinese Vice Premier Li Keqiang arrived in Edinburgh, on a visit to the U.K. aimed at boosting political and commercial ties. 

An environmental official in China's Anhui province was suspended after a battery factory sickened over 200 children with lead poisoning, authorities said.

An IranAir passenger plane crashed in the country's northwest in bad weather, and at least half of the 95 people on board survived, Iranian media reported. There was no word on any dead.