There's nothing like parenting for uncovering our most deeply held beliefs. In general conversation with friends, plenty of us exercise a certain liberal-mindedness, a flexibility of perspective that eases social intercourse. Why alienate pals by lecturing them on the need to be more detail-oriented, or frugal, or neat? At work it's rarely smart to tell colleagues that their thinking is sloppy or dull, even if it is.

But this self-restraint goes out the window when we are confronted with our own teenage offspring. With them we do not hesitate to pontificate on everyday virtues, every day. We extol the benefits of doing homework and studying for tests. We pass on our hard-won nuggets of wisdom to the people we most love in the world. And how do these people react? They roll their eyes.

Asian parents are renowned not only for attempting to steer their children in the right direction but also for exerting such impressive control over them that young Asians excel in almost every area of worthwhile endeavor. Can we all learn from this example? Can we move from merely spouting off to shaping prodigies? Can we get our children to achieve more, misbehave less and revere us all the way to a sunny graduation day in Harvard Yard? 

Amy Chua addresses such questions in "Battle Hymn of the Tiger Mother," an account of her attempt to bring up her two daughters, now teenagers, in the Asian way. Ms. Chua is herself a high-achieving Chinese-American—she is a Yale law professor—but her child-rearing campaign is not easy. "Chinese parenting is incredibly lonely—at least if you're trying to do it in the West, where you're on your own," she writes. "You have to go up against an entire value system—rooted in the Enlightenment, individual autonomy, child development theory and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights." 

 By Amy Chua  The Penguin Press, 237 pages, $25.95

Such grand pronouncements are characteristic of the driven, passionate and insightful Ms. Chua. Her sweeping statements do begin to pall after a while, but what saves "Battle Hymn of the Tiger Mother," and makes Ms. Chua ultimately an endearing presence, is her ability to be candid about her excesses and poke fun at herself.

After her first daughter, Sophia, was born in 1993, and then Louisa three years later, Ms. Chua decided to set the bar high: They're not allowed to go on play dates or to sleep over at friends' houses. The TV is off-limits, as are videogames. She requires her daughters to be fluent in Mandarin, although she herself learned the Hokkien dialect at home. She expects them to be straight-A students, advising them to check test answers three times and look up every word they didn't know and memorize its exact meaning. 

She also fears that her children will be pampered and decadent, growing up in America's prosperity. So she insists that they do physical labor. As often as possible she tries "to make them carry heavy objects—overflowing laundry baskets up and down stairs, garbage out on Sundays, suitcases when we traveled." She brooks no disrespect. When Sophia acts out on one occasion, her mother tells her that she's "garbage."

Ms. Chua considers most extra-curricular activities a waste of time, except one: playing a musical instrument. And it is in this realm that her fanaticism reaches full flower. She selects the piano for Sophia and starts her with lessons at age 3. She chooses the violin for Louisa. Both girls turn out to be talented musicians, and Ms. Chua is a determined taskmaster. "My Western friends who consider themselves strict make their children practice their instruments thirty minutes every day. An hour at most," she writes. "For a Chinese mother, the first hour is the easy part. It's hours two and three that can get tough." 

The descriptions of Ms. Chua's interactions with her children during practice sessions are hair-raising in their intensity and belie any notion that Chinese kids are naturally more compliant than children in the West. For hours she bullies the girls and cajoles them to do more, hovering over them to criticize their fingering and rhythm. Because she attends their lessons, she has notes on the teacher's comments and cites them incessantly. When Ms. Chua has to miss a daily practice, she leaves memos covering what her daughters should do. One point among dozens in a typical missive: "Page 8, [measure] 40: This chord is way too heavy! ½ bow pressure and high violin! Articulate short notes." 

One marvels at Ms. Chua's energy and focus—she has a demanding full-time job on top of all this musical monitoring—but one feels for the children. Only in her dealings with the family's two dogs does the author seem, well, normal. "I don't make any demands of them . . . or their future," she writes of the big cuddly Samoyeds. "For the most part, I trust them to make the right choices for themselves. I always look forward on seeing them, and I love just watching them sleep. What a great relationship."

In the end it's not the dogs but Louisa who persuades Ms. Chua that she needs to modify her approach. Always the more defiant of the two daughters, Louisa finally cracks, on a family trip, when her mother insists that she try caviar in a restaurant near Moscow's Red Square. Somehow that demand triggers in the 13-year-old girl a true American-style teenage outburst featuring thrown glasses and I-hate-you's ricocheting around the room. After this shocking display of disobedience, Ms. Chua concludes that she needs to relax her hold and grant the girls a modicum of independence. Louisa promptly dials back her violin-practicing to a mere 30 minutes a day and bans her mother from kibitzing.

So where does that leave Ms. Chua? Pretty much where millions of other parents are, standing on the sidelines of our children's lives, proud, anxious observers trying to offer useful advice. Meanwhile, Ms. Chua is thinking about getting another dog.

 Ms. McHugh is the editor of All You magazine. 