 New York  

How is it that vampires and zombies (not to mention serial killers, their postmodern cousins) are so hot nowadays? No doubt our undiminished interest in the blood-suckers and flesh-eaters among us says something profound, disturbing and transgressive about American culture, but I'm damned if I know what it is, perhaps because I hopped off that particular train when "Buffy the Vampire Slayer" closed up shop. I have yet to see a single installment of "Twilight," "True Blood" or "The Vampire Diaries," nor do I plan to do so anytime soon. I did, however, snag a ticket to the new Off-Broadway "Dracula," partly because the ever-excellent George Hearn is playing Van Helsing, Buffy's spiritual great-grandfather, and partly because Thora Birch, who was so fine in "Ghost World" and "American Beauty," was supposed to play Lucy Seward, the chief recipient of the sanguinary favors of the Transylvanian count (Michel Altieri).

 DRACULA   Little Shubert Theatre,  422 W. 42nd St., New York  ($89.50), 212-239-6200, closes March 13

Ms. Birch, however, got canned when the show was in rehearsal and has since been replaced by Emily Bridges, her understudy. Now that I've seen the play she left behind, I incline to think that she got lucky, for this "Dracula" is a limply staged, unconvincingly acted mess.

The last "Dracula" of any consequence to be seen in New York was the Edward Gorey-designed 1977 Broadway production that made Frank Langella a star. (Frank Wildhorn's 2004 musical version is best passed over in charitable silence.) It was, like this one, a revival of the 1927 Hamilton Deane-John Balderston stage version of Bram Stoker's novel that first brought Bela Lugosi to the attention of American audiences. Mr. Lugosi's subsequent career needs no recounting here, and Mr. Langella's urbanely sensuous performance, which was documented in John Badham's pretty good 1979 film version, is also vividly remembered by playgoers of a certain age.

Since then, though, vampire stories have been done to undeath in Hollywood and on TV, thus upping the ante considerably for anyone who wants to put Count Dracula's original story back on the stage. To return to the Deane-Balderston play after seeing "Buffy," Kathryn Bigelow's "Near Dark" and Francis Ford Coppola's 1992 "Dracula" film is to find it very weak tea indeed, a staidly talky telling of the old, old story in which the audience sits around waiting for something exciting, or even unexpected, to happen.

I can see only two ways to make "Dracula" work on the stage today. The first is to do it as a big-budget megaspectacular with special effects galore. The second is to do it straight, but with a cast of first-class actors who play the script for truth, not thrills. This production, by contrast, falls into the yawning gap between those two stools. It isn't exactly cheap—Dana Kenn's quick-change set is an ingenious piece of work—but too many corners have been cut in bringing the design from the page to the stage, and the results make a cheesy impression. Likewise the special effects (the bats are really bad) and 50-famous-classics-the-whole-world-loves incidental music (Lucy and the count actually dance to the "Moonlight" Sonata).

As for the acting, you won't have any trouble figuring out the high concept of this production: Except for Mr. Hearn and Timothy Jerome, who plays Lucy's father, everyone in the cast is very young and mostly very pretty. The goal, I assume, is to appeal to the teen-and-tween set, but the producers have neglected to hire any familiar faces and favored looks over experience. As a result, some of the performances are ludicrously amateurish. I won't name any names—Paul Alexander, the show's near-unknown, painfully ungifted director, may be the guilty party here—but I heard the chilling sound of unintended laughter at several points in the second act.

Alas, there is no evading the sad fact that Mr. Altieri, a pupil of Luciano Pavarotti who is said to be very big in Italy, is a hopelessly uncharismatic Dracula fitted out with a ponytail, a rented tux and a faux-Transylvanian accent whose mismatched vowels sound as though they'd been chosen by spinning the Wheel of Fortune. I've seen a lot of Draculas, but his is the first who was smaller than life.

All of which brings us to Mr. Hearn, a Broadway veteran better known for his musical-comedy performances (he replaced Len Cariou in "Sweeney Todd" and created the role of Albin in "La Cage aux Folles") than for his straight acting. Even so, Mr. Hearn does everything in his power to persuade us that he's standing on the bridge of a ship that isn't sinking beneath his feet, and there are moments when you can almost believe it. Most of the time, though, it feels as though he wandered in from a better production of "Dracula" and is patiently waiting for the curtain to fall so that he can slip out the stage door and find the right theater.

—Mr. Teachout, the Journal's drama critic, blogs about theater and the other arts at www.terryteachout.com. Write to him at tteachout@wsj.com.