ISTANBUL—Turkey sent a delegation to Syria to advise the government on implementing rapid reforms, as nations scrambled to find a way to convince President Bashar al-Assad to abandon a military crackdown on protesters against his regime.

Syria's leadership agreed to the visit, according to Selim Yenel, deputy undersecretary for the Americas at Turkey's Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Turkish leaders have repeatedly called for Mr. Assad to use restraint in dealing with protesters and to quickly introduce reforms, only to see their appeals ignored.

Mr. Assad has introduced some reforms to try to quell protests, including abolishing a decades-old emergency law that helped security forces keep a firm grip on dissent. But protesters haven't been satisfied with those steps, and the Syrian military has escalated its use of force to try to silence them.

As a wave of popular uprisings spread across the Arab Mideast and North Africa in recent months, the U.S. and others have found a succession of challenges in determining how best to influence entrenched regimes.

The U.S. has refrained from pressing for Mr. Assad to quit, as it did with Libyan leader Col. Moammar Gadhafi and Egypt's President Hosni Mubarak. 

The Obama administration, which had pursued closer ties with Mr. Assad in an effort to woo Syria away from Iranian influence, is now preparing sanctions against senior Syrian officials. The U.S. this week summoned Syrian Ambassador Imad Moustapha to protest the detention and harassment of a Damascus-based U.S. diplomat, according to a U.S. official. The diplomat has been released.

European Union ambassadors were set to discuss sanctions in Brussels on Friday. Senior European officials said the EU is likely to impose sanctions on Syria within the week. 

The measures are expected to include asset freezes and travel bans on senior Syrian officials involved in the political crackdown. These measures are being coordinated with the U.S., the officials said.

The U.S. and EU are considering pushing for a United Nations Security Council resolution condemning the violence in Syria, American and European officials said. The officials acknowledged that could be difficult, after the council failed to agree Wednesday to back a draft statement sending the same message.

More than 400 protesters have been killed by Syria's military in the crackdown on demonstrations that began in mid-March, according to rights groups. On Thursday, military forces continued efforts to preempt another Friday in which protests proliferate around the country. The southern city of Deraa, where antiregime demonstrations began, remained under military siege for a fourth day. 

Security forces also deployed around the capital, Damascus, activists said, and other cities. Military tanks moved in around the western city of Zabadani, 25 miles northwest of Damascus, near the border with Lebanon, a human-rights activist in Damascus said.

Despite the rising death toll from weeks of unrest, people across Syria continue to protest the government of President Bashar al-Assad. See events by day.

Track events day by day in the region.

Popular demonstrations in Tunisia toppled a president and spread to countries across the region. See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

About 200 people were detained in home raids in the nearby town of Madhaya, and one person was confirmed as killed by security forces, the activist said. 

For Turkey, the Mideast uprisings, and especially the crackdown in Syria, threaten to undermine a policy of avoiding friction with neighbors that has helped it expand trade and influence in the region in recent years.

That policy was achieved by developing strong commercial relationships and political ties with other regimes.

Turkey is one of the few countries—other than Iran—with a direct line of communication with Mr. Assad. Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan has met with and telephoned Mr. Assad in an effort to influence him "on a number of occasions" since protests began in Syria, said Mr. Yenel, the Turkish diplomat.

Mr. Erdogan—who is in the midst of an election campaign—has come under fire from political opponents in recent days for being too soft on the Syrian president as the crackdown became increasingly violent and death toll has risen.

"We don't want an authoritarian, totalitarian regime" in Syria, Mr. Erdogan said Wednesday. "We hope the process of democratization will be rapidly pursued."

A spokesman for Turkey's foreign ministry said the delegation to Syria included the head of Turkey's National Intelligence Agency, Hakan Fidan, and an undersecretary at the state planning organization, which is responsible for institutional reforms within Turkey's government bureaucracies.

The delegation to Damascus marks the beginning of a process designed to produce a "road map" for changes to Syria's public and economic administration, in line with popular demands, Mr. Yenel said. "We know [public pressure] puts them in a box, in a corner. We try to engage these people," he said, referring also to Libyan leader Col. Gadhafi.

—Jay Solomon contributed to this article.

 Write to  Marc Champion at marc.champion@wsj.com and Nour Malas at nour.malas@dowjones.com 