President Barack Obama's State of the Union speech Tuesday night will mark a turning point in the Washington debate, shifting it from one focused on the past to one focused on the future.

For most of the first two years of the Obama presidency, the nation's capital has been dominated by questions with a backward cast: Who caused the financial meltdown, which policies were responsible, which responses helped and which hurt, who was to blame for creating the budget deficit, and what was the best way to wind down the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan?

When he mounts the giant podium in the House of Representatives for his State of the Union, Mr. Obama will be pivoting to what comes next—specifically, launching a discussion about which party has the policies to "win the future," a phrase in vogue in Obama circles. In so doing, the president will be framing a fundamental philosophical debate that goes to the heart of the differences between the two political parties, and stating a core argument about the role of government that will dominate the next two years.

The president will be making the case that, even in a time of necessary and painful budget cuts elsewhere, the economic future of the country requires new government investments in research, infrastructure and education to make the U.S. economy more competitive and to turn it back into a robust job-creating machine. 

It will be a statement designed to address Americans' fears that their country might have lost its edge—in particular, that it's in danger of losing a long-term economic race with China's command economy, in which the Chinese government devotes whatever resources are necessary to become a global leader in such areas as solar energy and high-speed rail.

Put more bluntly, Mr. Obama will be saying that the private sector he has been working so hard to embrace in recent weeks needs help from the government to stay ahead. The argument goes like this: Businesses do what they do well, but they can't educate our kids, build transportation networks or be expected to invest their precious resources adequately in basic research. That's the government's role, and it's needed now more than ever.

The Republican response will be to say that the Democrats are looking at the future through a rear-view mirror—that the ideas Mr. Obama will present are essentially the same ones that were discredited in his first two years, simply put in a different frame. 

Their argument goes like this: Even well-intentioned efforts to engineer economic growth through government spending are less efficient than any spending in the private sector would be—and that the budget deficits of the hour ought to preclude it in any case.

"With all due respect to our Democratic friends, any time they want to spend, they call it investment," Senate Republican leader Mitch McConnell said on "Fox News Sunday," in a succinct summary of the GOP argument.

Republicans will argue that the best government investment in the future would be to simply cut spending, soak up deficits and thereby keep more dollars floating in the private sector, which inevitably knows best what to do with those dollars.

In a nutshell, Mr. Obama will be offering a plan to invest and grow, and Republicans will counter with a plan to cut and grow. 

It's a healthy debate, for it precisely frames the philosophical division between Democrats and Republicans. If there's any point in having political parties, it's because they help articulate such differences.

This debate about the proper role of government in the 21st century will also be at the heart of the next presidential campaign. "This State of the Union is going to start a two-year discussion about policy and contrasting views—his versus ours," said a senior Republican aide in the House.

Healthy as this debate may be, both parties are receiving some clear warning signals from a skeptical American public not yet convinced that the dark days of recession are past. In the latest Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll, Americans said by a wide margin that they would rather hear Mr. Obama talk about economic growth and jobs than any other topic in his State of the Union, while 55% of those surveyed said they worry the new Republican-heavy Congress will be too inflexible in dealing with the president. 

Americans are saying they want jobs, and won't have much patience for simply arguing about how to create them. Democratic pollster Peter Hart, who co-directs the Wall Street Journal/NBC News survey, summarizes the message for both parties this way: "Don't tell us what you cannot do; show us what you will do."

 Write to  Gerald F. Seib at jerry.seib@wsj.com 