As if struggling with the after-effects of the financial crisis weren't enough for Europe's policy makers, they now have to deal with an oil-price shock.

The effect is like driving a crippled car up a hill only to discover the exhaust has dropped off and brakes are gone. Either it slows so much it starts to roll backwards, or it gets over the top and runs out of control.

Will Brent crude at $116 a barrel, up almost 60% since the end of last summer, slam Europe's economies back into a deflationary recession? Or will it trigger a stagflationary wage-price spiral, the likes of which blighted the 1970s? 

As far as the majority of the Bank of England's rate-setters are concerned, the risks are probably tilted toward the former. With the U.K. running an output gap and unemployment still well above its normal rate, the jump in fuel prices will tend to slow the economy down as it acts like a tax, cutting households' ability to spend on other things. And with the government's austerity program finally starting to bite, the hit to domestic demand could be serious. 

So even though consumer price inflation is at double the bank's target and set to rise, its governor,  Mervyn King, is adamant this inflationary overshoot is a temporary phenomenon. Indeed, some on the bank's policy-setting committee worry about the deflationary consequences of the surge in oil prices.

The European Central Bank has a much trickier job of determining the balance of risks.

Countries at the euro zone's periphery are struggling with their own fiscal belt-tightening and high unemployment rates. They were already on the cusp of recessionary relapse even before revolutionary fever ignited the Middle East. 

But at the same time, the German economy is making like a Porsche on the autobahn. Some economists think it's at risk of overheating. According to EU statistics agency Eurostat, the German unemployment rate was 6.5% in January, its lowest since the summer of 1992. The result has been upward pressure on German inflation. The latest flash estimates of euro-zone consumer prices showed them rising 2.4% on the year in February, up from 2.3% the previous month and above the ECB target of slightly less than 2%.

Because there's likely to be very little excess capacity in the German economy, climbing oil prices are likely to translate into higher wage demands. The IG Metall union's negotiated 3.2% wage increase for  Volkswagen
VLKAY


-2.15
%




 workers last month is likely to be a pace-setter for industry overall during the current round of country-wide negotiations.

Further complicating matters for the ECB is the degree to which the euro zone is dependent on energy imports. The single-currency region produces only about 5% of its oil demand and 33% of its total energy requirements, according to data from the U.S. Energy Information Administration. By contrast, the U.S. covers about 50% of its oil consumption and 75% of its total energy needs, while the U.K. is self-sufficient for 90% and 75%, respectively. Among the major economic regions, only Japan is more dependent on energy imports.

How governments react adds yet another dimension to the overall policy puzzle.

For instance, pressure is on U.K. Chancellor of the Exchequer  George Osborne to pull back sharply on his austerity program at his budget later this month.

Haulage and motoring campaigners relentlessly lobby him to offset the rise in pump prices by easing up on fuel taxes. But if he merely maintains the fuel duty in line with inflation, rather than increasing it by inflation plus a penny, as is due to happen from the start of April, the government will lose around £500 million of revenue over the coming year. Were he to freeze taxes at their current levels, it would cost £1.5 billion.

The Institute for Fiscal Studies, an independent think-tank, says a fall in demand for fuel caused by high oil prices would knock £400 million ($653 million) off the current year's tax receipts and £800 million next year. Big as these numbers are, they're small change compared with what Mr. Osborne faces losing elsewhere if his resolve crumbles. 

A program of welfare cuts and changes to inflation indexation, both key parts of his austerity program, will squeeze pensioners and the poorest at a time when they're having to spend ever more on food and fuel. Campaigners will make a huge effort to get him to delay these measures. As they are already doing with his military spending review. 

It's true Mr Osborne has some money to work with. Capital Economics figures the U.K.'s budget shortfall for the current year will undershoot official projections of a £149 billion deficit by around £10 billion. But Mr Osborne will be aware that this isn't money in the bank. If oil prices cause the economy to slow substantially, the public finances will worsen again during the coming fiscal year.

The degree to which the government abandons its fiscal belt-tightening will also influence domestic inflationary pressures. If Mr. Osborne decides to soften the blow for the poor by providing fuel price stabilizers or welfare boosts designed to keep up with food prices, the Bank of England will start to worry about an inflationary spiral kicking in.

The European Central Bank will have similar concerns. In Greece, anti-austerity protesters have taken to withholding tax and other payments due to the government. Civil disobedience, weak public finances and debt renegotiations could yet force Europe's richer countries to extend even more loans and transfer payments, not just to Greece, but to Ireland and Portugal as well. If these aren't offset by higher taxes in core countries, the result could prove inflationary for the euro zone.

There are tough choices all around. Investors would do well to insure themselves against policy makers getting it wrong.

 Write to  Alen Mattich at alen.mattich@dowjones.com 