With the first week of the new year already gone, let's look at a few collector hot spots in the first quarter.

In a bid to reach collectors in their homes, top European, American and Asian galleries will launch the VIP Art Fair (www.vipartfair.com), the first online event of its kind from Jan. 22-30. Some 139 international galleries will participate, including heavyweights such as Gagosian, Hauser & Wirth, White Cube, David Zwirner and Sadie Coles.

VIP, which stands for "Viewing in Private," will be run like a physical fair with three exhibition halls dubbed VIP Premier, VIP Focus and VIP Emerging. 

Premier will have gallery booths presenting works by top contemporary artists such as Louise Bourgeois, Damien Hirst, Takashi Murakami and Jenny Holzer. Focus will have 24 galleries with eight works in each gallery by a single artist, including Jackson Pollock and Thomas Ruff. Emerging will present works produced in the last two years by up-and-coming artists. In addition, galleries will have a selection of art in their online backrooms ready to be shown when asked by collectors. 

Upon logging in, fair visitors find a map guiding them through exhibitions and, with a click, they can move from booth to booth. Collectors connect with gallery staff to discuss works through a chat and messaging system.

Fair co-founder James Cohen, owner of James Cohen Gallery in New York and Shanghai, says the fair is harnessing the international reach of the Internet to serve collectors who find it difficult to travel to events around the world and "yet don't want to miss out."

This VIP experiment is one to keep an eye on.

Meanwhile, for those collectors intent on viewing art face to face, ARCO takes place Feb. 16-20 in Madrid. This is southern Europe's most prominent art fair, with galleries from Europe, the Americas and Asia showing their 20th-century masters to 21st-century established and emerging artists. Each year ARCO puts a special focus on one country, and this year it is Russia, with eight galleries invited. As well as showcasing Russian galleries at the fair, cultural centers in Madrid have prepared a wide-ranging program of exhibitions, concerts and events centered on contemporary Russian artists.

Tefaf, the world's most influential art and antiques fair, runs from March 18-27 in the southern Dutch town of Maastricht. Private jets will be bringing the world's collector elite to an event famous for its great rarities, which this year includes the only fragment of an Egyptian clock remaining in private hands, commissioned by Alexander the Great in circa 332-323 B.C. (price €150,000 at Galerie Harmakhis, Brussels).

In Paris at the Palais de Tokyo on March 29-31, Christie's will offer the Gourdon Collection, one of the finest private collections of early 20th-century design. 

According to Philippe Garner, Christie's international head of 20th-century decorative arts and design, this promises to be a blockbuster event. "I am confidant that this sale will be an historic one," Mr. Garner says.

The collection comprises around 500 pieces from decorative Art Nouveau that flourished at the start of the 20th century to the striking forms of Art Deco in the 1920s and 1930s to the modernism of the Union des Artistes Modernes, a design movement backed by architects. The pieces were assembled over 15 years by French art collector Laurent Negro, who housed works in his family's medieval Chateau de Gourdon near Grasse. 

"He draw together great examples of French design spotlighting the functional and the aesthetic," Mr. Garner says.

More than 45 works by the great Art Deco master Emile-Jacques Ruhlmann (1879-1933) will be on offer, including an imposing writing desk from 1929 in black lacquer that emanates executive power (€2 million-€3 million). There will also be a group of works from the famed Irish-expatriate, French-based designer Eileen Gray (1879-1976). Among them "Transatlantique" (circa 1926), a chair made from canvas that breathes lazy days on a ship's desk (estimate: €1 million-€1.5 million).

Meanwhile, in Hong Kong on Jan. 22, British composer Andrew Lloyd Webber's extensive collection of French wines will be auctioned in 748 lots at Sotheby's, underlining the importance that Asian collectors have assumed in the wine market. The collection is expected to fetch HK$21.8 million-HK$32 million (€2.1 million-€3.1 million). 

 Write to  Margaret Studer at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 