HONG KONG— Hong Kong Exchanges & Clearing Ltd.
0388


-2.40
%




 reiterated its plan to capitalize on its links to China as it reported a 10% rise in first-quarter net profit from increased trading activity on the city's stock exchange. 

While acknowledging that cross-border merger plans from major exchanges and the emergence of alternative trading venues "have placed HKEx in a rapidly changing and increasingly competitive landscape," Hong Kong's monopoly exchange operator said Wednesday it would continue building on its role as "China's international financial center," including establishing the city as an offshore yuan center. 

Hong Kong's stock exchange has been the most popular global venue for new share offerings in the past two years, largely thanks to its ties to China. It is vying to attract international issuers such as resource and luxury-brand companies. 

So far this year, HKEx ranks sixth in terms of money raised through new listings, according to data provider Dealogic, trailing exchanges in New York, China and Singapore. The total will rise if expected stock listings from companies including Swiss commodities trader Glencore International AG, U.S. luggage maker Samsonite, Italian fashion company Prada SpA and casino operator MGM China Holdings Ltd. are completed.

HKEx has insisted it isn't in merger talks following a recent spate of deal-making among the world's largest exchanges.  London Stock Exchange Group
LSE


1.50
%




 PLC and Canada's  TMX Group Inc.
X


0.06
%




 have agreed to a tie-up, and  NYSE Euronext and  Deutsche Börse AG
DBOEF


0.53
%




 plan to complete a deal to merge by the end of the year.  Nasdaq OMX Group Inc.
NDAQ


0.14
%




 and IntercontinentalExchange Inc. are seeking to break up that deal through a hostile offer for  NYSE Euronext. Last month, Australia blocked Singapore Exchange Ltd.'s plan to take over  ASX Ltd.
ASX


0.93
%




 

Instead of seeking a deal, HKEx has said it is focusing on strengthening ties with China's markets. Last year, it said it would allow locally listed Chinese companies to prepare financial statements using Chinese accounting standards, and mainland auditors to vet them. It also announced a plan to better align its trading hours with Chinese markets. 

The exchange operator has said increasing the overlap with China is crucial because more than 70% of the trading volume on the local stock market is in China-related securities and the number of companies listed in both China and Hong Kong is likely to increase given the city's role as China's offshore yuan center. 

As part of those efforts, HKEx repeated that it plans to launch a yuan equity trading support facility in the second half of the year to ensure long-term growth and the stability of a yuan stock market. On Wednesday, it called that market "subject to the challenge of sufficient and reliable [yuan] liquidity in Hong Kong." 

Hui Xian Real Estate Investment Trust, controlled by  Li Ka-Shing, debuted April 29 as Hong Kong's first yuan-denominated initial public offering. At the time, HKEx Chief Executive  Charles Li called it a milestone for the internationalization of the yuan. 

However, shares fell sharply on its first day of trade as retail investors likely saw Hui Xian as a steady income-generating security rather than a quick money-making play, and on concerns that the market wouldn't have access to enough yuan to allow significant trading in the REIT. 

Those shares have fallen further since then, including a 1.5% drop on Wednesday. They closed at 4.66 yuan, down 11% from the IPO price of 5.24 yuan.

The stock-exchange operator said net profit for the three months ended March 31 was 1.24 billion Hong Kong dollars (US$160 million), up from HK$1.13 billion in the same period last year. 

The company, which makes money from fees and tariffs related to securities, options and derivatives trading, as well as listing fees, investment income and clearing and settlement fees, said revenue rose 11% to HK$1.91 billion from HK$1.71 billion. 

Average daily turnover on the stock exchange during the first quarter jumped 17% to HK$75.9 billion from HK$64.8 billion a year earlier. 

The exchange operator's shares fell 0.6% Wednesday, amid concerns that China might tighten policy again as inflation there rose more than expected.

 Write to  Kate O'Keeffe at kathryn.okeeffe@dowjones.com 