My son has earned his first real paycheck.

A Hollywood studio came to town recently and rented my wife's medical center to film a hospital scene. The producers gave my 14-year-old a spot as one of the extras.

For his 10 hours of labor -- if you call sitting around most of the time playing on his handheld videogame "labor" -- he earned $79 before taxes.

And that's where today's story really begins.

Somewhere between the $79 gross pay he earned and the $63.35 the bank teller handed him, my son came face to face with America's system of taxation.

And I came face to face with one of the toughest challenges I have to deal with as a parent: how to walk the line between my desire to tell my children what I believe in and an equally strong desire to have my children think independently.

As I learned with my son's paycheck, this isn't an easy line to walk.

* * *

We parents of teenagers routinely talk about the day our kids find a real job and learn what it means to actually earn a dollar.

But that first paycheck is also the start of an important education, an introduction to a litany of hot-button issues that split the country philosophically.

It is an opportunity to teach our children about the economic system we live in. As much as we might have tried to impart this information before, there's nothing that focuses a teenager's mind like seeing the difference between gross pay and take-home pay.

Suddenly, the questions we adults grapple with become all too real. Where do the tax dollars go? Does the government take out too much or too little? Should there be state income taxes? Social Security taxes? Should people who earn more pay more? Does the government spend our money wisely? And so on.

Now, I have my own set of beliefs about all these issues. I'm sure that if I aired my thoughts here it would anger half the people who read it, while the other half would sing my praises.

I'm not going to offer those views here. But the question I struggle with is how forcefully I should tell my children my opinions, and whether I should do all I can to make sure their opinions echo my own. Obviously, at some point they may turn against my arguments (perhaps for the simple reason that they are my arguments). But there's no doubt that I can exert a profound influence on what my kids believe.

A lot of people say I should take that power and run with it. It is my responsibility to pass on my values to my kids, they say.

And on some basic level, I agree. I want my children to know that I have strongly held beliefs about the relationship between government and the people. I like the idea of sending my children out into the world armed with the values I've given them.

And yet, I'm torn. Because part of me is also determined to send my children out into the world armed with values that they've arrived at on their own, because they looked at the options and discovered what made the most sense to them.

In writing this column, I sought counsel from a longtime friend, and what he said about his children rang true to me.

"I believe a parent's role is not to create a mini-me, but to create a person who can think for himself or herself," he told me. He said that when his now-adult son started to talk about the economy, "his knee-jerk reaction was to always be ultraliberal. And I often agreed with him. But I would always try to get him to see the bigger picture -- even to the point that he would think I disagreed with him."

The result, he says, is that while his son is still liberal, it's not nearly as knee-jerk as it once once.

My college friend Drew offers a similar perspective. Drew says he "is very careful about how I impart information to my kids. I will try to carefully point out when something is fact, and when something is an opinion based on my experiences or observations.

"If something is my opinion, then I try to give a little quick summary of what leads me to take that position. It can be boring for them, but hopefully they get the point that I am not trying to force my opinions on them."

* * *

One of the greatest gifts my mom gave me was an open mind. She has plenty of strongly held opinions about a lot of issues. But she taught me from an early age to see all sides in the debate, and to form my own opinions about what side makes the most sense to my way of seeing the world.

So when my son asked why he had to pay taxes, I explained that taxes generate the funds necessary for government to provide the many services people expect a government to provide.

He wanted to know if all states impose income taxes, and if all countries impose the same taxes, and when I told him the answer -- that some states don't and that the tax burden varies by country -- he decided we needed to move to another state, if not another country, because the $15.65 taken from his earnings was clearly excessive.

At that point, I realized that my son understands just one side of the argument. So I've been trying to educate him about other points of view, even though I don't necessarily agree with those points.

Recently, he had a friend in the car with us who parroted a social comment that clearly came from his parents. My son calmly and accurately described the other side of the debate and said, "You have to understand the way both sides think before you can decide which one you think is right."

I couldn't have been prouder.

—Jeff D. Opdyke writes about investing and finance from Baton Rouge, La. Email: lovemoney@wsj.com 