Jacques Kallis might just be the world's most under-rated sportsman. The South African has among the best statistical records in cricket history—but he's just never really been loved.

When it comes to discussions of the game's greats—and even of just its modern greats—batting all-rounder Mr. Kallis rarely gets a look-in, and almost never did until recently. But as he keeps breaking records and accomplishing feats, he's becoming one of the game's all-time greats.

Being perceived as a bit of a character goes a long way in cricket; the fans, in general, love a joker. They can also usually find it in their hearts to love a guy who tries hard—even if he's not the most talented.

Mr. Kallis has this working against him. He's come across as a reserved character, leading some to the unfair conclusion that his personality must be as dour as his batting can sometimes be. 

Lately he's commanding a little more affection from fans. That's partly because he's started to let his hair down slightly—almost literally. Mr. Kallis' feats in the most recent Test match series against India had an unusual follicular accompaniment, as the fast-balding player suddenly sprouted a full head of hair. 

His inverted-Samson performances prompted speculation as to its origin. While many suspected a hair transplant, Mr. Kallis said the secret was to "Take a bit of beer and manure and rub it on your forehead."

For his latest cricket-related trick, he broke the record for the most runs by a South African in a three-Test-match series, piling up an incredible 498, including three centuries (or 100 runs scored in an innings). He did this against India, the world's No. 1 team, which has been steamrolling pretty much everyone else recently. He did this at the age of 35, while spending much of the last Test laboring under a nasty side strain, and despite being on the receiving end of two unlucky dismissals in the second. 

He also finally shrugged a monumental monkey off his back in the first Test, when he finally notched a Test innings score of 200. Previously, he'd been very comfortably the batsman with the most career runs who hadn't yet managed one.

For one thing, there's long been a nagging suspicion, not entirely merited, that a lot of his big scores weren't really telling contributions to the team cause. But mainly this is about aesthetics—and a perceived lack of them. He has an unobtrusive, risk-free style, accumulating rather than destroying, with a technique more functional than beautiful, one that rarely catches the eye. Even in a sport as intensely statistical as cricket, fans are aware—in fact, often want to believe—that the numbers don't always tell the whole story, and that's blinded a lot of them to Mr. Kallis' transparently obvious greatness. I'm as guilty of this as anyone, having spent half of his career semi-unconsciously wanting him to fail, perhaps out of a nagging feeling that he just wasn't worthy of numbers like those. These days, as I have done for the longest time with Sachin Tendulkar, I want him to succeed, such an incredible statistical spectacle has his career become.

We've come to expect extraordinary numbers from Mr. Kallis. In 145 Tests, he has 11,947 runs at an average of 57.43 runs an innings; more than 40 is good, more than 50 is top-drawer. His batting record is only marginally inferior to India's Mr. Tendulkar, often ranked as the second greatest batsman in the history of the game and celebrated a thousand times more than Mr. Kallis. It's comparable to any other batsman currently playing. After 145 Tests, Mr. Tendulkar actually had an inferior record to Mr. Kallis, as did the other undisputed contemporary batting great, Australia's Ricky Ponting. 

In addition, he's also good enough as a bowler to have earned a place in the team even if he hadn't been able to bat at all, and a superb catcher who's broken all sorts of fielding records.

Cricket's quiet men often get a raw deal, particularly the batsmen; the sport is filled with flashy batting bezerkers who command far more headlines than someone like Mr. Kallis, despite frequently having less talent and always having a far inferior record: People like Chris Gayle of the West Indies (Test batting average 41.65), Shahid Afridi of Pakistan (36.51), and even first-rate performers like England's Kevin Pietersen (48.42).

But it's not just about wreckers versus eroders; it's also about the intense physical pleasure cricket fans get from pieces of play that please the eye. I watched with awe and a minor tremor down my spine recently as Australian all-rounder Shane Watson slammed consecutive sixes off the first three balls bowled by star England spinner Graeme Swann in a Twenty20 International. Even as an England supporter of occasionally tragic dedication, those shots gave me more pleasure than pain. Likewise Mr. Watson's fast-bowling teammate Peter Siddle's hat-trick—taking three wickets from consecutive deliveries—in the first Test match of the recent Ashes series; even my considerable instincts toward sporting jingoism were nullified by a sincere appreciation of two remarkable passages of play.

Cricket's followers, in other words, like a strong dose of aesthetics with their greatness. As with many of the best, most compelling, most keenly loved sports, part of the cricket-lover's joy is in the sheer elegance—and at times brutality—of the best batting and bowling. It's a viewpoint that, if you were to raise it in a bar, would probably get you laughed out of it, but the truth is this: Cricket fans are slaves to beauty.