Read the complete  Watches and Jewelry report.  

It was a common sight for analysts in the watch industry for decades: A thick cloud of smoke shrouding the ample figure of the bombastic, cigar-loving  Nicolas Hayek, the late co-founder of the  Swatch Group
SWGAY


-1.55
%




 who died last summer. Notorious for wearing up to four watches on each wrist, the colorful 'Mr. Swatch' was passionate about his industry. "They don't understand us. They are stupid," he would say of his critics. Hayek is credited with saving the venerable, but outdated, Swiss watch industry in the 1980s. Suffering from collapsed sales and severely reduced market share, the Swiss industry was under siege from a new breed of cheaper quartz watches coming out of Asia. Against this backdrop, the former engineering consultant emerged to turn the industry around and form what was to become a billion dollar company. Swatch Group came about through the merger of two ailing Swiss watchmakers in the early 1980s and was given life after Mr. Hayek bought a 51% share in 1984. 

Hayek made popular the idea that a cheap, colorful plastic watch could be just as desirable as an expensive designer equivalent, and would have mass appeal. In 1984, the Swatch, with quartz movements, was born. The no-frills timepiece is today still hugely popular and there are an estimated 700 Swatch shops around the world. "If you looked at the Swiss watch industry before Hayek, products were not cheap. But Hayek introduced a lower price product coming out of Switzerland," says  Luca Solca, senior analyst for luxury goods and general retail at Sanford Bernstein in Zurich. "He taught an industry that was considered to be dead that if you want to retain dominance you need to have high-end products but you also need to maintain volume." Hayek's legacy is strong. The firm has developed a highly successful Asian strategy, where 44% of the firm's sales now take place, and has shrugged off both the downturn and competition from mobile phones. Hayek's vision of cheap, cheerful and reliable timepieces is still paying off. But Swatch's flexibility also allows it to tap into the high-end market, with its Breguet range. There is one more lesson Hayek taught the sector. At the time of growing mobile phones and other gadgets that tell the time, he didn't see watches competing for their market share. "People ask me why the hell I make watches," Hayek said in an interview before his death "But I am not making watches only to look at the time. I am making jewels." With an estimated fortune of $3.2 billion at his death, it is hard to argue with his logic. 

 Mr. Espinoza is a reporter for The Wall Street Journal Europe. He can be reached at Javier.espinoza@wsj.com. 