NEW DELHI—Food prices in India are continuing their sharp rise, increasing concerns among economists about a prolonged period of high prices and adding pressure to the central bank to raise interest rates later this month. 

The Reserve Bank of India next meets on Jan. 25 to consider an interest rate rise after pushing up rates six times in 2010—one of the most aggressive tightenings of any central bank. But calls for a further move keep coming, most recently with the International Monetary Fund saying in a report released Thursday that rates need to be higher to curb inflation. 

India was one of the world's best-performing economies in 2010 and is being looked to as an engine of recovery for the global economy as it tries to shake off the impact of the financial crisis. The IMF predicts the Indian economy will grow 8.75% in the year ending March 31 and 8% in the following 12 months, driven by high consumer demand and strong industrial growth. 

But rising inflation is an increasing threat to that rosy picture. The central bank will need to walk a fine line, since liquidity within the banking system is tight and further rate hikes could exacerbate that problem, economists said. 



Data from the Ministry of Commerce and Industry Thursday showed that the wholesale price index for food articles rose 2.5% in the week ended Dec. 25 from the previous week. The year-on-year inflation rate for food surged to 18.32% from 14.44% the week before. 

It was the fifth straight week of rising food prices, which have been hovering at elevated levels in recent months. 

The rise is due mainly to higher vegetable prices, particularly onions, after unseasonal rains in some parts of the country damaged crops, significantly squeezing market supplies. Heightened demand from consumers who have seen their incomes rise also is playing a part, as is the government's failure to remove key blockages in the supply chain that prevent the increased demand from being met. 

According to a government statement, Finance Minister Pranab Mukherjee has urged provinces to ensure supply bottlenecks are removed. 

The government already has banned exports of onions—a politically sensitive staple given its ubiquity in Indian cuisine. It also removed the import duty and directed state-run cooperatives to sell the vegetable at subsidized prices in local markets. But onion prices continue to rise, up 23% week-on-week and up 82% from a year earlier—and there is little sign of a marked decline anytime soon. 

Indeed Pakistan, which had been exporting onions to India, banned their export by land—the only cost-effective route—because the trade was tightening supplies in Pakistan, which also has high food inflation. 

This alarmed Indian officials who are in talks with Pakistan to persuade them to reconsider the ban, a top official from India's trade ministry told reporters late Thursday. 

Anand Sharma, India's trade minister, had earlier described Pakistan's decision as a "setback." 

Reserve Bank of India Deputy Governor Subir Gokarn said the inflation level has been "worriedly high despite a good monsoon this year." 

The IMF also urged India to take significant measures to ensure that its current rate of high growth is sustainable. It said India should accelerate its plans to end economic stimulus measures adopted during the global economic crisis as it grapples with high inflation, surging inflows of foreign capital and high levels of government debt. 

And it said the country should cut subsidies, which are adding to its budget deficit, including liberalization of diesel and fertilizer prices. 

The Indian government has been reluctant to tamper with either because the subsidies benefit the poor masses, which also are the most politically involved. 

 Write to  Anant Vijay Kala at anant.kala@dowjones.com 