During the dark days of the recent recession,  Jane Holzer, a socialite and art collector, sold off a sprawling five-bedroom duplex on the Upper East Side for $14.1 million—a sizable discount from her original asking price.

Now that same apartment, with a 69-foot-long terrace at the Volney on East 74th Street, is going back on the market at $23.5 million. The asking price is a sign of the healing Manhattan luxury market, brokers and appraisers say.

"Back then, just about nothing sold unless it was a studio or a one bedroom," said  Anne Young of Brown Harris Stevens, who is one of three brokers sharing the duplex listing.

Ms. Holzer was the original  Andy Warhol superstar once known as "Baby Jane." In recent years, she has been active as a real-estate investor and art collector. Both her father and former husband were in real estate. 

In February 2009, while most of the property market in New York was frozen, she went into contract to sell the duplex penthouse on East 74th that she had assembled over a number of years.

The sale price was far below the $22.5 million she had hoped to get when she listed the apartment in June 2008, as prices were at or close to a peak in the Manhattan market. The asking price was cut in stages to $16.9 million and finally sold at $14.1 million in a cash deal, a 37% discount from the original asking price.

Ms. Holzer, who has homes in New York and Palm Beach, didn't return several phone calls Tuesday. It isn't clear why she wanted to sell the duplex. 

At the time of the sale, she was renovating a 20-foot-wide townhouse on East 69th Street. Property records show that she paid $10.5 million for the townhouse in the spring of 2008. She sold it last fall for $13.15 million. 

Although there are few signs of upward price pressure across the market,  Jonathan Miller, an appraiser and president of Miller Samuel Inc., said that it wouldn't surprise him if properties that changed hands at the bottom of the market could sell for considerably more now. 

Ms. Holzer sold the East 74th Street duplex to Nicole and  Jason Rabin, a founder of Wear Me Apparel/Kids Headquarters, which provides private-label apparel, and who negotiated a joint marketing venture with  Beyonce Knowles, the singer and actress.

In the fall of 2009, the company was sold to Li & Fung Ltd., a Hong Kong consumer company, and the family is now moving to Hong Kong, according to Ms. Young, the broker. Mr. Rabin declined to comment.

Ms. Young said the Rabins bought Ms. Holzer's apartment "at a time when almost no one in the continental U.S. was willing to spend this kind of money."

"When they saw the penthouse, they said this is what we want to buy," she said.

The Volney was originally a hotel, and Ms. Holzer bought and sold small apartments on a number of floors in the building, often combining them together. In 2005 she sold three combined units on the 14th floor for $3.4 million, property records show.

During the years she was accumulating apartments there, city records show, she had borrowed extensively against some of her art collection, including works by  Keith Haring, Joan Miro, Roy Lichtenstein, Robert Rauschenberg and Mr. Warhol.

In addition to Anne Young, the listing on the duplex is held by her daughter, Amanda, and another broker, Jarrod Randolph, all of Brown Harris Stevens.

 Write to  Josh Barbanel at josh.barbanel@wsj.com 