LONDON—Higher oil prices sparked by unrest in North Africa and the Middle East could push up inflation among countries in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development but policy makers may not need to react, the OECD said Friday. 

In a paper entitled The Effects of Oil-Price Hikes on Economic Activity and Inflation, the OECD said a $10 rise in the price of a barrel of oil would add 0.2 percentage point to the inflation rate in the OECD area in the first year after the shock and another 0.1 percentage point in the second year. 

Inflation in the OECD area could rise by 0.75 percentage point by 2012 if the $25-a-barrel increase in the oil price that has taken place, since Tunisia revolted against its leader, were sustained. 

However, the OECD said policy makers may not need to take action because inflation and expectations of future price increases are low. 

"The experience of 2008 is instructive in this regard. Due to well-anchored expectations, inflation remained tame, despite a sharp increase in oil prices. If inflation expectations were to destabilize, the effect of recent oil-price hikes, if sustained, could be stronger than expected," the policy paper said. 

Consumer prices in the 34 countries in the OECD increased 2.1% in the 12 months to January, the organization said on March 8. Higher energy and food prices were the main contributors to inflation but the OECD said the inflation rate was broadly flat compared with the 12 months to December 2010, despite heightened tensions across the Arab world. 

The OECD said a $10 increase in the price of a barrel of oil could reduce economic activity in the OECD area in the second year after the shock by 0.2 percentage point. Gross domestic product among OECD countries could be cut by 0.5 percentage point by 2012 if the recent $25-a-barrel rise in oil prices persists, the OECD said. 

Moody's Investor Service Inc. on Friday said high oil prices threaten the global economic recovery. 

Still, oil prices retreated somewhat Friday after the Libyan government declared an end to military operations against rebels opposed to Col. Moammar Gadhafi's regime. The United Nations earlier authorized the use of military force to stop the bloodshed in the oil-rich North African state. 