Dom Pérignon was a Benedictine monk. He was responsible for the wines and cellars at the abbey of Hautvillers, north of Épernay, France, around the time of Louis XIV in the mid-17th to early 18th-centuries. It was here that he wrote "L'Art de bien traiter la vigne et du Champagne" ("How to care for the vine and Champagne") and developed the process of blending wines from vines that were carefully harvested and pruned to produce low yields. 

In viticultural terms, he was a pioneer who greatly improved the still wines of Champagne. He is also the man who is widely credited with the invention of the sparkling wine we know as Champagne; a wine produced by a process that sees a secondary fermentation in the bottle, which gives the liquid its bubbles.

From everyday drinking to a treat from the cellar, three wines ripe for tasting today.

Whether or not the monk was the creator of Champagne is unclear. The Oxford Companion to Wine asserts that it was probably a myth spread after his death and embellished by Dom Grossard, the last treasurer of the abbey of Hautvillers, before it was closed during the French revolution. But his name lives on, and if you take a stroll down the Avenue du Champagne in Épernay you will come across a statue of the monk outside the house of Moët & Chandon. He also gives his name to the prestige cuvée launched by Moët & Chandon in 1936, with wine made from the 1921 vintage. Since then Dom Pérignon has become the wine of choice for the world's glitterati, toasted at royal weddings and has made numerous appearances in the James Bond series.

It is a vintage Champagne only made in the years when quality is deemed high enough. The quantity produced isn't known but estimates put it at more than one million bottles for each vintage. When I asked its present creator, Chef de Cave Richard Geoffroy, he refused to answer, merely smiling before remarking that they never disclose the numbers. But to focus on the production run is to miss the point; this is a wine made to be drunk and enjoyed, and its ubiquity is all the more impressive when you appreciate the quality of the cuvée. 

To produce a Champagne of this superiority in such quantity is remarkable. If the connoisseurs are uncomfortable that it is the drink of choice in the world's most expensive nightclubs, their only contention is that far too often Dom Pérignon is consumed too young. To really appreciate it one has to give it time.

As befits Moët & Chandon's house style, the wine is light, elegant and very fine on the palate, which marks it out from the other prestige cuvée Champagnes such as Cristal (Louis Roederer); La Grande Dame (Veuve Clicquot-Ponsardin); Sir Winston Churchill (Pol Roger) and (La Grande Année) Bollinger; Comtes de Champagne (Taittinger) and Krug.

With age, Dom Pérignon changes character from initial lively, citrus and honey notes to more secondary nutty flavors such as biscuits, malt and even notes of leather. In the 1962 vintage, for example, Mr. Geoffroy observes notes of cedar, sandalwood, marmalade and spicy hawthorn. 

But the style is changing, as Michael Edwards, author of "The Finest Wines of Champagne," says: "It is maturing slightly earlier, getting much more assertive and there is more punch from the Pinot Noir in it now. This change in style has happened since 2000. Dom Pérignon is wonderful at 20 years old, that is all very well, but how many people will actually drink it with that sort of age." 

Its last vintage, 2002, was widely acclaimed as one of the house's best, so when it was announced in December that Mr. Geoffroy had decided to release a wine next month from 2003, a year when Champagne was hit by both frost and hail, and Europe sizzled under an August heat wave, it seemed a bit of a risk. "We shouldn't be afraid of hot years," says Mr. Geoffroy. "We have to react to the condition of the year; there were some slight technical challenges but I'm very proud of this vintage." 

On a first sip what reveals itself is the aromatics; there is a saline minerality with a faint scent of iodine and oyster shell. On the palate, texturally it is sensational, displaying the hallmark elegance and creaminess of the house style, but it is also a big Champagne with plenty of power and fruit. 

 Write to  Will Lyons at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 

