 'Why Rich Parents Don't Matter' 

 by Jonah Lehrer 

 Milton Recht: It would be nice to know if the researchers controlled for the age of the mother, the gestational term of the baby and the number of children. The U.S. has a very high teenage-pregnancy rate (one of the highest in the world), primarily in lower socio-economic groups.

Teenage pregnancies, on all socio-economic levels, have lower weight babies, more early term and premature babies, more mothers who do not take prenatal vitamins or eat nutritional foods during pregnancy, and more mothers who first see a doctor later in their pregnancies. Teenagers are also more stressed about raising a child and feel more resentment for missing out on doing what their non-mother friends are doing. Teenage women in lower socioeconomic groups smoke more and are more likely to smoke during pregnancy. Also, with more children per mother, there is less of everything (attention, food, etc.) for each individual child.

There are adoption studies that show that identical twins split up and adopted into different socioeconomic groups perform very similarly despite their different upbringings.

 'Does Helping the Planet Hurt the Poor?' 

 by Peter Singer, Bjørn Lomborg 

 Anthony Aaron: Mr. Singer uses the word "should" 13 times—at least that's what my search and replace function tells me. So who is it in this world today that has such infinitely perfect vision that we should trust them to make decisions for all seven billion residents of Planet Earth? The intellectual elite like to make all sorts of rules. Just eliminating overpopulation, especially in underdeveloped and developing nations, and reducing the production and consumption of meat would go a long way toward solving a great deal of our present and future issues.

 James Handley: Basically Mr. Lomborg is assuming the climate will change gently, continuously and non-catastrophically. Of course, if you assume that, what's the worry? The problem is that the climate system isn't infinitely elastic. Like a rubber band, it will snap—irreversibly.

 'Be a Gamer, Save the World' 

 by Jane McGonigal 

 Nancy Kelly: I worry all the time that our 13-year-old son spends too much time playing videogames, but I can't deny that he's in the top 5% nationwide in his reading/comprehension test scores, and I know it's from the strategy games and texting during battle. Can you imagine learning the history of the rise and fall of the Roman Empire via an interactive video game that you play intensely for three weeks? How about a videogame that teaches the table of elements? I have no doubt that quest games designed to teach high-school-level subject matter could cause a paradigm shift in U.S. education.