 The Sotheby's U.K. deputy chairman talks to The Wall Street Journal Europe about how he starts his weekend. 

As a director of country house sales for Sotheby's in the U.K., Lord Harry Dalmeny has been behind the rostrum and on top of the gavel for some of the most high-profile auctions in Europe, including the Duke of Devonshire's sale at Chatsworth House and the 2004 record sale at Hopetoun House of Jack Vettriano's painting "The Singing Butler" for £744,800. 

Lord Dalmeny divides his time between London and his native Scotland, where he has a house and farm in the Moffat hills. With five children under the age of nine, including triplets, he admits weekends can get a little busy, but when he gets the chance, he likes to unwind with the St. Moritz tobogganing club.

  How does your weekend start?  

I work very hard in the week, so on the weekends, when I am not working, I like to completely switch off. Friday nights are usually spent traveling somewhere; it's not a big party night. It's more about making sure I wake up on Saturday morning somewhere incredible. I always feel if you can wake up in a strange bed (not with a stranger) in an amazing place, then it will be a good weekend. If we are spending the weekend in Scotland, this involves driving a large people carrier with my wife, five children and the nanny. It's quite an operation. But if I'm competing in the Cresta Run, it will involve a flight to Zurich and a three-hour drive to St. Moritz, where I usually stay with a friend or check into a hotel. 

  How do you relax?  

When I'm in Switzerland, I get up very early, put on a Lycra suit and clamber onto a toboggan and slide down the Cresta Run, which is an ice track, as fast as I can without killing myself. The run takes about a minute. I'm not sure exactly how long it is, but you are traveling about as fast as one possibly can. We do about three runs before lunch.

  Do you have a favorite restaurant?  

After the run, we have lunch at the Sunny bar in the Kulmhotel, which has the most beautiful terrace that looks out toward the lake—the most wonderful frozen space, where at weekends they have horseracing. We start off with a bull shot, which is a little like a Bloody Mary but made with consommé instead of tomato juice. Some people have a vodka fizz, which is a lemony, sherberty, splendid drink. If we are still feeling a bit peckish afterward, or we have a victory to celebrate, we will wander down the hill to Glattfelder's tea shop...and order a Glattfelder's tea, which is essentially an English tea with caviar rather than scones. But it's not an everyday treat. St. Moritz is a great place, but it is fiendishly expensive.

  Do you go out Saturday night?  

In Switzerland, the day ends at the Dracula club in St. Moritz, which really is the best nightclub in the world. It is effortlessly, fabulously glamorous and was set up by Gunter Sachs, who was married to Brigitte Bardot, and his friends. They are all now well over 70 years old but they still go. I tend not to drink very much, so will probably only have water. 

  What do you do Sunday morning?  

There is normally a big race which I am competing in. After the race, there is a prize giving. I always hope to win, as the prize is a bottle of Krug and a kiss from one of the prettiest girls in the room, which is always a good prize to get. After that, I drive back to Zurich airport and fly home. If I am not in Switzerland and we have a sale on, then I am usually in London on Sunday for the private view; this is a big moment where all the private buyers come in to look at the lots. So Sunday morning is spent preparing for the view.

  What about the afternoons?  

My wife [Caroline] does brilliant roast beef. I am the potato specialist, so I spend several hours trying to tease gobbets of goose fat under the skin. When we are in Scotland, we will go for a long walk with the dogs in the Moffat hills. About once a month I will do a long weekend here and spend Fridays talking to my father in the estate office working out the strategic planning of Dalmeny [House]. If I'm in London, I might take the children to play tennis in Burton's Court or we go to the indoor skiing center in Hemel Hempstead. 

 Write to  William Lyons at william.lyons@wsj.com 