

SHANGHAI—How to cut energy intensity by 16% to 17% over five years will be a hot topic at the National People's Congress starting this week, especially given that China has already taken the relatively easy step of shutting down many inefficient power plants and steel mills.

Scrambling to keep in reach its goal of reducing energy use per unit of GDP during the period of the 2006-10 five-year plan, China resorted to increasingly desperate measures such as rationing power to households and industry. (A severe diesel shortage developed last year as industry cranked up generators to deal with power blackouts.) With the low-hanging fruit of plant closures already plucked, the next five years likely won't be any easier. China, which many organizations—including the International Energy Agency—say overtook the U.S. as the world's biggest energy consumer in 2009, is looking to slow emissions growth by overhauling its industrial sector.

"Energy conservation will definitely be high on this NPC's agenda," said  Jiang Xinmin, assistant director of the Energy Research Institute under the National Development and Reform Commission. "Delegates need to discuss how to control energy use and whether a cap should be put on production of some polluting energy sources, such as coal."

Some Chinese officials have suggested capping the annual coal output at 3.6 billion to 3.8 billion metric tons by 2015. But that could spur fuel switching, driving up prices of diesel and fuel oil—and also coal prices regionally as Chinese traders increase imports.

One measure that could make a big difference in energy use—lifting state caps on electricity prices, which would encourage users to limit their use—is unlikely to get much of a hearing at the NPC, given concerns about inflation.

The NPC, China's annual session parliament, likely will scrutinize nationwide efforts to upgrade the power grid

  Zhang Youhui, a Tianjin delegate to the NPC, will submit a proposal to speed up construction of ultra-high-power transmission lines, according to the State Grid Corp., the monopoly power distributor in all but five southern provinces. UHV lines can carry more electricity than standard lines, and move it across vast distances with less loss, important given that China's renewable energy sources like hydropower and wind are located in the country's remote western regions. (And by the end of last year, only 66% of total installed wind-power capacity was even connected to the grid.)

China will spend more than 500 billion yuan (US$76 billion) on UHV lines in 2011-15, State Grid has said. 

Making the grid smarter by overlaying digital communications on it—enabling utilities to manage supply more efficiently and compensate for any variance—is another goal for State Grid, which says it aims to have a strong and smart grid in place by 2020. 

—Jing Yang

