  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.42
%




 has provided no details about the reason for  Steve Jobs's medical leave. But the 55-year-old executive has battled pancreatic cancer, had a liver transplant in 2009 and still appears gaunt. There could be many reasons why he may need medical attention again, experts said.

In 2004, surgeons removed an islet cell neuroendocrine tumor from Mr. Jobs's pancreas; it is a rare form of cancer that isn't necessarily deadly if caught early. Some doctors say that Mr. Jobs may have had a Whipple surgical procedure, in which part of the pancreas, stomach, bile duct and small intestine, plus the entire gall bladder, are removed.

Most patients who have the Whipple operation lose weight initially, but they tend to regain it after a few weeks. "It's uncommon to see the same weight loss in a patient two to three years after," said  Nicholas Nissen, assistant surgical director of the Multi-Organ Transplant Program at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles, and an expert in neuroendocrine tumors. Dr. Nissen isn't involved in Mr. Jobs's treatment.

Neither Apple nor Mr. Jobs have confirmed he had the Whipple procedure. Apple declined to comment on why he still appears thin.

It is possible Mr. Jobs had the liver transplant to fight the spread of the cancer that began in his pancreas. If the cancer had spread to the liver, for example, a replacement liver might have been the best way to combat the disease.

"If you had removed the main tumor from the pancreas and it had come back and was confined to the liver, you might consider treating it that way," said Dr. Nissen. Such an approach is used only occasionally, and neither Apple nor Mr. Jobs have ever confirmed that the liver transplant was related to Mr. Jobs's cancer.

But "it's really difficult to cure the disease with a liver transplant," said  William Chapman, transplantation chief at Washington University in St. Louis, who hasn't treated Mr. Jobs. 

Dr. Chapman said it was common to have some degree of recurrence. "Most people hope they reset the clock, gained some time and gained a quality of life even if you don't cure the disease."

Several longer-term complications can arise from a liver transplant, many of them related to the side effects of medication. For example, immunosuppressant drugs are needed to prevent the body from rejecting the new liver—but such drugs also can fuel the emergence of tumors.

"The immune-suppressing drugs may increase the risk of the cancer coming back, and if it does come back, it might be harder to fight," said Dr. Nissen.

The drugs also can affect the patient's ability to fight infections. 

"As long as you take immunosuppressants, you must watch for and prevent infections," warns the website of the Methodist Health System in north Texas, which runs an active transplant program. It adds: "Most infections can be treated and cured, but some require long-term medications."

In an article appearing on the website of the University of Illinois Medical Center at Chicago,  Robert Merion, an organ transplant specialist, says complications from a liver transplant can emerge at any time.

"Sometimes the major vessels that supply blood to the liver become blocked, or clot off," writes Dr. Merion. "This can lead to sudden liver failure and the need for another liver transplant." Or the connection between the bile duct and the intestine fails to heal properly and bile leaks out; or the scar tissue may block the bile duct, preventing the bile from flowing, the article says.

—Yukari Iwatani Kane contributed to this article.