WASHINGTON—The White House announced the resignation of the top U.S. official charged with rooting out waste, fraud and abuse in Afghanistan contracting. 

A news release issued Monday evening said that Arnold Fields, a retired Marine Corps general, would step down from his post as special inspector general for Afghanistan reconstruction. 

While the White House praised Mr. Fields for "hard work and steadfast determination," news of his resignation followed several months of public criticism by lawmakers, who said that the watchdog agency was plagued by mismanagement and poor investigative standards. 

A successor has not been named. In a statement, Mr. Fields said, "I intend to use the next month to ensure a smooth transition of duties and protect the vital mission of the agency I have had the honor to establish."

The oversight agency was founded in 2008 to track the billions of dollars the U.S. has committed to the reconstruction of Afghanistan since 2001, a figure that is expected to top $70 billion this year. But the agency was hobbled by a lack of funding and staff: Mr. Fields was sworn into office in July 2008, but the agency didn't receive full funding from Congress until July of the following year. 

Things came to a head last summer after a separate federal oversight body issued a damning performance appraisal of the agency, which came close to losing its law-enforcement authority. 

In a November hearing, Sen.  Claire McCaskill (D., Mo.), told Mr. Fields, "I don't think you were the right person for this job." 

On Monday, she said reiterated that claim: "Mr. Fields simply was not the right person for this very difficult job. I hope that his departure will allow the agency to turn over a new leaf and finally begin to do the important contracting oversight work we so desperately need." 

Mr. Fields defended his performance, but recently ordered a shakeup of his top management. 

The agency employs a staff of around 120 criminal investigators and auditors. It has a headquarters near the Pentagon, and personnel stationed in Afghanistan.