SYDNEY—Residents of a string of towns in the north-west of Australia's Victoria state were evacuating their homes Monday as flood defenses failed in the face of waters flowing towards the continent's largest river. 

Around 60 towns across an area larger than Denmark to the north-west of the state capital, Melbourne, have been hit by floods as heavy rain from recent weeks makes its way across broad floodplains to the Murray River. 

Earthworks holding back river waters were collapsing in some areas, bringing fast-flowing inundations of towns in the farming region.

"The levees are failing. Water is entering the area now. The area will be inundated in the next 12 hours," Victoria's State Emergency Service said in a flood bulletin issued to residents of Murrabit West early Monday. 

The town is trapped between the Murray and one of its minor tributaries. 

Evacuees were being diverted towards flood relief centers in towns near Swan Hill, a city of around 10,000 on the Murray's south bank where floodwaters from the Murray and its tributary the Loddon are expected to mingle and peak around Thursday or Friday. 

Towns in the Loddon Valley including Kerang, with nearly 4,000 residents, were isolated by the rising floodwaters.

At the Pelican Waters Caravan Park on the shores of Lake Charm, a scenic spot to the north-west of Kerang, owner Vanessa Burrows said she had been forced to send home tourists at peak season as the site is expected to be cut off. Wednesday marks the Australia Day public holiday, a popular time for visits to the countryside. 

"Our lake's going to be filled to capacity so it looks like we'll be isolated, could be for a week or two. We only moved in here in the last 10 weeks," she said. 

Flooding that hit Australia's north-eastern state of Queensland over the past month has affected 28,000 properties, according to Queensland's state government, and Australia & New Zealand Banking Group Ltd. estimates that costs could run to 20 billion Australian dollars (US$19.8 billion). 

In the country's arid north-west, the Bureau of Meteorology said a tropical cyclone was forming that could hit the Pilbara coast near the iron ore port of Port Hedland early on Wednesday. 

The bureau issued a gale warning for the coast from Port Hedland to Karratha for the next 24 to 48 hours but said the storm was likely to remain a category one cyclone, the lowest level of intensity. 

A cyclone that hit the Pilbara coast on New Year's Day caused ports to cease operations and forced bulk carriers to weigh anchors to avoid the path of the heaviest winds.

Record rains that began in November left huge parts of Australia's northeast Queensland state under water, killing 30 people, damaging or destroying 30,000 homes and businesses and

causing at least 3 billion Australian dollars (US$3 billion) in damage to crops and lost coal exports.

The flood disaster is now moving across southeast Victoria state, where driving rains have forced swollen rivers over their banks. The State Emergency Service has warned that a vast inland sea about 55 miles (90 kilometers) long northwest of the Victorian capital of Melbourne will continue coursing inland for the next week until it spills into the  Murray River.

Emergency services were focusing their efforts 210 miles (340 kilometers) northwest of Melbourne at Swan Hill, a town of 10,000 where the Murray meets the swollen Loddon River and flood waters are expected to peak mid-week, the State Emergency Service said. Volunteers have spent the past 10 days piling tens of thousands of sandbags around the community, Mayor  Greg Cruickshank said Monday.

"We're nearly to the point to where we are as prepared as we can be," he said. "If there happens to be inundation, it certainly won't be for lack of trying."

Several hundred residents were evacuated Sunday from tiny communities east of Swan Hill, including Pental Island, where about 50 properties were expected to become isolated or inundated.

On Monday, some residents of the small community of Murrabit West, about 30 miles (50 kilometers) east of Swan Hill, were urged to evacuate as water from the Murray began spilling over the levees protecting the township. An emergency-service spokeswoman said officials did not yet know how many homes were at risk of being flooded.

Deputy Prime Minister  Wayne Swan said in a statement Sunday that the floods will rank as one of the most costly natural disasters in Australian history and its impact on the economy will be felt for years. The government will announce its first cost estimates on Friday, he said.

Mr. Swan and Prime Minister  Julia Gillard were in the Queensland capital of Brisbane on Monday for a meeting of Ms. Gillard's business taskforce, which was set up following the Queensland floods to encourage companies to donate to relief efforts.

"We still don't know what the total damage bill is," the prime minister said. "We've got to be very clear here the federal government is going to step up and do everything we need to do to rebuild

Queensland."

The State Emergency Service said Monday that 76 towns in Victoria have been affected by flooding, with 1,770 properties suffering some water damage. Another five to 10 towns are still in the floodwaters' northern path across flat wheat-growing country. 