CAIRO—Egyptian demonstrators extended their nationwide antigovernment rallies into a second day Wednesday in defiance of a security crackdown, deepening a conflict whose outcome has the potential to rattle regimes across the Middle East.

Demonstrators turned out in smaller numbers Wednesday than they had Tuesday, when an estimated tens of thousands of Egyptians rallied against the 30-year regime of President Hosni Mubarak. Police, who had for the most part allowed gatherings during the previous day, responded Wednesday with redoubled force. 

Early Wednesday morning, police used rubber bullets, tear gas and water cannons to disperse the largest gathering of demonstrators, in Cairo's Tahrir Square. Police arrested as many as 860 protesters, according to media reports. Two people died in Cairo in connection with the protests, the Associated Press reported, bringing the two-day riots' death toll to six.

Leaders of the demonstrations—a loose grouping of Egyptians whose members are largely drawn from outside the country's established opposition—scheduled more actions for Friday.

In the city of Suez, a 1,000-strong mob gathered outside a municipal morgue to demand the body of one of three protesters who died there Tuesday, the AP reported. Rioters there lobbed firebombs at security personnel, who charged back with rubber bullets and tear gas. Several hundred protesters later tried to attack a police station and the local headquarters of Mr. Mubarak's ruling National Democratic Party. 

In statements to the press, NDP leaders have said they support protesters' rights to voice their opinions. A senior NDP official said discussions were taking place within the government about meeting protesters' demands for a higher minimum wage and replacing the country's emergency law with antiterrorism legislation, issues that have been under continued discussion. 

The upheaval in Egypt, the Arab world's most-populous country and a key U.S. ally, comes less than two weeks after protesters overthrew Tunisia's president. As Egypt's events have been broadcast region-wide on satellite-television networks such as Al Jazeera, and followed on social-networking sites including Facebook and Twitter, many have watched in amazement as another authoritarian regime has had its citizens' grievances thrust into the public spotlight. 

The response by Mr. Mubarak's regime to the protests—whether it will squelch them, allow for limited political or economic reforms, or, in the unlikely extreme, collapse—will color reactions far beyond Egypt. "All our assumptions about the Middle East have been called into question," said Shadi Hamid, a political analyst with the Brookings Institution based in Doha, Qatar.

One unusual feature of Tuesday's huge Egyptian protests was the presence of thousands of middle-class citizens who rarely demonstrate or even publicly voice unhappiness with the regime. Their participation was a function, several people here say, of how the protests came about—organized not by long-established opposition parties, but by an often-amorphous collection of ordinary Egyptians and newer opposition groups that fall outside the political establishment.

Some leaders have maintained anonymity, including an activist who communicates by an email address El Shaheed, or The Martyr. Like many in the revival of Egypt's protest culture, El Shaheed claims no political allegiance or discrete ideology and says he is motivated by a desire to see an end to police brutality in Egypt.

El Shaheed has organized protesters online since last summer's death in Alexandria of an Egyptian named Khalid Said, due to what the activist and others say was police brutality. El Shaheed, who has declined in emails to identify himself, played a large role in organizing this week's protests through his Facebook page, "We Are All Khalid Said."

 Such protests have since been joined by other opposition groups, including many who fall under an umbrella group called the National Association for Change, founded in February 2010. The group initially galvanized around the return of Mohammed ElBaradei, a former head of the International Atomic Energy Agency and a Nobel Peace Prize Laureate who many saw as an alternative to Mr. Mubarak. The coalition has been largely rudderless since then but its members are also credited with bringing about this week's protests.

"The people who took to the street are the ordinary Egyptians. They have no political background whatsoever," said Shadi Taha, deputy head of the Al Ghad (Tomorrow) Party, which is part of the National Association for Change. "Those are the silent majority that we have been talking about for so long."

Such demonstrators were joined by more established opposition, including individual members of the Islamist Muslim Brotherhood, which despite being banned remains one of the country's largest social and political organizations.

Egypt's ministry of interior on Tuesday blamed the Muslim Brotherhood for sparking the sometimes deadly outbursts, a thread that re-emerged Wednesday. "I noticed that people in the demonstrations the first day were trying seriously not to go into violence," said Hossam Badrawi, a parliamentarian and member of the powerful Policies Secretariat of the ruling NDP. He said that while he has "no information" on who sparked Tuesday's violence, the Brotherhood was most likely to blame. 

Brotherhood leaders denied the charge, pointing to the fact that the organization didn't formally participate in Tuesday's march to avoid just such accusations. 

"We don't want it to be a fight between the ruling regime and the Muslim Brotherhood, because it is really a fight between the ruling regime and all the people," said Mohammed Al Biltagy, a former member of parliament for the Muslim Brotherhood. 

Antigovernment activists met Wednesday to discuss how to carry forward the momentum from Tuesday's events, according to people familiar with these talks. A text message that circulated Wednesday evening, signed by the Khaled Said Group, advertised nationwide "mass protests" following noon prayers Friday. 

By Wednesday morning in Cairo, the demonstrations across the country appeared to feature a far higher proportion of hard-core protesters and angry youth, as police and security brigades sharpened a crackdown aimed at getting all protesters off the streets.

On Wednesday night in Cairo, young men from some of the city's poorer neighborhoods were seen building on the initiative from Tuesday's movement. Police moved slowly through streets crowded with pedestrians, forcing business owners to hide their wares and shutter their shops. 

In the dense, lower-middle-class neighborhood of Boulaq, groups of young men lobbed bottles at policemen who were mustering in groups nearby. As tear-gas canisters began to fall, protesters scurried into back alleys, where many residents had clearly hoped they would be left alone. 

"Don't come over here! I'll beat up anyone who comes near me!" one man shouted as protesters sought refuge near his auto-parts business. 

"People have started to get courageous," said another, anonymous resident of the neighborhood as he wiped tear gas from his eyes. "It's a new experience for Egyptian people."

—Bill Spindle contributed to this article.