Shane Bannon will watch the final four rounds of the NFL Draft on Saturday with his family and a few friends at home in Southbury, Conn. And like dozens, perhaps even hundreds, of other late-round hopefuls, Bannon, a former Yale fullback, will watch and wait to see if his name is called.

Whether it happens or not, Bannon's NFL candidacy is something of a minor miracle. Until about six weeks ago, almost no one outside of the Ivy League—not even the most obsessive NFL draftniks—had ever heard of him. 

Over the past month, thanks to a freakishly intense training program, and a little old-fashioned marketing, Bannon's fortunes have changed. At least eight NFL teams have worked him out. On Tuesday, the tight ends coach from the Chicago Bears arrived in New Haven to put Bannon through drills and chart his "measurables," which include a 40-yard dash time of 4.69 seconds. Against all odds, he's a bona fide prospect. 

"I expect him to get picked, although he might not," said Joe Linta, his Connecticut-based agent. "But the fact that he's even in the conversation is virtually unprecedented. It illustrates just how inexact the scouting process can be. Here's a kid who completely slipped through the cracks."

More than 2,000 draft-eligible prospects are listed on the two major scouting reports that most NFL teams use as a foundation to guide them through the process. Taking into account that a mere 224 players will be drafted his weekend, these lists might seem excessive. 

Nevertheless, Bannon, a bruising athlete at 6-foot-2 and 265 pounds, played his senior season at Yale without being listed on either one. He didn't participate in the NFL Combine. He wasn't invited to any senior all-star games. 

In fact, CBSSports.com updated a list of 84 fullback prospects last week and Bannon still was nowhere to be found. (He finally made an appearance this week at No. 18.)

Bannon had a couple of significant strikes against him. He played for Yale, which hasn't been a football powerhouse since Larry Kelley and Clint Frank claimed back-to-back Heisman Trophies in the 1930s. And there was the small matter of his position. Fullbacks are a dying breed, with more and more NFL offenses relying on pass-heavy schemes. "There's just less of a need for that traditional lead-blocking fullback," said Rob Rang, an analyst with NFLDraftScout.com. 

As a senior, Bannon caught 13 passes for 122 yards and a touchdown. The Bulldogs, who went 7-3 overall, 5-2 in the Ivy League, employed him almost exclusively as a blocker. "I just wasn't one of those guys who had huge amounts of stats, and scouts seem to go off stats when it comes to Ivy League players," Bannon said.

Undaunted by these grim realities, Bannon returned to campus this winter a full two weeks before the start of spring classes to begin a training program designed by Yale's strength and conditioning coach. The idea was to prepare himself for Yale's "pro day"—a showcase for scouts—at the end of March. 

He committed himself to the program, rising before 7 a.m. most days. "He hasn't been living the college life, I guess you could say," said Alex Barnes, a roommate and former teammate.

Bannon also said he spent three days in the Yale football offices going through hundreds of hours of game film to create his own highlight DVD for coaches. He culled 33 plays that showed him lining up at fullback, tight end and H-back, a hybrid position in the backfield. 

This sort of versatility is valued by NFL teams that are hesitant to use up a roster spot on a conventional fullback. 

The turning point for Bannon was one afternoon in early March, when he said he "tagged along" with teammate Sean Williams, a defensive end, to a workout for Linta. A Yale coach had asked Linta to do him a favor and put Bannon through a battery of tests. "I'd never heard of him," Linta said. "But I knew right away that the kid was legit."

Linta said he did what agents do—he got on the phone, calling confidantes around the league. Word spread, and Bannon put his self-made DVD to use. A highlight was a trip to Green Bay to meet with the Packers at Lambeau Field, which he likened to a "giant museum."

 Bannon said he has gotten good feedback from teams, though he knows there are no guarantees—a fact of life in football that he understands better than most. "I don't really have a gut feeling about the draft," Bannon said. "I would hope it happens. But at the same time, I feel like I've put myself in a pretty good place. Even if I don't get picked, I'm pretty confident somebody will sign me as a free agent. I love to play football, and this was all about giving myself a chance."

Especially when nobody else did.

 Write to  Scott Cacciola at scott.cacciola@wsj.com 