If it were up to  Oh Eng Lock, the typical Chinese breakfast would be toast, not congee.

Mr. Oh has been of chief executive of Singapore-based bakery and restaurant chain BreadTalk Group Ltd. since January. The company, which was launched in 2000, employs 5,000 people in 13 countries, with 420 stores, including franchises, half of which are in mainland China, with the rest spread mostly across Southeast Asia and India.

The company also owns and operates a handful of other brands, including  Din Tai Fung, which specializes in Taiwanese food, and RamenPlay, a brand of mid-end Japanese restaurants in Southeast Asia and China, as well as more than 20 food courts in Greater China under the Food Republic brand. 

BreadTalk Group, which has been listed in Singapore since 2003, reported profit of 11 million Singapore dollars (US$9 million) for 2010, down 4.1% from S$11.6 million a year earlier. With food inflation across Asia, and rising competition in China's fast-food market, Mr. Oh talked with The Wall Street Journal's  Amy Ma about his plans for the business.

 WSJ: How is managing your three core businesses—bakeries, restaurants and food courts—different?

 Mr. Oh: Food courts provide faster cash flow and because they have the largest floor space, they give us the most brand leverage. From a financial standpoint, bakeries require smaller investments and can expand faster so they give you more liquidity. Restaurants, on the other hand, have much higher margins. We've chosen to push two of the three: BreadTalk—in three years, we hope to have 1,000 stores—and Food Republic.

 WSJ: When BreadTalk opened its first bakery in China in 2005, the market was much less crowded. Today, there's South Korea's ParisBaguette, Taiwan's 85°c Bakery and Café, and local competitors like Holiland. How do you stay competitive?

 Mr. Oh: The bakery market has become extremely crowded—every competitor is trying to write a China story. 

 Career: Mr. Oh joined BreadTalk in June 2010 as group managing director and was appointed CEO in January. He was previously the head of North Asia at Merrill Lynch in Hong Kong, and has also worked for DBS Bank and United Overseas Bank.

 Education: Bachelor of arts degree from the University of Singapore 

 Extracurricular: Mr. Oh jogs five kilometers daily

To be a good bakery, we have to be very fast on new trends. We have more than 1,000 new products in our database that we can launch at any time. Price wise, we are about 5% to 10% over the market average to keep our quality high and maintain our upscale boutique bakery brand. And when it comes to [the food and beverage industry], location is key. 

So we focus quite extensively on traffic flow and have an extensive network of real-estate developers.

 WSJ: What are your thoughts on food safety issues in China?

 Mr. Oh: This is not a concern for us because we source our ingredients globally and always go for no-additive, top-tier products. We recently opened Bread Society, a higher-end concept that focuses on organic goods as a trend. This is still a niche market at the moment, but we are slowly exploring that territory.

 WSJ: What about rising food costs globally?

 Mr. Oh: Unfortunately, there's not much we can do about the ever-increasing cost of raw materials. We do have very long-term relationships with our suppliers, though, and they have not raised their prices dramatically. Yes, there are impacts, but it's all still manageable.

 WSJ: How different are your customers throughout Asia?

 Mr. Oh: Surprisingly, the top five products we sell in all the different markets are almost always the same. Our signature Flosss [a cream-filled bun that's topped with pork floss] is always one or two on our bestsellers list everywhere. It's interesting that even though these are very different customers with their own culture and tastes, certain things cross all boundaries and are universal.

 WSJ: How do you ensure consistent quality across your franchises?

 Mr. Oh: In Shanghai and Beijing, we manage our own BreadTalk stores. It's important to us that in these key markets, we really manage our brand. However, in second- or third-tier cities, we are in franchising mode. Franchises are always tricky, and we've had problems before with maintaining our standards. But that's something you just have to work through.

 WSJ: What is your biggest concern for the future?

 Mr. Oh: People. We need to build up a bigger team to support our plans. It's hard to get staff everywhere—some places it's a numbers issue, some places it's a quality issue. We try to mix up our staff so they can educate each other. A lot of our Singapore staff we'll transfer to China, and vice versa.