LISBON—Portugal's parliament rejected a new government austerity plan Wednesday, spurring the resignation of Prime Minister José Sócrates and setting off a new phase in Europe's sovereign-debt crisis.

The failure to pass the measure, after a heated debate, threatened to push already-high government borrowing costs to unaffordable levels and force Lisbon to seek a bailout.

That would make Portugal the third among the 17 nations that use the euro to apply for help from other members of the European Union and the International Monetary Fund. Greece and Ireland went first.

The events in Portugal could provide an indication of whether the euro zone's debt travails will be contained within three small countries or begin to undermine bigger economies.

There's plenty of money in Europe's bailout funds to handle Portugal's likely financing needs over the next few years, running into tens of billions of euros. However, if Portugal loses access to market finance, as now seems likely, the result may be to shift attention to Spain, the euro zone's fourth-largest economy and the one investors have identified as its next-most-vulnerable, partly because of its weak banking system.

A senior Spanish government official said prices of Spain's bonds and other assets may "face some temporary, speculative pressure" linked to Portugal's woes, but, as on prior occasions of intense market volatility, "Spain will continue moving forward with its reform efforts." These have included consolidation and recapitalization of local banks.

Portugal's crisis will be at the forefront of the agenda of an EU summit meeting in Brussels on Thursday. European leaders have spent recent months cobbling together a comprehensive package they hope will solve once and for all the euro zone's debt crisis.

Thursday's meeting is expected to settle a new post-2013 bailout fund, able to lend €500 billion, or about $710 billion, and an accord to improve countries' competitiveness. But a decision on enlarging the lending capacity of the current bailout fund beyond its roughly €250 billion has been put off.

Portugal's Mr. Sócrates, who is expected to serve as a caretaker prime minister until a new government is formed or an election held, plans to attend the Brussels summit, though his negotiating and policy-execution powers will be very limited.

Portugal has come under quiet pressure from other European governments over several months to take a bailout, but Mr. Sócrates has resisted. 

Citigroup economists said Wednesday that a vote by parliament to reject Mr. Sócrates's austerity measures would mean rising political uncertainty that "would increase market concerns and consequently...increase the chances that Portugal will be forced to accept a formal EU/IMF bailout package."

In a televised address, Mr. Sócrates said a bailout would mean even tougher austerity measures than he had proposed. "Those who imagine that an external aid package won't include more demanding measures—measures that are worse for us—are completely fooled or purely and simply don't know what they're talking about," he said.

Pedro Passos Coelho, leader of the center-right Social Democratic Party, said a new economic package is necessary. "The vote today," he said, "opened the way to present, to markets and to our European partner, a medium- and long-term strategy that will finally…get to the root of our problems, and doesn't just ask for redoubled sacrifices from the Portuguese every six months without giving them hope for the crisis to end." 

Any bailout would need IMF backing. One economist who keeps close tabs on the IMF's European activities said Lisbon has already started discussions with the Washington-based institution. 

Domenico Lombardi, a Brookings Institution economist, said discussions between the IMF and Lisbon "are a prelude to an [IMF] program" and borrowing from the European bailout fund.

A spokeswoman for the IMF said it hadn't received a request for financial help from Portugal.

With rising financing costs and investors willing to lend less and less to the country, Portugal faces a crunch in coming months. The government has debt repayments of €4.23 billion coming due next month, with about €4 billion in cash reserves.

The government expects the economy to contract by 0.9% this year, after previously predicting it would grow by 0.2%.

Mr. Sócrates and Finance Minister Fernando Teixeira dos Santos pledged to cut the budget deficit to 4.6% of gross domestic product this year, from around 7% last year and 9.3% in 2009. The new round of austerity measures rejected by the parliament was intended to reassure investors that deficit-cutting targets for the next three years would be met. 

The measures included an unpopular plan to reduce social-security spending, cut unemployment benefits and increase public-transport prices.

The resignation of Mr. Sócrates forces President Aníbal Cavaco Silva to consult with political parties over whether they are willing and able to form a new government. This seems unlikely, in which case the president will have to dissolve parliament and call early elections, which must be held within 55 days of the dissolution.

Opinion polls suggest the Social Democratic Party would win the most seats in an election, though probably not a majority. Mr Passos Coelho would likely need the help of the Democratic and Social Center party.

After the parliamentary vote, the euro sold off in late New York trading, breaking two weeks of steady gains against the dollar. It hit the day's lows at $1.4086 from $1.4196 late on Tuesday. Yields on Portugal's 10-year bonds hit 7.5% on Monday, the highest since the country joined the euro.

—Bob Davis contributed to this article.

 Write to  Patricia Kowsmann at patricia.kowsmann@dowjones.com 