Executive compensation likely won't rise as quickly this year as it did in 2010, but many chief executives will barely notice. 

Slower earnings growth and closer scrutiny by shareholders are expected to hold the typical increase in CEO pay packages below 10% this year. That compares with a median increase of 11% last year among the 350 companies in The Wall Street Journal/Hay Group compensation survey. 

But many executives are in line for big payouts from stock and stock options granted during the financial crisis, when share prices plunged. Major stock indexes have nearly doubled from their 2009 lows, boosting the value of those grants. The Wall Street Journal reported last month that the value of equity granted during the financial crisis to CEOs of companies in the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index has risen by more than $3 billion, compared with its value at the time of the grant.

Rising share prices also will likely increase the value of stock and options grants this year, compensation consultants project. 

 WSJ senior editor Scott Thurm will take reader questions about the executive compensation study at 1:30 p.m. today. Ask your questions now.  

Corporate earnings won't grow as quickly as last year, when profits soared as companies recovered from the recession. Analysts expect earnings at S&P 500 companies to rise 17.6% this year, down from 47.3% last year, said  Howard Silverblatt, senior index analyst at Standard & Poor's Indices. 

Slower profit growth will damp bonuses, which rose 19.7% last year— faster than any other component of pay—among the 350 companies in the Journal's compensation survey. 

Consultants say companies also are setting tougher performance targets this year.  Irv Becker, head of Hay's U.S. executive-compensation practice, says board compensation committees set less-stringent performance hurdles for last year because of the uncertain economic outlook at the time. 

  Doug Friske, global head of executive-compensation consulting for Towers Watson, expects total CEO compensation to rise a "couple percentage points" this year.  Ira Kay, a managing partner at Pay Governance LLC, anticipates a 5% to 10% increase. Both figures include salaries, bonuses and the awarded value of stock, stock options and other long term incentives. 

The expected smaller gain in compensation also reflects intensified shareholder pressure about executive pay, particularly when it seems unrelated to performance. Under the Dodd-Frank financial-overhaul law, nearly all public companies this year must offer shareholders an advisory vote on their compensation plans, known as "say on pay."

At 12 companies in the Russell 3000 stock index, a majority of voting investors have recommended against pay plans this year, according to Institutional Shareholder Services, a proxy advisory firm. Other companies are altering executive pay practices to win shareholder approval.  General Electric Co.
GE


0.30
%




 and  Lockheed Martin Corp.
LMT


0.13
%




 recently imposed performance hurdles on already-granted stock options, and  Alcoa Inc.
AA


-1.81
%




 said it would add conditions to this year's awards.  Walt Disney Co.
DIS


0.42
%




 rescinded agreements to pay taxes on separation payments to executives who lose their jobs following an acquisition.

After talking to investors,  Eastman Kodak Co. directors awarded CEO  Antonio Perez just 20% of his potential bonus for last year, even though he was eligible for 43%. Mr. Perez's total direct compensation last year fell 68%, to $3.1 million. A Kodak spokesman says Mr. Perez's compensation "reflects Kodak's pay-for-performance culture, which strives to align the interests of our executives with that of our shareholders.''

The Wall Street Journal CEO Compensation Study was conducted by Hay Group, a management-consulting firm. The study analyzes CEO pay from the biggest 350 U.S. public companies by revenue that filed their definitive proxy statements between May 1, 2010, and April 30, 2011. 

Such moves extend a trend to tie more CEO pay to aspects of corporate performance. Of the 350 companies in the Journal survey, 238 gave the CEO some form of performance-based award last year, up from 204 the prior year. 

Mr. Kay, of Pay Governance, says he expects to see more stock options carry performance hurdles before they can be exercised. The practice remains rare today, however. 

"Substantially less than 5% of outstanding stock options for CEOs have performance triggers,'' he estimates.

On the flip side, fewer companies in certain industries, such as retailing, are giving special equity grants for reasons such as retention, says  Robin Ferracone, executive chairman of Farient Advisors LLC, a Pasadena, Calif., compensation consulting firm. Such grants can boost pay even when corporate performance is sluggish. 

There could be other consequences from the advisory votes, including the further elimination of many executive perks. 

Compensation consultants say that the most vulnerable perks are those without a clear business purpose, such as country-club memberships, cars for personal use and supplemental retirement plans.

—Scott Thurm contributed to this article.

 Write to  Joann S. Lublin at joann.lublin@wsj.com and Dana Mattioli at dana.mattioli@wsj.com 