MANAMA, Bahrain—Bahraini security forces carried out a violent crackdown against protesters to drive them from the center of the capital Manama, and imposed a curfew across much of the city, as the island kingdom attempted to end weeks of demonstrations.

Riot police moved in at around 7 a.m. local time, raining down volleys of tear-gas canisters onto the camps of demonstrators, who for weeks have staged a sit-in at Pearl roundabout, according to eyewitnesses.

Witnesses said at least two protesters were killed and dozens injured, and state television reported two policemen were "martyred" when they were hit by a vehicle after protesters were driven out of the square.

The moderate opposition Al-Wefaq party said three protesters were killed and hundreds wounded.

Khalil Almarzooq, a senior member of Al Wefaq, said forces took control of the city's main Salmaniya hospital, blocking ambulances and civilian cars carrying the wounded from reaching the building.

"It is not just killing; they are preventing medical services from those who are wounded," said Mr. Almarzooq. 

Bahrain's health minister Nezar bin Sadeq Al-Baharna resigned Wednesday over the security forces' handling of the situation at Salmaniya, local media reported. A group of 12 judges and some members of the Shura council, the appointed upper chamber of parliament, also resigned. The number of council resignations wasn't clear.

The curfew affects a large part of central Manama and will last from 4 p.m. to 4 a.m. daily until further notice, said a statement from the General Command of the Bahrain Defense Force. The statement also said protests, marches and sit-ins were banned until normality is restored to the kingdom.

The crackdown is the latest escalation in a conflict between protesters, drawn mostly from Bahrain's Shiite Muslim majority, and the Sunni Muslim ruling Al Khalifa family. 

The recent unrest, following two weeks of relative calm, was sparked when demonstrators marched from the Pearl roundabout to occupy the heart of the financial district on Sunday.

Track events day by day.

Tensions rose Monday with the arrival of 1,000 troops from Saudi Arabia and 500 police from the United Arab Emirates, despite warnings from the U.S. that such a move could worsen the situation. The presence of the troops has heightened fears of a sectarian conflict and of possible involvement by Iran, Saudi Arabia's main rival for regional influence.

Iran's President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad told reporters at a news conference Tehran Wednesday that the events in Bahrain were not "justifiable" and added, "in today's world, you can't respond to the public's demand by using force and violence."

In response to the deployment of Saudi and other Gulf forces in Bahrain, he said: "Unfortunately some regional countries have sent their army to crackdown on the protesters in Bahrain. This is inhumane and these countries should learn their lesson from Saddam's fate and not repeat his mistakes."

Bahrain on Tuesday temporarily withdrew its ambassador from Tehran, after Iran described the arrival of the foreign troops as an "occupation."

In another sign of the regional dimension of the events in Bahrain, thousands of loyalists of Iraqi Shiite cleric Moqtada Sadr rallied in Baghdad and Basra Wednesday against the Saudi intervention in Bahrain, angered by what they see as sectarian targeting of Bahraini Shiites by the Sunnis.

As the police units moved into the Bahrain's city center, tents caught fire and plumes of black smoke could be seen billowing out of the roundabout. Sporadic shooting and occasional explosions also were heard. 

A government statement blamed protesters for torching the tents, and for setting fire to waste bins and igniting two gas canisters, and said they also hurled Molotov cocktails at the advancing security forces. It said police hadn't used live ammunition. 

State television carried some footage of the attack on the protest camp, showing pictures of people fleeing the area apparently carrying knives and swords. 

"Saboteurs torched tents at the square in an attempt to stall the advance of the police during the purge operations," state television said. 

State television also reported that a Bangladeshi man had been killed and 17 other Asian workers injured in attacks by "rioters," but the report couldn't be independently verified. 

Checkpoints were later set up by the army along the main highway running through the financial district, which was all but cut off. 

Bahrain's stock exchange was closed Wednesday owing to a state of emergency announced Tuesday, the Bahrain Bourse said on its website, without saying when it would reopen for trading. The stock market, one of the smallest in the Persian Gulf region, had closed up 1.3% at 1413.09 on Tuesday. 

Bahraini state television also said schools, universities and other public entities would be closed until further notice. 

Protesters put up little resistance to the police assault on their positions, according to eye witnesses. Most dispersed quickly when police started offloading rounds of tear gas.

At a police station by the Pearl roundabout, badly injured protesters were thrown into cells, many with blood splattered over their clothes. An eyewitness said some handcuffed protesters entering the police station were pushed and slapped by security forces. 

Internet access was down in some areas of the city and electricity was cut in areas surrounding the financial district. 

—Farnaz Fassihi in Beirutand Ben Lando in Baghdad contributed to this article.

 Write to  Summer Said at summer.said@dowjones.com 