The bank that was launched to help fix economies blighted by decades of Communist rule in Eastern Europe believes it can play a role in giving North Africa a fresh start.

The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development was established in 1991 to help countries in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union make the transition from centrally planned to market economies. 

It does that mainly by investing alongside private-sector partners, and has long focused on helping small and medium-sized companies, although it usually goes through local banks to do that.

It is owned by 61 governments, of which the U.S. is the largest single member, although the European Union's combined stake gives it a decisive say in what the EBRD does and where it goes. 

The indications are that most of those shareholders want the EBRD to start investing in North Africa, beginning with Egypt. In an interview Thursday, EBRD President  Thomas Mirow said the bank would be happy to oblige, noting that Egypt faces many of the problems the EBRD has already encountered in Eastern Europe.

"There are quite stunning similarities," Mr. Mirow said. "A very weak private financial sector, a very weak tissue of small and medium-sized companies, and poor utilities and services that municipalities offer. In terms of what an institution like this is best at after 20 years of experience, there are very many that are quite familiar to us."

But for Mr. Mirow, the similarities between the situation in North Africa in early 2011, and Central and Eastern Europe in late 1989 are more fundamental. 

"What is basically the same is that people know about how it is to live in a country that offers freedom and a decent way of living," he said. "People just want a chance to have a decent life."

The most likely time for a decision by the shareholders would be the EBRD's annual meeting, scheduled for May. The European Commission has made it clear that it sees a role for the EBRD in helping North Africa move from a political to an economic transformation, and it seems unlikely that the U.S. would object. 

"It's fair to say that we have very clear support in many places," Mr. Mirow said. "Whether in the end it will make a difference we will see."

If the May meeting were to give the EBRD the green light, it would take until early next year to complete the ratification process, and Mr. Mirow estimates that the development bank could invest as much as $1 billion in Egypt by 2014 or 2015.

For Egypt or any other North African country to become what the EBRD terms a "country of operation," all of the existing shareholders would have to approve. 

However, three-quarters of shareholders that have 80% of the total votes would be needed to approve the establishment of a separate fund that could invest in Egypt using the EBRD's resources and funds donated by governments. One status could lead to another, speeding the process of getting funds to those countries. 

For the bank's government shareholders, one of the attractions at a time of very tight budgets is that the EBRD could do that without asking for more money. The development bank made a profit of €1.4 billion (about $2 billion) last year.

"If things continue that way and provided we don't enter into a new phase of very heavy of stock value depreciations, we would be able to quickly engage at the level of a billion [euros], but certainly we would be able to go way beyond" in the region, Mr. Mirow said. "I would be cautious to speculate on the concrete figure. We are not engaging on a path that would lead us to ask our shareholders for fresh money."

Egypt has long been a shareholder in the EBRD, as has Morocco. Egypt's request for EBRD investment predates the departure of former President Hosni Mubarak after 18 days of popular protest against his rule, but it is being taken a lot more seriously since his departure.

As well as promoting a market economy, the EBRD is required by its statutes to support the transition to democracy. Mr. Mirow said the bank will have to be sure that a country in which it invests is on the right path, although the experience of the past two decades has taught the institution that it is not always smooth. 

"We need a level of comfort…that things are heading towards democracy," Mr. Mirow said. "But we must not be naive. We've seen that things don't always go straight forward, you have backlashes and reversals from time to time."

When the EBRD first started to invest in Eastern Europe, there was a great deal of speculation about how long it would take to complete the transition, catching up with Western Europe. Some guessed 10 years, some 20, some thought it might never happen.

Mr. Mirow said in the case of North Africa, much depends on the willingness of the countries themselves to make the needed changes.

"Depends on how much each country makes of it," he said. "It is superb to see what has happened in the Czech Republic and Poland—as a German, it has moved me to see the self-confident Poland of today. But at the same time, we have to witness countries not too far away from there that continue to struggle."

 Write to  Paul Hannon at paul.hannon@dowjones.com 