MANILA—The Philippine economy expanded at a faster-than-expected clip in the fourth quarter of 2010, as a recovery in the agriculture sector, steady growth in remittances and a rebound in exports helped to lift full-year growth to its strongest level in decades. 

Gross domestic product expanded by 7.1% in the October-December quarter from the year-earlier period, the National Statistics Coordination Board reported Monday. Compared with the previous quarter, fourth-quarter growth was up 3%. For the full year, GDP rose 7.3%, the agency said. 

Economists polled by Dow Jones Newswires had projected growth of 6% for the fourth quarter and 7% for 2010. 

Gross national product, which includes net factor income from abroad, rose 6.7% on-year in the fourth quarter and was up 7.2% for 2010. 

"We are happy to note that the 2010 economic performance bolsters confidence that the economy is on a path of strong recovery," Economic Planning Secretary Cayetano Paderanga told reporters, noting the country's 2010 GDP growth of 7.3% was well above the state-penciled target of 5% to 6%. 

The government is maintaining its 7% to 8% growth goal for 2011, Mr. Paderanga said. 

"The outlook (for 2011) is a bit better. We now have a momentum getting into 2011 and we're hoping that momentum will carry us forward," he said. "We'd like to keep the 7% to 8% (target) in the medium-term. If we would like to make a dent on unemployment and poverty, then 7% to 8% growth would greatly aid that goal." 

The government hopes that infrastructure investment it is hoping to generate under its public-private partnership initiative will make up for last year's election-related spending, Mr. Paderanga said. Four to five major infrastructure projects may be put up for bidding in the first half of the year, he added. 

Analysts, however, are less optimistic on the country's growth prospects this year. 

"While a 7%-plus growth rate this year is not out of the question, our forecast is for more modest growth of 5.4%, which mainly reflects the high growth base in 2010, slower government spending and the increasing risk of inflation, which could prompt a more hawkish policy from the (Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas) at some point," said Simon Wong, regional economist with Standard Chartered. 

Prakriti Sofat, regional economist with Barclays Capital, said she expects the Philippine economy to grow 5% this year "as election-related boost drops off," but added that the 7% to 8% official target numbers are "consistent with robust consumer spending, which will remain the mainstay of the economy." 

Mr. Paderanga acknowledged that the main downside risks to growth this year will come from external factors, including a further spike in commodity prices that could substantially lift domestic inflation.

Still, "at this point, we are fairly comfortable that (inflation) numbers will be within range of target," he said, referring to the government's 3% to 5% inflation target for 2011. 

Central bank Governor Amando Tetangco said a stronger-than-expected economic performance in the fourth quarter won't alter the outlook for stable inflation. 

In the fourth quarter, services, which account for more than half of GDP, rose 6.9% from a year earlier, while agriculture rose 5.4% and industry expanded 8.3%. 

For the whole year, industry rose 12.1% due to increased construction activity and election-related spending, agriculture contracted 0.5% because of the El Nino-induced dry spell in the first half of last year while services gained 7.1%. 

 Write to  Cris Larano at cris.larano@dowjones.com 