When Wilson Chandler, the Knicks' starting forward, did not play Friday night because of a sore calf and the Knicks lost 111-102, it shouldn't have come as much of a surprise. On a team with stars such as Amar'e Stoudemire, the understated Mr. Chandler is an often overlooked key to wins and losses. 

"Whether it's a coincidence or not, I don't know. But when we were 3-8 [in November.] he didn't shoot the ball well," Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni said. "Now we were 0-6 and he didn't shoot the ball well. When he's shot the ball well, we've won."

During the Knicks' recent six-game losing streak, Mr. Chandler averaged just 11.1 points. The Knicks broke the streak on Jan. 24 against the Washington Wizards—when Mr. Chandler had 25 points. 

His role is an important one: complementary scorer to the team's major star, Mr. Stoudemire, who is second in the NBA with an average of 26 points per game. 

"He's a big piece for us and when he plays well, it usually leads to good things," Mr. D'Antoni said. 

Mr. Chandler did not play again on Sunday night against the Detroit Pistons. Center Ronny Turiaf replaced him in the starting lineup and Mr. D'Antoni called Mr. Chandler "day-to-day."

During Knicks' wins, Mr. Chandler becomes a much more efficient player—his field goal percentage rises to 50% from 42%, free throw percentage to 86% from 72%, and 3-point percentage to 44% from 25%.

The only thing that doesn't rise dramatically is his points per game, which is 17.2 in wins and 16.5 in losses. 

Overall, Mr. Chandler is averaging 16.8 points per game, third most on the team behind Mr. Stoudemire and Raymond Felton. He also averages 6.1 rebounds, third on the team, and is tied for fifth on the team with 1.7 assists per game. Even as an undersized power forward at 6-foot-8, he averages 1.4 blocks per game, second on the team. 

His recent injury, however brief, gave the Knicks a glimpse of a world they didn't want to see: life without him. 

"I think [Mr. Chandler's performance] is a big factor,: Mr. D'Antoni said. "I won't put it all on him. It puts the pressure on [when he's out] to find someone to step up and take his place, to find someone to take his production.''

In Friday's game, Shawne Williams replaced Mr. Chandler in the starting lineup and scored 12 points on 5-of-13 shooting.

Mr. Chandler's toughness is also praised. Though Mr. Chandler won't admit it, Mr. D'Antoni guessed that he had been playing through the calf injury without saying anything. Mr. Williams said that Mr. Chandler feels that "if he's not dying he should play." 

"He's got the pressure of coming to play every night and having to score a high amount of numbers,'' Mr. Williams said. "We feel like when he plays good, we have a good chance to win. When he doesn't, we need scoring from other people.''

Mr. Williams said that if the Knicks were a puzzle board, Mr. Chandler would be the "big middle piece you can't have the puzzle without. Everyone has their role on this team and Wil has a much bigger role than a lot of us.''

Mr. Chandler had no explanation for his inconsistent performances that contributed to the Knicks' recent losing streak. Mr. Chandler, who is often mentioned in trade talk for Denver Nuggets star Carmelo Anthony, said he has not been bothered by the incessant trade chatter. 

"I don't read the paper as much, so I don't hear it as much as other people," he said. "When you have bad games you'll be down, but I'm good for the most part.…I'd rather have bad games and win than have good games and lose."

From the looks of it, neither of those scenarios happens too often.

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 