European stocks ended rather unevenly Monday, with market attention focused on a meeting of euro zone finance ministers to discuss the sovereign-debt crisis. 

The Stoxx Europe 600 index edged up 0.1% to finish at 284.06.

Finance ministers were gathered in Brussels for a two-day meeting at which discussions over increasing the European Financial Stability Facility, an emergency lending mechanism for fiscally troubled countries such as Ireland, were likely to take center stage. 

Royal Bank of Scotland said the meetings were unlikely to deliver any new resolution, given the complexity of the issues involved, and any decision was likely to be postponed to the meeting of the EU heads of state on Feb. 4, if not beyond. 

"Thus, we should not rule out possible disappointments for the market before a clear policy plan is announced," RBS said.

U.S. markets were closed for the Martin Luther King public holiday, while Chinese shares slumped to lead Asia lower, following Beijing's decision late Friday to raise banks' required reserve ratios for the seventh time since the start of 2009. 

Spain's IBEX 35 index underperformed other European markets, dropping 1% to 10280.00 as Banco Santander fell 1.1% after a report in El Mundo that Chief Executive  Alfredo Saenz may be forced to leave his job following a ruling by Spain's supreme court, after he was found guilty of fraud while at a previous role as chairman of Banco Espanol de Credito. 

Bank stocks were lower across the rest of Europe, following a strong rally at the end of last week.  Heino Ruland, strategist at Ruland Research, said worries about inflation in China and Europe were adding to the pressure on bank stocks. 

"The tightening in China is certainly leaving its footprint in Europe," Mr. Ruland said. He believes inflation in Europe will become more of a concern for the European Central Bank in the next few months and that it will have to begin lifting interest rates in the summer. 

  Barclays
BCS


0.23
%




 fell 1.4% in London,  Société Générale slipped 0.5% in Paris and  Deutsche Bank lost 0.7% in Frankfurt 

In London, the FTSE 100 index closed down 0.3% at 5985.70, while in Paris, the CAC-40 index inched up 0.2% to 3975.41 and in Frankfurt, the DAX index was little changed at 7078.06. 

In other market action, television broadcasting firm  Gestevision Telecinco
TL5


4.19
%




 dropped 3.9% in Madrid after it was downgraded to "neutral" from "outperform" by Credit Suisse, which cited a more cautious view on Spain's advertising market. 

  Apple,
AAPL


0.25
%




 which won't trade in the U.S. because of the holiday, fell 6.2% on the Frankfurt market after the company said Chief Executive  Steve Jobs will take medical leave, but is remaining CEO of the company. 

  Smiths Group
SMIN


0.11
%




 jumped 7.7% in London after the technology firm said late Friday it had rejected a takeover bid for its medical business from buyout group Apax Partners. 

  BP rose 0.2% after the oil giant late Friday announced a share-swap deal with Russia's  Rosneft, whic gianed 5.9% in London. The deal will allow the two firms to jointly drill in the Arctic Ocean. 

  Vodafone Group rose 1.8% on reports it is close to selling its stake in French mobile-phone group SFR. 

U.K.-based  Smith & Nephew gained 3.5%, after the Sunday Times reported that U.S. pharmaceutical giant Johnson & Johnson is considering a fresh takeover approach for Europe's largest manufacturer of replacement knees and hips. 

Fellow U.K. listed company,  Smiths Group
SMIN


0.11
%




 rekindled speculation about a possible breakup with its announcement that it rejected a cash offer from buyout firm Apax Partners for its Smiths Medical unit. Shares climbed 7.7%.

On the Swiss market, shares in  Compagnie Financiere Richemont
CFRUY


1.71
%




 dropped 2% after the luxury-goods group reported strong sales growth in Asia, but also said the final quarter of the financial year will be more challenging. 

Also in Switzerland, drug maker  Roche Holding
RHHBY


0.44
%




 rose 3% after the company appointed  Alan Hippe as its new chief financial officer.

On Tuesday, in addition to the meeting in Brussels, market participants will be looking at a plateful of U.S. economic data, including the Empire State manufacturing index and National Association of Home Builders housing market index. During the week, many U.S. banks will report fourth-quarter results, including Citigroup, Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley and Bank of America. 

In the currency markets, the euro was moderately lower with eyes on the EU finance ministers meeting.

Late in Europe, the common currency was trading at $1.3291 against the dollar, compared with $1.3375 late Friday in New York. The dollar was at 82.64 yen, compared with 82.97 yen.

February futures contract for gold on the Comex division of the New York Mercantile Exchange was flat, down 0.1% at $1359.7 per troy ounce. Light, sweet crude for February delivery was down 56 cents at $90.98 a barrel.

 Write to  Simon Kennedy at simon.kennedy@dowjones.com and Ishaq Siddiqi at ishaq.siddiqi@dowjones.com 