TOKYO—Japan's economy contracted more than initially estimated in the final quarter of 2010, as both business investment and private consumption were weaker than expected, revised data from the Cabinet Office showed Thursday. 

Gross domestic product contracted a price-adjusted 1.3% in annualized terms during the October-December period. That compared with an initial reading of a 1.1% contraction released last month. The revised reading matched the median forecast in a survey of economists by Dow Jones Newswires and the Nikkei. 

The economy appears to be returning to moderate growth in the current quarter, as exports to Asia and other key markets pick up. But economists say the government of Prime Minister Naoto Kan faces an uphill battle achieving higher growth, as it grapples with massive public debt, rising commodity prices and a treacherous political environment. 

GDP shrank 0.3% in the fourth quarter of 2010 from the previous period, the data showed, unchanged from the initial estimate and in line with economists' expectations. Capital spending was revised down to a 0.5% on-quarter rise from a preliminary 0.9% rise. 

Private consumption fell a revised 0.8% from the previous quarter, slightly worse than the initial estimate for a 0.7% fall. 

The revised data confirmed that inventory adjustments overseas were "a big factor" behind Japan's contraction in the final quarter, said Norio Miyagawa, senior economist at Mizuho Research and Consulting. 

Going forward, he said, he is more confident the economy will keep expanding from the January-March period, "as exports have shown a solid recovery." 

After the figures were released, Cabinet Office parliamentary secretary Takashi Wada told reporters the economy appears to be growing again. 

He said, however, the government is concerned about the recent rise in global oil prices amid the Middle East unrest. 

Mr. Wada also flagged Japan's worsening political climate as a source of potential problems for the economy. With Prime Minister Kan's government facing increasing difficulties, passage of legislation to authorize continued government borrowing is in doubt. 

"Another concern is one we have responsibility for, and that's whether [bills related to] the budget will pass or not, given the political situation." 

Separately Thursday, the Bank of Japan reported that the Corporate Goods Price Index, which measures prices at the wholesale level, was up 1.7% in February from a year earlier. It was the largest rise since November 2008 and underscores concerns about higher costs to the key manufacturing sector. 

Corporate goods prices sensitive to surging commodity prices are leading the "moderate rising trend" overall, a central bank official said. 

The cost of petroleum and coal products, for example, rose by 11.5% year-to-year after increasing 11.3% in January. Prices of nonferrous metals jumped 12.2% during the latest reporting month, compared with January's 7.8% rise. 

Even though Japan is trying to escape long-running deflation that has dragged on the economy, analysts say higher costs of raw materials, which are mainly imported, are bad for the economy. Manufacturers won't be able to pass higher costs onto consumers, who remain reluctant to spend given sluggish wage growth, they say. 

The fourth-quarter GDP figures also confirm Japan has fallen behind China and is now the world's third-largest economy. The revised figures showed Japan's nominal GDP for 2010 was 479.179 trillion yen, or $5.474 trillion, below China's $5.879 trillion in the same year. 

Despite the revisions, Japan's economy still grew 3.9% in all of 2010, unchanged from the initial estimate, making it the best performer among the Group of Seven industrialized nations. 

But economists caution against excessive optimism, saying Japan's dependence on exports means GDP growth could fall off again if global trade sours. That is what happened during the global financial crisis, when Japan's economy shrank 6.3% in 2009, the worst contraction among G-7 countries that year. 

—Takashi Mochizuki and Megumi Fujikawa contributed to this article.

 Write to  Andrew Monahan at andrew.monahan@dowjones.net 