TOKYO—Japanese officials continued their battle to keep damaged nuclear reactors from overheating in what has become the nation's worst nuclear accident, but said there were no signs of radiation leakage that would accompany a major meltdown. 

Japan chief government spokesman Yukio Edano said officials were trying to contain overheating at two of the six reactors at Tokyo Electric Power Co.'s Fukushima Daiichi power plant in northern Japan. The plant was damaged during Friday's massive earthquake and tsunami. Authorities injected seawater into both to replace cooling water they had lost—a procedure that would likely render them unusable.

Concern focused Sunday on Fukushima Daiichi's No. 3 reactor. Speaking at a press conference Sunday evening, Mr. Edano said pressure has been building up in the reactor due to a problem with a vapor release vent at the unit. As a result, the water level in the reactor fell sharply earlier in the day, possibly resulting in exposure of its fuel rods. 

Officials started pouring seawater into this unit Sunday afternoon to cool the reactor, following a similar step taken with the No. 1 reactor on Saturday that appears to have stabilized the situation there. However, the No.3 unit's water gauge has stopped functioning, making it impossible to tell whether the procedure is succeeding. The malfunctioning could be related to the vent problem, though the cause hasn't been determined. 

There has been no significant change in the radiation level near the power plant as a result of the latest problem at the No. 3 reactor, Mr. Edano said. Mr. Edano had acknowledged that radiation levels have risen at the plant after slightly radioactive steam was vented in a bid to lower pressure in the containment vessels and allow the pumping of cooling water. 

In another potential problem for the No. 3 reactor, Mr. Edano said hydrogen gas had been building up in the structure that houses the reactor, leading to the possibility of an explosion. But he said an explosion wouldn't damage the reactor or containment structure.

Japanese officials said the loss of power-generation capacity resulting from these shutdowns is likely to cause a crunch in power supplies starting from Monday, when businesses return for the first time since Friday's quake. To prevent a blanket blackout, two affected power companies will make controlled and regional power cuts starting as early as Monday. The government said that these coordinated power cuts would last for several weeks or longer.

"We are expecting to face a severe supply shortage in areas served by Tokyo Electric and  Tohoku Electric,
9506


0.88
%




" said Minister of Economy, Trade and Industry Banri Kaieda. The government is also asking businesses and households to reduce their electricity use sharply to prevent a blackout.

Some analysts say the government may be downplaying the real risk of a major disaster, and that the latest accident could be comparable to that of Three Mile Island in the U.S. Loss of cooling water resulted in a near meltdown of the Three Mile Island reactor in 1979, the worst nuclear incident in U.S. history.

"The Japanese authorities have been forced to take measures that were not called for in the playbook," said Mark Hibbs, a nuclear energy expert at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. "These have been unprecedented circumstances, and the government is doing whatever they need to do to cool the core of the reactor."

The International Atomic Energy Agency said it is ready to provide assistance if requested. All other Japanese power companies operating nuclear-power plants said their facilities are operating normally.

Friday's 8.9-magnitude earthquake exceeded the level at which Tokyo Electric's plants are designed to withstand,  Takeshi Takahashi, the general manager of the company's nuclear power plant management department, said Saturday.

On Saturday the major focus of concern was the plant's No. 1 reactor. Top government officials assured the nation late Saturday that an explosion that took place earlier in the day at the reactor merely knocked down the walls of its external concrete building, and that the reactor and the containment structure surrounding it remained intact. 

Mr. Edano said that nine people have been affected by radiation released from the No. 1 reactor at the time of Saturday's explosion, and that there are no health concerns for the time being. 

The building housing the stricken reactor collapsed Saturday afternoon with smoke billowing out, and officials responded by expanding the evacuation perimeter to a 12-mile radius and saying they were preparing to stockpile iodine supplies "just in case."

Soon after the explosion, the radiation level outside the reactor rose to 1,015 microsievert—the equivalent of being exposed to the maximum allowable level for a full year in a single day. The level has since come down sharply. 

Earlier in the day, Tokyo Electric took emergency measures to avert a meltdown of the stricken nuclear-power plant hit by massive tsunami that followed Friday's earthquake in the northeast region of Tohoku. Those steps appeared to be bringing down the dangerous pressures that had built up in the container, a Tokyo Electric spokesman said. But he and the government officials wouldn't discuss in detail the progress they have made in lowering the temperature inside the reactor.

The plant is located 150 miles away from Tokyo.

Previously, the utility had said there was a risk of a meltdown in the core after the quake cut off power to pumps providing cooling water. That, in turn, could lead to heating of the core, the risk of a meltdown, and the release of radiation.

A portion of the reactor's fuel rods, which create heat through a nuclear reaction, had become exposed due to tsunami-related cooling-system failure, a Tokyo Electric spokesman said. 

Loss of cooling water resulted in a near meltdown of the Three Mile Island reactor in Pennsylvania in 1979. 

If coolant isn't restored, the result could be what is known as a meltdown—extreme heat can melt through the reactor vessel and result in a radioactive release. Reactors have containment domes to catch any release. But there is always the chance that an earthquake could create cracks or other breaches in that containment system.

At Fukushima Daiichi, the three reactors that were operating when the earthquake struck shut down as they were designed to do, but pressure built up inside them due to malfunctioning of their cooling system.

Nuclear problems are particularly troubling in Japan, which has 56 nuclear reactors, providing about 20% of the nation's electricity. Eleven reactors shut down as a result of the earthquake, as well as dozens of conventional fossil-fired or hydroelectric plants, leaving millions of people without electricity.

When nuclear plants lose grid power, emergency on-site generation is supposed to furnish backup power. But some diesel generators at the Fukushima Daiichi plant failed a short time later due to the damage from the tsunami that followed the earthquake. That forced the plant to resort to batteries to furnish electricity to critical instrumentation and controls for at least one of the reactors, experts said.

Reactors at the plant use a special cooling system, called the Reactor Core Isolation Cooling system, to take waste heat and run some critical systems. But experts said even that system and batteries wouldn't be able to furnish as much power as was needed, putting pressure on plant officials to quickly find additional sources of electricity.

Experts said that Tokyo Electric has improved its processes and communications since a July 2007 earthquake heavily damaged the Kashiwazaki-Kariwa nuclear plant, one of the world's largest. The entire plant was shut down for 21 months following that quake, and some reactors still aren't back in operation.

Tokyo Electric was criticized after the 2007 quake for secrecy concerning how it was responding to problems at the Kashiwazaki plant and for rejecting inspection and assistance offers from the IAEA, which is intended to create confidence in the way an emergency is handled.

The Kashiwazaki plant suffered from seismic activity, in the 2007 quake, that exceeded the level for which it was designed, calling into question seismic assumptions made by regulators and the plant operator. There was a radioactive release when water sloshed out of spent-fuel-cooling pools and spilled into the Sea of Japan.

—Rebecca Smith, William Sposato, Takashi Nakamichi and Ben Lefebrve contributed to this article.

 Write to  Yuka Hayashi at yuka.hayashi@wsj.com and Mari Iwata at mari.iwata@dowjones.com 