FLORHAM PARK, N.J.—Inside the Jets' locker room, no one knows when it will happen, or why. But every now and then, linebacker Bart Scott will press play on his iPod and crank up the volume on his mini-stereo. After a song or two, wide receiver Braylon Edwards, whose locker is on the opposite end of the room, will blast his own music. And back and forth it will go.

There is a link between what happens in the locker room and what plays out on the field. A look at some of the Jets' key personalities.

"We're always having those DJ battles between Bart and Braylon," reserve linebacker Jamaal Westerman said this week. "You know how they have those 'flash mobs' and people start dancing at the mall? It's kind of like a 'flash DJ battle,' man."

NFL locker rooms are only open to public inspection for 3 hours each week—four 45-minute chunks, as mandated by the league, during which reporters are permitted to invade the team's inner sanctum. But according to players, past and present, what happens in the locker room often is just as important as what plays out on the field every Sunday. In fact, there can be a direct correlation.

The Jets will face the New England Patriots at Gillette Stadium on Sunday in a divisional playoff game, and for all their bluster, bravado and off-the-field antics, the Jets have created their own brand of chemistry this season. Behind closed doors, the Jets are more centered than they might let on, having taken their cue from veteran leaders such as fullback Tony Richardson, linebacker Jason Taylor and running back LaDainian Tomlinson—players who have fostered an atmosphere of compliance and camaraderie, even as their coach, Rex Ryan, continues to make headlines.

"I think it helps that the Jets have gone that route in using veterans who are still valuable, who are still making contributions," said Harry Carson, the Giants' Hall of Fame linebacker. "If you're missing any kind of leadership because you've got a lot of young players, these are the guys who can make their presence felt because they're respected." 



When he was with the Giants, Mr. Carson occupied a locker next to the door. He could see everything that was happening, and Bill Parcells, his coach, put the onus on his more experienced players: If anyone fell out of line, it was up to Mr. Carson and the other veterans to set things straight. This was important, Mr. Carson said, because he and his teammates spent more time in the locker room during the season than they did at home.

With the Jets, it seems revealing that the lockers belonging to Messrs. Richardson, Taylor and Tomlinson are scattered, forming a sort of equilateral triangle. Mr. Richardson is a 16-year veteran. Mr. Taylor is a six-time Pro Bowl selection. And Mr. Tomlinson ranks fifth on the NFL's all-time rushing list. They also happen to be three of the team's more soft-spoken players. So when they do talk, their words have weight to them.

"You tell them not to take the opportunity for granted," Mr. Taylor said of his conversations this week with younger teammates. "They should enjoy it, have fun with it and take advantage of it. Because these chances don't come around very often."

At the same time, cornerback Antonio Cromartie said the locker room itself—the actual physical space—has forged a feeling of togetherness. There are no walls, just lockers lining the entire perimeter. Things, he said, were different when he was with the San Diego Chargers.

"You had walls separating guys," said Mr. Cromartie, whom the Jets signed over the offseason. "But I love that this room is wide open. You can see everybody. You know where everybody is. It's by far the closest locker room I've been in since college."

Mr. Westerman said the layout makes a difference, improving communication and helping to build relationships. As a result, he said, players are more likely to speak up during games and ask questions. "You don't have any problems talking to anyone on the field," he said.

And yet chemistry remains a nebulous, unscientific concept. Do teams win because they have good chemistry? Or do they have good chemistry because they're winning? 

"It's a chicken-and-egg scenario," said Todd Christensen, a former NFL tight end. "If you're winning the Super Bowl and division titles, you're always in the locker room looking at each other fondly. It's amazing. But if you go 7-9 or 5-11, suddenly everyone's a jerk and you hate each other."

Mr. Christensen, who now works as a broadcaster for the MountainWest Sports Network, recalled the story about how Mark Messier, in one of his first acts as captain of the New York Rangers in 1991, removed a table that divided the locker room so he could look each of his teammates in the eye. Mr. Christensen dismissed the significance of the episode as "overrated." What matters most for any professional team, he said, is veteran leadership. And those players do not have to be vocal or demonstrative. Their mere presence usually is enough.

He cited his experiences playing alongside former Raiders quarterback Jim Plunkett, who elevated discretion to a high art. Aside from what Mr. Christensen described as the occasional "cold-fish handshake," Mr. Plunkett seldom reacted on the field. It sometimes was impossible to tell whether Mr. Plunkett had thrown a touchdown or an interception. But his teammates respected him, and the Raiders won two Super Bowls.

"He didn't exactly seem like 'Spartacus' back there, but maybe it was good because we had so many diverse personalities and a coach who was highly underrated," said Mr. Christensen, referring to John Madden. "We had players on that team who were notorious for doing all sorts of things off the field. But it was interesting how once we got between those lines, that all disappeared. The leadership mantle fell to the guys who knew what it took."

The Jets have managed to persevere through countless distractions this season, ranging from Braylon Edwards's early-season arrest on DUI charges, to the Ines Sainz incident, to questions about their head coach's personal life. Through it all, the team has maintained its familiar swagger and its surprising focus.

"Whether it's a team that has a happy-go-lucky attitude or a team that's serious-minded, it can work as long as everybody's on the same page," Mr. Carson said. "They can have fun. But when it's time to work, they're going to show up for work."

Even as the game has changed, the culture of the locker room has remained largely the same. Larry Grantham, a former linebacker who spent 12 seasons with the Jets before retiring in 1972, said the team's old locker room at Shea Stadium also was an open space. The defense had lockers along one wall, the offense along the other. But there was constant interaction, constant laughter, a feeling of family.

"What happens in the locker room means so much," Mr. Grantham said. "And the smallest things can mess it all up."

In some ways, it was a different era. The press could wander in and out, and Mr. Grantham said he remembers the legendary broadcaster Howard Cosell, his microphone drawn to quarterback Joe Namath like a magnet. Here was one instance where petty jealousies might have created rifts. Mr. Namath was more famous and made more money than his teammates—probably more than all the rest of them combined, Mr. Grantham said—but Mr. Namath never allowed those disparities to become issues. He checked his persona as "Broadway Joe" at the door.

It was a formula that launched the Jets to their first and only Super Bowl in 1968. That team had personality and moxie, and if that sounds familiar, it should. These Jets are hoping for the same sort of success.

 Write to  Scott Cacciola at scott.cacciola@wsj.com 