 New York 

During the course of his three latest albums, pianist Volker Bertelmann, who records and performs under the name Hauschka, has moved to funk from solo prepared piano and orchestral music. It's not as curious a journey as the different styles of music suggest.

"At 24, I was signed to Sony. I was in a hip-hop band—God's Favorite Dog," the affable 44-year-old Düsseldorf, Germany-based musician said before his recent set at Joe's Pub here. The group released one album before it was dropped by the label. "I'm very glad it was a failure. Major companies are not my cup of tea. They're not able to let me keep on going. They have expectations."

With the newly released "Salon Des Amateurs" (FatCat), Mr. Bertelmann blends his passion for modern rhythmic music with his classical training and need for experimentation. Featuring an adventurous cast that includes drummer Samuli Kosminen, from the Icelandic experimental group múm, as well as violinist Hilary Hahn and Calexico's Joey Burns and John Convertino, "Salon Des Amateurs" rises from Mr. Bertelmann's solo compositions on prepared piano—a traditional piano whose sound has been altered by objects placed on or between the strings. "The idea," he said, "was to mix minimalism and funk elements." On the disc, Mr. Bertelmann establishes percussive themes that repeat while other instruments, including brass and synths, enter and exit; in some cases, he's overdubbed melodic piano parts. The result is sprightly, challenging music that's also a lot of fun.

And it's quite different from other recent Hauschka albums: Issued in 2008, "Ferndorf" is a collection of formal pieces for prepared piano augmented by cello, trombone and violin; "Foreign Landscapes," released last October, features San Francisco's Magik*Magik Orchestra and is dense modern-classical music for strings, woodwinds and brass, with the crackle and shimmer of the prepared piano deep in the mix. Inspired by his travels, Mr. Bertelmann and the orchestra create a sense of bustle and displacement across the span of the album.

Mr. Bertelmann said he wrote "Foreign Landscapes" and the funky "Salon Des Amateurs" at the same time. He doesn't see the differing styles of the albums as distinct, but rather as two parts of a whole. "Your mind needs to be open to accept this as one thing rather than two things."

Listen to clips of songs by Hauschka:

Mr. Bertelmann began piano lessons at age 9. He soon became intrigued by the variety of sounds synthesizers could produce, but couldn't afford one. "I put tags in our piano to get a harpsichord kind of sound. Mom was very upset," he said with a smile. "But after that, I was using piano only for writing songs and arranging." He studied medicine before settling on a career in music, which led to touring often and playing in a variety of settings, including with the group Music A.M. alongside novelist and musician Luke Sutherland. With the birth of his twin daughters, Mr. Bertelmann decided to quit the road. "It was the right time for not making music," he said of his sabbatical. Eventually, he was ready to return, but he was reluctant to declare himself a solo pianist. "Friends encouraged me, but I'm to be in the world of Oscar Peterson, of Horowitz, of Keith Jarrett? How can I be on that shelf?"

In 2007, Mr. Bertelmann toured with múm, playing prepared piano. "Bottle caps on the strings sounded like high hats. With pieces of felt and necklaces, I was creating textures. I was getting more and more into detail."

Though he was growing bolder in his choices for preparing the piano, taking at least an hour to get it ready before shows, Mr. Bertelmann knew he was at risk. "I was scared, actually," he recalled. "I worried people thought I was stupid for ruining a perfectly good piano by putting in bottle caps." Some promoters refused his request to adapt their venue's piano.

At Joe's Pub, Mr. Bertelmann worked with Mr. Kosminen, who, in the spirit of his musical partner, prepared his drums by draping a towel over one cymbal and using a tiny high hat. Mr. Bertelmann coaxed sounds from the keys, mallets and strings that brought to mind cymbals or a toy piano; at one point, he got nothing more than a dull clack, thus creating a percussive duet with the drummer. When Mr. Bertelmann flexed his left hand on the low end, Mr. Kosminen responded with what sounded like creaking floorboards. An unopened bag of marbles went onto the piano strings, as well as springs and what looked like chopsticks, followed by a collection of ping-pong balls that bounced around like popping corn; Mr. Bertelsmann played with artistry and good humor, evoking Erik Satie and Steve Reich more so than John Cage's works for prepared piano. The music was intriguing, mischievous and never silly: When the duo found a groove, they worked it with satisfying intensity.

With budgets tight for experimental musicians everywhere, Mr. Bertelmann collected the ping-pong balls when his set concluded, taking them back with him to Europe for shows in the U.K., Luxembourg and Spain. This summer, he will host a piano festival in Düsseldorf; Mr. Reich and the Swiss jazz-funk pianist Nik Bärtsch have already agreed to appear. And he intends to continue defying audience expectations.

"Maybe I'm stretching their minds a little bit," he said. "If they don't expect something, you can lose fans along the way. But I want to surprise myself. I've had to accommodate in the past. I don't want to do that anymore."

 Mr. Fusilli is the Journal's rock and pop music critic. Email him at jfusilli@wsj.com or follow him on Twitter: @wsjrock. 