The color on the walls can make or break a room.

But  Candice Olson, host of HGTV design show "Candice Tells All," says that she doesn't choose the paint color first when designing a room. She first takes into account the fabrics, artwork, rug colors and other elements that will be in a space. "Color has to have context," she says.

People who want "a quiet, serene look" should look for wall colors that don't contrast with their furniture, Ms. Olson says, citing a beige sofa with a mushroom-colored wall behind it. 

If you have neutral furniture but want more contrast in the room, a bright color such as turquoise can work well, she says. Some currently trendy colors are lavender and wisteria, a pale tint of violet. In her own home, she has used a metallic bronze in a dining room and a blue gray—the color of storm clouds—in a family room.

When the rest of the décor is colorful, Ms. Olson is careful not to make the walls too bright. She recently worked on a project with a young couple who loved color. 

"The problem arose when they also liked bright, bold, intense artwork," she says. "In order to bring out the bold beauty of their art work, we needed to temper the walls." She chose a soft cream paint.

Beyond white and cream, there are many beautiful neutrals, she notes. "Light olive-colored walls, essentially a gray green," she says, can work in almost any room.

When you're picking wall colors, your room's lighting is an important consideration. In rooms with windows facing north or east, where the light coming in is cool, Ms. Olson likes warm, light-toned colors such as creams, caramels and buttery shades. 

In the brightest rooms, those with south and west-facing windows, soft shades of warm colors can play up the sunlight. Bright colors can work—but intense versions of colors like red, yellow and orange may be too bright.

Cool colors, such as blue and moss green, work well in rooms that have low or moderate amounts of light, she says. The sun tints everything yellow, and large amounts of it can turn blue into green and moss green into an acidic lime.

Before choosing a color, Ms. Olson advises buying a little paint, putting it on a big card and looking at it in the room. Keep in mind that incandescent lighting tends to give colors a yellow tint. Investing in halogen lighting shows a wall's true colors.

You don't have to commit to an all-over color. To quickly refresh a room, try just painting one wall to create a focal point. Be sure to paint the right wall: either the longest wall or the one with the main piece of furniture against it.

Ms. Olson generally leaves ceilings white but suggests tinting the ceiling paint with a bit of the wall color to create "a softer transition between the walls and the ceiling." Except in the very smallest rooms, she paints trim in a color that contrasts with the walls.

Don't be afraid to use darker colors on your walls, Ms. Olson says. She is a fan of dark navy walls, especially in dining rooms, where the color can complement crystal and silver on the table. 

Another favorite: black. The color adds contrast and drama to any room. "It is the little black dress," Ms. Olson says, noting that it can work in either modern or traditional-looking settings. "Everything goes with it." 

That said, living rooms and bedrooms are best suited for the feeling of moody mystery that black can create. A glossy finish can add further glamour. Remember to beef up the lighting, she notes. 

Ms. Olson suggests limiting the use of black in most kitchens to one wall—perhaps a wall of functional blackboard paint. And she would use very little of it in a master bath. "Limit black to the wall area above a chair rail," she suggests. "It gives the same high-contrast, dramatic effect without being too dark for grooming." 

—Anjali Athavaley

 Write to  Anjali Athavaley at anjali.athavaley@wsj.com 