Many taxpayers could save some money merely by doing a little extra homework.

As of March 4, the Internal Revenue Service had received about 60.5 million individual income-tax returns. It had issued more than 52 million refunds, up 1.1% from a year ago. Those refunds totaled $161 billion, an average of $3,070.

Getting a refund feels great. That's why so many early birds file so early each year. But it's worth remembering that Uncle Sam doesn't pay interest on routine refunds. Thus, these taxpayers effectively have given Washington large amounts of interest-free loans.

Instead of doing this year after year, these people should consider taking a few moments to recalculate their tax withholding for 2011, their estimated tax payments or both.

Sure, it's a nuisance, and it may not seem worth the effort since interest rates remain so low. But tax-preparation software can make the job much easier -- and many people could use that money to pay down expensive credit-card debt. (Even better, as my wife, Marilyn, just reminded me, don't have any expensive credit-card debt, if possible.) The IRS offers a withholding calculator -- at no charge -- on its website (www.irs.gov). Also see IRS Publication 919.

For those who haven't yet filed this year and expect a refund, you can receive that refund in several different ways. You can instruct the government to deposit that refund directly in a checking or savings account. Or, you can get it in the form of savings bonds or payments to retirement funds and mutual funds.

This year, there are new savings-bond options. Last year, if the taxpayer chose to receive a savings bond as part of the refund, it could only be issued in the taxpayer's name, the IRS says. This year, taxpayers "can designate anyone to receive a savings bond and also designate the co-owner or beneficiary."

IRS Form 8888 has a new section for entering savings-bond information "so that taxpayers no longer need to enter a pre-specified routing number," the IRS says. "Instead, taxpayers will enter the bond owner's name. The savings bonds will be mailed to the taxpayer."

For more details, see the IRS website and look for a news release dated March 14.

—Send your questions to us at askdowjones.sunday03@wsj.com and include your name, address and telephone number. Questions may be edited; we regret that we cannot answer every letter.