MUMBAI – India's growth and inflation outlook is vulnerable to food and energy price disruptions because of their relatively higher shares in the expenditure basket, a senior International Monetary Fund official said Monday. 

"Renewed spikes in energy and food prices could affect Asia's growth and inflation outlook,"  Anoop Singh, the IMF's Asia and Pacific Department director, told reporters at a briefing. "India ... is particularly vulnerable to food and energy price disruptions." 

Energy prices, if they reverse a recent decline, could hurt growth in Asian economies including India, he said. Global commodity prices could also further strain inflationary pressures. 

The IMF last month cut its 2011 economic growth forecast for India to 8.2% from 8.4% as persistent inflation pressure forced aggressive monetary tightening. 

At its annual policy last week, India's central bank forecast the economy to grow 8% in the fiscal year that started April 1, lower than the previous year's growth of 8.6%. 

Mr. Singh supported the Reserve Bank of India's sharper-than-expected 0.50 percentage point increase in key lending rates. 

"We remain confident that with its stated policy stance to maintain an interest rate environment that moderates inflation and anchors inflation expectations," inflation will start trending down in due course, he said of the RBI's policy. 

In last month's outlook report, the IMF had said most of the increase in India's headline inflation in recent months was due to a spike in food prices.

The IMF forecasts consumer prices in India to rise 7.5% in 2011 and to ease to 6.9% in 2012. 

Although Mr. Singh said fiscal policy can play a very helpful role in stabilizing the economy and inflationary expectations he added that "reaching this year's deficit target will be more challenging, requiring…the need to streamline and contain the rise in key spending targets."

The government hopes to curb its fiscal deficit to 4.6% of gross domestic product in the current fiscal year. 

Mr. Singh said he expects the investment outlook for India over the next three-five years to be "very positive." 