This week 10-year Irish bond yields touched a fresh record of 9.60%, barely three months after Dublin secured access to €67.5 billion in "temporary liquidity assistance" from the EU and IMF. Meanwhile, Greek 10-year yields rose to 12.85% and government bonds traded at discounts of more than 30% on secondary markets, 10 months after Athens was loaned €110 billion. 

  Daniel Gros: Borrower, and Lender, Beware  

Only in Brussels could this be read as a prescription for more EU-directed bond-aid. And yet that's exactly what euro-zone leaders will discuss this week when they meet to negotiate details for a permanent bailout mechanism to replace the current temporary fund. The question among euro-zone watchers is not whether the EU will remain in the "liquidity assistance" racket indefinitely, but on what terms. Go ask Athens—because logic and proportion have fallen sloppy dead in Brussels.

Markets are not infallible. But the high yields and steep discounts on the sovereign debt issued by Athens and Dublin are the most visible signs that Europe's ad hoc bailouts have failed to persuade investors that these countries are solvent. These columns have noted before that credit-rating agencies are often playing catch-up with what market players already know, so it says something that Brussels still won't admit what Moody's spelled out this week when it downgraded Greek debt three notches: The biggest threat to the euro today is not government or bank liquidity. It's their solvency. 

In explaining the downgrade, Moody's warned that Greece's eligibility for more European rescue capital after 2013 could "reflect solvency criteria that the country may not satisfy, and result in a restructuring of existing debt." Moody's added that its downgrade reflects the likelihood that "a solution that requires private-sector creditors to bear losses may become more appealing."

Those creditors seem to agree, if the debt premiums they're now demanding are anything to go by. Greek and Irish (and Portuguese and Spanish . . .) public fiscs are in tatters for different reasons, and each requires different solutions—which is a good argument against the EU's drive to harmonize economic and fiscal policies. But in every case, judging by the prices at which their debt is currently changing hands, private lenders are not convinced that these economies will grow fast enough to keep up with their government liabilities. 

Typically, the Greek Ministry of Finance shot the messenger, firing back that the Moody's downgrade was "completely unjustified," citing among other evidence the EU's latest appraisal of its efforts to bring its finances under control. But with long-term Greek debt yields in double-digits, continued EU life-support is a foregone conclusion, not a realistic vote of confidence. 

If either Greece or Ireland were to default, it would bring the current march toward a Brussels-centric economic government for Europe to a screeching halt, which is what the EU most wants to avoid. It would also require investors to apply more realistic default risks to Europe's other highly indebted countries. The powers that be prefer to delay that day of reckoning until the next phase of ever-closer union is firmly entrenched. 

Welcome to Euroland, where one pill makes debts larger, the other only makes them look small, and liquidity remedies for solvency problems won't do anything at all. 