Here's the problem for St. John's: No matter what happens Thursday night, their season will be considered one of the most astonishing successes in Red Storm history.

That is very nice for the school and a testament to its players and coaching staff. It is also a terrible way to enter a tournament.

With the loss of D.J. Kennedy, a resulting slip in the seedings and a formidable first opponent in Gonzaga—a team entering its 13th straight NCAA tournament and a pre-season Top 25 pick in the Associated Press poll—no one could blame the Red Storm (21-11) if they lose Thursday night in Denver. Game time is 9:45 p.m.

Falling to the Bulldogs (24-9) would not sully St. John's achievements this year. While the initial sting would be severe, there would be reasonable explanations and, in time, perspective.

Which raises the question: Now that the team has emphatically achieved something once thought all-but-impossible by almost everyone, how do they reset for something even more outrageous?

Here's a thought: They can look at Kennedy, who tore the anterior cruciate ligament in his right knee in the Red Storm's Big East tournament loss to Syracuse, as he watches his teammates step onto the floor at the Pepsi Center on Thursday night in Denver. Kennedy dreamed of playing in the NCAA tournament since "grade school," he said.

He was among the seniors who met in private at the beginning of the season and made a pact to do whatever it took to make the NCAA tournament. Their college careers had left them disappointed and dissatisfied, bereft of a single bid. They couldn't rely on a new coaching staff, they told each other. They could only count on themselves. And they would have only more chance.

Kennedy was one of the key voices.

"From the day that we came into St. John's and stepped foot on campus, he's been one of our leaders," said senior forward Justin Burrell, and he wasn't only referring to the stats Kennedy posted in becoming the team's third-leading scorer and top rebounder.

Over the course of the season, the players found a willing partner in Steve Lavin and the new coaching staff. Together, they forged one of the most unlikely stories in college basketball. St. John's entered the Big East Tournament with its first national ranking in a decade, the team's NCAA bid all but assured.

If Kennedy could have made it through two more hours of basketball against Syracuse, he would be starting on Thursday night. But he fell minutes short, after reaching for a rebound and crashing to the ground.

Now he understands that making the tournament wasn't enough. There have been other life lessons for other players this year; Sean Evans learning that he can pull himself out of what assistant coach Mike Dunlap termed an "abyss" and emerge as a leader; the knowledge that even outsized dreams can be realized. But here's the toughest one: with no warning, it can all be taken away. 

With that said, Gonzaga will present a genuine challenge. 

Though the Bulldogs stumbled early in the season, they enter the NCAA Tournament on a nine-game winning streak, fresh off a victory in the West Coast Conference championship.

Gonzaga's 13 straight appearances in the NCAA tournament is tied for the fourth-longest streak in the country; the Bulldogs have advanced to at least the second round nine times and made the Sweet Sixteen as recently as 2009.

Perhaps it is surprising, then, that only five Gonzaga players have previous tournament experience. But St. John's doesn't have a single one.

"Going out to Denver and playing a team that's had as much success as Gonzaga has had over the last decade is a daunting task," said St. John's coach Steve Lavin. "But we also understand that we've played a rigorous schedule and bring some things to the table that they have to be concerned with as well."

In the hours after Sunday's selection, Red Storm players pointed to the grueling schedule that earned them a Rating Percentage Index ranking of 26, according to rpiratings.com (Gonzaga lags far behind at 56). RPI rankings factor in winning percentage, strength of schedule and the strength of opponents' schedules.

St. John's opened its season by flying 12,860 miles by December 1, with games in California and Alaska and went on to notch tough road wins against No. 5 seed West Virginia and No. 6 seed Cincinnati.

"We're used to that jet lag," said Burrell. "We're familiar with playing in environments on the other side of the country."

Against admittedly weaker competition, Gonzaga compiled statistical edges in nearly every category, outscoring St. John's, holding opponents to fewer points, grabbing more rebounds, handing out more assists and shooting better from the field and foul line. The Bulldogs have a deep and balanced bench, with 10 players averaging 4.4 points or more a game.

But in the emotion of the NCAA tournament, intangibles are critical. And if St. John's needs to remember why it shouldn't be satisfied, they can just ask Kennedy: There won't be another chance. And they are lucky to get this one.