Until August,  Brian Weyandt was having a great 2010. Two of his children got married, a granddaughter was born and he started a new job at  AT&T.
T


-1.11
%




 But the 57-year-old IT project manager from Atlanta was unexpectedly laid off.

Mr. Weyandt spent the next five months searching for a job. He also joined a career support group that was being hosted by a Methodist church in nearby Roswell, Ga. "It was very comforting to find a network of people like me who shared my faith," says Mr. Weyandt. The group has kept him motivated, which helped him land a job in March as a business analyst at FiberLight, an Alpharetta, Ga., provider of fiber-optic services.

Across the nation, local churches and other religious organizations have stepped up their recession-busting efforts with free career workshops, résumé clinics and networking functions. The latter can generate quick leads if leveraged properly since religious-centered networks tend to have very invested members, says  Elliot Lasson, executive director of Joblink of Maryland, a job matching service that works with the Jewish community in Baltimore. "It's a community that wants to help each other," he says. But netting results requires effort.

First, determine what you want to get out of a networking event beforehand, says  Jay Litton, who has been the volunteer leader at the Roswell United Methodist Church job-networking ministry since 1997. "Put together a 30-second 'elevator pitch' that allows you to quickly communicate to other people what industry and companies you are targeting so they can help you with referrals and leads," he says.

Don't linger with people that you already know at networking events. That may be a temptation when held in a familiar church, synagogue or mosque. The key to creating new opportunities is through new people. Follow up any meetings you may have with email or a phone call. You want to reinforce your first impression and show your interest, says Mr. Litton.

Consider joining a religious-oriented professional group whose membership can offer very targeted insight on specific occupations like accounting or engineering, says  Zeba Iqbal, executive director of the Council for the Advancement of Muslim Professionals, or CAMP, in New York. Professional organizations like CAMP are always looking to partner with other networks, including those being formed within corporations like pharmaceutical company Merck.

Join the organization intending to participate actively. Most professional networking groups are primarily run by volunteers so offering to help is a good way to earn some early trust. Attend as many of the events as you can. Consider becoming an officer in the organization, says Ms. Iqbal, and be generous with personal resources like business contacts. The idea is that you'll get more by giving more.

 Write to  Dennis Nishi at cjeditor@dowjones.com 