PARIS—A report published by the French government Wednesday could give impetus to the country's search for alternative energy sources, at a time when the Libyan rebellion is disrupting oil and gas supplies and boosting prices and Japan's radiation crisis heightens concerns about the safety of nuclear power.

One option that has been fiercely debated is shale gas, whose emergence in the U.S. has helped the country reduce its dependence on imported energy and eased prices while providing a fuel that burns cleaner than oil or coal. France has abundant shale, with the most promising drilling area covering 10,000 square kilometers in the southeast, and technological advances are making it possible to extract deposits trapped deep in the rock. 

Wednesday's report by senator  Jacques Blanc said that for the sake of France's energy security, it was "legitimate to see if such resources [as oil sands and shale oil and gas] are potentially present in the national and European territories."

It isn't yet clear whether French shale holds commercially viable natural-gas deposits - or whether nearby residents can be persuaded that the benefits outweigh shale's environmental risks. A U.S. study released this week finding shale extraction generates more greenhouse-gas emissions than burning coal over 20 years could complicate matters further. Nor is shale gas likely to supplant nuclear power, which provides 80% of France's electricity, any time soon. 

"Developing shale gas in France would offer interesting prospects" in the face of the expected energy demand increase in Europe, notably for gas, said  Didier Houssin, director of energy markets and security at the Paris-based International Energy Agency.

Last year, the French government granted three exploration permits, one to oil major  Total SA
TOT


-1.78
%




 and two to U.S. energy-exploratio n company Schuepbach Energy LLC, for periods of three to five years to explore shale-rich regions. Gas operator GDF Suez has since entered partnership talks with Schuepbach. 

None of the permits has been acted upon, however, and that is unlikely to change until after the 2012 presidential election. Opposition from environmentalists and green-party activists has prompted a national suspension of even the preparations for drilling while the government awaits the results of an environmental-impact study, due in the next two months. 

Environmentalists aren't the only doubters. Christian Jacob, a former farmer who now heads the ruling right-wing UMP party in the National Assembly, France's lower house of parliament, is calling for a complete ban on exploration and extraction, which he said "are not without consequences for our environment and not without risks for our health."

In response to the widespread concern, the government has given the go-ahead to a parliamentary debate May 10 on draft legislation to ban shale-gas extraction. And Prime Minister  Francois Fillon told lawmakers Wednesday that the issue must be reviewed from the start. The current exploration permits were granted when the situation wasn't clear, he said, and must be scrapped.

Opponents focus on what they say is unacceptable pollution caused by the drilling techniques needed to get at the gas, which is trapped in the pores of tight rock formations. U.S. companies developed technologies that can extract commercially viable quantities by injecting huge quantities of high-pressured water, sand and chemicals into the ground, cracking the rock and releasing the gas.

In France's southeast, a scenic region that attracts millions of tourists a year, local communities fear the landscape could be disfigured by wellheads, while groundwater reserves could be drained or contaminated.

Residents backed by environmentalists have organized fierce demonstrations and media campaigns and made legal pleas. Energy Minister  Eric Besson pledged in March to travel to the U.S. this month to assess the environmental impact of shale-gas extraction. 

In the meantime, the government has commissioned a study of the potential environmental impact. A preliminary report is expected by Friday and a final report in June and, though the government insists no door has been shut, energy interests are fuming.

"Let's find if there is gas down there first, before debating about the merits of shale gas," said Total's boss,  Christophe de Margerie. Total, he said, has been reduced to studying 40-year-old samples extracted at the time the region was explored for conventional gas reservoirs. GDF Suez's chairman and Chief Executive  Gerard Mestrallet insisted the issue was "a matter of national interest."

Government officials admit privately that the country's strong foundation in nuclear energy gives it less incentive to explore new approaches compared with countries more dependent on energy imports from Russia. And polls conducted since Japan's March 11 earthquake and tsunami damaged reactors there show French public opinion in favor of retaining nuclear energy, which allows for cheaper electricity tariffs on average compared with the rest of Europe.

None of the big French pollsters has, as yet, conducted a survey on shale gas, so assessing public opinion is difficult. In an Internet poll carried out April 1 by the linternaute.com website, however, 62% of the 1,260 people polled said the shale gas issue "worries" them.