  Raj Kondur left professional tennis in search of greener pastures, but lessons learned on the court serve him well in his current quest for higher returns.

"Sports teaches you a lot about life," said Mr. Kondur, a former national junior tennis player who's now a director at private-equity fund Ascent Capital Advisors India Pvt Ltd.

"You can't lie to yourself, and you know if you don't practise you will not get that serve right," said Mr. Kondur, 37, dressed in crisp white shirt and blue tie, during an interview at his office in Bangalore's upscale UB City Tower.

The confident, affable mergers-and-acquisition-banker-turned-investor joined Ascent a year ago, and is focused on finding suitable investments for its $350 million fund.

Mr. Kondur, like legions of investors in India, is looking for the right company that promises the best returns, but he's not one to wait on the sidelines. He believes the time is ripe for the second phase of private equity in India, when investors take a more active role in the management of the firms they fund.

"If we want alpha returns, we need to do better than the stock index," Mr. Kondur said.

For that, the investor needs to "start structuring, respond to issues, augment teams, take an active investor role", he said, adding that the key is to know when to engage or offer supporting roles.

And Kondur has enough experience to provide such guidance.

In his career, Mr. Kondur has worn various caps, starting from his time as an analyst at AT Kearney Inc. in 1993, an M&A banker at  Morgan Stanley
MS


0.16
%




 in New York in 1997-99, a fund manager in 1999 after returning to India, an entrepreneur in 2002, and now a private-equity investor in 2010.

ChrysCapital Investment Advisors, or Chrysalis Capital as it was initially known, put Mr. Kondur on the map in India. With his Harvard roommate,  Ashish Dhawan, he founded the firm in 1999 and quickly raised $65 million to create one of the largest India-focused venture capital funds.

"We raised $65 million and we were quite surprised as the smallest deals we had done in the US were $100 million," he said.

Chrysalis' investors were the who's who of the VC world, including  Microsoft,
MSFT


0.52
%




 Harvard, HSBC, former Goldman Sachs chairman  Hank Paulson and  Vinod Dham, founding managing director at another venture fund, Indo-US Venture Partners.

It didn't surprise those who knew him.

At Harvard, "we would often tease him for being the one with the biggest network… He knew everybody," said classmate  Sumir Chadha, co-founder and managing director at WestBridge Capital Partners, a private equity fund.

Mr. Chadha recalls that while everyone was poring over their books, Mr. Kondur would be hanging out and making friends.

Mr. Kondur left Chrysalis in 2002, after the tech bubble burst, but he still recounts the heady days at the VC fund, and counts TransWorks and Spectramind, which  Wipro Ltd bought in 2002 for $93 million, among the prominent deals he led there.

Mr. Kondur decided to try his hand at being an entrepreneur after he parted ways with Mr. Dhawan. He started his own business process outsourcing firm, Nirvana Business Solutions Pvt. Ltd, which provided back-office processing and other offshore services to companies in the U.S., U.K. and Australia. The journey was rather bumpy. For six years he didn't take a salary, and travelled 200 days in a year.

"We started late in the cycle and the issues we were ready to tackle were much more severe than what we were prepared for," Mr. Kondur said. "Customers were growing cagey."

At present, the firm has 250 employees and is profitable. It has not raised any institutional funding.

"One can't be prepared enough in running a business," Mr. Kondur said. I have a 200 bullet-point list of major and minor things that were learned."

In hindsight, the one thing he wished he had was an outsider perspective. "As a promoter, I was so involved with running the businesses that I didn't see the obvious upcoming issues," Mr. Kondur said. "I wish there was someone, an adviser or investor, who could guide."

This is one of the reasons he wants to step back into the private-equity world, so that he can take an active role in a firm's management.

"He is back into deal-making; that's where he should be," said Suvir Sujan, who was Mr. Kondur's junior at Harvard. ChrysCapital invested in Baazee.com, an online-auction firm co-founded by Mr. Sujan. The company was acquired by  eBay Inc.
EBAY


0.35
%




 in 2004 for $50 million.

"Even at the school, we knew he would be in the financial world, making deals," Mr. Sujan said. "He's relationship-driven, social, well-connected, and has this competitive streak in him that being a sportsman brings into one." 

It was this streak that led Mr. Kondur from tennis to the financial world.

"I went to government schools in Bangalore and had never heard of the Ivy League, the Indian Institutes of Management or the Indian Institutes of Technology," Mr. Kondur said. "The only thing I had heard of was Harvard because of  Tom Cruise movies."

Mr. Kondur made it to Harvard in 1995, after graduating in 1992 from Georgia State University, where he had gone on a tennis scholarship. Even though he's moved on to other pursuits, his passion for movies and tennis hasn't waned. Mr. Kondur loves Hindi movies, even if he's slow on catching up with the latest releases. The last Hindi movie he saw was Band Baaja Baaraat, a love story that deals with entrepreneurship and teamwork.

Mr. Kondur isn't shy about sharing his expertise, and has been an active independent trustee at The Akshaya Patra Foundation, which has been running a subsidized midday meal scheme for Bangalore's poor children, for the past eight years.

  Binali Suhandani, associate director at The Akshaya Patra, said Mr. Kondur's active on various committees, including operations and finance committees. "He guides the foundation's future plans and as he's a member of the audit committee, brings in good governance practices," she said.