WASHINGTON—President Barack Obama's government-wide review of federal regulations will have little effect on two of the president's major regulatory victories: an overhaul of Wall Street and the health-care market, according to a White House budget official. 

The review focuses on old, outdated regulations so new ones written as part of the health-care and financial overhaul likely won't be affected, an official at the White House Office of Management and Budget said. Mr. Obama wants agencies to take a fresh look at old regulations to determine whether they are outdated or unnecessary. "New regulations will not be priorities for the lookback," the official said. 

The president on Tuesday demanded that federal agencies review their existing regulations as part of an effort to eliminate rules that stifle economic growth. 

"We are also making it our mission to root out regulations that conflict, that are not worth the cost, or that are just plain dumb," the president announced in an opinion piece published in The Wall Street Journal. 

The move was welcomed by some Republicans and the business community. U.S. Chamber of Commerce President and Chief Executive Thomas J. Donohue in a statement praised the executive order as a positive first step. Still, he said, the U.S. regulatory system is broken. He added, "No major rule or regulation should be exempted from the review, including the recently enacted health care and financial reform laws." 

Congress this week is set to debate a repeal of the health-care law, one of Mr. Obama's key legislative victories. Legislation repealing the law is set to pass the House, where Republicans have a majority, but not the Senate, where Democrats hold power. 

Individual government agencies will use a cost-benefit analysis to determine which regulations are potentially burdensome or outdated. The agencies will have 120 days to detail how they intend to conduct the review of old regulations. 

While the health-care and financial-overhaul laws likely won't be affected, White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs on Tuesday said they would pass a cost-benefit analysis. The OMB official said the financial-overhaul law was passed with the new executive order in mind. 

 Write to  Jared A. Favole at jared.favole@dowjones.com 



   