Some records never make it into the record books, despite the best efforts of the people who try to set them. Consider the case of  Jonathan Lee Riches. Since drawing a 10-year sentence for wire fraud in 2004, this 34-year-old inmate at the Federal Medical Center in Lexington, Kentucky, has filed thousands of lawsuits—targeting, among other people, NFL quarterback  Michael Vick, musicians  Stevie Wonder and  Dave Matthews, former U.S. President George W. Bush and ancient Greek philosopher Plato.

Legal officials calculate Mr. Riches has filed more than 5,000 of his handwritten lawsuits, some under the names of other people, such as jailed financier Bernard Madoff or al Qaeda leader Ayman al-Zawahiri, and some naming defendants that can't really be sued, such as the former planet Pluto or the continent Africa.

Mr. Riches previously has said his legal work helps him pass the time.

Then, in 2009, Mr. Riches won himself some international notoriety by suing the Guinness Book of World Records for allegedly planning to list him as the world's most-litigious man. He said in his complaint that the nicknames he has earned over the years, such as "the Patrick Ewing of Suing" and "Johnny Sue-nami," have "hurt my feelings and violated my civil rights."

"I've filed so many lawsuits with my pen and right hand that I got arthritis in my fingers, numbness in my wrists, crooked fingers. I got bags under my eyes for sleepless nights suing the world," he wrote in his complaint, Riches vs. the Guinness Book of World Records, filed with a district court in the state of Washington.

The legal action, which was dismissed, turned Mr. Riches into something of a B-list Internet celebrity and made him subject of dozens of media reports.

There was just one problem: The compilers of the Guinness Book of World Records say they had never heard of Mr. Riches, and don't track such records.

"He's not listed, and there's no records for anybody filing the most lawsuits," a Guinness spokeswoman said. As for the congratulations that Mr. Riches claimed he received in the mail from Guinness, she said, "We think he must have written that letter himself."

Worse, at least for Mr. Riches, is that U.S. authorities appear to have had enough of his deluge. Last September federal prosecutors asked a judge to prevent his filing any more actions.

In October U.S. District Judge  Karl Forester agreed, the Associated Press reported, ruling that the U.S. Bureau of Prisons can reject any legal communications sent by Mr. Riches, a decision that could effectively end his legal career.

Mr. Riches, who is scheduled to be released in March 2012, couldn't immediately be reached for comment. 

 Write to  James Hookway at james.hookway@wsj.com 