So it begins, The Great LeBreckoning. The Miami Heat and Boston Celtics are under way in the NBA playoffs, and for a second-round series, it sure swaggers in with an obnoxious bluster. Will this be an epic, soul-cleansing transfer of basketball awesomeness? Will a seven-game series be sufficient enough to project its majesty? Or are these both just plump, overrated snacks for Derrick Rose and the Chicago Bulls?

The protagonist/antagonist of this series is the Heat forward LeBron James, who last summer abandoned Cleveland to sign with Miami, infuriating Ohio and rendering ESPN unwatchable. A 26-year-old two-time MVP, James is a playoff underachiever, desperate for a title so the universe will leave him alone on Twitter. Last year, his Cavaliers limped out in six games to Boston, and there were suggestions that a distracted James had "quit." Of course, that accusation was perpetuated by the Cavaliers owner, who reacted to James's decision with the composure of a toddler denied entrance to a bouncy castle.

By now we all know the saga well enough to repeat it in our sleep: LeBron made a choice, it wasn't graceful, or sentimental, Harry morphed into Voldemort, and blah, blah, blargh. Cleveland is entitled to its pain, but how long do the rest of us get to act so aggrieved? Wouldn't it be nice to let this Miami-Boston series play out, and regardless of the outcome, take all that overwrought anti-James agita, bury it under center court, let Bill Walton read some Walt Whitman, and move on?

Eh, fat chance. LeBron's decision will hover as long as Miami lasts in this NBA postseason. It probably won't stop even if the Heat win a title, because then he'll be asked to win a bunch of titles, like Michael Jordan. Then after he does that, he'll have to play minor-league baseball and putter around for the Washington Wizards. The public's demands will never stop.

Still, James took a loud step toward personal self-fulfillment on Sunday, scoring 22 points as the Heat thumped Boston 99-90 in a messy Game 1 that wasn't nearly as close as the final margin.

"It was nights like this that I thought about when I made The Choice," James said when it was over, dressed in a navy polo bearing the logo of Liverpool FC, the Premier League soccer club in which he recently bought a stake. (The shirt bore the number 9, worn by Andy Carroll, a player under a harsh, Jamesian spotlight after Liverpool paid a £35 million transfer fee, the equivalent of $58 million, to get him. On Sunday, Liverpool prevailed 3-0 over Newcastle, Carroll's former club—shades of James's first game against Cleveland.)

Against Boston, James didn't walk alone. The big numbers belonged to friend and teammate Dwyane Wade, who scored 38 points, 23 of them in an otherwise dullsville first half. Boston struggled with early foul trouble and a ragged performance from point guard Rajon Rondo, a brilliant distributor who sometimes shoots as if his hands are lobster claws.

But these Celtics are grizzly, grouchy and possibly undead, and you have to kill them with a stake. Throughout the second half, the Celtics picked away at Miami's double-digit lead, but each time they drew close, it was James—yes, the Cleveland Quitter—who shouted back with an answer. There were a pair of LeBron jump shots that lifted Miami to an 11-point lead after Boston sliced it to seven. In the fourth quarter, after Boston's Paul Pierce and Miami's James Jones (25 points) bumped faces, earning double technicals, there was James with a thunderous dunk off a Wade alley-oop. Moments later, when Pierce was ejected after a second technical, James stole the ball from Rondo and threw a full-court touchdown lob to Wade. Dan Marino couldn't have threaded it better. 

After losing their first three games to Boston this season, Miami has won two in a row. The Heat are an imperfect team, capable of long, inadequate stretches (they began the game shooting 2-of-10), and they are ghastly in the final seconds of a squeaker. But when their shiniest parts agree to get dirty, as they did Sunday—James slapping a blocked shot off the backboard; Wade diving out of bounds late in the fourth quarter—they are scary and nowhere near as soft as their critics might hope.

"It's a game of runs," coach Erik Spoelstra said after. "With Boston, they will continue to come."

For Miami, the danger is that Boston is angry, that Pierce will return with a cranky belly full of early-bird London Broil and torment them with a big night in Game 2 on Tuesday. All Boston needs in South Florida is a split, and the Celtics should get firmer efforts from Rondo as well as Kevin Garnett (invisible Sunday with six points.)

The Celtics may also soon get back the services of "Kazaam" star Shaquille O'Neal, who missed more than half of the regular season and has yet to belly up to the postseason.

In Sunday's other NBA playoff contest, the Memphis Grizzlies beat the Oklahoma City Thunder, 114-101. The Grizzlies already performed the valuable service of knocking out the listless Western Conference No. 1 seed, San Antonio. (Finding out the Spurs have been eliminated from the NBA playoffs is like finding out a movie you'd never see is no longer playing.) The Grizzlies are powered by Zach Randolph, a peripatetic former head case who has played for four different clubs and has now emerged as the league's strange midcareer redemption tale—the Mickey Rourke of Memphis.