TOKYO— Tokyo Electric Power Co.
9501


0.14
%




 said it will strengthen defenses at the stricken Fukushima Daiichi nuclear-power plant against any future earthquakes and triple the size of the available labor force to limit workers' radiation exposure. 

The nuclear crisis, which has entered its eighth week, also continued to take a political toll on embattled Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan, who had to defend himself in parliament after a senior adviser quit Friday saying the government is ignoring the law and making ad hoc decisions as it goes along, prolonging the emergency. 

Tokyo Electric said Saturday it was taking a number of steps to guard against a new earthquake of up to magnitude 8. The original March 11 quake was calculated at magnitude 9, one of the most powerful ever recorded. A one-digit increase in magnitude on the Richter scale represents a 10-fold increase in intensity. In its plan, the utility will build a 6½-foot wall on the southeastern side of the Daiichi site, which is about 33 feet above sea level. This would block a 33-foot tsunami, which projections say could be made by a magnitude-8 quake.

The Japan Meteorological Agency calculated that there is still the possibility of strong aftershocks with magnitude 7 or higher, especially in the regions around the plant in northern Japan. 

Tepco also plans to seal one of the two ditches near the sea with concrete to prevent radiation-contaminated water in the trenches from overflowing into the ocean. Tepco expects to complete the wall by mid-June and sealing by the end of May, a spokesman said. The company didn't specify the cost.

The utility also said it was preparing to triple the size of the available work force to 3,000 people through recruitment of those with experience in the nuclear-power sector. At present, approximately 1,000 employees and subcontractors are working in a dangerous environment to try to bring the damaged reactors to a safe condition. 

New workers will become increasingly necessary as more of the current work force reaches its allowable limit of radiation exposure and must be removed from the area. 

The company said Sunday that a second female worker had been exposed to radiation in excess of the legal limit of five millisieverts. 

The worker, who is in her 40s, had been exposed to 7.49 millisieverts and will go through medical checks Monday, the company said. In the previous case, announced Wednesday, a woman in her 50s was found to have been exposed to 17.55 millisieverts from January through March. 

It also said that among male workers, 21 have surpassed radiation exposure of 100 millisieverts, including two who received burns from highly radioactive water while laying cables at one of the units. 

Male workers are allowed to receive cumulative radiation of up to 250 millisieverts a year in the current emergency situation, an increase from the previous 100 millisievert level. But the rule doesn't apply to female workers, whose radiation limit is set at five millisieverts for three months and 20 millisieverts annually. 

While normal radiation levels for the general population varies, the global average is 2.4 millisieverts a year, according to the United Nations committee on atomic radiation. 

A senior adviser to the prime minister announced Friday that he was quitting, in part because he disagreed with the government's guidelines on radiation levels, and for what he called ad-hoc decision making. The sudden resignation by the adviser, Tokyo University professor Toshiso Kosako, created additional problems for the embattled Kan administration. 

Taking part in an unusual weekend sitting of Japan's parliament, the Diet, to debate an initial spending plan for quake reconstruction efforts, Mr. Kan said he regretted the resignation but insisted the government was acting properly. 

Opposition lawmakers questioning Mr. Kan repeated their claims that the prime minister was doing a poor job of handling the crisis. 

That view appears to be spreading to the overall public. An opinion poll by Kyodo News on Saturday showed that 76% of respondents said Mr. Kan isn't exercising sufficient leadership in dealing with the situation, a rise from 63.7% in a previous poll in late March. The telephone survey, conducted Friday and Saturday, also showed 23.6% of the respondents think Mr. Kan should resign immediately, up from 13.8% in the previous survey. It didn't disclose the size of the survey or the margin of error. 

—Kana Inagaki contributed to this article.

 Write to  Mari Iwata at mari.iwata@dowjones.com 