  Bank of America Corp.
BAC


0.65
%




 began to put one of its most vexing problems behind it by paying Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac almost $3 billion to cover bad mortgages the government agencies purchased from the bank's Countrywide Financial mortgage unit. 

For several years, requests have been piling up for the nation's largest bank by assets to repurchase mortgages that allegedly ran afoul of its own underwriting standards. Total new mortgage repurchase claims amounted to $12.8 billion at the end of the third quarter, and about $6.8 billion of that amount was from Fannie and Freddie. The settlement on Monday, which began to thin the cloud of uncertainty over the bank, helped to allay investors' concerns that the mounting requests could overwhelm the bank.

Investors pushed shares up 85 cents, or 6.4%, to close at $14.19 as the amounts paid to Fannie and Freddie were largely in line with what many had expected. 

But the settlement doesn't affect the roughly $6 billion in repurchase requests from insurers and private investors who purchased Countrywide and Bank of America loans. Compounding the problem of uncertainty, analysts are divided about how damaging the private requests could be. Their estimates of the bank's ultimate exposure vary wildly, ranging from $8 billion to $35 billion. 

Some think the Fannie-Freddie settlement puts a ceiling on what the private-label exposure may be. That is because Fannie and Freddie have better access to documents, better relationships with the banks and stronger underwriting standards, said  John McDonald of Sanford C. Bernstein & Co. His estimate of Bank of America's put-back losses from private-label investors is $8 billion, although he noted in a report that the ultimate costs "will remain a wild card" in 2011 and 2012. 

The settlements are part of a larger move by the bank to rid itself of many home-lending woes. Since vowing in the fall of 2010 to fight repurchase requests in "day-to-day, hand-to-hand combat," Chief Executive  Brian Moynihan has taken a more conciliatory tone in trying to resolve the conflicts with investors. The payments to Fannie and Freddie, he said Monday, "resolve substantial legacy issues in the best interest of our shareholders."

No U.S. bank is more vulnerable to an array of threats posed by home-lending woes. BofA has more repurchase requests than any rival and it services one of every five mortgages, many of them from BofA's acquisition of lender Countrywide in 2008. 

The bank has set aside $4.4 billion in reserves for these repurchase requests. It will set aside another $3 billion in the fourth quarter of 2010. It also intends to take a separate $2 billion charge relating to a drop in the value of its home-lending unit. 

Counting the new settlements with Fannie and Freddie, the bank has now taken a combined $6.3 billion in losses from repurchase claims on loans made between 2004 and 2008. 

Other banks also are looking to reach similar deals. Last week, Ally Financial Inc. agreed to pay Fannie $462 million to cover repurchase requests related to its mortgage unit.  Bose George, an analyst with Keefe, Bruyette & Woods, said the Ally settlement suggests total losses across the industry could be roughly $33 billion, down from an earlier estimate of $57 billion. 

Mr. George said that the private repurchase requests won't be crippling to Bank of America. "Some of these lawsuits might be successful but it will take a very long time and losses will be pretty negligible on the private-label side," he said. 

BofA is negotiating a potential settlement with a large group of private investors that threatened the bank over mortgage loans they purchased. The investors include  BlackRock Inc.
BLK


-0.44
%




 and  Allianz
ALV


-1.21
%




 SE's Pacific Investment Management Co., or Pimco.  Kathy Patrick, a lawyer representing the group, said, "Our discussions with Bank of America on those securitizations continue." 

Some think comparing the Fannie and Freddie exposure to what the bank may have to pay a private-label investor "is apples and oranges," said  David Grais, a New York lawyer who represents investors seeking the purchase of troubled loans packaged into mortgage-backed securities. 

But other analysts warned that Bank of America's exposure to private-label losses is still large enough to be damaging.  Chris Gamaitoni, vice president with Washington-based Compass Point Research & Trading LLC, is the analyst with the most pessimistic view of Bank of America's exposure to repurchase requests. He said losses could be $35 billion. 

"It seems the market is not overly concerned about it anymore," Mr. Gamaitoni said. "I think it's a real concern." 

—Ruth Simon  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Dan Fitzpatrick at dan.fitzpatrick@wsj.com 