In the last three weeks, the Knicks have specialized in a play known as "Power," in which Amar'e Stoudemire, their star power forward, runs to the corner, Carmelo Anthony, their star small forward, sprints up the middle, and Chauncey Billups, the new point guard, dribbles up the right side to begin the offense. 

The plan, as it usually plays out, is that a clunky big man comes out to guard Stoudemire (they usually can't). Or even better, a guard does, leaving Anthony wide open. If that doesn't happen, the defense will commit to Anthony, leaving Stoudemire open.

 No matter what occurs, the result is almost always the same: An open superstar with a clear path to the basket. 

This is not exactly revolutionary. It's simple basketball maneuvering, but it is a vital part of this new Knicks offense, which runs on eggshells as both Anthony and Stoudemire need shots—and surprisingly, they've both gotten them so far. 

Since Anthony was acquired from the Denver Nuggets three weeks ago, the offense has shifted dramatically, players say, and a slower offense has created a rarity: an NBA team with two prolific shot takers.

 If their current shot attempts since the trade held up over a full season, the Knicks would become the first team in eight years to have two players average 19 shots per game. 

Since Anthony debuted on Feb. 23, Stoudemire has shot times 19.8 per game and Anthony 20.2 In fact, for the first 11 games after the trade, both stars averaged 20 shots per game. 

No team has had two players do that that over a full season since George Gervin and Mike Mitchell did it for the 1983-1984 San Antonio Spurs.

 As a result, the ultra-fast "Seven Second Or Less" philosophy which Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni used in Phoenix and in New York seems to have faded. The Knicks averaged 100 possessions a game in the month of November. In March, they've averaged 95. 

Jared Jeffries, the center who has played in at least parts of every season D'Antoni has coached the Knicks, said the playbook is similar, but slowed down and carries one major difference: instead of plays called for general ball movement, plays are now called for specific players. 



"This time you run them to get those two guys shots. Now you know there's two specific guys where you have to make sure you get those guys good, quality looks." 

Though it seemed obvious that schematic changes were inevitable once the Knicks traded for Anthony, players say the change was confirmed on Feb. 27, in the final moments of a dramatic win over the Miami Heat. There was little sprinting, just bruising pick-and-rolls in a half-court offense.

 Bill Walker, the forward who has played with the Knicks since last season, said it was unlike anything he'd experienced since he joined the team.

 He said the Knicks "got every shot we wanted. We made it physical. We played this dirty game. That's what playoff basketball is. Everyone knew our plays and we went out and executed." 

This was not an on-the-fly decision by Billups. In a phone call almost immediately after the trade, D'Antoni told Billups he had permission to run any offense he wanted. Billups admitted he wasn't comfortable running D'Antoni's offense, so he introduced his own style.

"Certain parts of the game call for it," Billups said. "The last part of the game you want to focus on getting a good shot. Certainly, he's told me whenever you want to slow it down and get a good shot, you've got the green light." 

Backup point guards Toney Douglas and Anthony Carter have been designated as the up-tempo point guards during their stints relieving Billups.

Even though he's entrusted with the task of getting both players the ball, Billups said he's not particularly worried about which player gets the ball on a given play. He said that typically one or the other is open on a pick-and-roll. If Billups is guarded, he says, Anthony will beat his man, and if Anthony is guarded, it means a player has left Stoudemire to help. And if both are guarded, Billups will add a third option, his own pull-up 3-pointer or drive to the basket.

The offense is now built on options for its stars. On a play called "Four Pop," both Stoudemire and Anthony can initiate the play either near the basket or as far away as the 3-point line. Because Anthony can play inside or outside despite his 6-foot, 8-inch height and Stoudemire can play far from the basket despite his 6-foot, 10-inch frame, the Knicks have plays for both players in nearly all situations. 

And if all else fails, D'Antoni said each player will get plenty of shots when he is the lone star on the floor. Stoudemire usually sits at the end of the first quarter, Anthony at the beginning of the second. 

The team has not yet even settled into their ideal offense. Stoudemire said the plan is to play what is called "Part-Method" offense: run a set play for the first seven seconds of the shot clock, look for a first or second shot off screens and cuts toward the basket. Then, in the final seven seconds, either he or Anthony uses one-on-one isolation as a last resort. "We can easily get a shot off," he said. 

Part of the problem, for now, is that both players like the ball in the same spot, on the right side of the court near the free throw line. Stoudemire has adjusted with more trips to the perimeter, where he hopes to see mismatches, while Anthony has continued to get the ball on the right.

 Entering this week's games, Anthony had 117 shot attempts from the right side, and 76 from the left (don't tell him to move just yet—he's made 47% from the right side and 40% from the left). 

Dan D'Antoni, the Knicks' assistant coach, said that one problem with the new offense has been spacing of the stars. The other problem, Dan D'Antoni said, is running one-on-one isolation plays too early in the shot clock. 

Anthony is an isolation specialist who is still growing comfortable in this offense. In fact, he told Shawne Williams, the 3-point specialist, that he should isolate and drive the baseline more instead of taking 3-pointers. Williams said he hasn't done that yet. The 3-point shooters, like Williams and Roger Mason, say their roles are unchanged: sprint to the corners and shoot the ball.

All of these plans for the stars, of course, raise the question of whether anyone else on the team will ever get another shot. The Knicks seem to agree that everyone will get their share. 

"Everyone's setting their defenses to stop those guys. There's so many mismatches," Billups said. "Other people will benefit." 

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 