She was Cleopatra. She was the girl next door. She was the most beautiful woman in the world.

Elizabeth Taylor, who died of congestive heart failure Wednesday at age 79, broke the mold for Hollywood celebrity by becoming a star of the first magnitude while infusing her career with the triumphs and pathologies of her freewheeling life.

Ms. Taylor was a whipsawing publicity machine through a life marked by serial marriages, near-death experiences, lawsuits, spells in recovery, and philanthropic and entrepreneurial success. And the adventures continued decades after she had ceased to be box-office gold.

What was largely forgotten in the recent decades of tabloid covers, appearances and celebrity benefits was the spell she once cast as the epitome of Hollywood beauty.

She graced the cover of Life magazine a dozen times, People magazine even more often. An Andy Warhol painting of Ms. Taylor, "Men in Her Life," sold at auction in 2010 for $63 million.

She won two Academy Awards for best actress. Critics first flipped for her as an adolescent equestrienne in "National Velvet" (1944). She was incandescent in melodramas like "Cat on a Hot Tin Roof" (1958) and "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?" (1966), both of which took advantage of her real-life propensity for verbal jousting.

But the star was inseparable from her real-life antics, as she bounced from film to film, husband to husband, crisis to crisis. Even as the films dropped out of the mix beginning in the 1970s, her public stayed with her, still gaping at the violet eyes, as she took up causes like AIDS and lent her name to down-market perfume and jewelry.

Ms. Taylor started acting during the studio era, when actors were tied by contract to studios that burnished their images for public consumption. But she emerged into adulthood in the mid-1950s, just as actors were cut loose. Her independence made her a gossip-sheet star at the same time she was achieving international superstardom.

  More interactive graphics and photos  

Briefly married at age 18 to hotel heir Conrad "Nicky" Hilton and then to English actor Michael Wilding, she was widowed in 1958 when her third husband, film producer Mike Todd, was killed in a plane crash. 

A year later, her affair with Eddie Fisher became one of the great media brouhahas of the 1950s because Fisher was married to Debbie Reynolds, a squeaky-clean movie queen and a bigger star then than Ms. Taylor.

The affair killed Mr. Fisher's career, but Ms. Taylor rode high in "Cat on a Hot Tin Roof." She subsequently dropped Mr. Fisher after taking up with co-star Richard Burton on the set of "Cleopatra."

"I try not to live a lie," she told Look magazine in a 1963 interview that underscored the radical changes a decade without the studio system had brought to Hollywood. "I can't be that hypocritical [just] to protect my public."

Her public seemed not to desire protection; the couple's real-life high jinks fueled their top billing in 10 further pictures, television, and, in 1983, a Broadway revival of Noël Coward's "Private Lives."

They were married and divorced twice. Had Mr. Burton lived, Ms. Taylor let it be known, she might have married him a third time.

In addition to the beauty and the scandals, she stayed in the public's eye because she was smart.

Not long after making "Cleopatra"—for which she demanded and received a then-record $1 million salary—Ms. Taylor told Life magazine, "When I was growing up, the studios always made me feel like so much meat on the hoof. Nowadays when I can be very cool about a million dollars, I feel like a nice big steak."

Born in England to American parents, Ms. Taylor was the daughter of a Broadway actress and an art dealer. Her mother gave her dancing lessons and an adopted godfather trained her in riding at his estate in Kent.

The family returned to the U.S. shortly before the outbreak of World War II and settled Beverly Hills. Ms. Taylor was cast as an English heiress in "Lassie Come Home," and then in her breakthrough film "National Velvet," opposite Mickey Rooney.

She found steady work after that, making a smooth transition to adult roles while her salary rose to $2,000 per week and gossip columns burgeoned with rumors the studio planted about her private life.

The culmination was perhaps in "Father of the Bride," Vincente Minnelli's 1950 film starring Spencer Tracy, in which Ms. Taylor, just 18, played the bride. It opened days after her marriage to Mr. Hilton, a hint of how her private and public lives would cross-pollinate for decades to come.

After her old friend Rock Hudson died of the disease, she became one of the earliest and most visible Hollywood stars in the founding of the American Foundation for AIDS Research.

"Acting is, to me now, artificial," she told the Associated Press in 2005. "Seeing people suffer is real."

—Email remembrances@wsj.com 

 Write to  Stephen Miller at stephen.miller@wsj.com 