The nation's home and commercial insurers moved rapidly this week to set up staging areas in spots hardest hit by the tornadoes in the South, with claims likely to help secure 2011 a place in insurance record books, according to industry executives.

The tornadoes that swept North Carolina earlier this month already put 2011 on track to be one of the industry's most expensive years in history for thunderstorm losses. Since then, scores of powerful tornadoes have destroyed homes and property in six other states, and left hundreds dead. 

State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co., said it had received 4,200 home-insurance claims through midday Friday from Alabama, Mississippi and Georgia, the majority from Alabama. It had 12,740 auto claims, about 9,600 of those in Tennessee where the tornadoes spawned hailstorms. 

Nationwide Mutual Insurance Co. had about 1,000 claims in Alabama and 1,040 from Tennessee as of Friday afternoon, said spokeswoman Elizabeth Stelzer. Nationwide employees drove a 45-foot motor coach to Alabama from North Carolina, where it had been stationed since the tornadoes there. The vehicle serves as a center to coordinate claims adjustment, as well as hand out water, ice and even diapers. 

"Homes with a tree through a wall, an exposed roof, or other claims in which the home has become uninhabitable are the priority," Ms. Stelzer said. 

Big insurers typically have relationships with contractors who can make emergency fixes to homes, such as putting tarps over damaged roofs. Insurers may also cut checks or hand out pre-paid debit-cards for lodging, food or other items.

Extra staff from State Farm arrived in Alabama bearing their own generators to work around the widespread power outages as adjusters fanned out to assess damage.  Allstate Corp.
ALL


0.40
%




 had two mobile claims centers set up outside of Birmingham, and others were on the way.

"The damage we're seeing ranges from a few trees on fences, cars or homes to some streets where nearly everything is gone," an Allstate spokeswoman said.

For insurers, the damage from the continued spate of extreme weather comes on top of three straight years of costly damage from thunderstorms, which includes hail, tornadoes and other severe storms. The bill for 2008-10 collectively topped $30 billion, the industry's costliest three-year stretch for thunderstorm damage, said Robert Hartwig, president of trade group Insurance Information Institute.

Despite the potential record losses, insurers are "prepared both logistically and financially," with strong capital cushions as they entered the year, Mr. Hartwig said, because the industry has experienced just one punishing hurricane over the past several years. In 2008, Hurricane Ike caused $12.5 billion in insured losses.