MANAMA, Bahrain—More than 100,000 protesters gathered in the Bahraini capital Friday for one of the largest demonstrations since protests erupted in the kingdom almost three weeks ago, escalating pressure on the ruling al-Khalifa family to accept sweeping political reforms.

The demonstration came a day after fighting between Sunnis and majority Shiite Muslims in the first sectarian violence since protests began. 

In a demonstration organized by the country's opposition groups, protesters poured into Manama's financial district after Friday prayers, blocking the capital's main highway and then inching their way to the Pearl roundabout, the focal point of antigovernment protests that have left seven dead since they began on Feb. 14. 

Thousands of Bahraini flags waved amid a column of protesters that stretched for over half a mile. They chanted in unison for the government to step down.

The protest was organized by formal opposition parties who on Thursday submitted demands to the ruling family that included the introduction of a constitutional monarchy and the dissolution of the government. Other, more hard-line protesters are calling for the end of the al-Khalifa monarchy. 

Fighting between a group of Shiites and Bahraini Sunnis of Syrian and Jordanian extraction took place Thursday night in Hamad town, on the outskirts of Manama before riot police arrived and dispersed them, local residents said. Only half of Bahrain's population of 1.2 million are native Bahrainis. 

The Ministry of Interior said it took police about two hours to get the situation under control, with the help of local politicians and high-ranking government officials who calmed residents. Seven people were injured in the fighting. 

Organizers of Shiite-led antigovernment protests and Sunni-dominated pro-government rallies have been careful to try to avoid sectarian slogans and stress national unity, but tensions between the groups have escalated in recent days as opposition protests gathered momentum and government loyalists objected to the demonstrations' mounting impact on the economy.

"We feel the government is trying to separate the Bahrainis, and it's a dangerous new development, but today's protest shows we're united.… We will keep building pressure until the government falls," said Jawad Fairooz, a Bahraini opposition lawmaker.

Track events day by day.

See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

Bahrain's ministry of information says the country's crown prince, Salman bin Hamad al-Khalifa, has made clear he intends to begin a national dialogue with all sections of society to "move away from polarization and ensure that sectarianism does not take root in Bahrain."

Persistent anti-government protests and rising sectarian tensions in Bahrain are likely to heighten concerns in neighboring Saudi Arabia, the region's largest economy, where a restive Shiite minority in the oil-rich Eastern Province took to the streets on Thursday to protest against the Sunday arrest of prominent cleric Tawfiq al-Amir, who had called in a sermon for more religious freedom. 

Saudi Arabia's authorities on Thursday night detained 22 people in Qatif, the main Shiite town in the Eastern Province, after they staged a demonstration demanding the release of prisoners they said were being held without trial. Saudia Arabia is connected by a short causeway to Bahrain.

"About 200 people took to the streets in Qatif on Thursday night. The protests were peaceful, but still the authorities interfered, they tried to stop them and arrested 22 people," according to Human Rights First, an independent human-rights group. 

In Bahrain, the government has offered a series of concessions over the past week, releasing 308 political prisoners, reshuffling the cabinet and reducing citizens' monthly housing costs by 25% in a move to assuage protesters' demands.

But the antigovernment movement has kept up the pressure for deeper reform.

—Summer Said in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia contributed to this article.