Biostatistician Ted Gooley's day job involves studying the outcome of clinical trials in stem-cell transplants. Each year around this time, he turns his attention to another statistical conundrum: how best to run a March Madness pool.

Dr. Gooley is one of millions of Americans who participate in the annual ritual of predicting the outcome of the men's college-basketball national-championship tournament, which begins in two weeks. Many make their forecasts as part of a workplace or college-dorm competition for bragging rights and, though technically illegal, for cash. One in five workers surveyed in a new online poll sponsored by CareerBuilder say they have participated in such a contest.

In most betting situations, from horse racing to lotteries to playing roulette at the casino, bets with longer odds offer the potential for greater rewards. But that isn't the case with most office pools, where long shots are weighted the same as near shoo-ins.

Excitement in the college-basketball tournament peaks when an underdog beats a favorite, in the same way that Academy Award telecasts and television contest shows—say, "American Idol"—are enlivened by upsets. But Dr. Gooley and some other statisticians say the standard strategies for scoring pool entries don't sufficiently reward participants who are willing to take a risk by gambling on upset victories.

"Almost all of us have participated in a pool where somebody out there picks favorite all the way through," Dr. Gooley says. "It's not that much fun." 

Millions of Americans each year predict the outcome of the men's college-basketball tournament, using a variety of systems to determine the winner:

Each game counts the same. 

 Pros: Simple; it rewards upset picks in the first round more than other systems do.

 Cons: Entrant can win without picking any Final Four teams, or the winner.

Correct picks count more in each successive round.

 Pros: More emphasis on picking the champ.

 Cons: Winner can get far fewer games right than other entrants.

The less likely the pick, the more points it gets if right.

 Pros: It rewards risk-taking; matches odds-based gambling. 

 Cons: Complicated; one correct pick of a major upset could win even if rest of bracket is wrong.

The typical March Madness pool rewards the same number of points for a correct pick, whether it was for the favorite in a game or the underdog. Fed up with that approach, Dr. Gooley, a researcher at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle, decided to create his own pool in 2007, devising a complex system for rewarding upset predictions. Each correct pick was worth one point divided by the probability that the pick would be correct. If a team has a 50% chance of winning its first game, picking that team would be worth two points. A team with a 20% chance would be worth five points—if it won. The goal is to set a fair price for each pick; the favored teams are likely to win but aren't worth many points, while underdogs pay off more if they pull off the upset.

To implement his system, Dr. Gooley had to determine each team's victory probability. He based the probability on a ranking assigned to each team by the tournament selection committee, in the form of a seed number from 1 to 16, with the four No. 1 seeds considered the best teams. Dr. Gooley gathered the results from every tournament since 1985 to see how often teams with a given seed advanced in each round. Then he used the raw numbers to create a statistical model that calculates probabilities even for events that never have happened. For instance, heading into the tournament, each No. 15 seed has a 1-in-862,483.7 chance of winning it all, by his reckoning. 

A similar approach could be used for office pools on everything from the Academy Awards to choosing the winner of ABC's "Dancing With the Stars." Favorites nearly swept the major award categories at this year's Oscars, making it easy to guess the outcome, and, some would say, taking the fun out of trying to predict the winners.

Complexity is one drawback to a customized scoring system; millions of office pools these days are scored automatically through free websites such as ESPN.com and Yahoo Sports. Those two sites together had roughly eight million entries last year for the college-basketball tournament. Yahoo started allowing pool managers to give point bonuses for upsets in 2009, though the weighting system is less elaborate than the one Dr. Gooley uses. "It adds more intrigue and it encourages people to pick upsets instead of playing it safe," says Edwin Pankau, senior product manager for Yahoo's fantasy-sports division. 

Some statisticians still question whether systems need to be tweaked at all to incentivize risk. They reason that people who pick only favorites to win might finish near the top of pools, but they rarely win, because others with very similar picks but just one correct variation can win. "Upset bonuses are a cute idea, but they are no more 'fair' than not having them," Bradley Carlin, a biostatistician at the University of Minnesota, wrote in an email. "If anything, it's fairer not to have them since it makes it tougher for geeks like me to win."

Dr. Gooley acknowledges that picking only favorites isn't usually a winning strategy, no matter which scoring system is used. But someone who takes that mundane approach in a pool that lacks rewards for risk-taking still probably will do well enough to win office bragging rights. "Every pool has all sorts of internal competition. If you finished 51st and your buddy finished 53rd, well, you can say, 'I still beat you,'" Dr. Gooley says. "Most of the people in my pool like the fact that you get some sort of reward for going out on a limb."

 Write to  Carl Bialik at numbersguy@wsj.com 