WASHINGTON—Senate Republican Leader Mitch McConnell escalated his party's complaints that President Barack Obama has been derelict on major fiscal issues, predicting Friday that no GOP senator would vote to raise the federal debt ceiling unless the White House helped craft a broad, bipartisan deficit-reduction agreement.

The Kentucky senator said Mr. Obama was squandering a rare opportunity to forge a plan to rein in the debt and to overhaul entitlement programs such as Medicare and Social Security, saying such deals come together at times of divided government.

"I'm stunned at the president's passivity and lack of apparent willingness to realize this is an opportunity to do something important for the country," Mr. McConnell said in an interview in his Capitol office.

Mr. Obama, in a news conference Friday, said he agreed that longer-term issues must be tackled soon, but he suggested the first priority is settling the short-term budget fight that threatens to lead to a partial government shutdown.

"It's going to be important for us to have a conversation, after we get the short-term budget done, about how do we really tackle the problem in a comprehensive way," Mr. Obama said.

"We've got to make sure that we're tackling defense spending, we're tackling tax expenditures and tax loopholes, that we're tackling entitlements," he added.

Mr. McConnell's acerbic comments about the long-term budget landscape came as House Republicans proposed a new stopgap bill that would fund the government through April 8 while cutting $6 billion of spending. Democrats signaled that they would sign on. Legislation now funding government operations expires March 18, and failure to pass a new funding mechanism would trigger a partial shutdown.

A longer-term challenge comes in April or May, the point when the U.S. Treasury expects the government to hit its borrowing limit. If that cap isn't raised, it could shake financial markets by signaling that the U.S. isn't prepared to meet its obligations.

Republicans have said they would insist on major spending cuts in exchange for their support for raising the debt ceiling, but Mr. McConnell suggested Friday that they would require something more—a sweeping deal that would significantly alter the U.S's long-term fiscal outlook.

"Unless we do something important about the debt, I don't believe there will be a single Republican senator voting to raise the debt ceiling," he said.

Many Democrats—as well as Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke—have warned against using the debt-limit increase as a bargaining chip in a broader budget deal, saying it could generate uncertainty that could shake the confidence of global markets.

The White House responded that Mr. Obama had laid out more than $1 trillion in deficit reduction over the next decade and had urged the two parties to find common ground. "But the president does not believe that we should put the full faith and credit of the United States in doubt by playing politics with the debt limit,'' said Amy Brundage, a White House spokeswoman. "Failing to raise the debt limit would have devastating consequences for our economy and middle-class Americans, and Republicans agree." 

Mr. McConnell didn't say whether Republicans would try to block an increase in the debt-ceiling bill with a filibuster, which would force Democrats to find some GOP partners to reach a 60-vote threshold. But Mr. McConnell suggested that the Senate's 53 Democrats might be able to raise the debt ceiling on a simple majority vote.

The GOP leader said only Mr. Obama's leadership could prompt a political deal on the nation's long-term debt.

"If the president thinks this is going to go away by ignoring it, he must be on some other planet here," Mr. McConnell said.

Some Democrats said if Mr. Obama did step into the fray with a long-term debt plan, Republicans would immediately attack it, and the process would collapse.

Mr. McConnell responded that he is asking for quiet, back-channel negotiations. "I'm not suggesting he lay out his 10-point plan publicly," he said. "I don't blame him for not doing that.…But I'm telling you, nothing is happening." 

He didn't outline what he thought a sweeping deal should include.

Mr. McConnell noted that voters didn't penalize President Ronald Reagan after he worked with congressional Democrats on a major Social Security overhaul in 1983. "Whoever down at the White House is advising him that this is [politically] dangerous may have missed the fact that Reagan carried 49 out of 50 states in 1984," the Republican leader said.

While considering moves to address the nation's long-term fiscal challenge, the two parties are at odds over how much discretionary spending to cut the current-year budget. They have passed a series of short-term funding measures while trying to settle on a plan for the remainder of the 2011 fiscal year.

The latest stopgap measure, proposed by House Republicans, makes cuts that are supported by Mr. Obama or congressional Democrats. Among them are $200 million from wildfire-suppression efforts and $200 million of technology funds for the Social Security Administration.

The biggest savings appears to come from taking back $1.74 billion that was left over to fund the 2010 Census and remains unspent. 

But both sides say it is crucial for Congress to reach a deal to fund the government for the rest of the fiscal year, which ends Sept. 30. The two sides differ by about $51 billion on how much to cut over the course of the year.

 Write to  Naftali Bendavid at naftali.bendavid@wsj.com 