For a special occasion, many people want to cook a fancy roast. Not for me. Make mine stew.

Stew? Yes, emphatically, adamantly yes! A stew has flavor, character, depth. Has everyone forgotten? I seem to be on a mission to remind people about the glories of slow-cooked, long simmered, saucy, succulent stew. And I'm gaining some converts.

Call it a stew, a braise, a daube. Call it spezzatino, ragout, stifato. Think Boeuf Bourgignonne, Osso Buco, Bollito Misto, or Coq au Vin, or Chicken Paprikash, or Irish Stew. There are infinite variations, and improvisation is almost a given, once you learn the technique. In most stews, the meat is seasoned, browned, moistened with broth or wine, then gently coaxed to tenderness. 

Slow-simmered braises are all made from the so-called "lesser" cuts—oxtail, shoulder, neck, short rib, brisket, belly, shank. Yes, they require slow, long cooking, but that only intensifies flavor. Lesser cuts have enough marbled fat and natural gelatin to ensure unctuous, tender meat without dryness, and they readily accept marinades and aromatics. 

Stews can be prepared over several days—marinate one day, cook the next. And they always improve if made ahead and reheated, which makes them the perfect choice for entertaining.

It must be said, however, that a good braise requires an investment of time, as well as a fair amount of babysitting and nursing. You can't rush it, and you'll need to stay home while it cooks. With practice, the craft of stewing can be raised to a high art. Each time you prepare a braise, you learn something new about the pot you cook it in, and the idiosyncrasies of your oven or stovetop. 

This time of year a good choice is the fragrant North African stew called tagine. (The name comes from the traditional conical-topped earthenware vessel.) There are versions made with chicken and fish, but it's typically made with lamb or goat. With a base of buttery onions, most tagines have a mixture of pungent spices, a winning combination of sweet and savory and the seasonal addition of fresh or dried fruits. 

I first learned about tagines years ago from the eminent American food writer Paula Wolfert. When I finally visited Morocco I was able to taste them in situ, which was a revelation. The tagine of tagines, though, was one I ate one cold night in the desert. My guide had encouraged me to spend a night in the Sahara dunes, where encampments are set up for tourists who want the real taste of Morocco. It was the most deluxe camping I had ever experienced. We took a two-hour taxi ride from town and were met at the edge of the road by a boy with a camel. Muhammed was convinced I would enjoy being conveyed on camelback. It was true I had never ridden a camel, but since it was only a mile to the camp and the other two were walking beside me, I felt a little silly. 

When we reached the camp, we were greeted by the proprietor, a tall, smiling djellaba-clad fellow who looked a lot like Frank Zappa. A dozen woolen nomadic tents were the extent of the facilities. There were a few more camels in a makeshift corral, and a few sheep and goats as well. Climbing to the top of a dune, we watched a spectacular sunset. Within moments the sun dropped from sight, the chilly winds came up and darkness descended. We retired to our tent to drink tea and await dinner. Presently it arrived, a sizzling aromatic tagine served in its earthenware vessel atop live coals. "Delicious" hardly begins to describe this meal. Perhaps it was the setting, or maybe the cook was a genius. Tearing at the savory spiced goat meat and dragging good Moroccan bread through the sauce, we were on top of the world.

This particular stew is one I have made dozens of times. Use the larger, meatier hind shanks of the lamb (the front shanks are bonier). The shank meat contributes succulence and texture to the sauce. If you can't get shanks, use thick slices of bone-in shoulder or large chunks of boneless shoulder and meaty neck bones. 

Seasoning the meat several hours in advance or overnight is always a good idea. Take care to taste at each step of the way. Make sure the onions are well seasoned, and don't be afraid to let them brown a bit. When the liquid comes to a simmer, taste again to be sure there is brightness. Remove the meat from the sauce when it reaches the proper state of tenderness. It should be falling from the bone, but not disintegrating. Even a stew can become overcooked and stringy. Reduce the sauce over high heat to concentrate it—it should not be syrupy but neither should it be too thin. Taste again. This is your last chance to assure the right balance of sweet, salty and spicy. Pour the sauce over the stew and refrigerate overnight. The next day (or two days later), remove and discard any congealed fat. To serve, gently reheat the stew, accompanied by your starch of choice. Buttered egg noodles, grits, steamed potatoes, mashed sweet potatoes, couscous or crusty bread are all good options.

—Mr. Tanis is head chef at Chez Panisse, in Berkeley, Calif., six months of the year. He is the author of "A Platter of Figs" and "The Heart of the Artichoke."

For the tagine:

6 pounds lamb shanks

Salt and pepper

2 tablespoons butter

2 large onions, thickly sliced

Pinch of saffron threads

6 garlic cloves, chopped

One 2-inch chunk fresh ginger, peeled and slivered

1 small cinnamon stick

1 rounded teaspoon coriander seeds

1 rounded teaspoon cumin seeds

1 tablespoon ground ginger

2 scant teaspoons cayenne

1 cup golden raisins

2 cups pitted prunes

4 cups chicken broth or water

1 cup tomato puree

For the garnish:

1 tablespoon butter

1 cup whole blanched almonds

Large pinch of salt

Small pinch of sugar

 WHAT TO DO: 

1. Season lamb generously with salt and pepper and set aside for 2 hours (or refrigerate over-night). Preheat oven to 325 degrees.  

 2. Melt butter in a large skillet. Add onions, season with salt and crumble saffron over them. Saute over medium heat until softened and slightly browned. Add garlic, fresh ginger, cinnamon stick, coriander and cumin seeds, powdered ginger and cayenne. Stir together, remove from heat and correct the seasoning. Add raisins and half the prunes.

 3. Put the lamb in an enamelware dutch oven or deep sided baking dish and spread the onion mixture over the meat. Stir together broth or water and tomato puree and pour over. Cover the pan with foil and a tight-fitting lid.

4. Bake for about 2 hours, or until meat is meltingly tender.

5. Remove the foil and lid, add the second cup of prunes and submerge

them. Raise the oven temperature to 400 degrees. Return lamb to the oven, uncovered, for about 15 minutes, to let it brown a bit.

 6. Carefully lift meat from sauce and put in a low wide bowl or storage container. Skim any fat from the surface of the sauce. If sauce seems thin, pour it into a low saucepan and reduce over high heat. Check the seasoning and adjust. Pour sauce over meat and let it cool to room temperature. Refrigerate.

7.The next day, remove and discard any congealed fat. Gently reheat the stew, covered, in a low oven.

 8. Just before serving, fry the almonds for the garnish. Heat the butter in a small skillet over medium heat and fry the almonds gently, stirring occasionally. When the almonds are golden, blot on paper towels and sprinkle with the salt and sugar.

 9. Transfer tagine to a warmed platter and scatter almonds over lamb. 

— Adapted from "Heart of the Artichoke and Other Kitchen Journeys" by David Tanis 