LONDON—U.K. retail sales rose at their strongest pace in five years in April as the combination of Easter, the royal wedding and warm weather provided retailers with a boost following a month of dire sales in March.

The survey followed news that U.K. house prices in April experienced their largest annual fall since October 2009 , while a survey from the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors also published Tuesday recorded an increase in sellers. 

The British Retail Consortium said Tuesday that sales in stores open at least a year rose 5.2% in April from the year-earlier month. 

That was the largest annual increase since April 2006, when sales rose 6.8%. Same-store sales fell 3.5% in March and fell by 2.3% in April 2010.

Total sales, which include new stores, rose 6.9% from a year earlier in April, compared with a fall of 1.9% in March. In April 2010, which didn't include Easter, sales fell by 0.2%.

The BRC said April's hot weather led to strong sales of summer clothing and footwear. Food sales also returned to growth after March's decline, which stemmed from this year's late Easter. 

While the strong sales figures are welcome news for retailers, which have struggled amid a climate of weak consumer spending, the BRC cautioned that Tuesday's data don't provide an accurate gauge of the actual conditions for retailers.

"Considered together, the results for March and April largely cancel each other out and the overall trend is flat," said  Stephen Robertson, director-general of the British Retail Consortium. "The underlying pressures on the retail sector of climbing costs and depressed consumer spending will be problems for many months to come." 

In a sign that consumers remain anxious about their job and income prospects, sales of big-ticket items remained subdued, the BRC said.

Leading mortgage lender Halifax said weak consumer confidence is also having an impact on the housing market. Its monthly measure released Monday showed prices in April fell by 1.4% from March.

"Weak confidence among households, partly due to uncertainty over the economic outlook, is constraining housing demand and resulting in some downward movement in prices," Halifax housing economist  Martin Ellis said.

A separate survey by RICS recorded a slight increase in prices. Its price balance—the percentage of surveyors reporting a rise in house prices in the past three months minus those who reported a fall—improved to -21 in April from -23 in March. That's the highest reading since July 2010.

The survey showed 12% of surveyors reported a rise in house prices, 59% said they stayed the same and 29% reported a fall. More than 80% of surveyors reporting a decline in prices said the falls were of the order of 2% or lower, RICS said. There were 232 contributors to the survey. 