(Please see Corrections & Amplifications item below.)

ISTANBUL—In the running debate over whether Turkey's government is chipping away at the foundations of one of the region's few secular democracies, a new front has opened: alcohol. 

A top Turkish official on Thursday defended regulations announced last week on the sale and promotion of alcohol, a tightened regime that has reignited claims that the government has a hidden Islamist agenda. Islam forbids alcohol consumption.

"Our goal is not to limit anybody's freedom. What we are doing is to make sure there is no irresponsible consumption within the framework of universal values," said Faruk Celik, minister for labor and social security and a leading voice in the ruling Justice and Development Party, or AKP. Claims of a hidden agenda were baseless, he told reporters in Istanbul.

Mr. Celik said the changes aim solely to move Turkey into the European mainstream in terms of controlling alcohol sales, as Turkey negotiates to join the European Union, and to protect the young.

The rules, issued by Turkey's Tobacco and Alcohol Market Regulatory Authority, could have substantial impact on alcohol sales. They ban the use of drink-company names in sports clubs, restrict advertising that promotes drinking or suggests certain alcohol should be drunk with specific foods, and confine alcohol sales in stores to sequestered areas.

Some measures, such as enforcing a longstanding ban on the sale of alcohol in restaurants along national highways, are uncontroversial. But the move has raised hackles among some secularists in a country whose modern founder, Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, was a renowned drinker of raki, the national anisette spirit.

Western countries restrict alcohol, too, wrote columnist  Burak Bekdil in Friday's Hurriyet Daily News, continuing: "But does that mean that Islamist... governments restrict alcohol for the same reasons, with the same motives, as American, British and Swedish governments do? The answer could have been a 'yes' if there were not a thousand facts pointing to a 'no.' " 

Opponents have focused in particular on a requirement that licensed companies must sell on licensed properties, and that caterers must get permission to serve alcohol at outdoor events such as weddings, which critics suggest will present frustrating bureaucratic hurdles. 

The regulations also suggest major Turkish brewer Efes Beverage Group will have to change the name of its basketball team, Efes Pilsen.

A Efes spokesman said the firm wouldn't comment on the regulations' impact until after the tobacco and alcohol agency has ruled on the name issue.

The changes come just months after the government increased a special tax on alcohol by 30%, making Turkey one of the world's most expensive drinking destinations. A one-liter bottle of raki, also known as lion's milk, now averages about $35.

"The special taxes are a real problem—the industry really feels it," said Ilker Guner, 37-year-old manager of Balans Volt, a three-story beer house in central Istanbul.

Still, in an economy that grew in double digits for much of last year, Mr. Guner says tourists are keeping business humming. Meanwhile, Turkey's market has been a winner for importers of premium brands. Pernod Ricard has said its most popular brands, including Absolut, Chivas, Havana Club and Ballantines—though they typically sell at a premium to raki—grew 40% in Turkey in 2010. 

But in Turkey's heartland, the picture isn't so bright for drink makers. From 2003—the year after the AKP came to power—to 2008, household consumption of alcohol fell 34%, according to a November study by the Betam research center at Istanbul's Bahcesehir University. 

"The government is clearly trying to put pressure on alcohol sales and distribution, but that's not necessarily incompatible with democracy. There won't be a big political reaction here to this policy—because too few people will be affected," said Betam director Professor Seyfettin Gürsel. 

Relatively few Turks drink alcohol—about 1.4 liters per capita annually, according to 2008 figures from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, compared with 9.9 liters for Germans and 10.8 for the British.

Religious conservative social pressures appears to have been having an impact on Turkish drinking habits long before the new regulations appeared. 

According to a study by Betam, a research center at Istanbul's Bahcesehir University, around 300,000 households stopped consuming alcohol between 2003 and 2008, mainly due to social pressure—reducing the country's alcohol-consuming households to 6% of the population, from 8%. 

 Corrections & Amplifications 

Some 300,000 Turkish households stopped drinking alcohol between 2003 and 2008, mainly due to social pressures, according to a study by Betam, a research center at Istanbul's Bahcesehir University. An earlier version of this article incorrectly attributed the statistic to another report supported by the Open Society Institute, which also documents the disappearance of bars from towns in Turkey's conservative heartland, as city halls become less willing to grant licenses to serve alcohol.

—Erkan Oz  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Marc Champion at marc.champion@wsj.com and Joe Parkinson at joe.parkinson@dowjones.com 