NEW DELHI – Italy's Ferrari SpA Thursday said it will start selling its sports cars in India by spring this year, becoming the latest luxury car maker seeking to tap the rising number of wealthy individuals in emerging markets such as China and India. 

Ferrari, controlled by industrial group Fiat SpA, will sell car models such as the California, 458 Italia, 599 GTB Fiorano and the latest FF in India via a dealership each in New Delhi and Mumbai, the auto maker said. The two dealerships will add to the some 200 dealerships that Ferrari has in 57 countries. 

Owning a Ferrari, however, will be more expensive in India than elsewhere as the federal government levies taxes in excess of 100% on cars that are imported or completely built units, making them twice as expensive than in the country of production. 

At 22.27 million rupees ($493,573), the California will be the cheapest Ferrari car in India. The 458 Italia will cost 25.66 million rupees and the 599 GTB will be offered at 33.71 million rupees. 

The Indian dealerships will be established and managed by India's Shreyans group, which also operates dealerships of German sports car maker Porsche Automobil Holding SE and Italian motorcycle maker Ducati Motor Holding in India. 

Shreyans will also set up an independent office of Ferrari in India to manage the dealer network and handle after-sales service. 

The New Delhi dealership will be operational by spring this year, while that at Mumbai will start selling cars in the second half, Ferrari said. 

"Obviously, we won't stop at two dealerships," said Ashish Chordia, chairman of Shreyans group, told Dow Jones Newswires by phone from Italy. "We will open more dealerships in the next three years," he said, without elaborating. 

Ferrari joins Volkswagen AG's Bugatti and Lamborghini units, as well as Nissan Motor Co., which already sell their sports cars in India to capitalize on a potential rise in demand for such vehicles and to find new markets as sales in their primary markets of Europe and the U.S. stagnate. 

An expanding Indian economy has spawned a rising number of millionaires and billionaires, which is leading companies such as Daimler AG, BMW AG, Audi AG and Jaguar to introduce more luxury cars in the market. 

Audi's sales chief Peter Schwarzenbauer said Tuesday that the company expects annual sales in India to touch 15,000 cars by 2015, compared with about 3,000 in 2010. Ferrari sold nearly 300 cars in China in 2010, a growth of nearly 50%. 

Fiat, whose other brands include Alfa Romeo, Fiat and Maserati, currently manufactures cars such as the Punto hatchback and Linea sedan in India via an equal joint venture with Tata Motors Ltd. Fiat cars are marketed through select Tata Motors showrooms across the country. 

Ferrari said there aren't any plans to assemble Ferrari cars in India. The company currently makes its cars in the north central Italian town of Maranello. 

"There is a huge potential in the market for luxury cars," Mr. Chordia said. "If you have the right dealership network and offer good service, sales will grow." 

He said "there is a lot of strong initial interest" for Ferrari cars in India, but declined to give any potential sales target. 

"We believe that there is a sustainable business for Ferrari in India," said Mr. Chordia. 

Besides automobiles, Shreyans group distributes luxury products such as yachts and jewelry. 

 Write to  Nikhil Gulati at nikhil.gulati@dowjones.com 