KABUL—U.S. Gen. David Petraeus, the coalition's commander in Afghanistan, issued a rare apology Wednesday for a helicopter strike that killed nine children, hours after Afghan President Hamid Karzai condemned the allies for launching what he called a "ruthless attack." 

It was Gen. Petraeus's first such public apology since taking command in July. The issue of civilian casualties is highly sensitive in Afghanistan, and Tuesday's deaths could rattle the already strained relationship between the U.S.-led coalition and Mr. Karzai.

"We are deeply sorry for this tragedy and apologize to the members of the Afghan government, the people of Afghanistan and, most importantly, the surviving family members of those killed by our actions," Gen. Petraeus said in a statement. "These deaths should have never happened."

Nine related boys ages 8 to 14 were killed while collecting firewood in a remote part of Kunar province, according to Afghan officials and family members. "I don't care about the apology," Mohammed Bismil, the 20-year-old brother of two boys killed in the strike, said in a telephone interview. "The only option I have is to pick up a Kalashnikov, RPG [rocket-propelled grenade] or a suicide vest to fight."

Gen. Petraeus's predecessor, U.S. Gen. Stanley McChrystal, repeatedly apologized for botched military operations that killed civilians, maintaining a warmer relationship with Mr. Karzai.

Earlier Wednesday, Mr. Karzai condemned Tuesday's strike while on an official visit to Britain. In a statement, he asked "whether bombing an area where poor children were collecting firewood for winter was the way to succeed against terrorism and secure Afghanistan."

A preliminary military investigation of Tuesday's incident concluded that U.S. attack helicopters responding to a Taliban rocket attack on an American base accidentally fired on a group of Afghan civilians. 

U.S. officials said the strike came after insurgents fired two rockets at Camp Blessing, a remote U.S. base in Kunar province's rugged Pech River Valley. 

Soldiers at the base responded by summoning attack helicopters to target the militants, they said.

Under normal circumstances, said one coalition official in Kabul, helicopter crews are supposed to have both a grid location and a description of the target before firing. Coalition officials were trying to determine if the helicopter crew had both before launching the attack.

Officials are also trying to find out if there was a miscommunication between the ground forces and the crew. "What seemed to have happened was that there was an error between what the people on the ground were passing up and what the helicopters got," said one coalition official in Afghanistan.

Tuesday's strike was the latest in a decadelong series of errant attacks that have undermined U.S. attempts to win support from war-weary Afghans. While three-quarters of the civilian casualties in Afghanistan are caused by insurgents rather than coalition forces, deaths such as these fuel animosity toward the U.S.-led fight to cripple the Taliban.  

In late 2009, NATO jets in northern Afghanistan's Kunduz province targeted a disabled fuel tanker while scores of civilians were gathering at the site. German investigators concluded that 100 civilians were killed.

United Nations officials in January 2010 concluded that coalition forces killed eight schoolchildren and two adults during a botched assault in Kunar province. 

Most recently, another coalition attack in the province late last month killed 65 Afghan civilians, according to Afghan investigators. In that incident, U.S. military officials have challenged the Afghan conclusions. While coalition officials continue to examine the case, their preliminary review determined the attack killed militants, 

Gen. Petraeus drew the ire of Afghan leaders last week when he suggested that some children whose parents say sustained burns in that airstrike might have been maimed by their own parents, so as to blame American forces.

Gen. Petraeus on Wednesday directed all coalition commanders, especially attack helicopter crews, to review the tactical directive he issued last August that was meant to minimize civilian casualties.

"Every Afghan civilian death diminishes our cause," Gen. Petraeus said in the August directive. "If we use excessive force or operate contrary to our counterinsurgency principles, tactical victories may prove to be strategic setbacks."