Federal aviation officials broadened a staff shake-up Friday in the wake of several reports of air-traffic miscues, including controllers caught sleeping on the job.

The Federal Aviation Administration said three officials who oversee U.S. air-traffic management were being replaced by three veteran managers. An FAA spokeswoman declined to name the three officials being reassigned or to say whether they had violated agency policies.

The moves came two weeks after the FAA's top air-traffic control official quit under pressure amid media reports about controllers sleeping on the job. The agency also fired three controllers for dozing off at work, beefed up staffing at more than two dozen airports and revamped work schedules to reduce worker fatigue.

In addition, the agency recently suspended a controller and his supervisor after the controller brought a DVD player to work at a control center in Oberlin, Ohio, violating agency policy. And a controller's error forced a jet carrying first lady Michelle Obama to abandon its approach to Andrews Air Force Base in Maryland because it was too close behind a larger Air Force C-17 cargo jet. The FAA said neither plane was in danger.

The three managers appointed Friday will assume what the agency called critical oversight positions in air-traffic management. One will oversee terminal operations, airport towers, approaches and departures; another will supervise high-altitude flights and oceanic operations; and the third will serve as air- traffic manager at the Cleveland Air Route Traffic Control Center in Oberlin, Ohio.

FAA officials indicated the shake-up wasn't over, saying in a statement that they were assessing "key mid-level management positions to determine that both technical and leadership expectations are being met." 

"We are continuing to do everything in our power to ensure that our nation's aviation system remains the safest in the world," Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood said in a statement.

A spokesman for the National Air Traffic Controllers Association, the union representing the nation's 15,500 controllers, said the group doesn't comment on FAA management decisions.

Also Friday, the agency appointed members of a panel to evaluate the agency's training curriculum, qualifications and the process by which controllers are assigned. The panel includes two academics, a union official, an airline-industry representative and an FAA official. The panel will submit a report to FAA chief Randy Babbitt this fall.

Mr. Babbitt and the head of the air-traffic controllers union are touring facilities across the nation to gather information.

 Write to  Josh Mitchell at joshua.mitchell@dowjones.com 