A lawyer for Galleon Group founder  Raj Rajaratnam attempted to raise doubts about the testimony of former McKinsey & Co. consultant  Anil Kumar in his second day of cross-examination in the insider-trading trial of the hedge-fund maven.

Pointing to multiple documents that showed Mr. Kumar's associations with Galleon Group, defense lawyer  John Dowd said Mr. Kumar had received $1 million in payments in connection to other services he provided to Galleon, including a fund that included private-equity investments.

"Mr. Rajaratnam paid you for legitimate business ventures you were working on," Mr. Dowd said, throwing out two examples. 

"Wrong," Mr. Kumar responded.

Mr. Kumar has been testifying for the government in the trial of Mr. Rajaratnam, who faces 14 counts of securities fraud and conspiracy. Mr. Kumar, a star witness in the trial, pleaded guilty in connection with insider-trading charges last year.

In testimony earlier in the week, Mr. Kumar testified that Mr. Rajaratnam paid him $2 million through offshore accounts in exchange for inside information about a variety of topics, including the 2006 acquisition of ATI Technologies Inc. by  Advanced Micro Devices Inc.
AMD


-2.68
%






Mr. Dowd pointed to news articles and reports that suggested the acquisition of ATI by AMD was leaking out before it was publicly announced in July 2006—suggesting Mr. Kumar wasn't providing inside information.

Mr. Dowd showed the jury emails on the subject sent before the announcement of the deal in 2006 by two mutual-fund managers. One urged  Hector Ruiz, chief executive of AMD at the time, not to buy ATI. The email, from a manager at Janus Capital Group, carried the subject line: "Please don't buy ATI. Your stock will go down a lot more."

Mr. Kumar responded that the rumors of the deal were speculation, while he was privy to "facts" and "timing" information. "I was privileged to know about it six months before," he said.

  Mr. Rajaratnam is among 26 people charged in a broad criminal insider-trading probe; 19 people have pleaded guilty in the investigation.

 Write to  Susan Pulliam at susan.pulliam@wsj.com 