 Fertilizer producer Potash Corp. of Saskatchewan more than doubled fourth-quarter earnings, posted a 65% jump in sales and almost tripled gross margins, driven by soaring demand and prices. The world's largest producer of the crop-nutrient potash, earned $482 million in the fourth quarter, up from $239 million a share a year earlier.  

General Motors is withdrawing its request for billions in U.S. Department of Energy loans aimed at making its vehicle fleet more fuel-efficient, two people familiar with the matter said. 

 Fiat returned to a net profit in 2010, as a weak European car market was offset by car, truck and tractor sales in Brazil, the U.S. and elsewhere. The auto maker reported a net profit of €600 million ($821.5 million) against a net loss of €848 million the previous year.  

Hyundai posted a 48% fourth-quarter profit jump to 1.397 trillion South Korean won ($1.25 billion), and the company said it intends to use those models to grow its presence in the U.S., where it is continuing to grab market share. 

 La Caixa, the biggest and healthiest of Spain's large savings banks, said it plans to transfer its banking business to listed unit Criteria CaixaCorp, in a bold restructuring effort to improve management and its access to capital markets.  

 Portugal's central bank has urged the country's banks to suspend paying dividends to conserve capital, as they prepare for new requirements under Basel III rules.  

 Procter & Gamble's fiscal second-quarter profit slid 28% to $3.33 billion as the prior-year period included a large gain from discontinued operations, masking higher sales, although margins also fell as commodity costs grew.  

Lockheed Martin's fourth-quarter earnings jumped 19% to $983 million as its sales rose more than expected. 

L-3 Communications' net fourth-quarter profit climbed 18% to $268 million on increased orders for the contractor of services such as training militaries and upgrading government aircraft 

 Russian shareholders in TNK-BP, BP's Russian joint venture, are seeking an injunction in the High Court in London to halt the landmark share swap and exploration deal between BP and Rosneft, the state-owned Russian oil giant. A hearing has been scheduled for Feb. 1. 

U.S. oil giant Exxon Mobil became the second company in a month to sign a major offshore-oil-exploration agreement with Russian oil company Rosneft, following a similar deal with BP. 

The chief executive of Austrian oil and gas company OMV, Wolfgang Ruttenstorfer, was acquitted of charges for insider trading in connection with a personal share buy in 2009 that coincided with a major divestment. 

Oil India will relinquish two exploration blocks in Libya due to low prospects, the state-run explorer's chairman N.M. Borah said. 

 Auctioneers Christie's International said it sold £3.3 billion ($5.25 billion) of fine and decorative art last year, up 53% from 2009 and surpassing its £3.1 billion in sales during the art market's prior peak in 2007. 

 Citigroup, which in the coming months is expected to seize control of EMI Group from beleaguered financier Guy Hands, has already made contact with parties that could quickly take the music company off its hands—and Hands himself is among those angling to grab the historic music company.  

A lawyer for Chinese tycoon Stanley Ho said the casino mogul had been forced to make a televised statement in Hong Kong, and filed a lawsuit against two branches of his sprawling family to regain shares of his flagship casino empire, raising the specter of a drawn-out courtroom fight. 

 Prada's announcement that the Italian fashion house intends to go public on the Hong Kong stock exchange is the latest example of a company heading east to sell global investors on its Asian growth credentials.  

AIG's SunAmerica Financial Group regained a spot on the sales list of brokerage Edward Jones for a popular retirement product, following a nearly two-year sales suspension.

 Goldman Sachs Group's J. Michael Evans will be named the head of its emerging-markets business world-wide, said people familiar with the matter.  

Goldman is also naming two executives, David Ryan and Yusuf Alireza, to be co-presidents of Goldman's Asia business, excluding Japan, said the people. 

 Sara Lee is pushing ahead with plans to separate its two main businesses after offers from interested buyers came in below its price expectations, people familiar with the matter said. The expected move is likely to squelch what had been a mounting auction for the company. 

 Caterpillar's fourth-quarter earnings soared to $968 million, up from $232 million a year earlier as demand at the heavy-machinery maker recovered from slumping levels a year earlier.  

Information about stock-market trades that used to flow through the floor of the New York Stock Exchange will now be kept secret from traders, thanks to a procedural change quietly implemented last week. Names of buyers and sellers on the storied exchange's "book" of orders will no longer be visible to traders. 

 British Sky Broadcasting reported a 40% jump in profit for the fiscal second quarter to £179 million ($284.6 million) in results that illustrate why News Corp. is going to great lengths to buy out the cash-generating U.K. pay-TV operator. 

The launch of News Corp.'s tablet newspaper for the iPad will be Feb. 2. The paper, which will be called The Daily, will be unveiled at an event in New York. 

Lilly's fourth-quarter earnings rose 28% to $1.17 billion, as higher sales of an antidepressant and a cancer drug lifted overall revenue. 

AstraZeneca reported a better-than-expected 5% fall in adjusted net profit for 2010's fourth quarter of $1.62 billion. On a reported basis, net profit for the quarter was up 4.5% from the year-ago period's $1.55 billion. 

Novartis missed forecasts with a 2% drop in fourth-quarter net profit, to $2.27 billion. Sales in the final quarter increased by 10% from a year earlier to $14.20 billion thanks to growing sales of flagship drugs such as cancer medicine Glivec, as well as the inclusion of U.S.-based eye care company Alcon. 

 Fashion retailer Hennes & Mauritz said its net profit in the three months ended Nov. 30 fell 11% from a year earlier to 5.49 billion Swedish kronor ($848.2 million), as the strong krona and rising cotton prices hit earnings. 

 Microsoft posted an 0.4% drop in quarterly profit to $6.63 billion, as the prior-year quarter included deferred revenue related to its Windows 7 software operating system, which masked a jump in revenue amid strong sales of its Kinect videogame device.  

 Higher expenses weighed on Amazon.com's holiday quarter, resulting in an 8% rise to $416 million in fourth-quarter earnings even as sales jumped 36% for the period.  

 Nokia, the world's largest cellphone maker, said its net profit fell a less-than-expected 21% to €745 million ($1.02 billion) in the fourth-quarter.  

 Sony unveiled a new portable game machine to rival Nintendo's 3DS handheld and opened up its game software library to phones and tablet computers running Google's Android software.  

Motorola Solutions posted a fourth-quarter profit of $194 million in the business mobile and networks company's first period reporting results. 

Smartphone maker Research In Motion said it can't give Indian security agencies access to its BlackBerry corporate email service. 

NEC said its net loss in the October-December quarter widened to 26.53 billion yen ($322.4 million), compared with a loss of 9.61 billion yen in the same period a year earlier. 

 Lenovo Group said it will invest $175 million in a personal computer joint venture with NEC that gives the Chinese company control of Japan's biggest PC maker.  