MELBOURNE—Thousands aspire to it. Hundreds get a shot at it. Only a handful achieve it.

For these finalists who make it to Rod Laver Arena for the men's and women's Australian Open finals, there is no prize money, nor much reward beyond local fame. If anything, their job is to be invisible.

But for the ones who spend the better part of a year training for this opportunity, servicing the Grand Slam finalists is the pinnacle of their ballkid careers.

At 16 years old, veteran ballkid  Simone Phillip has finally made it to the top. She will be as close to the Australian Open trophy as the winners will be this weekend, having the responsibility of walking the trophy through the hallway before the finals ceremonies.

Much as it is for the players themselves, the road to making it to Rod Laver Arena for the finals is a long one. It takes year-round dedication, a love of the game, intense focus and above all, tirelessness.

The ballkids, who can range in age from 11 to 16 so long as they're between 12 and 15 at the start of the tournament, first apply in February. Ballkids Superviser Matthew Dutton estimates around 2,500 kids express interest in the job, but after the rounds of tryouts and cuts, only 367 are chosen for the tournament. Most come from the state of Victoria, but a handful hail from other Australian states and 20 of the ballkids come from Korea through a sponsorship program.

Those who make the cut then go through a training program to learn ball rolling and player-servicing skills. At the Open, ballkids are assessed after matches and ranked based on their performance before 12 are chosen for each of the finals matches.

"Generally you find that it takes the kid a couple of years to build up the skill level just to make it onto a televised court," Mr. Dutton said.

Not so for 13-year-old  Matthew Boykett, who stands at 4'11" (150 centimeters) and in his first year as a ballkid was selected for the women's doubles.

"I was surprised; I didn't expect to get anything," he said after the ballkids awards ceremony where he was given his assignments.

Other awards went to the ballkid who threw the best accidental airball when attempting to roll a ball across court; an award to a ballkid who got hit the face—presumably also by accident—during the tournament; and a prize for the ballkid who wound up with the unexpected task of having to help No. 9 seed Victoria Azaranka of Belarus fix her outfit during a match.

Wardrobe malfunctions aside, the ballkids get to know the players in a way few others involved in the sport ever do.

With tennis players being notoriously superstitious athletes, the most successful ballkids are those that pick up on their tics quickly.

Ms. Phillip, who has been a ballkid for three Australian Opens, has learned a few things in her day. No. 16 seed  Maria Sharapova takes her balls only from the right side of the court. Up-and-coming 22-year-old Ukranian star  Alexandr Dolgopolov, who unexpectedly made it into this year's men's quarterfinals, takes a particularly long time with his towel and balls between points. Ms. Azarenka developed a habit of taking balls from the left side during one match before unexpectedly switching to take them only from the right.

"You've really got to notice what the players do," she said.

While ballkids aren't supposed to play favorites, they do find themselves supporting the friendlier players. Ms. Phillip and young Mr. Boykett, incidentally both left-handed tennis players, have developed a fondness for No. 1  Rafael Nadal, also a leftie.

"I didn't like Nadal until I got him on court, he's one of the nicest, he's always saying 'please' and 'thank you,'" Ms. Phillip said. "Now he's one of my favorites."

Some tennis stars have donned the ballkid uniforms themselves. Australians  Lleyton Hewitt and  Pat Rafter were both ballkids in a former life. Even  Roger Federer has spoken about his days as a ballboy at the Swiss Indoors tournament in Basel.

Ballkids at the Australian Open are not paid for their work—save for a gift pack that this year contained $100. The tournament restricts the program to kids, unlike the U.S. Open where one ballboy spent 30 years on the job, doing it well into his 40s.

Ballkids superviser Mr. Dutton worked as a ballboy from 1995 to 1998, but never was one of the select few chosen for a singles finals match.

Mr. Dutton, who works in investment banking when he's not attending to his supervisory duties, said the decision about which ballkids are used during the finals is not taken lightly. The day before announcement, he and around 30 other supervisors debate the skills of various ballkids before taking a walk around the courts to assess the finalists one last time. Eight hours were spent discussing which ballkids would be used for each of this year's finals matches.

The best ballkids need not only exceptional hand-eye coordination, but also a strong ball roll, unshakeable concentration and the ability to adhere to the golden ballkid rule: The player comes first.

It's not always easy to know how to help the athletes, though.

"Some (players) talk to themselves while they're looking at you," Ms. Phillip said. "I'm like, 'Am I meant to respond?'"

It's only natural that during the later stages of a night match, ballkids can grow tired. Ms. Phillip, who was ballkid at the  Bernard Tomic-Marin Cilic match that lasted past 2 a.m. at last year's Open, said it's not as difficult to stay focused as one might imagine.

"You do have the best seat in the house," she said. "You might as well make the most of it."

 Write to  Cynthia Koons at cynthia.koons@wsj.com 