"Remake" often connotes a low-quality, big-studio product that cynically rehashes a classic or a foreign art-house hit to make an easy buck. But, like Claude Monet with his haystacks and water lilies, talented directors sometimes return to earlier subjects. And the results can be fascinating. "Auto-Remakes," beginning Friday at the Anthology Film Archives, will present 20 films by directors ranging from Golden Age Hollywood names to maverick experimental filmmakers. They span the silent era to the 21st century and reflect such changes as variations in genre, visual style and plot.

In some cases, the remake should be better known. Humphrey Bogart hit his stride as a weary gangster yearning to live decently after one last heist in Raoul Walsh's wrenching "High Sierra" (1941). But Mr. Walsh's less celebrated retooling of the story as a Western set amid sun-bleached caverns in "Colorado Territory" (1949) is a stark masterpiece whose final scenes evoke a hollowness worthy of the darkest noir. Joel McCrea and Virginia Mayo contribute taut performances as the doomed outlaw and the girl he discovers he loves too late, while their robust good looks seem as tragic as Mr. Bogart's and Ida Lupino's drawn faces in "High Sierra."

Some remakes reflect cultural shifts as well as the director's aesthetic development. Alfred Hitchcock's electrifying 1934 original and more polished 1956 version of "The Man Who Knew Too Much" are both superb thrillers, but differences include the latter's more fragile and nurturing mother, and a change to her kidnapped child's gender. Andrew Sarris has observed: "Indeed, in charting the transition of Hitchcock from Britain to America, one may note the pattern of fathers and daughters in Britain and that of mothers and sons in America." 

Yasujiro Ozu abandoned the bittersweet tone of "I Was Born, but…" ("Umarete wa mita keredo...," 1932) when he reworked the plot for his cheerful satire "Good Morning" ("Ohayo," 1959). With static camerawork typical of his later style, and a color scheme punctuated with red accents, it depicts a Japanese suburb swept by consumerism.

Can a remake hew closely to the original and still feel utterly fresh? Leo McCarey was an often-underrated director with a gift for sophisticated visuals, improvisation and eliciting naturalistic performances—the great French director Jean Renoir said no one in Hollywood understood people better. In "Love Affair" (1939) and "An Affair to Remember" (1957), Mr. McCarey transforms a melodramatic plot into an exquisitely wistful romance. The characters may plan the same sentimental rendezvous and be separated by the same tragedy, but the couples (played by Charles Boyer and Irene Dunne in the original, and by Cary Grant and Deborah Kerr in the remake) seem entirely different. This pairing, like others in "Auto-Remakes," spotlights the hallmarks of a particular director's art.

Art is front and center for the veteran avant-gardist Ken Jacobs. His 16mm masterwork "Tom, Tom, the Piper's Son" (1969–71) is a revelatory feature-length examination of a 1905 Biograph nursery-rhyme short involving a stolen pig. Rephotographing the original, he used freezing, panning, zooming and other techniques to unearth the essence of cinematic illusion. In his remakes "Return to the Scene of the Crime" (2008) and "Anaglyph Tom (Tom with Puffy Cheeks)" (2008), Mr. Jacobs breathes even more life into the footage with sound, deadpan commentary and eye-popping digital effects, including 3-D. 

What if the filmmaker, rather than a character, is the one who committed the obsessively revisited crime? In "The Beaver Trilogy" (1979-2000)—a stranger-than-fiction documentary and two dramatizations it inspired—director Trent Harris seems to grapple with his moral failings like Bill Murray in "Groundhog Day." The documentary, "The Beaver Kid," follows a vulnerable, "tube"-besotted young man who met Mr. Harris in a TV station parking lot and later invited him to tape his drag act as "Olivia Newton-Don" in a local Utah talent show. In the remakes—starring Sean Penn and Crispin Glover, respectively—Mr. Harris emerges as an oily, exploitative character oblivious to the personal fallout from the kid's media exposure. But at the trilogy's conclusion, Mr. Glover drives away from his hometown, wearing a wig and happily blasting Olivia Newton-John's music, a hero at last.

—Ms. Jones writes about film for the Journal.