Frankly, readers, my credibility is on the line. Am I, a woman who has either written for or edited style and fashion magazines for the last 20 years, really qualified to write on such gnarly issues as the pros and cons of leopard-print coats for canines, cashmere dog sweaters and diamante-studded leashes? Will you take me seriously? Will you question whether I know my stuff? 

There are, after all, no runway shows for dogs (well, actually, recently there have been—of which more later). There are no seasons for dogs—not of that sort anyway. And of course, there are no leading designers of the canine variety, for blindingly obvious reasons. But then, dogs are in the literary and social zeitgeist. They always have been. 

The Greeks and Romans used them for hunting and safety. "Never with them on guard need you fear for your stalls a midnight thief, or onslaught of wolves, or Iberian brigands at your back," says Virgil of canis venaticus and canis pastoralis. Shakespeare's Mark Antony fears Caesar's vengeful spirit will "cry havoc and let slip the dogs of war" (albeit the hounds were a metaphor for marauding soldiers) in "Julius Caesar." More recently, Winston Churchill's description for his famously depressive moods entered the vernacular as "the black dog."

If you really want to understand the position of dog as totem in today's image- and icon-saturated society, then look no further than the debate that raged in the media for weeks over which dog America's new first family should possess. The Obamas' choices were weighted with symbolism. Tradition versus modernity, old guard versus the new. When Bo, the Portuguese Water Dog, was announced as the president's choice, there was a sense of anticlimax. Questions were asked. Why hadn't they done the right thing and adopted a stray? (a PC gesture that would have been regarded by the nation as an immediate touchdown). The situation was swiftly diffused when the news came through that Bo was a gift from Sen. Edward Kennedy, himself the owner of two such dogs. A dog with the endorsement of a Democrat grandee. So that's all right then.

Time was when owning "the right sort of dog"—one that reflected your position in and on life—was all that mattered. If David Cameron owned a dog, it couldn't possibly be a trusty Labrador (way too much Conservative baggage); more likely it would be a sleek, modernist, self-confident Weimeraner. These days though, it's what your dog wears, what he or she is transported in, drinks from and sleeps in that matters most. And nowhere is this more so true than in that bastion of the bonkers, New York City. 

New York is where I first came across dog bootees, but it's also where I met a dog whose owner (a woman who religiously slept for 10 hours a night) taught him to hop into the bathtub to relieve himself, rather than wake her in the small hours. In New York, dog bootees are de rigueur for smart dogs from November through March, when, it has to be said, the pavements are quite often riddled with snow, slush or fast-running streams of the melting aforementioned. Dog bootees have taken a while to catch on here (I wonder why), but you can get some marvelous "hiker boots," with rubber soles and Velcro straps for £34.99 from Pet London (www.petlondon.net). New York is also the home of Pet Fashion Week; there's one in Moscow too, where they quite recently showed (on a runway), among other things, a Swarovski-crystal-encrusted Tiger Collar. It's from Diamond Dogs (www.diamonddogs.us)—just in case you feel the need to purchase the very same.

The other dog accessory that makes sense in New York is the dog jumper, or dog coat. When I first lived in the city, I used to laugh derisively at the Poodles, Pomeranians and skinny Pointers as they paraded down Museum Mile wearing all manner of knits and cashmeres, with their mink-swathed owners trotting behind in early November. And then the snows came along with the subzero temperatures, at which point I gave in and bought my shivering Vizsla a little something from Ralph Lauren. You can do the same if you are in the U.S.—I'm particularly fond of the Skull dog sweater ($115) and the turtleneck ($69). If, of course, you want to be more of a show-off, you could buy the coat of the moment—the Roberto Cavalli leopard pet jacket (from £200). For those of us with more stalwart British sensibilities, the eminently sensible Barking Mad Clothing (barkingmadclothing.co.uk) sells wonderful water-resistant dog coats in conservative colors and fabrics. Think of them as the Delia Smith of the dog couture world.

Of course there's little use for smart collars and leads during the wet winter months, when nobody spends any time studying what your dog is wearing and a lot of time trying to get the walk over and done with. During the warmer months, though, it would be remiss of any seriously stylish dog owner to send their pooch out in anything that might be considered less than fashion forward. At least that has to be the theory behind the plethora of choice out there in what I like to term the "dog bondage" department. Inevitably, designers who have dogs are at the forefront of this movement. Dsquared2 has a capsule collection designed by Dean and Dan Caten, the two dog-loving men behind the label. I particularly like the Douglas chain leash and harness set in black, though I think my Vizsla would resist. Diva Dogs (divadogs.co.uk) designer Ed Hardy has let his tattoo-influenced art run wild on a brightly colored Christian Audigier collar and lead set, £40. Gucci has a traditional webbing collar with a heart-shaped charm, £125, whilst from Pet London you can buy a rock-star collar, £48, and lead, £38.

If all of this frippery offends your muddy country sensibilities, then you can always turn to that bastion of upper-middle-class shooting and doggy stuff, gunmakers Purdey. They offer a deeply reassuring and solid-looking leather dog collar for £125 and a much-less-convincing hallmarked, sterling-silver dog whistle for £435. (Perhaps they made it for Prince Philip and he didn't want it?)

An interior designer friend of mine tells me darkly that she has, more than once, been asked to figure the dog's bed into her decorative schemes. Before you dismiss the concept (as I'll admit I did initially), this actually makes a lot of sense. How many homes have you been into where the kitchen has been dominated by a hideous corduroy dog bed in a dirty brown color with a dog-bone print interior? I'm not saying that one should stoop to the pink and blue dog sofas (£58) as offered by Posh Dogz (poshdogz.co.uk), the website allegedly favored by Sir Elton John, Mrs. Beckham and Katie Price; but you could buy (from the same place) a very chic Madison slumber bed, from £17.56, and whilst you're at it, pick up a Puchi Pac-a-mac, from £22. Juicy Couture has had huge success with its slightly tongue-in-cheek line of pet paraphernalia. I can see why; I wouldn't mind their dog sleeping bag myself.

All of which brings me to the real heavy-hitter in the world of dog couture—the dog carrier. Requiring a dog carrier signifies one of two things (or in some cases both): The first being that you own a dog tiny enough to be transported in what is effectively a large handbag; the second that you are a celebrity, since this strange species seems to be alone in considering a canine to be a fashion accessory. But don't let my grumpiness on the matter dissuade you. Louis Vuitton has come up with an impressive carrier. The size 40 will cost you £1,240 and they can hot-stamp it with your initials (or, I suppose, those of your dog). Gucci, meanwhile, has adopted a more nonchalant approach, with a shopping bag/dog carrier in beige-and-ebony GG fabric with a brown leather trim, for £565. 

Is there anything left to say about dog couture or have we exhausted the topic? I'm glad you asked because, actually, I'm saving the best for last. Were I the type of woman who could afford to lavish untold finances on my beloved hound, I should most certainly opt for the crème de la crème of the dog couture world—the Goyard trunk. Every dog, of course, needs a method by which to transport his or her dog bowls. The cost? From £1,780. In that case, I think I will buy two.

 Write to  Tina Gaudoin at Tina.Gaudoin@wsj.com 