 The federal mine safety agency is planning new rules that would require companies to add new safety measures and self-police more rigorously. 

Regulators have discussed these changes for much of the last year, preceding even a broader mine-safety bill that was proposed after the April explosion in a Massey Energy Co. mine in West Virginia that killed 29 people. That bill, which would have raised penalties on violators of safety laws and added protections for whistleblowers, failed to pass in the House last year when Republicans opposed it as too punitive. 

Despite that defeat, the Mine Safety and Health Administration is proposing the new rules which would require companies to provide gear to each miner to measure coal-dust exposure—a growing hazard to miners—and install alarms to protect them from heavy machinery. Six of the 48 U.S. coal mining deaths last year involved workers being crushed by machines. 

Another rule would require mining companies to clarify who the legal operator of a mine is to prevent owners from shutting and reopening a mine under a new name to avoid paying fines. 

"We think that more needs to be done by the mine operators to carry out their responsibilities," said  Joe Main, head of the mine safety agency, which is part of the Labor Department, in a conference call with reporters Wednesday to discuss the regulatory agenda. 

Mr. Main called the 82,000 citations issued to underground coal mines in 2009 "outrageous" and said he believed companies tend to wait for the agency to issue citations before fixing safety problems. 

The new policy would impose stricter rules on company personnel to identify and fix safety hazards. 

Luke Popovich, a spokesman for the National Mining Association, said the agency's "aggressive" agenda would add costs for companies. But he added that the trade group doesn't oppose any of the new measures and that the industry was disturbed by the deaths of miners last year. "We want to stress that we're looking at all ways in which mine safety can be improved," he said.

In March, all underground coal operators will need to install the safety alarms on heavy equipment, while other changes are expected to go through a lengthy rule-making process. 

Separately, Massey agreed on Wednesday to permanently close its Freedom Energy Mine No. 1 in Kentucky after the regulator took the unprecedented step in November of asking a U.S. District Court in Kentucky to shut the coal mine temporarily to fix safety problems. The agency pointed to six roof falls since August and nearly 2,000 safety violations in the past two years. 

Massey has been the subject of stricter regulatory enforcement following the April explosion at its Upper Big Branch mine in West Virginia. 

The company had said it believed the Freedom Energy mine was safe and initially challenged the mining safety agency in court but it agreed to a settlement before a trial was set to begin Wednesday. 

"We felt the best course of action was to cooperate with [regulators] and jointly develop a plan for our coal miners to safely close the Freedom Energy mine," said  Shane Harvey, Massey's general counsel. 

Massey, which has struggled to meet production goals since the April accident, said on Wednesday that it mined about 800,000 tons less coal in the fourth-quarter than it had projected in October, citing lower productivity in deep underground mines that have had been subjected to stepped up regulatory enforcement. 

Patricia Smith, the Labor Department's solicitor, said the agency could take legal action to try to temporarily shut down another mine, but declined to name the mine and the company.

 Write to  Kris Maher at kris.maher@wsj.com 