BUENOS AIRES—Moves by Hugo Moyano, the powerful boss of the national truckers union, to convoke, and then suddenly cancel, a national transportation strike, represent an unmistakable warning to the government of President Cristina Kirchner, analysts said.

The strike call, which Mr. Moyano issued on Thursday and then retracted late Friday, was a message to Mrs. Kirchner to ease up on ongoing criminal investigations of Mr. Moyano's business activities, or face a protest that could paralyze the agrarian-based economy, analysts said

The union chief has maintained an at times tense alliance with Mrs. Kirchner's administration. And never were the tensions higher than after revelations on Thursday that Swiss prosecutors were seeking information from their Argentine counterparts about alleged money laundering by a purported associate of Mr. Moyano's. 

At a news conference late Friday in which he called off a strike that had been set for Monday, Mr. Moyano lambasted critics in the Argentine press for "acting with a perversity that doesn't have limits." 

He added: "We workers want to assume power, and that's what bothers many people."

Previously, a statement from the Argentine Supreme Court's press service indicated that the Swiss were investigating "suspicious operations of asset laundering" by a company "supposedly related to Hugo Moyano." Argentine officials said the company in question was Covelia SA, which is involved in the garbage collection business in greater Buenos Aires. 

Mr. Moyano said on Friday that he had no connection with Covelia, with which he has been linked in Argentine press reports. Statements issued separately Friday by Swiss authorities and Argentina's Foreign Ministry said Swiss investigators weren't directly targeting Mr. Moyano. Representatives for Covelia couldn't be reached for comment.

But Argentine prosecutors have launched several investigations of their own into Mr. Moyano's activities, including one examining alleged fraud in the union's health plan. And events of the past couple of days suggest further conflicts with the union boss may lie ahead, at a sensitive time before October presidential elections. Mrs. Kirchner is expected to seek reelection, though she hasn't officially announced her candidacy.

Graciela Ocana, Mrs. Kirchner's former health minister who repeatedly denounced alleged corruption by Mr. Moyano's union, said in a recent interview that Mr. Moyano threatened to be "a kind of Frankenstein," who could one day turn against the government.

The friction with Mr. Moyano, who also heads the main umbrella group of Argentine unions, is a potentially grave problem for Mrs. Kirchner. Her cabinet chief, Aníbal Fernández, recently dubbed Mr. Moyano's union movement as "the backbone" of the government. The truckers, who transport much of Argentina's grain exports, could effectively shut down the economy, analysts say. Argentina is the world's second largest corn exporter and third largest soybean exporter. 

For several years Mrs. Kirchner and her late husband and predecessor, Nestor, maintained a sometimes uncomfortable marriage of convenience with Mr. Moyano. Mr. Moyano kept salary demands relatively reasonable, sent the rank and file to pro-government demonstrations and launched protests targeting Kirchner enemies, like the Clarin media group or farmers, analysts said. 

In return, Mr. Moyano has been allowed to increase his political influence, becoming leader of the governing Peronist party in vast Buenos Aires province. He and his associates have also greatly expanded their business activities, which range from hotels, to cargo trains, to port services. 

At times tensions emerged between the government and Mr. Moyano, who is more conservative ideologically than the leftist Mrs. Kirchner or her late husband. There were multiple Argentine press reports that Mr. Moyano had an intense argument with Nestor Kirchner the night before he died of a heart attack in October. Mr. Moyano denied the reports.

At a political event Friday, before Mr. Moyano called off the strike, Mrs. Kirchner had spoken frankly of how disconsolate she felt. "I need help," she said. "Alone I can't do it. I need leaders who accompany me." 

She added: "Never has a president been so attacked, so offended, so insulted."

 Write to  Matt Moffett at matthew.moffett@wsj.com 