It began as a low rumble on a cool spring night—a "murmur" is the word Howie Rose chose. It pulsed along the third-base line at Citizens Bank Park in Philadelphia, swelling in other sections until it became a clear, familiar chant.

U! S! A! U! S! A!

In the Mets' radio booth, they knew why it was happening. A short while before, WFAN producer Chris Majkowski had told Rose that President Barack Obama was going to address the country late Sunday evening. It was an unusual, unsettling event. Then came the stunning flashes: Osama bin Laden was dead, killed by U.S. forces.

Rose, working with partner Wayne Hagin, didn't want to say anything on-air until they knew for sure. Everyone agreed: No need to rush and make a mistake. This was a baseball game, and a close one, between National League East rivals. 

But now the "U! S! A!" chanting was rolling around the stadium. "Like a verbal wave," Rose said Monday morning. "You had one section of the park begin to chant, and given the age we're in, where everyone's got smartphones and instant access to information, all it took was someone sitting next to someone else to ask, 'What's that about?' "

By then, news organizations were reporting bin Laden's demise. Rose felt comfortable enough to go on the air with the news during the top of the ninth inning, when New York second baseman Daniel Murphy was at the plate.

"I'll tell you what's going on," Rose said calmly to his audience. "The crowd is chanting, 'U! S! A!' And the reason for that is that there are reports circulating—I am not sure if they have yet been confirmed by the White House—that Osama bin Laden is dead. How that's happened, we don't know. But this crowd now knows it."

Rose turned back to the action. "Fastball on the outside, for a called strike two," he said. The juxtaposition was bizarre. "This is becoming an almost surreal evening."

Rose is 57, an experienced New York voice. He had been on the air for major local sports moments—the Rangers' double-OT stunner over the Devils in 1994 (in which he famously cried "Matteau! Matteau! Matteau!" when Stephane Matteau scored the winner), a Stanley Cup the same season, and a melancholy night in 1989 when Billy Martin died. Rose recalled being at an Islanders game in 1973 in which the public-address announcer told the hockey fans at Nassau Coliseum that a cease-fire had been brokered in Vietnam.

The crowd went wild, Rose said. "I remember one of the Islanders, Craig Cameron, skating around in a circle, banging his stick on the ice in jubilation."

Sunday was different. The moment was global. There was no loudspeaker announcement—personal technology passed the word. Players on the field, deprived of smartphones, were confused.

And there was still a baseball game going on. The Mets and the Phillies were tied, 1-1. "We had two wildly unrelated scenarios," Rose said.

In the booth, they pushed on through. Memories flooded back. Rose admitted he wasn't enthused about baseball's return after Sept. 11. "My feelings were, 'Cancel the season. I don't care if they play another game,' " he said Monday.

But 10 days later, Mike Piazza hit that home run against Atlanta, and Shea Stadium thundered with emotion. Said Rose: "It crystallized in my mind why baseball needed to be back."

Sunday in Philadelphia, it took 14 innings to reach a conclusion. As New Yorkers gathered at Ground Zero, the Mets prevailed, 2-1, after a go-ahead RBI double by Ronny Paulino. Manager Terry Collins called it "a good win for us and obviously a huge win for America."

Howie Rose was on his way home. In the car, he listened to the radio and called in to his station to talk about what happened. It had been an unforgettable night, when the world stopped and a baseball game played on.