SAN'A, Yemen—Yemen's President Ali Abdullah Saleh on Thursday proposed a new constitution that would strengthen the powers of the country's parliament, but his offer was swiftly rejected by the thousands of demonstrators seeking his resignation.

Track events day by day.

"What we have heard today gives no solution for the Yemeni crisis. It only deepens this crisis," said  Yassin Said Noman, president of the opposition coalition. "We reject the offer." 

Mr. Noman said the only acceptable solution is for Mr. Saleh to hand over power.

Mr. Saleh told a gathering of over 30,000 supporters in an outdoor stadium in San'a on Thursday morning that a new constitution to increase the separation between the executive and the legislative branches of government— thereby increasing the power of the parliament—would be brought to a vote.

But Mr. Saleh didn't concede the one insistent demand of the protesters— that he step down immediately. Instead, Mr. Saleh reiterated he will remain in power until his term ends in 2013.

The president has also called for the creation of a unity government with members of the opposition, one of several concessions made in recent weeks in an attempt to quell growing unrest. All the initiatives have been rejected by the opposition.

Amnesty International says 30 people have been killed since protests began in January, inspired by the uprising in Tunisia. 

Late Tuesday night, the army fired live ammunition and tear gas into a crowd camping in front of San'a University, according to witnesses. Two protesters died of their injuries and over a hundred were injured by tear gas, bullet wounds and falling debris, doctors on the scene said.

Khaled al Anesi, a protest organizer and human-rights lawyer, said the president's latest concession is "too late." He said Mr. Saleh knows his proposal will be refused, but mistakenly sees unrest in Yemen as a "passing storm."

Nasser al Sabr, an antigovernment protester who drove to the capital from the eastern desert province of Marib, said the president's speech would only serve to strengthen the demonstrations. "Saleh's words are lies. He has always lied and we won't believe him now."

