Efforts to strip public employees of collective-bargaining and other rights in Wisconsin and Ohio have received much of the attention, but at least 10 other states are pursuing similar measures. 

Lawmakers in Florida, Idaho, Missouri, Tennessee and South Carolina have introduced bills to reduce union power or to make it more difficult for them to sign up workers, and there is talk of similar measures even in labor-friendly California and New York. Those efforts would build on bills already working their way through legislatures in Iowa, Kansas and the traditionally progressive state of Massachusetts. 

The measures aren't identical, but each attempts to rein in labor unions amid concerns about state budget deficits and a national debate over public-sector pay and pensions. 

The campaign to curb union power comes after recent election gains by conservative Republicans and despite three national polls that found most voters support public-sector unions. 

In Florida last week, three state legislators introduced bills addressing labor unions. One would prohibit state and local governments from deducting union dues from employee paychecks, which would add to unions' burdens by forcing them to bill members directly.

Another would require members to recertify, or approve, labor unions each year—a costly and time-consuming process—if fewer than half of the workers they represent have formally joined. Since Florida is a right-to-work state, workers represented by a union aren't required to join a union even if it negotiates on their behalf. 

The third would require unions to send each member a reminder of how they can decertify, or fire, the union, along with an account of union spending, including political contributions. 

In Idaho, the state Senate has taken up a bill to phase out tenure for teachers and restrict collective bargaining. In Tennessee, both houses are weighing a bill that would allow local school districts to refuse to negotiate with teacher unions. 

Nebraska's Legislature is considering a bill that would end collective bargaining for all state- and local-government workers. In Missouri, the House has taken up a bill that would require labor unions to get written permission from their members to deduct dues from their paychecks. 

South Carolina, which has long forbidden government workers from joining together to negotiate pay, benefits or working conditions, took up legislation to allow private businesses to ignore a proposed federal rule that would require them to notify their workers that they have the right to form a union. 

Legislators in California and New York, meanwhile, are considering bills to allow public-school districts to ignore seniority when deciding which teachers to lay off—a practice that teacher unions consider crucial to their members. 

The Iowa House has passed a bill denying state employees the right to negotiate over health-insurance benefits or layoffs. In Kansas, the lower house of the Legislature approved a bill that would prevent public-employee unions from endorsing candidates or spending members' dues on political activities, and would end payroll deductions for union political-action committees. 

A bill in Massachusetts would eliminate union input into policies on hiring, promotions, drug and alcohol tests or the use of part-time workers. 

Mike Schrimpf of the Republican Governors Association said Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker and other officials were simply following through on their election mandates. 

"Citizens support Republican governors for making the difficult decisions necessary to balance their budgets without raising taxes while also providing state and local governments the flexibility to solve their long-term obligations," he said. "It's what they were elected to do." 

However, three recent national polls—by The Wall Street Journal and NBC News, the New York Times and CBS, and USA Today and the Gallup Organization—each found Americans oppose weakening collective-bargaining rights for unions by a 2-1 count. 

Lily Eskelsen, vice president of the National Education Association teachers union, said the flood of antilabor legislation this year isn't coincidental. 

"Of course this is coordinated," she said. "Who could flip through the channels and not think so? You're going to hear the exact same words" from elected officials across the country. 

Republican National Committee spokeswoman Kirsten Kukowski denied knowing about any coordination among Republicans. 