WARSAW—Polish officials blamed Russian air-traffic controllers for blunders they say contributed to the plane crash that killed Poland's president in Russia last year, amid an intensifying bout of mutual finger-pointing over who is responsible for the tragedy.

Russian controllers at the airport in Smolensk, the destination of the Polish president's flight, failed to react when they noticed his plane was off course and, under pressure from superiors in Moscow, allowed it to attempt a landing even though visibility at the airport was below the minimum safety threshold, Polish investigators said Tuesday.

At a news conference here, the Poles also said Russian meteorologists gave the Polish air crew misleading weather reports shortly before the April crash, which killed President Lech Kaczynski and the other 95 people on board, plunging Poland into mourning and roiling its politics.

The Polish investigators, who plan to release the findings of their probe into the causes of the crash next month, were reacting to a report published last week by the Moscow-based Interstate Aviation Committee, which blamed the Polish pilots, who it said were pushed to land by dignitaries on the plane.

The Russian report made no mention of any actions by controllers that could have contributed to the crash.

The Polish news conference drew an immediate Russian response Tuesday. "The commission analyzed the dispatcher recordings…and the tapes of communications between air-traffic control and the…crew," an investigator with the Interstate Aviation Committee told NTV television.

"We also conducted an independent analysis of how air-traffic control behaved [in the situation]. We found no evidence of any pressure being put on air-traffic control," the investigator said. 

Poland's government has come under increasing pressure from the opposition Law and Justice party of the late Mr. Kaczynski for not taking a tough enough line on the crash with Russia. Since 2008, Poland's prime minister, Donald Tusk, has been trying to mend ties between the two historical rivals.

Warsaw has criticized Moscow for failing to share important information about the crash, including recordings of conversations among air-traffic controllers ahead of the disaster. On Tuesday, Polish Interior Minister Jerzy Miller told reporters the country had made "a knockoff copy" of the recordings.

Mr. Miller declined to say how the copy was made. After the Polish news conference in Warsaw, Russian investigators in Moscow said they would release a full transcript of controllers' conversations.

Controllers at Smolensk had also witnessed two prior attempts by a Russian government plane to land at the airport, both of which were aborted when the Russian crew decided conditions were too dangerous. The controllers didn't tell the pilots of the Polish presidential jet that the Russian plane had decided not to land, the Polish investigators said.

They also said the Russian controllers, after consulting with officials in Moscow, also didn't provide any information about alternate airports where the Polish plane could have landed instead.