Top U.S. financial regulators on Thursday threw more fuel on the raging debate over a controversial Federal Reserve Board rule capping debit-card fees, testifying that they still believe small banks could be hurt by the new limits despite efforts to shield them.

The strongest ammunition for those who are seeking to delay the debit-fee rule came from the Fed chairman himself, whose board has been charged by Congress in last year's financial-overhaul law with writing a rule capping debit-card fees. 

Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke told senators at a hearing that "we're still not sure" whether the exemption for small banks that Congress included in the law will work. Mr. Bernanke added that while he couldn't make a hard-and-fast determination, he believes that "there is good reason to be concerned about it."

And if the carve-out for banks and credit unions with less than $10 billion in assets fails to effectively shield those institutions, the debit-fee rule would reduce the revenue of small banks "and it could result in some smaller banks being less profitable or even failing," Mr. Bernanke said.

Congress included in the financial-overhaul law, known as Dodd-Frank, a mandate that the Fed limit the "swipe fees" banks charge merchants every time a customer uses a debit card to pay for a purchase. The Fed released a draft rule in December that capped the fees that banks can charge at 12 cents a transaction, well below the average 44 cents per transaction banks charge now. The final rule is expected to be somewhat different as many Fed officials seemed unhappy with the draft, but the law is fairly prescriptive and gives the central bank very little flexibility in how they craft the fee limit, experts say.

But small banks and credit unions opposed the measure, despite the carve-out, and have mounted an intense lobbying campaign seeking repeal or delay of the rule.

That effort, backed by the big banks that stand to lose billions of dollars in fees, has gained traction, with lawmakers introducing bills in both chambers to delay the rule and further study its potential impact on small banks and consumers. The delay effort faces tough odds in the Senate, however, since the No. 2 Democrat there—Richard Durbin of Illinois—is the prime champion of the swipe fee rule.

Retailers, who lobbied Congress for years to limit debit card fees, argue that the current fee system isn't competitive and hurts consumers by driving up the cost of goods and services.

In an interview Thursday, Sen. Jon Tester, (D., Mont.) the author of the Senate delay bill said he has the votes to pass it if he can attach it to another bill. "I'm very confident that we're going to get a vote; we've just got to find a vehicle. And, who knows?" Mr. Tester said, adding that to work the vehicle has to be a bill that can pass the Senate. "If we get a vote, it will pass," he said.

The Fed was due to release a final rule implementing the "swipe fee" limits on April 21 but was forced to delay it as officials waded through more than 11,000 comments. Mr. Bernanke has said the central bank will not miss the July 21 deadline for the rule to take effect, which adds urgency to the delay supporters' mission. 

Banks say the proposed cap wouldn't allow them to cover what debit cards cost them and that it would lead them to offer fewer products and charge consumers higher account fees. Small institutions say they are less able to make up for the lost revenue than larger competitors.

Mr. Tester said the debit-fee provision, as currently proposed, would drive business away from community banks and reduce access to financial services in some communities. "And it's going to further consolidate banking to the big boys. This is just bad, bad, bad policy." 

Retailers sought to downplay regulators' statements, pointing to Mr. Bernanke's remark that the Fed has "plenty of information" with which to write the rule.

"Chairman Bernanke's comments confirm that Congress shouldn't insert politics or prejudge the thorough fact-based process the Federal Reserve has conducted," said Doug Kantor, counsel to the Merchants Payments Coalition. He said merchants have said they will honor the small-bank exemption.

Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. Chairman Sheila Bair also reiterated her concerns that the small-bank exemption won't work in practice. She said she believes the Fed should mandate that card networks such as those run by Visa and MasterCard accept a two-tier pricing system, which could help enforce the exemption. "If their view is that there's no legal authority to require that, it does become even more problematic," she said.

Getting hit with the fee cap wouldn't push small banks to failure, Ms. Bair said, "but clearly it would stress them. And if there are other challenges confronting community banking sector, it's probably something they don't need to be dealing with now."

—Luca Di Leo contributed to this article.