MOSCOW—Russia said further cuts in nuclear weapons sought by the U.S. can be achieved only as part of a multinational accord limiting other types of armaments, a position that dims the Obama administration's chances for swift progress toward one of its biggest foreign policy goals.

Under conditions spelled out Thursday by Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov, a new round of talks aimed at slashing Russia's large arsenal of short-range tactical nuclear weapons must involve other nuclear powers and focus as well on conventional warheads and weapons in space.

The statement comes in the wake of the two countries' landmark New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, or New Start. The treaty, a centerpiece of the administration's efforts to "reset" relations with Russia, won U.S. Senate ratification on Dec. 23. Russian lawmakers say they will follow suit this month.

Tommy Vietor, a spokesman for the White House National Security Council, said the administration intends to try to move to talks on tactical nuclear weapons "within one year of the New Start's entry into force." The White House said there is a schedule for talks on missile-defense issues that "will help us advance the broader arms-reduction agenda."

Mr. Lavrov suggested talks on tactical nuclear weapons wouldn't happen quickly. "Before talking about any further steps in the sphere of nuclear disarmament," he cautioned at a news conference, "it's necessary to fulfill the New Start agreement." That process could take years, as the former Cold War enemies shrink their long-range nuclear warheads to a limit of 1,550 each, down from the current ceiling of 2,200.

"Then it will become clear what further steps must be taken to strengthen global security and strategic stability," Mr. Lavrov said. At that point, he added, other nuclear-armed nations must take part and the agenda must include weapons in space, strategic missiles equipped with conventional explosives and other weapons. 

Russia has long sought to draw space-based defense systems into arms-control talks, and the U.S. has long resisted. 

More complicating was Mr. Lavrov's call to draw in other powers—an apparent attempt to bring China into negotiations. The U.S. is engaged in its own discussion with China about its growing military might.

Defense analysts in Moscow said the remarks reflect Russia's reluctance to give up its strength—a large stockpile of tactical nuclear weapons—in the face of superior conventional forces in the West and in China.

Fyodor Lukyanov, editor of Russia in Global Affairs, an influential journal, said Mr. Lavrov's insistence on delaying a new round of talks for years "should not be taken literally." But he said Russia is determined to reshape the agenda. "Russia also needs to compensate for its weakness in conventional forces vis a vis China, in the event of a conflict along that border," Mr. Lukyanov said. "To negotiate about tactical nukes with just the Americans—for Russia it's not relevant any more."

The strategic warheads covered by New Start are designed to be used against cities. Tactical warheads are meant to be used at short range on a battlefield. Russia has a decided advantage in those, with about 2,050, compared with 500 in the active U.S. arsenal. 

Russia needs this edge, Mr. Lavrov said Thursday, because "the balance of forces in Europe has been seriously tilted" with NATO's eastward expansion.

Mr. Lavrov praised the Obama administration's reset of relations. He said the warming ties had brought a "noticeable improvement in the international situation" over the past year. "The most important task in our contacts" with Washington, he added, "is to maintain positive dynamics in our relations."

The White House said it hoped momentum from the strategic agreement will help in working with Russia on issues such as Iran and North Korea's nuclear programs.

 Write to  Richard Boudreaux at richard.boudreaux@wsj.com 