OAK CREEK, Wis.—The fifth round of the fight Kathy and Stephen Scaffidi have been having for weeks started Tuesday evening in this Milwaukee suburb when Chris Larson's name came up.

Mr. Larson isn't an old boyfriend or a drinking buddy, but the couple's state senator. Three weeks ago, he and 13 other Democratic senators fled to Illinois in an effort to prevent Republicans from passing a bill pushed by Gov. Scott Walker to curtail collective-bargaining rights for public union employees.

Ms. Scaffidi, a schoolteacher, considers Mr. Larson a hero. Her husband, a manager at a media-rating company, thinks the senator is a coward.

"How can you be saying what you're saying when you're married to a teacher?" Ms. Scaffidi recalled yelling at her husband in their living room.

"You've got to look at the big picture!" Mr. Scaffidi shouted back.

Adoption of the Republican governor's plan this week doesn't seem likely to ease the tensions built up during the sometimes-bizarre battle over the bill. The fight has polarized not just politics in this state, but families, friends and even doctors' waiting rooms. 

According to a survey by Public Policy Polling of Raleigh, N.C., Mr. Walker has an approval rating of 86% among Republicans in Wisconsin and 8% among Democrats. Nearly three-quarters of voters either strongly approve or strongly disapprove of the governor, say polls from the Wisconsin Policy Research Institute.

A poll this week by Rasmussen Reports found that 57% of people disapproved of the governor's proposal to weaken collective-bargaining rights.

The passions evoked at both ends of the political spectrum are to be expected, said George Lightbourn, president of the Wisconsin Policy Research Institute, a conservative think tank. Mr. Walker is "going about effecting transformational changes, and that's always difficult and challenging."

The disparity might be felt most intensely in the Milwaukee suburbs, where the city's strong Democratic and union culture melds with more conservative, affluent suburbs where Mr. Walker grew up.

Sitting in the Alterra coffee shop this week near Mr. Walker's home in Wauwatosa, Leonard Noll said he hadn't spoken to his older sister since late last year.

Mr. Noll, 53 years old, is an entrepreneur who owns a plastics manufacturing company. His sister is a teacher nearby. He is a millionaire but would gladly trade his cash and property for his sister's pension, he said. "Throw in the health care and you can have my car, motorcycle and boat," Mr. Noll said.

When his sister sent an email to her four siblings and other family members in February asking them to join her in Madison, Wisconsin's capital, to protest Mr. Walker's bill, no one went. The sister didn't return phone calls seeking comment. "I think she feels betrayed that we didn't go," he said, "but we've been having this fight for 30 years."

Carla Goetsch-Arnold, 50, an urban farmer, said she was in her doctor's office reading a Twitter feed from her Democratic representative to her 21-year-old daughter when two other people in the waiting room rolled their eyes.

"They said if the Democrats could get their act together, we wouldn't have to play hardball with them," she said. "I couldn't believe it. We Democrats are polite people, and Republicans are so divisive."

Mr. Goetsch-Arnold said she recently de-friended about 30 Facebook friends because of their views of the Wisconsin situation.

In the newsroom of Third Coast Digest, a Milwaukee website about local arts, culture and politics, arguments between liberals and conservatives have grown so heated that the advertising director sent the publisher an email saying he didn't think he could come to work because he was so angry.

"We have a weekly staff meeting, and I had to let everybody know that not everybody holds the same beliefs," said the publisher, Jon Anne Willow.

A few hundred miles north in Two Rivers, near Green Bay, a student had a T-shirt made at a local shop that said "Scott Walker My Hero" on the front.

The shop owner, former union member David Van Ginkel, said he later received an email from the local teachers union president implying his shop might not get further business from the schools. The union official couldn't be reached.

Mr. Van Ginkel says he told the official he's not partisan, he's just trying to make a living. Since a local newspaper wrote a story about the incident, he says he's received hundreds of orders for the shirt.

"Conservatives are writing in, supporting me,' Mr. Van Ginkel said. "But long term, I'm still not sure how it's going to affect my business."

At the Oak Creek home of the Scaffidis, who have been married for 25 years, Tuesday's argument went on for an hour, with neither spouse giving an inch. They've decided not to watch the evening news together anymore.

"It was just getting too stressful," Ms. Scaffidi said.

 Write to  Douglas Belkin at doug.belkin@wsj.com and Kris Maher at kris.maher@wsj.com 