For a self-confessed foodie with epicurean tendencies, it sounded too good to be true. An acquaintance rang up and whispered that a three-star Michelin chef in Paris was cooking a private dinner featuring ortolan and would I like to be his guest? Since 2007, it has been illegal in France to sell these highly prized small songbirds, though it is still permissible to eat them. My immediate response was, if it was good enough for Roman emperors, François Mitterrand and Gigi (the fictionalized film courtesan), it was fine with me. 

Many cultures and religions have taboo foods, ranging from pigs to shark fins, but in France, the ortolan is the supreme contradiction—some consider it to be the soul of France, while others believe it to be far more wicked than the consumption of foie gras. There is a mystique about eating ortolan that is greater than any other culinary delicacy. The folklore was only enhanced by Mitterrand having them at, literally, his last supper, on New Year's Eve 1995. According to guests who were present, the ailing French president munched through several with a look of ecstasy on his face and then ate nothing more before his death eight days later. 

The traditional way to consume ortolan is to capture them with nets, fatten them up in a darkened space, drown them in Armagnac, then roast and consume them whole, bones and all, while your head is covered by a large napkin. Some say this was necessary to avoid the wrath of God, others put it down to the pleasure of capturing the aromas, while still others say it was necessary because it is such a disgusting spectacle.

Detailed accounts have survived since antiquity of the gourmet delights of eating songbirds of every description, with the Roman voluptuary Lucullus consuming them while dining within his aviary. For important feasts in the ancient world, it wasn't uncommon for up to 5,000 ortolan, thrushes and larks to be served at one sitting. Certainly the tradition of consuming these birds seems to have gone on uninterrupted until the modern era. Guillaume Tirel, the great chef who published the first French recipe collection in the 14th century, mentions dishes including ortolan, while La Varenne, the 17th-century chef, unaccountably stipulates that ortolan can be eaten at any time of the year except between the festival of St. Remy and Lent. Their praises weren't confined to decadent French gourmets—a character in 19th-century British Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli's novel "The Young Duke" goes into raptures about ortolan: "What a flavour! How peculiar! ... All paradise opens! Let me die eating ortolans to the sound of soft music!" In the modern era, Georges Auguste Escoffier lists 41 recipes in his magnum opus, "Le Guide Culinaire," for ortolan, thrushes and larks, plus 36 purely for woodcock, which are also now banned in France.

The pressure in France for a ban on netting ortolan had been growing for some time, with laws passed in 1999 to outlaw the sale of ortolan, though they were only put on the statute book in 2007. The ban was a result of the growing scarcity of the birds in France rather than the morality of eating them; some experts say there are approximately 30,000 trapped and eaten annually from a migratory population of around a quarter of a million. They aren't considered to be endangered internationally, however, as there are estimated to be around 10 million world-wide.

But back to my own quest. After I was invited to the meal in Paris, happening that evening in the private room of a famous restaurant, I rushed to Eurostar and made it with minutes to spare, only to find the maître d' look completely puzzled when I tried to say what the appointment was without actually spelling it out in the jammed foyer. The great chef himself came to reception and was equally flummoxed until I handed him six woodcock that I had brought from London as a present. Then he understood and led me to the private room, where the meal proceeded with the chef's numerous specialities until the main dish arrived. It was first shown to us on a platter of mashed potatoes and large cloves of garlic, with some roasted birds not much larger than a hen's egg and others looking like miniature quail. I was mildly disappointed not to see any large napkins, but entered into the spirit of the occasion, which occurred in total silence except for the sound of crunching bones. The taste was sweet and subtle, with an undertone of game liver, as the birds aren't gutted before roasting. But the underlying memory is of the considerable exertion; it felt as if one's mouth was being taken to the gym for a work out, as it took several minutes to munch through all of the bones. The bruising in my mouth lingered far longer than the taste. Interestingly, the host, a French manufacturer of famous kitchenware, drew the line at swallowing the bones and left what looked like a pile of toothpicks on the side of his plate.

I hadn't expected to see the next dish, which was of my woodcock, as it was a gift to the chef. He was more delighted than I expected at my offering, as they too are on the proscribed list in France —though, again, it is perfectly legal to eat rather than pay for them. For me, they were the highlight of the evening, with their curious "wet hay" aroma and, of course, the unique taste of the innards on toast with a small amount of foie gras. The event was over by midnight and we thanked everyone profusely for a fascinating evening. It was only upon departure that the host sheepishly disclosed that he hadn't been able to source any ortolan, so we had in fact been eating les mauviettes. When I asked for a more specific translation, it turned out that they were grives and l'alouettes—in plain English, thrushes and larks.

I can't say that I felt especially proud to have eaten such creatures, particularly as the culinary rewards were, to my mind at least, anything but ethereal. I later discovered that these days ortolan cost around €200 apiece. It remains an experience I would like to encounter, but I now know that Horace's quote "Nil melius turdo" (nothing better than a thrush) will remain true—but for their company rather than their carcass.

 Write to  Bruce Palling at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 