 Bank of Japan doubled the size of its asset-purchase program and poured over $183 billion into money markets to ease liquidity concerns to temper the economic blow from the earthquake, tsunami and nuclear emergency that hit the country.  

 Investors dumped Japanese shares, sending Tokyo's main index down 6.2%, its biggest drop in more than two years, as the nation struggled with quake-related destruction, thousands of deaths, a nuclear crisis and billions of dollars in insurance losses. U.S. stocks fell to their lowest level in six weeks.  

 The yen rose against the dollar as the Bank of Japan provided a massive dose of liquidity and further loosened its monetary policy in the wake of last week's devastating earthquake and tsunami.  

 Economic disruptions from Japan's disaster are expected to further muddle Asia's economic picture at a time when countries are already struggling with higher oil and food prices.  

 KDDI, Pacific Crossing and other telecom operators were scrambling to repair quake-damaged undersea cables.  

 Global technology firms face possible component shortages and higher prices in the weeks ahead due to the recent disruption of high-tech manufacturing in Japan.  

 Japanese auto makers extended halts in domestic production at least through Wednesday as they deal with supply shortages, damaged facilities and power outages.  

 Immelt said GE will offer technical assistance to its nuclear-energy joint-venture partner Hitachi and Japan's government. Separately, GE will invest an initial $50 million to build a factory in India.  

 China ordered 50 to 100 new container, tanker and dry bulk ships, under a deal financed by a private-equity consortium led by the Carlyle.  

 Banks in China reined in new lending more sharply than expected in February, while money-supply growth slowed. Economists say that may mean extra measures to cool the economy aren't needed for now.  

 Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway agreed to buy specialty-chemicals company Lubrizol for about $9 billion in cash.  

 Renault will apologize to three executives it fired for allegedly leaking proprietary information, saying an investigation by French authorities found no evidence of wrongdoing.  

 China Everbright hired bankers for a Hong Kong IPO,and other firms are moving toward offerings as well, even as market turbulence forced some to pull back.  

 Ping An Insurance will raise $2.5 billion by is selling a 3.4% stake to a firm controlled by Hong Kong tycoon Cheng Yu-tung in an effort to strengthen its capital base.  

 San Miguel's profit fell 65% last year from a record result in 2009, when the Philippine group realized an extraordinary gain from the sale of a stake in its beer-brewing unit.  

 India's Reliance Capital is selling a 26% stake in its life-insurance unit to Japan's Nippon Life Insurance.  

 Bahrain's Batelco and Saudi Arabia's Kingdom Holding made a joint $950 million bid to acquire the Saudi operations of Zain, a Kuwaiti telecommunications company.  

 Morgan Stanley's Asia CEO, Owen Thomas, is returning to the U.S. His successor hasn't been named.  

 Saudi troops arrived in Bahrain to help quell protests amid sectarian tensions and the threat of spreading Iranian influence.  

 Forces loyal to Gadhafi pressed their offensive further into eastern Libya, with reports of warplane strikes in the rebel-held city of Ajdabiya and a push on the ground toward the rebels' de facto capital city of Benghazi.  

 A Pakistan high court declined to decide whether a CIA contractor held for killing two armed men is covered by diplomatic immunity, saying a separate court hearing a murder case against the contractor would rule on the issue.  

Fighters backing Ivory Coast's President-elect Alassane Ouattara pushed into strongholds of Laurent Gbagbo, the incumbent who has been resisting efforts to dislodge him.

Niger's veteran opposition leader Mahamadou Issoufou won the nation's presidential run-off election, according to final provisional results announced by the electoral commission Monday.