Everything was going so well for Eric Chavez. Too well, it turns out.

Wednesday afternoon, Chavez was reflecting on the productive first months of his New York Yankee experience after a decade in Oakland as a star, followed by a stint as an injury-wracked disappointment.

As he weighed retirement this winter, then decided between playing for his home-state Los Angeles Dodgers or the Yankees, he said his wife Alex told him to step outside his comfort zone and go to New York.

"My wife was the one who pushed for going to New York and trying something different. I kinda owe her for that one," Chavez said with a grin.

Healthy and happy for the first time in five years, Chavez had become a comeback story that seemed too good to be true.

But that was before Thursday's 6-3 loss to the Tigers in Detroit. 

In the lineup in place of Alex Rodriguez, Chavez hammered a ball to right-center that sliced away from diving Tiger it centerfielder Don Kelly. It caromed against the wall as Chavez rounded second base, on his way to his first triple since 2007.

Then it all came apart.

As he chugged around second, Chavez suddenly pulled up lame, pointing to his left foot as he stopped at third base.

He limped off the field with the help of team trainers, and soon the diagnosis came back— a fractured metatarsal, the mid-foot bone that connects to the little toe. The fracture is small, but Chavez is assured of a trip to the disabled list regardless, and his timetable for returning is unclear.

"I felt bad for him. He's been through these injuries, and as well as he's been playing, it's frustrating," Yankees manager Joe Girardi said.

Chavez was once a 30-homer, Gold Glove third baseman for Oakland, but persistent shoulder and back injuries put his career on life support.

 He nearly retired this winter, but came to the Yankees as a long shot to make the roster and won the backup corner infielder's job with an excellent spring training. 

He was hitting .303 with two doubles, Thursday's triple, and a .410 on-base percentage when he broke his foot.

"You work so hard to get back, and you come back from surgeries, and to have something bad like this happen on a positive play, where you hit a triple, it's tough," Girardi said of Chavez, who flew back to New York for further examinations without speaking to reporters.

As Chavez limped off the field, Rodriguez came on to replace him and scored the second Yankee run. But it was all downhill from there for New York, which lost its third straight game for the first time this season.

They did it on a day when A.J. Burnett showed just how maddeningly good—and mystifyingly inconsistent—he can be.

Burnett hit the first batter of the game, Detroit's Don Kelly, then threw away a pickoff attempt to allow Kelly to reach third. After a sacrifice fly, it was 1-0, Detroit.

Burnett clamped down, in a big way. He threw five no-hit innings before weak-hitting Ramon Santiago lined a single for the first Tiger hit in the sixth.

He eventually came unraveled, but he had help, in the form of Derek Jeter's backup, Eduardo Nunez, who threw away an-inning ending grounder that allowed two runs to score.

After the game, the Yankee clubhouse was somber, as much for the loss of the popular Chavez as for the losing streak.

Nick Swisher, who played with Chavez in Oakland, said his friend's latest injury was the unfairest break of all.

"He's meant so much to this team just for the time that he's been here. Just the splash that he's made in New York, I couldn't be more happy for him, more proud of him from the way he's handled everything," Swisher said.