Congressional debate on the proposed South Korea free trade deal could begin as soon as March, now that the final, legal language of the agreement is set, people familiar with the process said Thursday.

The agreement, which includes supplemental legal language on auto tariffs, will be released to the public next month. President Barack Obama is expected to send the pact to Congress for ratification soon afterward.

U.S. and Korean negotiators agreed in December on limited revisions to the trade pact, originally agreed in 2007. The most important change would allow the U.S. five years to phase out a 2.5% tariff it levies on South Korean-built cars, rather than cutting the tariff immediately, as provided for in the original pact struck in 2007. 

Once the deal reaches Congress, it will be debated not only on its merit, but on its timing in relation to other pending trade agreements with Colombia and Panama, congressional sources say. While the White House has put most of its effort into the Korea deal, some Republican leaders are pushing for faster action on those smaller pacts, particularly with Colombia. 

Pro-trade congressional leaders may insist that debate of the Korea pact be coupled with moves to expedite the Colombia deal, though those discussions are still under way and nothing has been decided. 

Senate Finance Committee Chairman Max Baucus (D., Mont.) said Thursday that he and a delegation of business leaders will travel to Colombia and Brazil the week of Feb. 20 to meet with senior government officials in both countries about trade issues, including the Colombia Free Trade Agreement and the Doha Round of World Trade Organization negotiations. 

"Colombia is our largest agricultural market in South America and contains huge opportunities for U.S. agriculture, manufacturing and services...Now is the time to resolve outstanding issues," Mr. Baucus said Thursday. 

The senator remains unhappy that the Korea agreement fails to address Korea's ban on sales of beef from cattle older than 30 months, a ban put in place after mad cow disease was found in the U.S. Several years ago.

"Korea needs to commit to a process to fully open its market and remove remaining unscientific barriers to 100% safe American beef," Mr. Baucus said.

 After Mr. Obama's State of the Union address Tuesday, some Republicans expressed dismay that he didn't voice stronger support for fast passage of pending trade deals. 

"I am disappointed by the lack of an action plan or commitment to move the long-stalled Colombia and Panama trade agreements," Rep. Dave Camp (R., Mich.), Chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, said in a statement. Ways and Means is the House panel with jurisdiction over trade. 

"We should address each of the three trade agreements in the next six months … If the U.S. fails to implement our own trade agreements with Colombia, Panama and South Korea, we will only lose ground to our foreign competitors and jeopardize U.S. job creation."

U.S. and Korean negotiators want Congress to pass the Korea agreement before Korea's FTA with the European Union enters into force July 1, to avoid losing market share to European exporters. 

 Write to  Elizabeth Williamson at elizabeth.williamson@wsj.com 