 Renault this week is expected to start the dismissal process for at least one of the three managers it suspended for allegedly divulging secrets about the auto maker's electric car program to an organized international network. In a newspaper interview, Renault's chief operating officer, Patrick Pelata, said the information disclosed by the three managers concerned "vehicle architecture, and…the costs and economic model of our vehicle program." 

U.K. new-car registrations in 2010 rose 1.8% from 2009, but are expected to shrink 5% this year as tough market conditions persist, a trade group said. The Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders forecast that new-car registrations in the U.K. in 2011 will slip to 1.93 million vehicles from 2.03 million vehicles in 2010. 

Ford and retailer Best Buy will partner to install household charging stations for the new Focus Electric cars being launched in the U.S. later this year. The partnership with Best Buy will help facilitate the adoption of electric cars by evaluating homes, working with electricians on permitting issues and installing the units. The retailer will also handle warranty and repair claims for the unit. 

 J.P. Morgan Chase executives say the firm's newly approved securities venture in mainland China is the latest piece in its growing Asia-Pacific platform and a critical part of a push to globalize the U.S. bank. The joint venture, approved by China's securities regulator last week, will allow the Wall Street bank to underwrite stocks and bonds in mainland China. 

The highest court in Massachusetts ruled against Wells Fargo and U.S. Bancorp in two foreclosure cases that cast doubt over whether some home loans were properly handled when packaged into securitizations. Justices in the state's Supreme Judicial Court upheld a lower court's decision to void foreclosure sales of two homes in Springfield, because owners of the loans couldn't prove that the mortgages had been assigned to them. 

German savings and regional banks have in principle agreed on a deal under which savings banks can acquire the remaining 50% of DekaBank, currently owned by regional banks. DekaBank, which is worth about €4.5 billion ($5.8 billion), is 50-50 owned by savings bank associations and Landesbanken, which are regional banks controlled by German states. 

Resona Holdings said it will issue about 1.24 billion in common shares to raise about $7.2 billion as it strives to repay the public funds it borrowed. The share issuance is the Japanese bank's first public share offering since it was effectively nationalized in 2003. Of the shares to be issued, 479 million will be sold to overseas investors. 

Two Chinese banks —Agricultural Bank of China and China Minsheng Banking Corp.—are planning to raise as much as US$11 billion from the domestic capital market, as China's lenders gear up to meet stricter capital rules amid mounting concerns about bad loans.

Air Products & Chemicals extended the expiration date of its $70-per-share offer to purchase smaller rival Airgas, saying as of the stock market's close on Thursday, shareholders validly tendered 3 million shares. The takeover bid of almost $5.9 billion is now scheduled to expire on Feb. 4 at midnight New York City time, unless further extended. 

KB Home, one of the largest home builders in the U.S., reported an 83% slide in fourth-quarter profit to $17.4 million, but generated pretax earnings for the first time in almost four years as it trimmed expenses. 

 Alyeska, the company that operates the Trans Alaska Pipeline, has told operators on the North Slope to reduce crude production by 95% after an oil leak was discovered at one of their pump stations. The order is a big blow for BP, the largest oil producer in Alaska. The North Slope currently produces about 630,000 barrels of oil per day, with BP accounting for almost two thirds of that. 

 The U.S. government is auditioning bankers this week to manage a public offering of a chunk of its majority stake in insurer AIG, according to people familiar with the matter. Treasury and AIG officials plan initially to meet with representatives of 10 banks that are looking to play a role in the stock offering, people familiar with the matter said.  

 Carlyle Group is seeking to raise as much as US$1.79 billion by selling part of its stake in China Pacific Insurance (Group), according to a term sheet, its second sale of the company's shares in two weeks. The move would allow the U.S. private equity firm to reap returns from one of its most lucrative investments.  

Delta Lloyd Asset Management, a shareholder in takeover target Draka Holding, will wait as long as possible to tender its shares to acquirer Prysmian, saying that it doesn't completely rule out a surprise counterbid for the Dutch cablemaker. If no other offer is made for Draka during the tender period that ends Feb. 3, Delta Lloyd will tender its shares, which represents 2%-3% of total shares outstanding. 

NYSE Euronext Amsterdam is looking to boost its role in the Dutch economy, and pushing hard for new listings—particularly those of small and midsize businesses—is a key way of doing it, the new chief of the global exchange's Dutch operations said.

 Sanofi-Aventis and Genzyme are discussing ways to assemble a deal that would eventually value the biotechnology firm at about $80 per share, people familiar with the matter said. The figure includes a structure known as a contingent value right, which is often used when buyers and sellers can't agree on a purchase price and usually kicks in after an acquired company meets sales or regulatory targets.  

U.S. regulators have postponed by three months a decision on whether to approve AstraZeneca experimental thyroid cancer pill vandetanib, because they need more time to evaluate it, the U.K. drug maker said. AstraZeneca wants vandetanib approved in the U.S. for treating patients there with non-operable metastatic medullary thyroid cancer. 

Novartis said it has gained a new indication from the European Commission for its eye medicine Lucentis to treat patients with vision loss linked to diabetes. Lucentis, which is already on the market to treat age-related vision impairments, is one of Novartis's fastest growing drugs, with sales rising more than 20% in the third quarter. 

 Capital Shopping Centres Group, in its latest attempt to fend off a takeover offer from U.S. shopping mall operator Simon Property Group, said its potential value is much higher than the £3 billion ($4.66 billion) Simon Property is offering for it.  

 Tesco said it will appoint a separate board to lead its U.K. operations when incoming Chief Executive Philip Clarke takes the helm in March. Under Clarke's plans for the U.K., the new board will report to U.K. Chief Executive Richard Brasher, who also sits on the main board.  

 Nintendo's chief executive said a recent warning against young children playing the new three-dimensional hand-held gaming device "is not saying the product is dangerous," but rather, a precaution to fully inform customers and fend off possible litigation. 

 Verizon Wireless, the U.S.'s largest wireless carrier, will announce Tuesday it's getting Apple's iPhone, people familiar with the matter said. The phone will make its way to company stores around the end of January, a person familiar with the matter said. 

 Smartphone users are three times more vulnerable to email phishing scams than users accessing email and Web via a PC, according to some timely research by Tel Aviv-based internet security firm Trusteer. 

 Television makers are turning online to videogames as another way to incorporate Web-delivered entertainment. Many manufacturers are forming partnerships to play videogames on the TV without the need for a dedicated game console, and courting developers to create apps for the TV. 

 Duke Energy is close to a deal to buy Progress Energy in an all-stock merger that would value its smaller U.S. rival at more than $13 billion, people familiar with the matter said. 