 (Best of the Tube this weekend: We're discussing the Tucson massacre and its aftermath on "The Journal Editorial Report," Saturday at 2 and 11 p.m. ET on Fox News Channel, and "Fareed Zakaria GPS," Sunday at 10 a.m. and 1 p.m. ET on CNN. Now for the bad news: no column Monday, Martin Luther King Day.)  

Back in the 1960s, who'd have imagined that a septuagenarian white sheriff from Arizona with a hostility to free speech would one day become a hero to the left?

The other day we observed that Democratic politicians have, for the most part, behaved far better in the wake of the Tucson massacre than has the formerly mainstream media led by the New York Times. One notable exception, however, is Clarence Dupnik, the elected sheriff of Pima County, Ariz.

Dupnik, who has held office since 1980 has identified a wide range of suspects in the attempted assassination of Rep. Gabrielle Giffords. One of them is Jared Loughner. He named another in an interview with ABC News: 

Loughner was arrested at the scene and charged with the crime. Limbaugh is described as a white male approximately 60 years of age, of average height and stocky build and possessing a "radio voice." He is still at large.

But wait. The same ABC report made clear that Dupnik's "opinion" was speculative fantasy at best: "Investigators have yet to determine what motivated 22-year-old Jared Lee Loughner. . . . So far there is no evidence that he has any ties to any political group."

Dupnik made multiple statements drawing connections between conservative "rhetoric" and Saturday's crime. But on Wednesday, as MediaBistro.com notes, ABC aired an interview with Zach Osler, a friend of Loughner, whose comments raise further doubt about Limbaugh's guilt. "He did not watch TV," Osler said of Loughner. "He disliked the news. He didn't listen to political radio. He didn't take sides. He wasn't on the left. He wasn't on the right."

So what's going on here? At a time when most politicians were behaving responsibly, why was Sheriff Dupnik speaking with a reckless disregard for the truth that better befits a New York Times editorialist than a law-enforcement professional?

 James Taranto on Sheriff Dupnik. 

Perhaps, like the Times, Dupnik has his own institutional interest in a distracting "debate" about the guilt of parties who have nothing to do with the crime. The Arizona Republic reported Wednesday that Dupnik's department was "refusing to release a wide range of public documents about the man charged in Saturday's shooting rampage that left six dead and more than a dozen wounded." Later that day, the Republic reported, the department relented and released "12 sets of incident reports" about police calls to the Loughner home or Jared Loughner's high school.

Tucson blogger James Kelley writes: "Anyone in Law Enforcement or Mental Health in Pima County that ever had contact with Mr. Loughner is now in bunker mode. Everyone is afraid of lawsuits down the road. They are evaluating their behavior and checking to make sure they followed all rules governing the care of Jared Loughner. . . . It is my sincere hope that transparency in the investigation will prevail." Amen.

It's quite possible that Dupnik simply enjoys shooting off his mouth. He was known to do so before Saturday, albeit to considerably less attention from the national press. (We suppose we should note that in May he contributed an op-ed piece to The Wall Street Journal opposing Arizona's immigration law.) But journalists and Arizona lawmakers ought to be pushing for full disclosure of information about Loughner's previous contacts with the Sheriff's Department and other local agencies.

As sheriff, Dupnik knew, or should have known, that his claims about political "rhetoric" having played a role in the shooting were not supported, and perhaps were disproved, by the facts of the investigation. Of themselves, the statements that have made him a hero to some on the left constitute professional negligence.

  Shorter Paul Krugman   Uh-oh, Obama's talking about me! 

  An Actual Case of Violence   MSNBC's Lawrence O'Donnell has come up with an actual example of the "violent rhetoric" we've been hearing so much about. O'Donnell showed a video Wednesday on "The Last Word," which depicts an election-night incident in San Diego that was reported at the time in the Southwestern College Sun:

The video, difficult to watch, is considerably more menacing than this written account. It should be noted that spitting and punching cross the line from speech to physical assault, and that some of the Popaditch supporters' speech might well be prosecutable as fighting words, threats or incitement.

There's a world of difference between a politician's exhortation to "fight" and the incitement of an actual fight. Popaditch and his supporters' intolerable conduct puts into perspective the prissy plaints about mere metaphors.

  Honorary Terrorist   If the only tool you have is a hammer, every problem looks like a nail. For Peter Beinart, Saturday's murders looked like an opportunity to make a point about Islam--a subject that had as much to do with the crime as Rush Limbaugh and Sarah Palin put together, which is to say zilch.

Beinart wants to declare suspect Jared Loughner an honorary terrorist:

Well, we can think of any number of examples of "white Americans" who committed acts of terrorism: Timothy McVeigh, Ted Kaczynski, Eric Rudolph, Scott Roeder. For that matter, Beinart's contraposition of white and Muslim is bizarre and ignorant. What about John Lindh and Adam Gadahn, both white, both Muslim, both of whom joined up with America's enemies?

But "terrorist" is not a synonym for "mass murderer." Jared Loughner is charged with being the latter, but he is not the former unless--contrary to all available evidence--he turns out to have been politically motivated.

Whereas Beinart wants to declare Loughner an honorary terrorist, Dean Obeidallah, "an award-winning Arab-American comedian," takes precisely the opposite approach, in a CNN.com essay titled "What if Jared Loughner Were a Muslim?":

Even Secretary of State Hillary Clinton is falsely equating the Saturday killings with terrorism, as Politico reports:

The conservative magazine Human Events the other day carried a piece with almost the same headline as Obeidallah's CNN essay: "What if Jared Loughner Was Muslim?" (As an aside, CNN's grammar is superior. Since Loughner isn't Muslim, this calls for the subjunctive mood, not the indicative.) The writer, Tony Lee, contrasts the media's hypercaution about assuming a political or religious motive in the Fort Hood massacre with its reckless speculation about a Tea Party or Sarah Palin connection to the Tucson one.

It's a fine point, but it doesn't go far enough. Imagine if, in the hours immediately following the Tucson crime, journalists had speculated wildly that it was the work of a Muslim terrorist--and if they had continued insinuating that it was connected to Islam and was an appropriate occasion for a debate on Islamic extremism even after the facts became known. 

Such an approach would be shameful and scurrilous, notwithstanding that Islamic extremism is a real problem. The media's actual conduct vis-à-vis conservatives has been no less shameful or scurrilous.

 Can We Say Sarah Palin Got Swiftboated?  Further evidence of the phoniness of those complaining about Sarah Palin's reference to "blood libel" came on MSNBC's "Hardball" last night, as host Chris Matthews and Newsweek's Jonathan Alter waxed indignant (transcript from Factiva):

First, "going nuclear"? Aren't we supposed to be toning down our rhetoric? Second, as bad as the blood libel is, are Matthews and Alter really unable to think of worse things that have been done to Jews?

 NewsBusters.org, however, notes that on Dec. 19, 2000, Matthews and guest Jack Kemp were discussing an NAACP Voter Fund campaign ad "basically blaming [George W.] Bush for the James Byrd horror story," a brutal racist murder that occurred during Bush's tenure as Texas governor. Matthews raised no objection to Kemp's description of it as "a brutal, brutal ad hominem blood libel ad against George W. Bush."

NewsBusters also quotes MSNBC contributor Mike Barnicle as saying in 2006 on the network's "Scarborough Country": "The problem for Kerry here is that two years ago, Joe, he did not talk like that when he was undergoing a blood libel by the Swift Boat people."

Speaking of Kerry, AltTransport.com reports that on Tuesday he "said in a speech at the left-leaning policy think tank Center for American Progress that working in a bipartisan manner on infrastructure and clean energy could help overcome the 'divisive political rhetoric' in the wake of the Tucson tragedy."

This is far from the crassest thing anyone has said over the past week, but it's pretty damn crass, and it's reason to feel relieved that George W. Bush won the 2004 election. Can anyone imagine a President Kerry rising to the occasion the way Barack Obama did Wednesday night?

  A Decent Country   Our praise for the president's speech prompted this email from a reader:

Here's another way of looking at it: Americans can be grateful to live in a country where we are able, most of the time, to take decency for granted. It has not been always or everywhere so. Like sense, decency is not cheap even when it is common.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Taylor Dinerman, T. Young, Abe Beyda, Ethel Fenig, Chris Moran, Michele Schiesser, Daniel Goldstein, John Bobek, Jeanie Ribble, Jeff Dobbe, Greg Clapp, Joe Perez, Ed Lasky, Dan Pawlak, Darin Zimmerman, David Gerstman, Daniel Lepanto, Michael Savitz, Nick Weir and Andy McGill. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)