NEW YORK—U.S. stocks charged higher, sending blue-chip shares up by the most in three months, as a strong reading on employment and a drop in the price of oil helped investors breathe a sigh of relief.

The Dow Jones Industrial Average climbed 191.40 points, or 1.6%, to 12258.20, its biggest gain since Dec. 1. Leading the blue chips were more than 3% gains in  Caterpillar, Bank of America and  Boeing. Industrial and financial companies led the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index up 22.53 points, or 1.7%, to 1330.97, also posting its best session since the beginning of December. The Nasdaq Composite added 50.67 points, or 1.8%, to 2798.74.

The Dow and S&P 500 gained for the fourth time in five days after Wall Street received good news ahead of Friday's closely watched payrolls report. The Labor Department reported on Thursday that the number of workers filing new unemployment claims unexpectedly fell to the lowest level since May 2008, raising hopes for a sustained improvement in U.S. employment. 

"The U.S. labor market is picking up decisively, and it isn't just coming from claims," Jim O'Sullivan, chief economist at MF Global, said. "It's likely just a matter of time before the pickup becomes more apparent in the payrolls data."

A retreat in oil prices beneath $102 also assuaged nervous investors. Crude futures headed lower with reports that Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi had accepted a plan to mediate the conflict with rebel groups, though it was unclear how feasible the plan was. The market seemed more confident that developments in the Middle East and North Africa wouldn't crunch oil supplies,  Joseph Greco, managing director at Meridian Equity Partners, said. "It gave people more ammo to get into equities," he said.

Stocks also got a bump after the euro slid following European Central Bank President  Jean-Claude Trichet's comment that the central bank could raise interest rates next month for the first time since the worst of the financial crisis in 2008.

"The saying is, 'In the land of the blind, the one-eyed man is king,'" said  Robert Phipps, a portfolio manager at Per Stirling Capital Management in Austin, Texas. The U.S. has served as the preferable "one-eyed man" among investors' options around the globe, he said, and stocks' gains Thursday reflected the view that the U.S. market could keep attracting investors. 

Tensions in the Middle East and North Africa continued to simmer despite investors' more sanguine view on Libya. In that violence-wracked country, a heavy military presence could be seen outside the important oil city rebel-held city of Zawiya on Thursday, where the government kept hold of the country's second-largest refinery. Earlier, Libyan war planes struck the rebel-held oil port in the eastern town of Marsa el-Brega, as pro-Gadhafi forces fought rebels for control of another strategic oil installation. 

Among stocks in focus,  Amylin Pharmaceuticals tumbled more than 25% and  Alkermes fell 11% after an investigational drug to treat Type 2 diabetes failed to meet primary endpoints in a 26-week study.  Eli Lilly, a third co-developer, gained 0.3%.

February retail sales showed strength, and high-end department stores continued to perform well. Shares in  Saks gained 3.8%, and  Nordstrom added 0.9% as sales topped Wall Street's expectations.

Among other retailers,  Zumiez said late Wednesday that its February same-store sales jumped 12.8%, comfortably outpacing the 4.2% consensus forecast and helping its shares rise 5.6%.  Hot Topic posted a smaller-than-expected drop, and its shares rose 5.9%.

  US Airways Group shares rose 4.9% after the company said traffic rose 4.5% in February from a year earlier amid an "exceptionally strong" demand environment.

  News Corp. rose 1.9% after the U.K. government gave it the green light to buy the 61% of  British Sky Broadcasting Group it doesn't already own, on the condition that it spins off the satellite broadcaster's news channel. News Corp. is the owner of The Wall Street Journal.

Budget retailer  Big Lots reported fourth-quarter earnings of $1.46 a share, up from $1.27 a share in the year-earlier period and ahead of the $1.38 consensus forecast. Its shares added 3.6%.

 Write to  Brendan Conway at brendan.conway@dowjones.com 