Something curious happened on the way to the great bond selloff. It didn't happen. At least not yet.

Over the past 10 years as stock markets struggled to do much more than mark ground, bonds put in boffo performance. Bond values steadily moved higher amid a climate of falling interest rates, disinflation and moderate growth. This "great moderation" made central bankers -- those charged with fighting inflation -- into demigods.

Bonds 101: It's not so easy to understand, but bond investors like the low or falling interest rates we have seen for most of the last decade. That's because existing bonds become more valuable if interest rates fall. So if you hold a $1,000 bond that pays 6% when new bonds pay just 4%, your bond is going to be worth a great deal more if you sell it. Likewise, when interest rates start to rise on new bonds, the market value of existing bonds falls.

Then when the financial crisis struck in late 2008, interest rates went to near zero, and bonds became even more popular. But by mid-2010, interest in bonds had become so intense that commentators started talking about a bond bubble. When the yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury bond fell to 2.8% in October, the view took hold that bonds had either become too expensive or were pricing in an economic calamity of near apocalyptic proportions.

Since then, bonds have had a tumultuous ride, but many bond funds haven't experienced the mass selloff that had been forecast. Yes, money has poured into equity funds -- almost $32 billion in the first seven weeks of the year. At the same time, bond funds have seen outflows of just $353 million.

Over the past few weeks, bond funds have received a fillip from the crises in the Middle East and North Africa. With governments falling in Egypt and Tunisia and teetering in oil-rich Libya, and civil unrest stretching from Morocco to Bahrain, the safety of bonds has once again become attractive. Moreover, spiking oil prices have raised worries about the global recovery. If oil prices remain high, economic growth could peter out, which would be a boon for bond bulls who feast on slow or declining growth and the reduced inflationary pressures that come with it.

Of course, spiking energy prices could lead to inflation, which bond investors hate since it erodes the value of a bond over time. But for the most part, bond investors have taken a more sanguine view. While yields have risen, they remain at historically low levels, which has helped support bond funds. Many economists believe the high unemployment rate in the U.S. and much of Western Europe will make it challenging for inflation to really take hold. That's one reason that short-term interest rates have remained at record low levels.

The resilience among bond funds varies. For instance, municipal-bond funds took a bath in late 2010 amid rising worries of possible bond defaults. More recently, however, the muni-bond sector has recovered. The iShares S&P National AMT Free Muni exchange-traded fund (MUB) has bounced from a low of $96 reached in mid-January to trade above $100. It is closing in on its pre-worry level of $106 to $107.

Among taxable bonds, high-yield bonds had a torrid year in 2010 and remain strong into 2011. Junk bonds "continue to be on fire and people are grabbing for yield and it is overheating," said RBC research in a recent note. "Watch this market. When it slows, then the [most volatile] corporate bonds will be sold."

The Dreyfus High Yield Strategies closed-end fund (DHF) is up 34% over the past year and the  Neuberger Berman High Yield Strategies closed-end fund (NHS) has gained 28% over the same period. Both are off to solid starts in the new year.

Meantime, corporate bonds, especially those closer to junk status, also are performing strongly, with a number of funds that focus on these bonds performing well. The  John Hancock Sovereign Bond fund (JHNBX), which has about 60% of its holdings in corporate bonds, is up 11.78% in the past year and 1.7% year-to-date. The Vanguard Long-Term Investment Grade fund (VWESX), which has about 90% of its holdings in corporate bonds, is up 9.85% in the past year and 0.23% year-to-date.

Other funds that are off to a solid start this year include "go anywhere" bond funds. These funds can invest in a wide range of bonds, including those issued overseas. The Pimco Unconstrained Bond fund (PUBAX) is up 0.71% so far this year and 4.2% over the past year. Pimco's Harbor Unconstrained Bond fund (HAUBX), which launched last April, is up 0.3% year-to-date.

One area that has struggled to get much momentum in bondland: Treasury funds. The Columbia U.S. Treasury Index fund (LUTAX) is up 3.4% over the past year, but down 0.4% year-to-date.

Even though bond funds have proven surprisingly resilient, most economists expect interest rates to rise in the coming year, which will make bond investing increasingly tough. Despite gaining some ground in the past several months, most bond funds are underperforming the stock market. Instead of a big selloff, maybe bonds will retreat in a more orderly manner.

—Dave Kansas is The Journal's chief markets commentator in New York. Blog: blogs.wsj.com/marketbeat Email: dave.kansas@wsj.com 