The body of al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden was buried at sea on Monday just hours after the terrorist leader was killed in a U.S. Special Forces operation in Pakistan, culminating more than a decade of often-frustrated efforts to hunt down the man who oversaw the largest terrorist attack in American history.

U.S. President Barack Obama announced that U.S. troops killed the terrorist leader after the U.S. learned of his location in a mansion in Abbottabad, roughly 65 kilometers outside the capital city of Islamabad. 

An initial DNA analysis showed a "virtually 100%" match of the body against DNA of several bin Laden family members, a senior U.S. intelligence official said.

 Governments around the world warned against complacency in fighting terrorism and prepared for the chance of retaliatory attacks in the wake of bin Laden's death. From Africa and Southeast Asia to Europe, officials said they were watching out for potential reprisals from Islamist terrorists intent on avenging his killing.  

Officials in Southeast Asia—a major theater of operations for al Qaeda over the past dozen years—are watching out for potential reprisals from Islamist terrorist groups around the region following news of bin Laden's death.

 Long before bin Laden's death, al Qaeda had adapted itself to survive and operate without him, ensuring that the threat his terror network poses will live well beyond his demise.  

 The U.S. raid that killed bin Laden marks a new low in relations between the U.S. and its ally Pakistan, raising uncomfortable questions for both sides about why Washington chose to go it alone in an operation that took its troops to the doorstep of the Pakistani military. 

 The death of bin Laden reinforced calls in Afghanistan for a quicker pullout of American troops, even as Taliban insurgents announced a spring offensive and made clear their war would continue. 

 India said it reacted with "grave concern" to news that bin Laden had been hiding out "deep inside" Pakistan before his death, and called on Islamabad to arrest militants connected to the attacks on Mumbai in 2008 that killed more than 160 people. 

News of bin Laden's death reached a Middle East that has been vastly transformed in recent months by popular nonviolent uprisings against the type of regimes that helped first inspire his terrorist organization.

The U.S. State Department is putting U.S. embassies on alert and is warning Americans abroad of possible reprisal attacks from al Qaeda and its affiliates around the world after the killing of bin Laden.

The U.K. Foreign & Commonwealth Office advised all its embassies to review their security in the wake of bin Laden's death, while Britain's Home Office told people to "remain vigilant" and to report anything suspicious to the police.

 The U.S. strike against bin Laden will likely give an immediate public-opinion boost to President Obama at a time when he faces multiple challenges and a decline in public approval as he campaigns for re-election, but the benefit is likely to be atmospheric rather than help him win concrete policy achievements, lawmakers and strategists said. 

 Manufacturing activity grew at a robust pace throughout much of the world last month, though high commodity prices, Japanese supply disruptions and monetary tightening in China began to take a toll, according to the Institute for Supply Management's index of manufacturing activity. 



The fiscal situation in a number of euro-zone countries remains "precarious" and the commitment to fiscal consolidation must be sustained, the European Central Bank said in its annual report. The ECB urged countries with a stronger economic outlook to use the opportunity to correct excessive deficits early. 



The euro zone's manufacturing sector grew at a more rapid pace in April, although slowdowns in Spain and Italy underlined continued divergences in economic growth across the bloc, according to a Markit Economics survey.



 Warren Buffett has sounded a bullish note on the health of the U.S. economy. But in a weekend press conference, the legendary investor and chief executive of Berkshire Hathaway sounded the alarm about the debt crisis in Europe. 



 U.K. business confidence rebounded strongly in the weeks following the government's March 23 budget, while small businesses reported their fastest growth in orders in 16 years, according to new surveys. 

But a survey by the Confederation of British Industry also contained worrying news for the Bank of England, as it found that small businesses are raising their prices rapidly in response to rising production costs.



Bank of England Governor Mervyn King told members of the European parliament that a rise in long-term interest rates could have "severe" consequences, given the still high levels of indebtedness in the global economy.



 New Bundesbank President Jens Weidmann signaled he will take a hard line on inflation and push the European Central Bank to withdraw special measures it introduced to help banks recover from the financial crisis. 



True Finns party Chairman Timo Soini reiterated he won't support the European Union's bailout for debt-ridden Portugal and acknowledged that could mean the party doesn't form part of Finland's next government.



Pope Benedict XVI fired an outspoken Australian bishop who had called on the church to consider ordaining women and married men. The Vatican said in a statement that the pope had "removed from pastoral care'' Bishop William Morris of the Toowoomba diocese, west of Brisbane.



 The Greek government outlined a three-year plan to crack down on chronic tax evasion, hoping it will bring €11.8 billion ($17.48 billion) in additional revenue by 2013. 



A one-time lawyer for ex-New York financial adviser Kenneth Starr admitted to allowing proceeds from Starr's fraud to be shuttled through his escrow account. 



A federal judge suspended deliberations in the insider-trading trial of Galleon Group founder Raj Rajaratnam for a day because of a juror's medical issue, and the defendant himself was absent from court because of emergency surgery.



Asia needs to rebalance its economies away from export-driven growth and instead promote domestic demand, an official with the International Monetary Fund said.

More broadly, the IMF said the recovery in the world economy from the global financial crisis is moving at a faster pace than had been expected in late 2010, with growth particularly strong in Asia. 



Economic data from around Asia confirmed that the region's breakneck growth is slowing, but analysts said there won't be a hard landing and that growth should pick up again in the second half of the year as Japan's post-quake reconstruction spending boosts the whole region.



 A project to install air filters to reduce airborne radiation at the No. 1 reactor building of Japan's crippled Fukushima Daiichi nuclear complex began, in a move aimed at allowing workers to enter the building for the first time since the start of the crisis to make needed repairs. 

Meanwhile, the country's Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry disclosed that 68 of its former senior officials have ended up working for power companies in the past 50 years, illustrating a close relationship between the regulatory body and the industry.

Separately, the operators of a reactor in central Japan said they had detected above-normal levels of radioactivity in cooling water, suggesting there was leakage from the central fuel rods that power the unit. 

 Japan's parliament passed a ¥4 trillion ($49.3 billion) disaster relief budget as ruling and opposition lawmakers put aside their differences and sought to quickly launch efforts to rebuild the country's quake-hit northeast.  



 Mourners firing rifles into the air and shouting for revenge rallied outside a Tripoli cemetery as the family of Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi buried his second-youngest son, killed in a weekend airstrike by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. 

Gadhafi was visible in dozens of large portraits held aloft by his followers, but not in person. 



An overcrowded boat capsized in south-central Congo, leaving at least 106 people missing in the latest transportation tragedy in the vast Central African country. 