NEW YORK—Across the New York region, which was hit hardest by the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, families and friends of victims were struggling on Monday to cope with a range of emotions following news of bin Laden's death.

Frank Coughlin, who lost his 42-year-old brother Timothy in the attacks, called the news bittersweet. "I'm glad that the murderer of my brother has been caught," said Mr. Coughlin, a resident of Manhasset, N.Y., in Long Island. "But it's not an event to celebrate. I'm not gleeful about it. I just think it's justice done."

Mr. Coughlin said he had received emails from a lot of his brother's friends Monday, remembering him. "To me, this event does not bring closure," he said. "It's still a powerful loss."

Mr. Coughlin said the family had moved on in the interest of his brother's three young children. "It isn't as if we've forgotten," he said. "We've moved forward in a constructive way. This kind of thing reminds us of what a terrible waste this was."





In New York City and nearby suburbs, emergency responders, family members, neighbors and friends of people lost in the terrorist attacks were dealing with mixed emotions as they digested the announcement of the terrorist's demise. 

In an area awash in daily reminders of the attacks, from sidewalks and roadways dotted with tribute plaques and paintings, to speeding fire trucks labeled with admonishments to "never forget," the new development took some getting used to. 

Many people flocked to memorial sites for quiet remembrances. Some reveled in vengeance. At Main Street Cutters Barber Shop in Middletown, N.J., a town that lost 37 residents in the attacks, a firefighter in for a trim gleefully displayed a photo on his cellphone that was circulating across the Internet—since deemed a fake—of what purported to be the bullet-riddled body of bin Laden. 

The front page of the Journal on Sept. 12, 2001.

One 9/11 widower said he canceled his appointment with his therapist, too overcome with emotion to grasp how to even talk about his feelings. Others simply felt numb. 

New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg arrived at Ground Zero, flanked by families of victims and elected officials, to deliver a message of hope.

"Osama bin Laden is dead, and the World Trade Center site is teeming with new life," the mayor said. "Osama bin Laden is dead, and Lower Manhattan is pulsing with new activity. Osama bin Laden is dead, and New York City's spirit has never been stronger." 

Photos from around the world.

 "Justice has been done" and more.

Mr. Bloomberg called the construction work at Ground Zero "a rebuke to those who seek to destroy our freedoms and liberties. Nothing will ever return our loved ones—but we are rebuilding from the ashes and the tears a monument to the American spirit. New York's way is ever forward, ever skyward."

Nikki Stern, whose husband, Jim Potorti, was killed in the attacks, had gone to bed early Sunday. She was awakened in the middle of the night by reporters' phone calls. She didn't pick up, but listened to messages and learned the news. Then she went back to sleep.

"I was able to go back to sleep because I realized it didn't rattle my world," she said. "I don't want to say I felt nothing, but I didn't have a big dramatic sense of anything."

The news of bin Laden's death interrupted plans for memorial events on the 10th anniversary of the attacks in communities across New York. 

"People are listening and trying to get the details, and it's such an extraordinary story," said Jon Kaiman, the town supervisor of North Hempstead, a collection of communities on Long Island that together lost 60 people on Sept. 11th. "But it's been so long, I think it just needs to sink in a little bit."

Others were thrilled when they heard the news. Joyce Mercer of Flushing, N.Y., whose son Scott Kopytko died on Sept. 11th, said she had just crawled into bed and turned on the TV last night, expecting to fall asleep, when she saw the news that bin Laden had been killed.

"I yelled to my husband. He said he had the TV on downstairs," she said. "We were so elated." Her husband, Russell Mercer, ran downstairs to hang their Flag of Heroes—a flag decorated with the names of 9/11 victims—to stand alongside their American flag. 

Maureen Santora, the mother of Christopher Santora, a 33-year old firefighter who was killed in the attack, said she knows her son is happily "screaming and yelling in heaven today with all the other people killed on 9/11." 

"Al-Qaeda took a big hit," she said of the terrorist group. "My son has been vindicated."

Sally Regenhard lost her son Christian Regenhard, 28, also a firefighter, on that day. She said that while she was gratified by bin Laden's death, it doesn't diminish the pain of the loss of her son. "While we close the book on Osama bin Laden, for the families, there will never be closure," she said.

—Shayndi Raice, Michael Howard Saul, Sumathi Reddy  and Conor Dougherty contributed to this article.

