Look, if they were great, you'd be bored. The Miami Heat did brush greatness, a couple of months ago, ripping off a run of 21 wins out of 22 games in which they thundered through the NBA and briefly hushed the clamor over LeBron James's graceless exit from Cleveland. The Decision suddenly looked wise; James and teammate Dwyane Wade were touted as potential co-MVPs (cute!). There also was that widely published, hypnotic photograph from a December game in Milwaukee: a confident Wade in the foreground, arms triumphantly stretched, palms open, as James floated above the rim, the ball curled at the end of his arm, ready to hammer a dunk. How could anyone stop such virtuosity? The Heat were unstoppable progress, like the internal-combustion engine, or microwavable minicheeseburgers. There was no sense getting irritated about them any longer.

But Team Everyone's Got an Opinion has meekly returned to the atmosphere. In the last week, Miami has suffered a ghastly streak of losses—a narrow one to the reshuffled New York Knicks; a comeback shocker against the Orlando Magic; a 30-point crushing by the San Antonio Spurs, the unfussy, efficient Berkshire Hathaway of basketball. 

On Sunday, it grew worse. The Heat fell 87-86 to Chicago—a game in which the most reliable Miami star at the end was the renowned Mario Chalmers; in which the Bulls clawed back after the Heat inexcusably allowed Chicago to rebound its own missed free throw; in which both James and Wade missed final-seconds, game-winning shots.

It was not virtuosity. It wasn't even Washington Wizardsosity. And away from the glitter of South Beach, you could hear a faint snickering sound: Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.

The Heat are not what they hoped to be. They are not even close. They are a very respectable 43-20, third in the Eastern Conference, but that upbeat record masks a 1-9 mark against the NBA's top five teams. Miami has feasted largely on previously gnawed NBA carcasses. They've been hopeless in close games and are a distressing 0-3 against the Boston Celtics, the conference's first-place team, led by a collection of declining stars who joined the league during the Nixon administration. After Sunday, the Heat are also 0-3 against Chicago. The smart MVP pick now is Bulls guard Derrick Rose. 

"The Miami Heat are exactly what everyone wanted, losing games," Wade said after Sunday's defeat, which reportedly had some Heat players in tears. "The world is better now because the Heat are losing."

Should we raise another banner in Miami? HEAT BASKETBALL: THE SCHADENFREUDE IS BACK. As Wade knows, the only thing humans respond to more than hype is hype publicly punctured, and the questions that happily kicked around when the Heat were 9-8 early on have returned with gusto. Can Wade and James co-exist? Did Miami undervalue depth? Who is this Chris Bosh and what is his purpose? The Heat have plenty of wins, but to borrow a fashionable term from a current celebrity train wreck who will not be named, they are not "winning."

Naturally, this losing streak has prompted a rehashing of speculation that Heat president Pat Riley will Favre his young successor, Erik Spoelstra, and return to Miami's sideline to steer them in the playoffs. The Heat's problems appear, for the most part, to be basketball-related—murky leadership, a thin supporting cast, a half-court offense installed by Madame Tussauds. As the ESPN radio analyst Will Perdue put it on Sunday: "When you look at this Miami Heat team, there's a lot of standing around."

Weirdly, the Heat's spiral coincides with renewed worries that the league is being overtaken by its stars. After Carmelo Anthony engineered his exit from Denver to New York, upending two teams and cities, it revived talk that the best players have too much control, that small-market teams have no choice but to unload beloved faces, that pretty soon we're all going to be watching two bespoke franchises: Kobe & Friends vs. LeBron & Friends. 

It's hard to see how stars leaving loyal franchises is a shocking development. What's more interesting is how much these current, star-injected teams are proving the importance of being, well, a team. The Heat struggle against well-bonded units like Chicago, San Antonio and Boston. The Carmelo Anthony Knicks have lost twice to the Cleveland Cavaliers. Everyone seems to agree that two stars are a prerequisite for NBA success, but two stars alone are not enough to offset a well-rounded enterprise. (Or, in New York's case, Cleveland.)

This is probably a good time to point out that a number of casual sports fans consider the NBA regular season to be an unnecessary appetizer—one of those overpriced triple-decker seafood plateaus that nobody really needs. Why bother, the argument goes: Everyone that deserves following will be there once the playoffs start. 

But this NBA regular season has been surprisingly worthwhile. The Heat and Knicks have absorbed all the media energy, but the Bulls and Spurs are much more formidable. Dallas is eager to vanquish its playoff ghosts. Orlando may be stabilizing. The defending champion Lakers, despite recent hiccups, should be a major threat—just ask the Spurs, who were thumped by them Sunday. The Celtics, despite the weird trade of big man Kendrick Perkins, keep rattling on. There are intriguing stories in Oklahoma City, Denver and Portland. There's even a flicker of life from the sub-.500 Los Angeles Clippers, home of the exciting guy who dunked over the front end of that car.

What there isn't yet is a breakout team, a clear favorite for a title run. For a moment, it looked like it could be Miami. Now they're battling like everyone else. Dwyane Wade had it wrong: The world isn't better because the Heat are losing. But it's getting kind of fun.

—See Jason Gay's daily Greater New York sports columns at WSJ.com/NYSports