By most conventional measures, the Giants remain the more popular of New York's football teams, despite the Jets' recent success. But by a different set of metrics, the Jets aren't just surpassing the Giants—they're leading the NFL. 

A savvy social-media campaign rooted in the team's commitment to transparency has catapulted the Jets to the top of an array of multimedia categories gauging fan interest. They have the most Twitter followers of any team in the NFL, despite ranking 27th in the league in national popularity according to an ESPN Sports Poll (a service of TSN Sport) last year. 

This year Gang Green was also the most "buzzed about" team in the NFL, according to NM Incite, a category that includes blogs, blog comments, boards, groups, Twitter and video/image sites.

 The Jets recorded more than one million mentions since August 1. The next closest team was the Dallas Cowboys, who recorded a little more than 600,000. 

There is no calculation about how many of those mentions included the word "feet." But Jets officials stressed that any tradeoffs are worth it and that it is part of a deliberate strategy to transform the Jets into the consummate team for the Internet age. 

"We decidedly embarked on a course of transparency and engagement, and I think we've taken it to a level beyond what most teams take it to," said Matt Higgins, the Jets executive vice president for business operations. He paused. "For better or for worse."

That includes efforts to leverage social media connections to generate revenue. The team's Fireman Ed Chant app ($1.99) is the second-best selling paid sports app on i-tunes. Their "Ultimate Fan" app on Facebook, which allows fans to make predictions and stage virtual tailgates, has four sponsors, making it a rare revenue-generating Facebook app for a sports team.

This year, 10% of Jets sponsorships included a social media component; the team is planning to bump it up to 50% by next year, according to a spokesperson.

"It's not just spinning the wheels—there's a real business purpose behind social media," Mr. Higgins said.

Still, conventional wisdom and an array of stats suggest the Giants retain a commanding lead among local loyalties: As of Thursday morning, they still boasted almost 200,000 more Facebook followers than the Jets.

 Even in the week leading up the Jets-Patriots playoff game, the Giants outpaced their rivals, adding 35,458 new Facebook fans' to Gang Green's 34,081, according to the website sportsfangraph.com.

But around 20% of Jets fans have friended the team, compared with just 7% of Giants fans, according to Coyle Media, a firm that provides digital media consulting to sports franchises.

The Giants declined to comment. "It's their time to shine," demurred a Giants spokesman. "The focus and attention should be on them."

Nick Truelson, the fan development manager for Australia's Essendon Football Club, recently visited the United States to study fan outreach and digital media efforts within America's sports leagues, including meetings with the Giants and the Jets.

The Jets have "probably been the most impressive I've come across in the way that they're able to engage with their fans and make them feel part of the team," said Mr. Truelson, citing his own first-hand experience.

Mr. Truelson initially connected with the Jets after reading a tweet by Mr. Higgins asking readers for ideas on how to use the social networking service Foursquare more effectively. Why not provide seat upgrades when fans arrive at the stadium and check in, Mr. Truelson tweeted back. "He responded straight away, saying, 'Nick that's a great idea,'" Mr. Truelson said.

They now communicate on Twitter regularly, Mr. Truelson said, even though Mr. Higgins' followers have swelled from around 600 when they met to more than 13,000. "You can't really understand it unless you're part of it," said Mr. Higgins, who says he recently expanded his presence on Twitter and regularly solicits advice from fans on everything from staging rallies to the stadium experience. He is one of 24 Jets employees and team members on Twitter. 

Shripal Shah, who served as senior vice president of digital strategy for the Washington Redskins until this past December, said that the Jets "may not come top of mind right at first glance as being leaders in social media." 

But "I really feel in the last few years we were paying attention a lot more to things that the Jets were doing," he said, adding that today, "the Jets, to me, are some of the most creative of all the NFL teams I've seen on Twitter." 

Mr. Shah pointed to their current website, which recently advertised a Twitter-based contest to win tickets to this weekend's playoff game against the Steelers. Of the four teams still in the playoffs, it is the only Twitter contest featured as the first click on a homepage.

"It's really a cultural shift," said Mr. Shah, who now works at Catalyst Public Relations in New York. "It's not as simple as selling playoff travel packages." 

Twitter seems like the perfect medium for a notoriously uncensored team—an attitude that stems from the very top.

"Woody says it all the time: This is not the NSA," Mr. Higgins said, referring to Jets owner Woody Johnson. "We're not hiding state secrets here, so the extent to which we can share without compromising our competitive advantage, we should pull back the curtain."

That began with the hiring of Rex Ryan. "Woody knew exactly what he was getting with Rex," Mr. Higgins said. "There was no question about what Rex was going to do and how he was going to present himself."

Perhaps it is ironic, then, that Mr. Ryan remains one of the few Jets to decline a Twitter account. "I'd say that's probably the number one question I get, and I say that, 'it'll happen sometime around never,'" Mr. Higgins said. "Don't hold your breath."

Still, his impact is felt.

"We'll spend hours creating a great video that we're proud of, and then Rex will float a balloon regarding Brady and it's game over," Mr. Higgins said. "Oftentimes his press conferences will exceed game highlights."

After Sunday's game, that's one metric they hope will change.

—Scott Cacciola contributed to this article