WASHINGTON—The U.S. military is drawing up plans to sharply expand a network of village security forces across Afghanistan, a program U.S. officials say could be a cost-effective way to make up for shortages in the regular army and police in rural areas.

But the U.S. needs a green light from Afghan President Hamid Karzai, who has long been wary because such local forces could potentially threaten his government's authority unless they are kept in close check.

U.S. military planners want Mr. Karzai to expand Special Forces-trained village units from the current goal of 10,000 members to 30,000. Officials have told U.S. lawmakers that the number of villagers in the program, known as Afghan Local Police or ALP, could swell over time to 50,000 or more.

The plan reflects U.S. hopes that teaming lightly armed Afghan irregulars with elite Special Forces could help significantly weaken the Taliban in rural areas beyond the reach of the Afghan national army and police. 

It also underlines growing concern in Washington with more costly efforts to train the national police, a force that has long been hamstrung by rampant corruption, illiteracy and drug abuse. 

The push to expand the village forces comes as the Obama administration weighs whether to sign off on an increase in the ceiling on the number of regular army and police.

Officials in Washington and Europe are increasingly wary of the long-term costs associated with building such large standing army and police forces.

The buildup, however, is seen as essential if the U.S.-led coalition is to meet its target of pulling out the bulk of its troops and handing over national security responsibilities to Afghan forces by the end of 2014.

Advocates say the proposed new cap of 30,000 local police is the number that could be recruited, trained and equipped over the next year. 

Afghan officials said Friday they, not the U.S., will decide how rapidly the program expands and which areas will get more forces.

Afghan Local Police (ALP) vs. Afghan Uniformed Police (AUP) 

 Tactics  ALP: Defensive role only, in villages; can't make arrests  AUP: Can conduct raids and make arrests; on district level

 Training  ALP: Three weeks in village, plus long-term mentoring by U.S. Special Forces;  AUP: Six weeks at a national training center. Embedded U.S. mentors join some units

 Pay  ALP: $100/month, plus food  AUP: $165/month, plus $75 hostile-fire pay and food

 Equipment  ALP: Light arms only  AUP: Primarily light arms but can have heavier weaponry

Mr. Karzai signed off on a limited pilot program in August after being assured that the units would fall under the authority of the Interior Ministry. But the village forces are more autonomous than the regular army and police, and have closer ties to local tribal leaders. 

One of the president's top advisers cautioned against moving too rapidly in expanding the ALP because of the risk of empowering local warlords who could destabilize the country. He cited the damage militias caused to the country in the early 1990s.

"The president believes the best future for us is to have a capable and well-equipped military and police. We have a history that makes this [ALP] idea very difficult and maybe very dangerous," the adviser said.

"Karzai does not want to arm a bunch of tribes that will eventually turn on him," a senior U.S. defense official said.

U.S. officials voiced confidence that Mr. Karzai would agree to the proposed expansion. The White House and the U.S. military have tried to portray the village security initiative as Afghan-led, and want any increases to be announced by Mr. Karzai.

The local forces, modeled after joint village teams set up by the Marine Corps during the Vietnam War, now include nearly 3,000 members in 17 Afghan districts. Officials hope to have 10,000 in place at some 68 sites by spring, traditionally the start of the fighting season.

To cope with the rapid growth of the program, the Pentagon has begun deploying an Army battalion alongside the Special Forces units that train and mentor each ALP unit. Officials said the full contingent of between 800 to 1,000 Army soldiers should be in place within the next two to three weeks, allowing Special Forces units to split into smaller teams to set up and train additional ALP sites.

Zemarai Bashary, spokesman for the Afghan Interior Ministry, said a decision on whether to expand the local police wouldn't be necessary until the first 10,000 were in place.

The program has emerged as a cornerstone of President Barack Obama's war strategy. It was singled out as holding "significant potential" in the White House's internal strategy review in December, according to officials. 

Many military and White House officials have seized on the local forces as a potential game-changer. Some are more cautious. "We perpetually look on these programs as if they're going to produce magic, instant results, and they're not," said  Anthony Cordesman, a defense analyst at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington who is influential with policy makers at the Pentagon.

American officials see the Afghan Local Police program as a stop-gap measure that will help gather intelligence and prevent Taliban militants from finding sanctuary in rural areas where the Afghan national army and police have little or no presence.

U.S. officials say the ALP program is designed to be in effect for two to five years, and after that, its members will be integrated into the regular army and police, or disbanded.

Afghan officials worry the Americans are pushing the program to accelerate their exit from the country. 

America officials say the initiative takes advantage of the tribal structures in Afghanistan, and is meant to empower tribal elders to stand up to the Taliban in areas where the central government is virtually nonexistent. 

It is also cheaper—an increasingly important factor for the White House This week, it put on hold a military plan to add 72,400 additional security forces, citing cost concerns among other matters. 

"If we ever expect to get out of Afghanistan with any reasonable shred of dignity, in a reasonable amount of time, you've got to have local security and you simply can't rely on the regular national security forces to do it," said  William Rosenau, a military expert at the Center for Naval Analyses near Washington.

 Write to  Matthew Rosenberg at matthew.rosenberg@wsj.com 