The head of National Public Radio quit under fire as the organization became ensnared in a fresh scandal at a time when Congress is debating whether to pull its government funding.

Vivian Schiller, president and chief executive of NPR since January 2009, stepped down just hours after a video showed the head of NPR's fund-raising arm making disparaging remarks about the Republican Party and tea-party activists to men posing as prospective donors, and suggesting NPR would be better off without government funding. That executive quit Tuesday.

The pressure on NPR intensified Wednesday as the conservative activist behind the video, James O'Keefe, said he planned to release additional damaging materials about the radio network on Thursday. 

NPR Chairman Dave Edwards said the scandal had become such a distraction that "it hindered Vivian Schiller's ability to lead the organization going forward." That opinion was not shared by Ms. Schiller, according to a person familiar with the matter. The board ultimately decided she needed to resign. 

"NPR's under an incredible amount of pressure right now in Washington from the defunding threat," Ms. Schiller said. "It's quite possible that the fact that I'm no longer with NPR would potentially mitigate that threat." 

Republican members of Congress, who have lambasted what they see as NPR's liberal bias, have long lobbied to cut its funding. NPR took criticism last fall after it fired news analyst Juan Williams for comments he made on Fox News about being nervous around Muslims on an airplane—a decision Ms. Schiller has said was "badly" handled. That move led to the resignation of NPR's then-top news executive.

"Big Bird needs to be pushed out of the nest," said Rep. Doug Lamborn (R., Colo.), who leads the charge against NPR funding in the House. Mr. Lamborn said NPR's new leadership should embrace a more free-market approach. "We don't want leadership that wants to salvage the old model. I believe those days are over," he said.

Public radio is popular, Republicans argue, and it should be able to pay for itself. "The issue about taxpayers funding public broadcasting isn't about who gets hired or fired," Sen. Jim DeMint (R., S.C.) said in a statement. "It's about two simple facts: We can't afford it and they don't need it."

NPR's member stations receive an average of about 10% of their funding from the government-backed Corporation for Public Broadcasting, with other federal, state, and local government sources accounting for another 6%, according to NPR. A little more than half of stations' revenue comes from listener contributions and corporate sponsorship, with the balance coming from foundations and universities, among other sources, according to NPR. 

House Republicans voted last month to cut $86 million from the Corporation for Public Broadcasting's $430 million appropriation for fiscal year 2011, which runs through September. Mr. DeMint introduced a bill last week to zero out federal funding for the CPB after fiscal 2013, since the organization receives its funding two years in advance. Both measures would face opposition in the Democrat-controlled Senate.

Rep. Earl Blumenauer (D., Ore.), founder and chairman of the Public Broadcasting Caucus in the House, said NPR official Ron Schiller's comments in the video were "foolish and indefensible," but that funding needs to stay. Mr. Edwards said that without federal funding, some stations in smaller communities, where donations are harder to attract, "could go dark." 

NPR's board now faces the challenge of finding new leadership who can move the radio network forward at a perilous time. NPR said Joyce Slocum, senior vice president of legal affairs and general counsel, would serve as interim CEO. Mr. Edwards said NPR would immediately establish a committee to oversee a search.

In the video that surfaced Tuesday, Mr. Schiller, the head of NPR's fund-raising arm—who is no relation to Vivian Schiller—and a colleague are shown meeting two men in a café pretending to be from the fictitious Muslim Education Action Center and offering a donation of as much as $5 million to NPR because of what they describe as "Zionist coverage" by other news organizations. 

In the video, Mr. Schiller said the GOP had been "hijacked" by groups hostile to Muslims. One of the "Muslim Center" men asked, "The radical, racist, Islamophobic, tea-party people?" Mr. Schiller responded, nodding, "And not just Islamaphobic but really xenophobic. I mean basically, they are, they believe in sort of white, middle-America, gun toting. I mean, it's scary. They're seriously racist people."



Ms. Schiller said she watched the video released Tuesday shortly after it was posted online and was "shocked" and "incredibly disturbed by some of the things Ron said." She alerted the board and issued a response condemning the comments. Ms. Schiller and Mr. Edwards spoke several times throughout the day, during which NPR hardened its position as the controversy escalated. Early Tuesday evening, the news organization announced it had placed Mr. Schiller on administrative leave. 

At about 7 p.m. Tuesday, Ms. Schiller took part in a conference call with the board during which Mr. Edwards said there was a "wide-ranging conversation" about the video and other recent events. 

About an hour in, Ms. Schiller got off the call while the board continued its discussion. Mr. Edwards later called Ms. Schiller and told her the board agreed she should resign, which Ms. Schiller had offered to do.Mr. Schiller had announced last week that he would soon leave for another job at the Aspen Institute. But on Tuesday night, he released a statement saying that he and NPR had agreed to make the resignation effective immediately.

On Wednesday, the Aspen Institute said Mr. Schiller has informed it that in light of the controversy around his statements, he "does not feel that it's in the best interests of the Aspen Institute for him to come work here." 



 Write to  Russell Adams at russell.adams@wsj.com 