NEW DELHI–India's finance ministry has agreed to issue additional cash subsidies of about 80 billion rupees for the October-December quarter to help its state-run fuel retailers reduce revenue losses from selling diesel and cooking fuels at discounted prices, the country's oil minister said Monday. 

Indian Oil Corp. will receive about 44 billion rupees, Bharat Petroleum Corp. Ltd. about 18 billion rupees and Hindustan Petroleum Corp. Ltd. about 17 billion rupees in cash subsidies from the government, S.  Jaipal Reddy told reporters. 

The retailers sell diesel and cooking fuels at state-set prices to help control inflation. They are partly compensated by upstream companies through discounts on products and crude oil and partly by the federal government through cash subsidies. 

Indian Oil, Hindustan Petroleum and Bharat Petroleum have already deferred to February their financial results for the October-December quarter on expectations of cash compensation from the government. 

In the third quarter through December 2010, Brent crude prices averaged $86.48 a barrel compared with $74.57 a barrel in the year-earlier period, Indian Oil's website showed. This widened the revenue losses of the retailers during the period. 

"The finance ministry has intimated to us that it is giving 80 billion rupees toward under-recoveries [revenue losses] for the third quarter," Mr. Reddy said. "This will mean a total assistance of 210 billion rupees for the first nine months [of the financial year through March], which comes to 45% of total under-recoveries for the nine months." 

Mr. Reddy said the oil ministry will seek more funds from the government to compensate retailers for the revenue losses that will be incurred in the current quarter. 

He said the three retailers posted combined revenue losses of 470 billion rupees during April-December 2010, of which the government provided 210 billion rupees as cash subsidies. 

The upstream companies--Oil & Natural Gas Corp., Oil India Ltd., GAIL (India) Ltd.--gave discounts worth 150 billion rupees on crude oil and product sales to the fuel retailers, Mr. Reddy said. The process left the retailers to absorb sales losses of 110 billion rupees, he said. 

 Write to  Rakesh Sharma at rakesh.sharma@dowjones.com 