SEOUL—The Bank of Korea unexpectedly left its benchmark interest rate unchanged at 3.00% for a second straight month on Friday, opting to pause as inflationary pressures show some signs of moderating and amid uncertainty over external economic conditions. It suggested though that it will resume tightening in the near future. Most economists had expected the BOK to raise its policy rate by 0.25-percentage points this month, as part of an offensive against rising prices.

"The vote to keep the base rate steady at 3% wasn't unanimous," said BOK Governor Kim Choong-soo, indicating that some on the board felt a need for more immediate action. Mr. Kim said the central bank will be "consistent" in normalizing its policy rate. 

"Today's decision to hold rates steady came after a very careful consideration of all factors. Inflation is still elevated and we're closely monitoring prices," Mr. Kim said at a news briefing. 

He also said a policy mix involving rate responses and foreign exchange is needed to curb inflation, in his clearest message yet that currency is a tool to deal with rising prices. He added though that "foreign exchange is very important, but it can't be the sole tool against inflation," in an apparent effort to avoid having the market read too much into his comments. 

Economists say gains in the South Korean currency, along with the four rate increases since July, are helping to contain inflation. The won has risen by about 4.6% so far this year, and reached a 32-month high versus the U.S. currency early this month. 

The BOK's decision on Friday triggered a fall in the won and other Asian currencies against the U.S. dollar, while bond futures turned higher in South Korea and stocks recovered early losses. 

The central bank is widely expected to raise its policy rate in the third quarter, given the country's underlying solid growth momentum and as inflation remains above the central bank's target band. 

Both the government and the BOK have declared inflation as their priority concern after consumer prices surged to multi-month highs recently. 

South Korea's annual consumer inflation remained above the BOK's target range of 2% to 4% for a fourth straight month in April at 4.2%, although that was down from a 29-month high of 4.7% in March. Annual producer inflation—typically a good leading indicator of changes in consumer prices—remained at an elevated level of 6.8% in April, after hitting a 28-month high of 7.3% in March. 

Shinhan Investment Corp. economist Lee Sung-kwon said the BOK may opt to pause for a couple more months before resuming tightening, due to rising household debt, a relatively inactive housing market and external uncertainties. 

"The sluggish property market is a drag on the economy and higher interest rates will serve to delay a rebound in the sector. Rising household debt is also a concern," he said. He said he expects the BOK to raise rates again in August. 

Mr. Kim has said steady and gradual rate increases, which he termed a "baby-step" stance, are preferable for the South Korean economy—Asia's fourth largest—and the central bank accordingly had raised its policy rate by a quarter percentage point every other month in the November-March period. 

"'Baby step' doesn't necessarily mean a hike in every other month. There's no change in our stance towards normalization. We just decide on the pace of scope of rate hikes at the monthly reviews," he said at the briefing on Friday. 

In a policy statement, the BOK said it will conduct future monetary policy with a greater emphasis on ensuring a firm basis for price stability. 

The market consensus for a policy rate rise this month had weakened due to recent developments such as concerns over the U.S. job market recovery, plunges in oil and commodity prices and the flare-up of debt crisis in Greece. 

However, economists noted that improving job market conditions, along with strong exports, will give the BOK room to continue to raise borrowing costs without hurting growth momentum. 

Employment data released on Wednesday showed the domestic economy is strong enough to weather further monetary tightening. The seasonally adjusted jobless rate fell in April for the first time in five months to 3.6% from 4% in March. 

Twelve of 14 analysts surveyed by Dow Jones Newswires early this week had forecast for a 0.25-percentage point increase this time, while the remaining two expected no change. 