FLORHAM PARK, N.J.—Of the two safeties whom Jets coach Rex Ryan regards as the best he has seen in the NFL, one has played for him and one has tormented him.

The former is Baltimore's Ed Reed; he and Mr. Ryan spent seven years together before Mr. Ryan left the Ravens in 2009 to become the Jets' head coach. The latter is the Pittsburgh Steelers' Troy Polamalu, as famous for his flowing mane of black hair as he is for the ferocious manner in which he plays. Truth be told, after facing Mr. Polamalu at least twice a season for six years—the Ravens and Steelers play in the same division—Mr. Ryan has seen enough of him, thank you.

"When they say he plays with his hair on fire, that's a true thing," Mr. Ryan said Monday, six days before the Jets take on the Steelers in the AFC Championship Game. "And his hair is ridiculous. But the guy's amazing. How do you not love watching the guy play? I mean, I hate watching him play against us. Maybe that's the thing. He should rest up and not play this week."

Would that were the case for the Jets. But Mr. Polamalu will be out there, the nerve center of a defense that would seem to have been designed to stop the Jets' offense. In beating the Indianapolis Colts and the New England Patriots to reach the championship game, the Jets have been frank that a good bit of their defensive success has been predicated on their offense's ability to run the football and use short passes to extend drives. It has allowed them at critical moments to produce points and melt minutes off the game clock—sometimes at the same time.

Their problem now is that Pittsburgh was the best team in the NFL this season at defending the run. The Steelers gave up only 62.8 rushing yards per game and three per carry, each the lowest figure in the league. No other team was close; the Chicago Bears (90.1) ranked second, and they surrendered 27.3 more yards a game than Pittsburgh did. Compared with all other NFL teams in a given season, no defense has been that much better against the run in the past 68 years, according to Stats Inc., a company that tracks statistical trends in sports.

"Anyone who doesn't see the task," center Nick Mangold said, "is kind of blind."

In their 17-16 victory over Indianapolis in the wild-card round, for instance, the Jets held the football for more than 15 of the second half's 30 minutes and scored on two drives of more than 60 yards. In doing so, they limited quarterback Peyton Manning and the Colts' offense to just three possessions after halftime. The Jets finished with 169 yards on 38 attempts (a 4.4 yards-per-carry average), then rushed for 120 yards on 29 carries (a 4.1 avg.) in beating the Patriots, 28-21, on Sunday. 

But in each of those games, the Jets faced a rush defense that was at best a notch above mediocre. New England allowed 4.2 yards per carry during the regular season, which was tied for the 13th-lowest mark this season among the NFL's 32 teams, and in giving up 4.6 yards per attempt, Indianapolis had the sixth-worst rushing defense in the league.

The Steelers present a much more formidable challenge, and according to Jets guard Brandon Moore, it's because of Mr. Polamalu. In the blocking schemes most teams use, it's rare that they have to account for a free safety as physical and as fast as Mr. Polamalu, who stands 5-10, weighs 207 pounds, and ran the 40-yard dash in a reported 4.33 seconds in 2003, when the Steelers made him their first-round draft choice. He's since made the AFC Pro Bowl team six times, including this season.

"He'll be coming down the line at the last minute, [and] you don't have anybody to block him," Mr. Moore said. "He can come free or get to the edge on somebody who wasn't looking to block him. I think that's where you see the difference."

An injury to his right Achilles' tendon caused Mr. Polamalu to miss two games during the regular season. One of those two was the Jets' 22-17 victory in Pittsburgh on Dec. 19. 

The Jets had 106 rushing yards on 27 attempts that day, enough production to maintain a reasonable balance with their opportunistic passing game. Quarterback Mark Sanchez threw for a mere 170 yards, but the Steelers sacked him just once, and he didn't commit a turnover.

"It's going to be the same game plan," Mr. Moore said. "You've got to grind and grind and grind on them. They pride themselves on stopping the run, so it's definitely going to be difficult. But that's our mentality."

 Write to  Mike Sielski at mike.sielski@wsj.com 