 Authorities claimed modest gains in their efforts to tame a heavily damaged nuclear-power plant that has caused worries around the world, but increasing international skepticism and troublesome levels of radiation on the ground underscored the ongoing difficulties. 

They attempted to douse the troubled Fukushima Daiichi nuclear-power complex with some 100 tons of seawater using helicopters and fire trucks, an urgent effort to combat rising temperatures in two storage pools for spent nuclear fuel. Radiation levels at the site fell slightly. 

The battle to bring the plant under control came as Japan continues to grapple with the effects of last week's massive earthquake and ensuing tsunami. Japanese police said the death toll reached 5,692 people, with nearly 10,000 missing and many parts of the country still difficult to reach. 

 Across large parts of Japan's disaster zone, nearly a week after a gigantic earthquake and tsunami, aid isn't getting through. The continuing aid shortages are testing a belief that Japan, one of the world's richest and most-developed economies, is capable of largely shouldering what is turning into a colossal aid effort. 

 Companies around the world were scrambling to retool their supply chains as they coped with the earthquake—and many might not be as well-prepared as they thought. Logistics experts said the quake's aftermath exposed crucial weak points in a slew of global businesses, such as electronics and the automobile sector.  

 Multinational companies stepped up efforts to move staff out of Japan as worries grew about the damaged nuclear reactors in the country's northeast. 

The U.S. said that its citizens in the country should consider leaving. The U.S. Embassy flew in two planes to evacuate citizens to Seoul, while the U.S. military began voluntary evacuations at certain military bases in Japan. 

The U.K. advised its citizens in Tokyo and north of Tokyo to leave the area, and it began hiring commercial flights to help them leave Japan.

 Recent pension reforms in developed economies aren't sufficient to deal with increasing life expectancy, and people will have to work longer in future, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development said.  

 European officials unveiled some details of the latest "stress tests" they plan to run on the Continent's banks, hoping to show that the exercise will be tough enough to defuse fears about the sector's health. 

But haggling among regulators has left some fundamental questions unaddressed, possibly disappointing investors expecting greater clarity about the European Banking Authority's tests. 

The U.K.'s financial regulator broke ranks with its colleagues in Europe, urging banks to include the risk of a sovereign-debt restructuring in the euro zone in their stress tests. The stress testing the FSA refers to in this case is the routine supervisory exercise it carries out on a rolling basis with U.K. banks. 

 Britons expect consumer prices to rise more quickly over the next 12 months than they did three months ago, but that's unlikely to push the Bank of England into raising interest rates before the summer.  

Meanwhile, U.K. consumers became even more pessimistic about the outlook for the economy and their job prospects during February, and less willing to spend, according to a monthly survey set to be released Friday. 

Pakistan cricketers Salman Butt, Mohammad Asif and Mohammad Amir have been ordered to stand trial in a British court over spot-fixing allegations. 

Germany's government will present a clear timetable for a change in energy policy away from nuclear power, Chancellor Angela Merkel said, signaling that the country may accelerate its exit from nuclear power. 

The Swiss government significantly raised its forecast for economic growth this year, but warned the strong franc and Japan's nuclear crisis could undermine exports and growth.

 Consumer prices in February rose at their fastest pace since mid-2009 as energy and food prices continued to move higher, but underlying inflation remained tame, giving the Federal Reserve scope to keep its easy-money policies in place for now. 

Separately, the number of U.S. workers filing new claims for unemployment benefits dropped off more than expected last week, while industrial output declined in February as a warmer month lowered demand from utilities.

A Justice Department investigation into the New Orleans Police Department has found misconduct that includes excessive force, racially biased police tactics and illegal stops and searches.

 Haiti's Jean-Bertrand Aristide is leaving exile in South Africa, despite U.S. President Barack Obama's bid to keep the hugely popular but controversial figure away from his homeland until it holds presidential elections this weekend, officials said. 

The Chinese government confirmed that a young Tibetan Buddhist monk died after setting himself on fire in a Tibetan area of southwestern China on Wednesday, the anniversary of anti-Chinese protests in the area in 2008. 

Malaysia's government was investigating whether seized equipment being shipped illegally to the Middle East could be used to make nuclear weapons. 

 A leaked U.S. diplomatic cable made public by the whistle-blowing website WikiLeaks suggested India's ruling Congress party offered bribes to win a crucial confidence vote in parliament on the U.S.-India nuclear deal in 2008.  

India's central bank raised its two key interest rates by a quarter-percentage point each, continuing its tightening measures as the fight against inflation trumps concerns of a global slowdown in growth after the Japan earthquake.

 Pakistan's Army chief made a rare public condemnation of a U.S. drone strike that killed up to 40 people, in a sign of mounting disagreements between the two nations over how to defeat Taliban militants that shelter on Pakistan's border with Afghanistan. 

 Bahrain arrested several opposition leaders and activists in dawn raids on their homes, as the government continued its attempt to stifle the uprising on the strategic Gulf island. 

 In Yemen, opposition ranks are swelling with members of the country's vast tribal network from outside of the capital of San'a, greatly complicating the challenge President Ali Abdullah Saleh faces in quelling unrest without undermining his government. 

 The United Nations Security Council was set to vote on a resolution to authorize airstrikes on Libya, several diplomats said, as Col. Moammar Gadhafi's air force bombed the opposition's capital of Benghazi in a push to end the month-long revolt against his rule. The U.S. joined Britain and France in pushing for the vote.  

In anticipation of authorization to use force, the Pentagon was fine-tuning military options for "serious" strikes against ground and air targets in Libya, military and defense officials said.

Gadhafi's forces bombed Benghazi for the second day in a row, near the airport on the southern edge of the city, killing one shepherd and injuring at least 12 civilians, rebel officials said. The bombing brought Gadhafi's forces the closest to the rebels' stronghold since the uprising began.