The federal budget deficit will hit a record of nearly $1.5 trillion in 2011 because of the weak economy, higher spending and fresh tax cuts, the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office said Wednesday, in a stark warning that will drive the growing battle over government spending and taxation. Friday brought better news, as the Commerce Department estimated annualized economic growth of 3.2% in the fourth quarter. Meanwhile, the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission issued its report, finding that 12 of the 13 largest U.S. financial institutions "were at risk of failure" at the nadir of the 2008 financial crisis, while at least 50 hedge funds tried to capitalize on it. 

Fresh evidence suggested anxious BP staff on the doomed Deepwater Horizon rig voiced concerns to their bosses. Three days before it exploded, the onshore manager in charge of the rig warned his supervisor that last-minute procedural changes were creating "chaos," and was urged to tell rig workers "to hang in there." The supervisor then signed off to attend a dance practice, promising to call later in the day. "We're dancing to the Village People!" he wrote.

Tucson shooting suspect Loughner pleaded not guilty to charges of attempted assassination and attempted murder of federal employees. Further charges are likely.

Obama used his State of the Union address to urge the nation to meet the challenges of a global economy, framing what he called a competitiveness agenda. It includes infrastructure investment and traditional Democratic proposals like increased education spending, amid the rise of powers like China and India, alongside gestures to Republicans seeking deep budget cuts. Results from a national exam released the day of the speech revealed that fewer than one-third of elementary- and high-school students have a solid grasp of science. The speech also laid out areas of potential cooperation between the parties, including a call to rewrite the corporate tax code. The Republican-controlled House wants much deeper and more immediate cuts in domestic spending.

Obama's new team is coming together, including White House Chief of Staff Bill Daley, National Economic Council Director Gene Sperling and Press Secretary Jay Carney. Some of the same business groups the president has been courting said they would fight his renomination of Craig Becker to the National Labor Relations Board. Joseph Smith, the administration's pick to run the agency that oversees Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, doesn't want to be renominated, in the face of strong Republican opposition, a White House official said. Energy czar Carol Browner is leaving her post, which is likely to be eliminated. The position, and Browner herself, have been lightning rods for critics of the president's environmental policy.

Uprisings in Egypt shook the Arab world, threatened the future of some of Washington's closest allies in the region and raised the specter that Islamic radicals could seize on the protests against authoritarian governments. Egypt's President Mubarak, defying Washington's call to embrace reform, declared a curfew in riot-racked cities as tanks rolled down the street to beat back protesters. Nobel Peace Prize laureate and pro-democracy reformer ElBaradei returned, stoking the rallies. Local stocks and the Egyptian pound plunged. The rallies, in Jordan, Yemen and Algeria, too, were inspired by the toppling of Tunisian President Ben Ali on Jan. 14. In Lebanon, meanwhile, the ouster of a Western-allied government set back U.S. efforts to blunt the influence of Iran and Syria in the region. 

Leaked documents show extensive collaboration between Palestinian security forces and their Israeli counterparts, a relationship Israeli commanders say has been central to security gains in the West Bank. The documents, released by al Jazeera, spurred anger in the Palestinian territories at the Palestinian Authority leadership, which has held uncompromising positions in public but appears to have negotiated poorly with Israel in private. 

A suicide-bomb blast killed 35 people at Russia's busiest airport. Officials said they suspect Islamist insurgents based in the Caucasus. 

The threat of inflation, the burden of public pensions and Europe's approach to its debt crisis dominated the annual World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland. China sent its largest delegation ever, underlining its growing influence on the global economy. Important Chinese companies are considering stepped-up investment in the U.S., with the White House's encouragement. Meanwhile, world-wide fears about unsustainable government borrowing reached Japan, as S&P issued a surprise downgrade of its bonds, the first since 2002, and slammed the nation's political leaders for having no "coherent strategy" to tackle Japan's quickly worsening fiscal problems.

Afghan President Karzai inaugurated the country's new parliament, ending a six-month power vacuum during which he ruled by decree. 

Ford Motor reported an unexpected drop in fourth-quarter earnings, to $190 million from $886 million a year earlier, on rising costs in North America, a loss in Europe and special charges related to debt-reduction measures. It was also a big decline from the $1.7 billion Ford made in the 2010 third quarter. The year was one of Ford's best ever.

Companies tracking Internet users' interests and activities across unaffiliated websites. Amid growing privacy concerns, Mozilla this week said it would add a do-not-track feature to its Firefox browser, and Google said it would let users of its Chrome browser permanently opt out of ad-tracking cookies.

Increase in the consumer price index for food between 2009 and 2010, the mildest increase since 1962. Food inflation is heating up again after one of its slowest years in decades. Food-at-home prices in 2010 were up just 0.3% from the year before, the lowest annual increase since 1967, and restaurant prices climbed 1.3%, the smallest yearly increase since 1955. 

U.S. tornadoes last year, among the 10 busiest years since records began in 1950. Minnesota came in first, for the first time, with 104 twisters. The Atlantic region was far stormier. 

Optimal bank capital-to-assets ratio, Bank of England economists say. 

Banks will need a lot more capital if we want to avoid financial disasters like the one that just shook the world, according to the economists. Critics say that would hurt the economy by pushing up the cost of lending. But in a new paper, the economists estimate that a permanent one-percentage-point reduction in the probability of crisis is worth more than half a year's economic output, or about nine times the cost of permanently doubling banks' capital ratios. Assuming that severe crises tend to come along every few decades or so, the optimal capital level would be 52% of assets, weighted according to their riskiness. That compares to the 7% requirement most big banks must meet by 2019. 

 —Mark Whitehouse 

 Sources: PrivacyChoice, Mozilla, Google (Web trackers, data as of Thursday afternoon); U.S. Department of Agriculture (food inflation); U.S. National Climatic Data Center, preliminary data (weather).  

Amazon bested many of its retail rivals during the holiday shopping season but spent dearly to expand, chewing into profit. Cost-cutting helped Yahoo's profit more than double, but revenue declined 12% as the company struggled to keep pace with Google and Facebook. Microsoft reported strong demand in the holiday quarter for its Office software and Kinect videogame accessory. 

A lawsuit filed by 89-year-old Chinese tycoon  Stanley Ho against some of his children and their mothers portends a protracted legal battle over control of the Macau casino empire. The suit accuses family members of stealing his share of the business. 

Sara Lee said its board agreed in principle to split the company's two main businesses in the face of takeover bids, but is still working out details of the new structure. Some questioned whether the breakup would pay off as well for shareholders as a sale to another meat company or to private equity firms, which have been circling. 

Warehouse giant ProLogis was close to a pact to merge with its biggest rival, AMB Property, in what would be the largest deal in years for publicly traded real-estate companies. 

Packaging maker Rock-Tenn agreed to purchase Smurfit for $3.5 billion in cash and stock just seven months after Smurfit emerged from bankruptcy proceedings. 

Toyota Motor said it would recall more than 1.7 million vehicles world-wide because of faulty parts.

Air France-KLM's operations lack "strong safety leadership at all levels of management," an independent study found. It said the result was lax cockpit discipline, ineffective pilot training and "an unhealthy relationship" with unions. 

  John Paulson personally netted more than $5 billion in profits last year, likely the largest one-year haul in investing history, trumping the nearly $4 billion he made with his bearish bets against subprime mortgages in 2007. Appaloosa's  David Tepper and Bridgewater's  Ray Dalio each made between $2 billion and $3 billion in 2010. The gains came on winning bets on commodities, emerging-market companies, bank shares and Treasury bonds, among others.

Unrest in Egypt put a damper on the Dow industrials, which flirted with 12000 but then snapped an eight-week winning streak, falling 0.4% on the week to end at 11823.70. Oil prices surged Friday on the Egyptian turmoil, helping crude scratch out a weekly gain of 0.3%. Gold continued its January descent, falling for the fourth week in a row. The yellow metal is off 5.8% since hitting a record close of $1,422.60 on Jan. 3.

Investors and regulators are growing skeptical of the information state and local governments disclose about their finances. The SEC is looking into statements Illinois made about reducing its pension-fund costs, amid the agency's scrutiny of the muni-bond market. Separately, banks are making it harder for municipalities to renegotiate bond deals, tightening lending standards and demanding more for letters of credit.

U.S. taxpayers are expected to reap a $12.3 billion profit on the government's $45 billion Citigroup investment, as the U.S. completes its exit from the bank. The Treasury estimates the $700 billion Troubled Asset Relief Program will end up costing taxpayers about $28 billion.