LONDON—When Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne presents his budget to the House of Commons on Wednesday, he will seek to make the point that while the U.K. is ardently sticking to the course of eliminating the budget deficit, there won't be additional pain for squeezed households. 

The first part of this message—reasserting his commitment to the ambitious austerity measures that will result in £111 billion of fiscal tightening by 2015—leaves Mr. Osborne constrained, resulting in a budget that is likely to consist of tweaks to existing policy rather than major changes or new initiatives. 

"The government has been keen to emphasize that there is no Plan B, and will not want to compromise the message by even minor tinkering with its existing program," said  Chris Crowe, an economist at Barclays Capital. 

Still, unexpectedly strong public finances have given the chancellor some room to maneuver. 

Economists are predicting that total borrowing for 2010-2011 is likely to undershoot the £148.5 billion target by between £8 billion and £10 billion because of increased tax revenues. But with a long way to go until the government finances regain balance, Mr. Osborne looks unlikely to indulge in any substantial giveaways. 

Instead, the chancellor will probably use that extra money "to build a buffer against slow growth and potentially higher borrowing needs in the future," said  Hetal Mehta, economist at Daiwa Capital Markets. 

But economists expect Mr. Osborne to announce some relief for households—who are currently being squeezed by inflation of 4% and stagnant wage growth—by taking measures to counter the surge in oil prices. 

The most likely scenario is that Mr. Osborne will delay plans for April's 1 penny rise in fuel duty, a move that will cost between £500 million and £1 billion. 

Other, more costly, alternatives include a fuel-duty stabilizer—which would lower fuel duties as oil prices rise—or reversing January's value-added tax increase on motor fuels. 

The government is aware of how strongly the issue of fuel duty is resonating with the public, a point illustrated by a ComRes poll Monday that showed 81% of 2000 respondents agreeing that the government should scrap the duty increase to show it is on the side of "ordinary families." 

The chancellor is also expected to drop a planned inflation-linked rise in the flight duty leveled on aircraft passengers. 

The budget comes at a delicate time for the U.K. economy, with unemployment at its highest level in 17 years and inflation at twice the Bank of England's target rate of 2%. The fragility of the U.K.'s economic recovery became clear in gross domestic product figures for the fourth quarter of 2010, which showed contraction of 0.6%. 

That disappointing reading will put the spotlight on the latest growth and borrowing forecasts from the independent Office for Budget Responsibility, which Osborne will announce as part of his budget presentation. 

In its last projections in November, the official government forecaster predicted growth of 2.1% in 2011 and 2.6% in 2012. These figures now seem optimistic, with economists picking that the OBR will lower its prediction for 2011 to the consensus figure of 1.8%. 

The OBR will also assess whether the government will meet its formal fiscal goals of eliminating the structural budget deficit and stabilizing the ratio of debt to gross domestic product by 2015-16. Economists expect the OBR to continue forecasting that the government has a better than 50% chance of achieving this goal. 

Despite largely sticking to the path mapped out in last June's emergency budget and October's spending review, Mr. Osborne will try to cast the government's economic plans in a fresh light by labeling the new spending plan as a budget for growth and by emphasizing that he is moving the economy from rescue to recovery. 

The communications strategy is designed to counter criticism from the opposition Labour Party that the government has no coherent plan to help foster economic growth. 

Speculated has arisen that Mr. Osborne will announce a consultation process to examine combining income tax and national insurance. There will also be a £300 million package to help alleviate youth unemployment—an issue that has plagued repeated governments—through programs such as apprenticeships. 

Markets will also be looking for some clarification of the status of the Green Investment Bank, designed to help companies investing in newer and smaller low-carbon technologies, such as wave and tidal power and other renewables. At issue is whether it will be allowed to function as a real bank and have the power to borrow, lend and issue bonds. 

Companies seeking to build new low-emissions electrical generating facilities will also be seeking clarity on where the government will establish the minimum price for energy produced by relatively clean means. Part of a package of reforms of the electricity sector, the measure is designed to give potential investors some certainty on carbon prices, which are currently too low to stimulate required investments. 

Overall, economists believe that any "growth" announcements Mr. Osborne makes will be relatively small and fiscally neutral, focusing on matters such as regulatory reform and tax simplification. There is also skepticism about how much economic growth the measures will actually deliver, with Société Générale's Brian Hilliard labeling them "meaningless hype." 

—Selina Williams and Alistair MacDonald contributed to this article.

 Write to  Ainsley Thomson at ainsley.thomson@dowjones.com 