JERUSALEM – The head of Israel's National Economic Office,  Eugene Kandel, on Wednesday outlined some of the policies the Israeli government is pushing in its bid to keep the shekel's value down, including new measures to stem inflows of capital.

Mr. Kandel, a U.S.-educated economist who spearheads Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's influential economic policy, said the policy reforms were aimed at reining in chronic balance-of-payments surpluses that are putting constant upward pressure on the shekel, which currently trades at about 3.6 to the dollar, and harming Israel's heavily export-dependent economy. 

"We need to change our policies to say we don't need foreign direct investment just for the sake of foreign direct investment," Mr. Kandel said. "We need foreign investment that strengthens specific industries and that brings expertise, and not just any foreign investment that brings in money, because that just strengthens our currency and we don't need that. We're no longer interested in strongly subsidizing just because it's foreign." 

He cited a recent law that removed incentives and tax breaks offered to foreigners investing in Israel as an example of the sort of changes the government was advocating.

Mr. Kandel, speaking in Jerusalem to a small group of journalists, said that the government wanted to encourage the country's massive pension funds to shift capital out of Israel and into foreign markets as another means of easing pressure on the shekel. He said the goal was to increase the 10% that Israel's pension fund managers at present invest overseas to 25% by, among other things, recalibrating the benchmarks by which the funds' performance are measured.

Chronic balance-of-payment deficits during Israel's first 50 years of existence underpinned a constant fear that cash shortfalls could leave a besieged Israel unable to purchase badly needed weapons in one of its frequent crises. It drove policy makers to offer aggressive incentives to attract foreign investment of any sort and encourage export-oriented businesses in Israel.

But that trend began reversing itself in the late 1990s, amid an explosion in Israel's export-driven high-technology sector and consistent annual growth rates over 5%. In 2003 Israel had its first balance-of-payments surplus. That surplus has grown steadily ever since, and is expected to keep growing, especially as cash from Israel's recent offshore gas discoveries begins flowing into government coffers. 

 Write to  Charles Levinson at charles.levinson@wsj.com 