PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla.—Fingers are fragile things, so David Wright rarely slides headfirst anymore. Fingers can get tangled in third-base bags and opposing infielders' spikes. "That sticks with you for a while," said Wright, the Mets' third baseman.

He is 28 now, a little older, a little wiser. He doesn't have to "go in Pete Rose style," he said, not for appearance's sake and not at the risk of injuring himself.

Such are the small sacrifices Wright has made to stay in the Mets' lineup. They have contributed to his becoming the most durable infielder in the franchise's 49-year history—no minor matter considering the physical demands of his position and the Mets' recent inability to get their best players back on the field in a timely manner after injuries.

He has started at least 142 games in each of six consecutive seasons and at least 153 games in five of the past six. No Mets infielder has started as many games over so long a continuous length of time, according to Stats Inc., a firm that tracks statistical trends in sports.

The only sizable chunk of action that Wright has missed in his career came in 2009, a 15-day stint on the disabled list that resulted from a freak occurrence: A fastball from San Francisco pitcher Matt Cain struck him in the head. That Wright returned to play so quickly after suffering a slight concussion contrasts him with a series of Mets—Carlos Beltran, Jose Reyes, Jason Bay, Ryan Church—who have taken longer to recover than the team suggested they would.

Last year, the Mets were well above the major-league average in players' days on the disabled list, according to Stats Inc. And the latest candidate to continue these trends is pitcher Johan Santana, who is building back strength in his left shoulder after off-season surgery.

Wright is a reliable oddity: a member of the everyday lineup who is actually in the lineup every day, a single piece of Tupperware in an armoire full of Waterford.

He attributed his resilience to his off-season and in-season workout programs, routines of weightlifting and flexibility training that, according to Wright, have remained virtually unchanged in their content over the past several winters.

"I'm kind of a creature of habit," he said. "Once I start something, I like to finish it and stick to it. I can probably count on one hand the number of times over the last four or five years I've missed an off-season workout or baseball workout.''

As he has aged and the number of games he has played has risen, Wright has tapered the regimen during the past few regular seasons, said Jeff Cavaliere, one of his personal trainers. Maintaining the consistency of the sessions, though, is of vital importance.

"Let's say leg training," Cavaliere said. "I tell him, 'Give me one leg workout a week. Get in there, get out, and be done with it.' That's key."

Wright sets a target of 155 games each season, and he said he understands that manager Terry Collins will give him an occasional day off to keep him fresh.

"I look for it being an open line where we can talk about it," Wright said, which would be a bit of a change from last year. Jerry Manuel, Collins's predecessor, sometimes would float the idea of resting Wright during his daily sessions with reporters—before mentioning it to Wright.

"That," Collins said, "is not going to happen."

If Wright has his way, something else won't happen, either: a change of positions. He has given no thought, he said, to the possibility that, as he passes age 30 and the years and games pile up, he eventually might have to move to a less rigorous defensive spot, such as first base or the outfield.

"I do realize that probably the way I play, the style I play, you kind of get beat up, and who knows what's going to happen 10 years down the road as far as what my body's going to feel like?" Wright said. "But I've always been the kind who, 'Play as hard as you can now and worry about later when later comes.'

"The one move I want to make is from third to my couch."

 Write to  Mike Sielski at mike.sielski@wsj.com 