Julie Taymor, director of "Spider-Man: Turn Off the Dark," may be forced to part ways with the troubled production as early as Wednesday as producers plan a major overhaul of the musical, according to a person familiar with the matter.



Producers are negotiating Ms. Taymor's possible exit and mulling options for an additional or replacement artistic team as they plot sweeping creative changes that would require shuttering the show for at least one or two weeks, according to this person.

As a result, the cost of what is already the most expensive show in Broadway history, now more than $70 million, a person familiar with the matter said, could climb to as much as $75 million, this person said. (Cost estimates have hovered for months around $65 million.)

Shuttering the show would would also appear to delay its opening night, which as of Tuesday remained scheduled for March 15.

Facing the prospect of significant revisions to her years' work, Ms. Taymor—who has seen "Spider-Man" through the brink of bankruptcy, the longest preview period on Broadway and four accidents— has shunned the suggestion that she collaborate with a new artistic team that producers are now trying to assemble.

"She ain't gonna be in the room with any other creative people," this person said, describing Ms. Taymor's reluctance to cede control.

A spokeswoman for Ms. Taymor declined to comment on the internal discussions.

A spokesman for the production, Rick Miramontez, said Tuesday: "The cast remains committed to the show and remains enthusiastic about the show."

Ms. Taymor herself has not been involved in all of the recent talks with producers about the show's future, according to one person familiar with the matter. Another person said Ms. Taymor has expressed her desire to open the show in its current form, particularly since the musical has already dealt with a slew of highly unfavorable reviews.

Ms. Taymor does not think the kinds of sweeping changes can be made by closing the show for only one or two weeks, and she is concerned that postponing the show's opening again signals that its own backers do not believe in it, according to a person familiar with the situation.

While Ms. Taymor is known for her attention to rich visual detail, one person who has worked on the production said she has become consumed by the minutiae of this complex production. "She's overwhelmed herself," this person said.

As producers Michael Cohl and Jeremiah Harris and score co-creator Bono of U2 struggle to determine the musical's future course, the show's previously strong footing at the box office has begun to falter. Last week its capacity fell to 84%, the lowest attendance since it began previews in November.

Though it grossed $1.28 million during the week ending March 6, second only to "Wicked," it must gross at least $1.5 million per week for at least another two years in order to pay back investors.

In her most recent public appearance, at TED2011, a tech conference held last week in Long Beach, Calif., Ms. Taymor said her experience with "Spider-Man" was akin to Arthur Miller's play about the Salem witch trials. "I'm in 'The Crucible' right now," she said. "It's trial by fire."

 Write to  Erica Orden at erica.orden@wsj.com and Ellen Gamerman at ellen.gamerman@wsj.com 