When the Formula One racing season kicks off next week (March 24-27) at the Australian Grand Prix, Ferrari fans will be watching with particular anticipation, hoping for a first victory on the way to redeeming an agonizing, last-minute loss of the championship last year.

As the most victorious team in Formula One history, Ferrari has a truly global fan base, and its chief sponsor is an American cigarette brand (hence its official name, Scuderia Ferrari Marlboro). Yet there is no doubt that Italians proudly regard Ferrari as a national institution. Its newest racing car, which will debut next week in Melbourne, is named the "150° Italia," to mark this year's 150th anniversary of the country's unification. And Ferrari Chairman Luca Cordero di Montezemolo, who has never held political office, is now being seriously talked about as a replacement for the country's scandal-plagued prime minister, Silvio Berlusconi.

Ferrari is an emblem of Italian national identity, not only because of its team's pre-eminence on the race course or because its sports cars exemplify "Made-In-Italy" excellence, but because the brand represents certain cherished Italian values, including elegance, agility and, of course, speed. As anyone who has spent time on an autostrada can attest, ordinary Italians, when given the chance, will drive like Michael Schumacher on the run from the law, perhaps unconsciously compensating for the frustrating slowness of other parts of their society, including the career ladder and the state bureaucracy.

Cars are the foremost symbol of Italy's 20th-century modernization and of the individualism made possible by affluence. The automotive sector was a major engine of the post-war boom that transformed Italy from a backward agricultural country into what is today the world's seventh-largest economy. In the 1950s and '60s, that industry produced the affordable Fiat 500 and 600 models, which were the first cars that millions of Italians ever owned and which remain beloved period icons to this day.

But Italy's passion for cars has had its costs. On street corners and roadsides across the country, you can see sad monuments composed of withered flowers, sun-faded photos and other mementos of those killed in traffic accidents. The auto industry's clout goes far to explain Italy's underdeveloped public-transportation network and a density of car ownership higher than in any other major European country—a preposterous state of affairs for a population concentrated in cities and towns, whose centers are typically warrens of narrow medieval streets. Congestion makes driving and parking an ordeal rather than an adventure, rendering ownership of a fast sports car practically pointless.

Scooters are a popular solution, both practical and stylish, but also risky; I know few longtime riders who have escaped injury. At the same time, the helmet requirement in force since the year 2000 has made the experience considerably less glamorous than it was when Audrey Hepburn and Gregory Peck provoked amusing mayhem on the capital's streets in "Roman Holiday."

The ideal option, for the 30,000 lucky public servants with access to one, is a chauffeur-driven car provided by the state. These are typically nondescript black sedans, the farthest thing from sexy, but they boast two prestigious features: a siren and a flashing blue rooftop light, which permit the flouting of traffic laws and tell others on the road to clear the way. Strictly speaking, this privilege may be invoked only in case of emergency, but in a nation as excitable as Italy, emergency is a highly elastic concept. The true height of Italian automotive luxury and status, guaranteed to make all others green with envy, is therefore not a bright red Ferrari but a so-called Auto Blu.

With its bizarre mix of celebrity and ghoulish mischief, the case of Mike Bongiorno's body has provided a sideshow to the more sensational sex scandals and murder investigations dominating recent news here. The coffin of the late television host, who died in 2009 at the age of 85, was stolen from the cemetery this January. Relatives were reportedly willing to pay €300,000 for its return, before two suspects were arrested earlier this month. The American-born Bongiorno, who pioneered the quiz show on Italian TV and was beloved for his verbal gaffes, was proposed as a senator-for-life in 2002, though he didn't actually become an Italian citizen until the following year. His state funeral at the Milan Cathedral drew more than 10,000 mourners. His remains were still missing at press time.

Yesterday's rather half-hearted celebration of a century and a half of Italian unity—a national holiday observed over the misgivings of the regionalist Northern League party and the outright abstention of the German-speaking region of South Tyrol—has left an appropriately downbeat memorial in the new Museum of the Roman Republic. Located by the Porta San Pancrazio on Rome's Janiculum Hill, the museum recounts the history of an attempt at secular, republican government, which started in February 1849 and lasted barely five months. 

 Next week, Lennox Morrison in Paris. 