Across the Mediterranean, orange trees are coming into full bloom, scenting the air with their sweet, delicate fragrance, decorating the countryside with their white blossoms. These are not the orange trees that give us vitamin C, but rather bitter orange trees or citrus aurantium biga radia—"one of the quintessential 'giving trees' of the perfume world," says David Seth Moltz, the nose behind D.S. & Durga, the Brooklyn-based perfume company. 

Cold-pressing the fruit peel yields bigarade, the essential oil of the bitter orange; distilling the twigs gives you petitgrain; and the orange blossoms provide you with neroli. That's not all: Distill the leaves, twigs and flowers together and you have "petitgrain sur le fleur." Extract the oil from the flowers and you have orange blossom absolute. "This one tree," Mr. Moltz explains, "gives you a range of citrus, wood, flower and all that lies in between—clean, fresh, dark, spicy." It is, in other words, a tree worthy of obsession. So, no matter your perfume preferences, we suggest you seduce this spring with the nectar of the multidimensional citrus. 

In the 17th century, the princess of Nerola, Italy, used orange blossom to perfume her stationary, baths and, most famously, her gloves. As she gestured to her courtiers and lovers, a gentle wake of blossom must have trailed her hands. Now, neroli can be found in any number of perfumes, soaps and, according to myth, the secret recipe for Coca-Cola. It is the very essence of spring—that first bloom that promises sun and romance. And like romance, in the hands of a master perfumer, it can be heady or hesitating, sophisticated or innocent, sweet or dangerous. 

Mr. Moltz describes pure neroli as being "prim and proper." He likes to "dirty it up" with flowers that bring out neroli's wet and sexy vibe. In Poppy Rouge ($85, dsanddurga.com ), he pairs it with the heady heat of narcissus for an altogether naughty scent. 

For a refined, modern elegance, Chloé's Eau de Fleurs Neroli ($135, saksfifthavenue.com ) has flower notes that are bright yet reserved. Rosemary, peony, clary sage and white musk give it dimension.

Another modern interpretation is Jo Malone's classic Orange Blossom ($105, jomalone.com ). Top notes of lemongrass and clementine leaves keep it crisp while a faint tease of lilac and lily soften it. 

In contrast, Annick Goutal's Néroli ($120,   neimanmarcus.com)  is unabashedly feminine and very French. "The idea for Néroli was a warm wind blowing through a blooming orange grove," says the perfumer's daughter and the brand's creative director, Camille Goutal. "It was also inspired by a childhood memory: my uncle spent his holidays in Tunisia and would bring me back bouquets of orange flowers. Of course the main ingredient is the neroli, freshened by the petitgrain Paraguay (which is also tender and green) and petitgrain citronnier. The cypress and the galbanum bring a subtle woody note."

Entirely handcrafted to order—your name will be inscribed on the label of the bottle—perfumer Le Labo's Orange Blossom is at the heart of three of their best fragrances: Fleur D'Oranger 27, with jasmine and sunny bergamot; Neroli 36, a flirtatious mix of watermelon, salt, rose, mandarin and musk; and in Tubereuse 40, an energetic blend of tuberose, cedar, mimosa and petitgrain ($200, store.lelabofragrances.com ).

There is never a wrong note in a Serge Lutens perfume, and his Fleurs D'Oranger ($120, barneys.com ) is no exception. Upon application, the orange blossom comes softly forward—Mr. Lutens describes this as the "strengthening of a breeze"—but with each passing minute, the fragrance grows more complex and mysterious. Hours later, only a faint, grown-up sweetness lingers. Imagine a day that begins in an orchard somewhere off the Mediterranean coast, moves inside during the heat of the afternoon sun and ends with a sweet siesta. It's an ode to a time and a place—and most of all to the orange blossom, in all its shades and seductions.