DETROIT– General Motors Co.
GM


-1.38
%




 has stepped up its lobbying in Washington in recent months, federal records show, as Detroit's two rescued auto makers unwind their ties to the government and return to pursuing their own interests—which sometimes are at odds with the Obama administration.

GM spent nearly $3.6 million on lobbying in the first quarter of 2011, more than twice what it spent in the three months after it emerged from a restructuring in bankruptcy court in 2009, according to its lobbying disclosure forms. 

It also outspent  Ford Motor Co.
F


-0.81
%




, the only one of the Detroit three to avoid a bailout and trip through bankruptcy court. Ford spent about $1.7 million on lobbying in this year's first quarter and $5.6 million in all of 2010.

In recent months, GM—still partly owned by American taxpayers—has lobbied to shape proposed emissions and fuel-mileage standards, influence implementation of a new financial-overhaul law, and lift limits on its executive pay.

That's a stark contrast to a couple of years ago, when GM, in the wake of a $50 billion government bailout, treaded lightly around some hot-button issues.

Lately the company has joined other auto makers in urging the White House to back off a proposal that could require auto makers' vehicle fleets to get an average 62 miles a gallon by 2025, and to instead adopt less ambitious standards. GM also has worked to show that the entertainment and communications features it offers in its cars are safe, amid concerns about distracted drivers. 

Meanwhile, GM's chief executive has traveled to Washington to argue against the executive-pay caps imposed on it by President Barack Obama.

It is the kind of advocacy GM shied away from in the months following the bailout, when it even scrapped, at the White House's behest, a money-saving plan to move its headquarters out of Detroit.

"It was inevitable that the companies were in a defensive position," around the bankruptcy, said  Bob Ferguson, GM's top lobbyist, in an interview. "Now we're at a point where we're on the offensive to improve the interests of the company and the interests of the shareholders and customers."

After the government ushered GM into bankruptcy proceedings, Mr. Ferguson said, meetings with lawmakers often involved heated criticism of the bailout. Talk about GM's position on industry issues was off limits. "It wouldn't have been appropriate to go into those meetings and make a hard ask," he said.

Those barriers appear to be falling as GM and Chrysler Group LLC, which also remains part-owned by the U.S., make headway in repaying their debt to the government. 

GM repaid the loan portion of its bailout and, last fall, carried out an initial public offering that reduced the government's stake to 26.5% from 61%. Last week Chrysler said it plans to repay its loans from the U.S. and Canadian governments, and is working toward its own IPO.

GM's lobbying increased last year, and the first-quarter figures from 2011 show that it is on pace to shatter the $9.57 million it spent in 2010. That compares with a year-to-year drop of 36% in lobbying outlays in 2009. Part of this year's increase is because the company paid bonuses to employees when it didn't a year ago, GM said.

Chrysler, too, is once again becoming a player in the nation's capital. The company spent $1 million on lobbying in the first quarter, putting it on pace to eclipse the $2.54 million it spent during all of last year.

Chrysler CEO  Sergio Marchionne on Thursday said the company's move to pay off its government loans likely will mean more freedom to pursue its own interests. "I don't think anyone ever let us forget that we were saved by the government," Mr. Marchionne said.

GM and Chrysler say they are exercising their free-speech rights to voice concerns about policy and legislative proposals that would affect them and the auto industry as a whole. 

They also point out that they are more active in the capital this year because U.S. regulators currently are drafting proposals for long-term emissions and fuel-mileage targets, the most expensive regulations the auto makers face.

The new rules are expected to be released in September.

The car companies are in a struggle with California and environmental groups over how far the Obama administration should go in setting the new targets; they are fighting a proposal pushed by California that could lead to a 62-mile-a-gallon fuel-efficiency standard by 2025.

The auto makers also have lobbied the government on matters that affect business more broadly, the disclosure records show. GM has weighed in on how regulators are implementing the so-called Dodd-Frank financial-overhaul law, trade issues and health-care reform.

In February, GM, Chrysler and Ford hired former Missouri Gov.  Matt Blunt to lead their top trade association. The move was a sign that they wanted to strengthen their influence in the capital."There's a sense we can be out there more now," Mr. Blunt said recently.

For GM, the shift is another step toward distancing itself from the stigma of being "Government Motors," an unflattering nickname that has dogged it since the unpopular bailout. 

Public hostility toward the company, which was shared by many lawmakers, hurt sales after bankruptcy, GM has said. It has also worried potential investors.

Though GM continued to lobby during its bankruptcy proceedings and immediately afterward, and said the Obama administration didn't meddle in its day-to-day affairs, it still lived under the shadow of government control. Executives griped about caps the government imposed on executive pay, but did little to fight them. 

In recent months, GM Chairman and CEO  Daniel Akerson has gone to Washington to try to persuade Treasury officials to loosen the restrictions, arguing that they make it harder for the company to hire talented executives, and that the government shouldn't dictate them because it is no longer majority owner. 

Mr. Ferguson said an effective lobbying shop is critical to GM's ability to compete with rivals. 

"We were very limited, and appropriately so, in our ability to sponsor things and be involved in things," he said. "But at the same time, our competition operates very efficiently and has very respected offices, so it's very important for our voice to be heard."