Even as some Silicon Valley companies such as Facebook Inc. raise capital that enables them to stay private for longer, other Bay Area companies haven't held back from going public.

In 2010, the region enjoyed one of its strongest slates of initial public offerings for years. A total of 15 local companies backed by venture capital went public last year, up from two Bay Area companies in 2009 and only one in 2008, according to new data from research firm VentureSource. It was the strongest year of local IPOs since 2007, when 21 Bay Area venture-backed companies went public, according to VentureSource.

Among the Bay Area companies that went public last year were biomedical company  Pacific Biosciences of California Inc. in Menlo Park and electric car maker  Tesla Motors Inc. in Palo Alto. In total, all of the local companies raised nearly $1.3 billion in IPO proceeds, up from just $103.7 million in 2009 and $54 million in 2008, according to VentureSource.

"Last year was a tremendously healthy IPO market," says  Lise Buyer of Class V Group, which helps Silicon Valley start-ups and others navigate the IPO process.

The stronger showing comes even as some local Web companies with huge numbers of users and fast-growing revenue such as Facebook and social-gaming company Zynga Inc. have said they are in no hurry to go public. Facebook recently raised $500 million in funding from  Goldman Sachs and Russian investors Digital Sky Technologies, building up a war chest that allows the Palo Alto start-up to stay private for a while longer yet.

Yet for many other Silicon Valley companies in non-Internet sectors, an IPO is still the best way to raise capital for acquisitions and other operations. That drove some of the IPO push last year, say venture capitalists, with some closely held concerns that were able to grow through the recession pulling the trigger on an IPO in 2010 once the public markets settled. 

Ms. Buyer adds that the improved 2010 IPO market also was fueled by investors' larger appetite for new issuances, now that memories of the 2008 market meltdown have somewhat abated.

The rebound in IPO activity raises the specter for some of a return to market excess. But Bill Gurley, a venture capitalist at Benchmark Capital, says he isn't worried about unwarranted enthusiasm in the IPO market as much as froth in the buying and selling of private-company shares. "It's froth with risk," he says.

This year, some local venture capitalists say they expect an even better IPO showing.  Tim Draper of venture firm Draper Fisher Jurvetson says 2011 will be a "great year" for IPOs. That's because many start-ups that had only $20 million to $30 million in revenue five or six years ago had "put their head back down," he says. Those companies have now grown "to $100 million or $200 million in revenue and can afford to go public," he says. 

 Write to  Pui-Wing Tam at pui-wing.tam@wsj.com 