HONG KONG—The battle for financial-services talent in Asia is causing costs to spiral and will lead to a shakeout in the industry, UBS AG's joint chiefs for the region warned in an interview.

Banks such as  Barclays
BCS


1.41
%




 PLC,  Deutsche Bank AG and  Citigroup Inc.
C


0.67
%




 have been ramping up headcount since the financial crisis, seeking to advise the region's wealthy entrepreneurs and fast-growing companies. 

Investment banks typically lose 16% of their staff annually, according to research done by  Alex Wilmot-Sitwell, UBS's new Asian-Pacific co-chief executive. That is the equivalent of going through a complete change of headcount every six years. But in Asia, the average attrition rate is running even higher.

"Some investment banks are trying to bulk-up off a near-zero revenue base for some businesses, in the hottest market on the planet for talent. It's not really viable," said Mr. Wilmot-Sitwell in his first interview since starting in Asia last November.

Mr. Wilmot-Sitwell is now UBS's second group board member to be based in Asia, underscoring the region's importance to the Swiss bank. UBS has garnered the most revenues from core investment-banking activity of any bank since 2002, according to data tracker Dealogic. 

In November 2009, UBS set a target of earning 8.5 billion Swiss francs (US$8.8 billion) in revenues over the medium term from the Asian-Pacific region, or 25% of group revenues based on the group's three-year strategic plan. Currently, Asia represents 16%-17% of regional revenues. 

Both Hong Kong and Singapore are competing to attract the newcomers to bolster their standing as financial centers. Meanwhile, London and New York are increasing the regulatory burden on banks in the wake of the financial crisis, which hit their economies harder than those in Asia. 

The pull eastward strengthened last year as investment banks generated a record level of revenues in Asia. Companies raised more capital in Hong Kong than anywhere else in 2010, for the second year running.

However, the banks' rush into the region is starting to encounter problems. Deutsche Bank Chief Executive  Josef Ackermann warned last year that the fight for talent in Asia is causing a bubble in bankers' compensation. Since then, several senior investment bankers have said they are struggling to balance hiring locally experienced talent with keeping their own staff motivated.

Barclays Capital, the investment-banking arm of Barclays, is expected to lay off staff around the world soon, though how many isn't clear. The ax will fall most heavily in the U.S. and Europe, but a small portion will also hit Asia as new senior recruits favor bringing in their own people over using legacy staff, one person said. 

Barclays Capital is planning a "massive" hiring spree next year, according to one senior executive.

Managers are bracing themselves for another round of poaching in the coming months after bankers receive their annual bonuses.

The top 10 U.S. and European banks are planning to boost headcount by about 10% in 2011. That is equal to a whole new investment bank in Asia, even excluding Barclays, according to one U.S. head of investment banking in the region. 

Local banks are also entering the fray. "Banks in Asia Pacific which survived the crisis in fairly good shape are now able to hire top-quality traders and investment bankers, especially from Europe, who are attracted by bonus arrangements which are still relatively unconstrained," said consultants at KPMG said in a recent note.

Talent is the biggest cost for investment banks generally, and in Asia those costs are climbing fast. Managers have said bankers have been lured away by rivals offering to double and even triple compensation.

  Chi-Won Yoon, Mr. Wilmot-Sitwell's co-chief executive, said industry margins are being compressed as competitors pile into the region like never before. 

"The cost base for the industry in Asia Pacific is rising dramatically," said Mr. Yoon.

Mr. Yoon said the ramp-up is unsustainable and is likely to lead to layoffs and consolidation among banks in the Asian-Pacific region within the next few years.

"We have tended to invest counter-cyclically in the region," he said.

Rivals lured away a number of key UBS personnel in 2010, including  Steven Barg, head of global capital markets;  Henry Cai, Asia investment banking chairman; and  Mark Williams, head of equity capital markets. As a result, UBS brought some heavy hitters back to the region including  Peter Burnett as chairman of global capital markets Asia and  Sam Kendall as head of equity syndicate Asia.  John Sturmey, a former UBS executive who left in 2008, returned as its co-head of global capital markets for Asia. UBS has seen particularly fast turnover in its fixed-income operations.

Despite the disruption, UBS topped the league tables for core investment-banking revenues, equity and debt capital markets, and mergers and acquisitions in the Asian-Pacific region excluding Japan for the eighth year running, according to Dealogic. 

Industry rivals point to its well-developed Australian investment-banking franchise, a full securities license in China, its footprint across 13 countries as well as its private-banking operations as advantages in the region.

UBS is fighting to keep its head start. Core investment-banking revenues are growing but UBS's market share is at its lowest point since 2001. One push is to make the investment bank and the wealth-management division work more closely together.

"The combination of our strong investment-bank and wealth-management businesses is incredibly powerful in this region…So you've got to bring the walls down," said Mr. Wilmot-Sitwell, who sees further integration boosting revenues and UBS's bottom line.

As well as bringing in new talent from around the world, UBS is nurturing its own people. UBS recruits from about 50 universities in the Asian-Pacific region. It has a training center in Singapore and is establishing a similar facility in Hong Kong.

—Peter Stein contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Alison Tudor at alison.tudor@wsj.com 