Mumbai--India's NTPC Ltd plans to raise $500 million through a dollar-denominated bond, two people familiar with the matter said, making it the latest in a long line of firms seeking to tap relatively cheap offshore funding markets. 

The state-run firm--the largest coal-based power producer in the country--is likely to mandate banks for the sale over the next month after investment bankers made a series of presentations to the firm last week, the people told Dow Jones Newswires, but asked not to be named. 

The firm hasn't specified what it plans to use the funds for, the people added. Recently, the company has said it plans to bid for overseas coal assets to feed its growing power production. Analysts expect it to add as much as 1,000 megawatts to its generation capacity of 33,194 MW after adding about 1,500 MW of capacity last year. 

The planned deal comes as Indian firms continue to turn to offshore funding markets to escape rising borrowing costs in India, as a series of aggressive tightening steps by the central bank and tight onshore liquidity continue to push onshore debt costs higher. 

Recent Indian corporate issuers in the offshore market include first-time issuer Canara Bank, the Export-Import Bank of India and Bank of Baroda.

More are likely to follow, including relatively new issuers like Syndicate Bank, IDBI Bank and Indian Overseas Bank, and more seasoned issuers such as Axis Bank Ltd and ICICI Bank Ltd, investment bankers said. 

Increasingly aggressive overseas acquisition plans for power and mining firms are also likely to stoke the borrowing plans of Indian firms as they compete for increasingly scarce coal resources to feed their rapid expansion in the mining and power sectors. 

This would follow a recent acquisition-linked bond deal by Reliance Industries Ltd., which raised $1.5 billion in October 2010 through a bond sale to help refinance short-term debt taken for a string of shale gas acquisitions. 

Similar acquisition-linked deals could follow, as Indian conglomerates such as the Birla, Essar and Adani groups, and state-run firms, ramp up their search for coal assets.