Mayor  Michael Bloomberg, billionaire patron of the arts, purchased his most prized painting on layaway.

The object of Mr. Bloomberg's desire, he said Wednesday, captured his attention shortly after he began working in New York, having accepted a job in 1966 with Salomon Brothers to work on Wall Street.

As he was walking past a gallery, he noticed an artwork hanging in the window. The painting depicted a wintertime scene of Boston's Copley Square, and Mr. Bloomberg, a Boston-area native, was enchanted. 

"It was a nondescript artist," he said at the opening of the Armory Show in Manhattan. "But I loved the painting."

Spotting Mr. Bloomberg gazing in from the street, the gallery's proprietor invited him inside, and the two struck up a conversation. Mr. Bloomberg soon realized he couldn't afford the painting's $2,500 price tag (around $16,500 in today's dollars when adjusted for inflation).

"I was making $9,000 a year then," he recalled.

The following day, Mr. Bloomberg found himself on the same street, and stopped again to admire the artwork. Sensing Mr. Bloomberg's attachment to the piece, the dealer told him he would sell it to him on an installment plan: $25 per week.

They had a deal.

Mr. Bloomberg dutifully abided by the terms of the agreement, and, after receiving a bonus around a year later, he paid the balance. (A spokesman for the mayor,  Stu Loeser, declined to provide the name of the artist or title of the work.)

The painting is now installed in the mayor's mansion on the Upper East Side. While the townhouse contains an impressive collection—the first floor boasts several Old Masters, and a painting by German-born  Abstract-Expressionist Hans Hofmann hangs in the dining room, according to a person familiar with the matter—the Copley Square piece remains one of Mr. Bloomberg's most beloved possessions.

"Of all the paintings that I look at when I turn the light before I go home, before I go to bed at night, that's the one," he said, "because it meant so much to me and I had to sacrifice in order to get it."

 Write to  Erica Orden at erica.orden@wsj.com and Michael Howard Saul at michael.saul@wsj.com 