 New York 

Trey Parker and Matt Stone, the naughty boys of "South Park," have teamed up with Robert Lopez, one of the co-creators of "Avenue Q," and the results of their collaboration are pretty much what you'd expect: slick and smutty. "The Book of Mormon" is the first musical to open on Broadway since "La Cage aux Folles" that has the smell of a send-in-the-tourists hit. Casey Nicholaw ("The Drowsy Chaperone") has staged the musical numbers with cheery energy, and the cast, especially Nikki M. James, is terrific. But don't let anybody try to tell you that "The Book of Mormon" is suitable for anyone other than 12-year-old boys who have yet to graduate from fart jokes to "Glee." A couple of reasonably effective production numbers notwithstanding, it's flabby, amateurish and very, very safe.



The plot is exiguous. Two shiny-faced young Mormons (Josh Gad and Andrew Rannells) are sent to Uganda to evangelize the natives, promptly discover that life in Africa is more complicated than they thought, and prevail by being geeky and lucky. This is, in other words, a one-joke show, the joke being that Mormons are unworldly nerds who think that "bullpoop" is a deletable expletive. Most of the other jokes in the show are derivative of this one and are just as obvious, including the Obligatory Song About a Closeted Gay Mormon: "Being gay is bad, but lying is worse / So just realize you've got a curable curse!" This being a "South Park" spinoff, we also get several other songs that operate on the mistaken assumption that four-letter words are automatically funny when sung, plus an assortment of AIDS-in-Africa "jokes" that are to black comedy what pies in the face are to screwball comedy.

The creators of "South Park" like to call themselves "equal-opportunity offenders," but if you think there's anything risky about "The Book of Mormon," you're kidding yourself. Making fun of Mormons in front of a Broadway crowd is like shooting trout in a demitasse cup. And while we're on the subject of imitation courage, let it be duly noted that if the title of this show were "The Quran," it wouldn't have opened. Messrs. Parker and Stone found that out the hard way a year ago when online death threats caused Comedy Central executives to censor an episode of "South Park" in which the Prophet Muhammad was shown wearing a bear costume. The boys have learned their lesson well: Never shoot at anybody who shoots back.

That's the flabby part. The amateurish part relates mostly to the score, which is jointly credited to the three co-creators and is no better than what you might hear at a junior-varsity college show. The tunes are jingly-jangly, the lyrics embarrassingly ill-crafted. (This is the kind of show whose makers think that "days" rhymes with "AIDS.") The opening song, "Hello," is a moderately clever pastiche-style ditty about Mormon doorbell-ringers that gets things off to a brisk enough start, and "Hasa Diga Eebowai" is a crudely funny let's-sing-lots-of-dirty-words production number that earns the laughs it gets. But you can pull that stunt only once a night, and "The Book of Mormon" tries to pull it several more times, always with diminishing returns. As for the lame second-act parody of the "Small House of Uncle Thomas" story ballet from "The King and I," these guys have a long way to go before they earn the right to make fun of Jerome Robbins.

The aforementioned Ms. James is charming as a nice African girl who longs to move to Salt Lake City and live happily ever after. Messrs. Gad and Rannells are nearly as good, and their supporting cast leaves nothing to be desired. The show itself, on the other hand, leaves pretty much everything to be desired, though Tuesday night's preview audience shrieked with frantic joy all night long. The last time I heard that much laughter in a Broadway house was at the opening of "Monty Python's Spamalot," undoubtedly for the same reason. It is the sound of people who paid good money to see a mediocre brand-name show and are trying to persuade themselves that it lived up to their expensive expectations.



John Leguizamo has turned to straight autobiography in "Ghetto Klown," his fifth one-man show. No, his parents didn't understand him. Yes, he became an actor and started getting work in Hollywood, albeit in stereotypical wisecracking-Latino-with-an-Uzi roles. Yes, he started writing one-man stage shows in order to understand himself. Yes, his screen career went into the tank, in part because of his undisciplined behavior and general mouthiness. No, his first marriage didn't work out. Yes, his second marriage did, which gave him the courage to write "Ghetto Klown" and return to the stage after an eight-year hiatus…but enough already! Mr. Leguizamo is an energetic and resourceful performer and "Ghetto Klown" has its moments. The problem is that you've heard them all before, not just from Mr. Leguizamo himself but from a hundred other serial monologists who think that everything that ever happened to them is worth hearing.

Fisher Stevens has staged "Ghetto Klown" very deftly, but he failed to do the first job of a good director, which was to sit Mr. Leguizamo down and tell him in no uncertain terms that a 2½-hour show about the ups and downs of his wild and crazy life is an hour too long. At least.

—Mr. Teachout, the Journal's drama critic, blogs about theater and the other arts at www.terryteachout.com. Write to him at tteachout@wsj.com.