HOLLISTER—The population of this city 45 miles south of San Jose grew faster than nearly anywhere else in Northern California during the late-1990s economic boom, as tech workers sought cheaper housing. Since then, though, the local economy has withered.

Beset by high unemployment and a sewage-system failure that curbed development for more than five years, Hollister and surrounding San Benito County never fully recovered from the dot-com bust. And the mid-2000s housing boom that helped many other rural areas before faltering in 2008 never arrived here.

Now, neighboring Silicon Valley is on the upswing. And while San Benito has shown some signs of optimism—including new businesses in downtown Hollister as well as plans to encourage development next to the local airport and to build a giant solar-panel array—it continues to lag behind.

San Benito's jobless rate was 20.6% in March—double that of adjacent Santa Clara County and well above the statewide rate of 12.3%—ranking 53rd out of California's 58 counties. Santa Clara's jobless rate in March was down 1.4 percentage points from a year earlier; San Benito's fell four-tenths of a point. San Benito's high unemployment rate is expected to temporarily inch closer to the California average in the summer, as seasonal farm labor provides temporary jobs that generally dry up around September. 

Meantime, San Benito's bankruptcy rate of 2.4% for companies and individuals was nearly double the rate in Santa Clara, and among the highest in Northern California, according to data compiled by the Associated Press.

Local appliance and furniture stores, as well as restaurants, have closed over the past few years, leaving Hollister with vacant storefronts.

"It's been tough here," said County Supervisor Jerry Muenzer, whose family's bike and locksmith shop, Muenzer's, has been a downtown Hollister mainstay for nearly a century.

San Benito's problems trace back to the dot-com boom, when parts of it became a bedroom community for Silicon Valley's new hires. Workers moved south, first to Gilroy at the southern end of Santa Clara County and then to new subdivisions that popped up in farmlands surrounding Hollister.

Between 1990 and 2000, Hollister's population grew 79% to 34,413. San Benito's own job growth didn't keep up with housing—the county's largest employer is a grower of organic lettuce—but money from the Valley supported new boutiques and restaurants in Hollister.

Hollister began to suffer with the dot-com crash, and the trouble deepened in 2002 with a sewage debacle. The city hadn't expanded the capacity of its sewage-treatment plant to accommodate growth. That spring, a levee in the treatment system failed. (Officials blame a gopher.) The resulting spill sent several million gallons of raw waste into the San Benito River.

In the ensuing months, regional water-quality regulators imposed a moratorium on new building until a new sewage-treatment plant was built, stopping the already-approved construction of about 1,100 houses.

At the same time, a rancorous debate among local officials and community groups ensued over how fast San Benito should grow. After a series of public spats—which included a lawsuit by the district attorney against members of an anti-development group that later was dropped— the county imposed a development cap on areas outside Hollister. Economic and population growth in the county stagnated.

By the time the new sewage plant was complete and the building moratorium lifted, it was 2008. "Right when we started moving forward, the economy crashed," said Nancy Martin, director of San Benito's nonprofit economic development corporation.

Ms. Martin moved from Riverside County in Southern California in late 2008 to help San Benito attract businesses. She said Hollister and the surrounding areas are making progress. 

The tiny town of Tres Pinos, south of Hollister, now has a "restaurant row" of three bars and restaurants geared to tourists, she said. And a big solar company plans to install panels in a remote part of the county.

Meantime, local entrepreneurs are starting to repopulate downtown Hollister. While the area has seen four businesses close this year, eight have opened, said Brenda Weatherly, head of the Hollister Downtown Association.

Among businesses expected to open this year is The Market & The Butcher. Owners Zeph and Carla Thorning are Hollister natives who returned from Sacramento in late 2009 "with the intention of opening a small business in our downtown," said Mr. Thorning.

Mr. Thorning said he and his wife saw an opening for a business that could "vertically integrate" the county's cattle ranching industry. Mr. Thorning's family has been raising cattle in San Benito County since they arrived with the Donner Party in the mid-1850s.

The shop, he said, will butcher local beef as well as game brought in by hunters, make cured-meat products and possibly serve lunch and dinner. He expects much of its business to come from people in the Bay Area looking for locally produced and butchered meat.

 Write to  Justin Scheck at justin.scheck@wsj.com 