Americans are increasingly responsible for health-care expenses, yet it's nearly impossible to comparison-shop for a doctor, test or procedure. Castlight Health Inc. aims to change that by bringing the online-shopping revolution to the giant, opaque health-care industry. The company pulls together price data, consumer reviews and individual health-benefit information into one spot, with the goal of helping users make sensible, long-term, economical decisions. "If you have diabetes, we can help you plan all your treatment for the whole year, so you know what it's going to cost," says Chief Executive  Giovanni Colella, who co-founded the company in 2008. Castlight eventually hopes to "cast light" on medical spending for all consumers. For now, though, it's only available to employees of companies that sign up -- to date, five employers have, and 61 more are in line to strike a deal, Dr. Colella says.

Castlight recently ranked No. 1 in the Journal's Top 50 Venture-Funded Companies ranking, securing $81 million in capital to date. Edited interview excerpts follow:

 Q. How did you get the idea for Castlight? 

 A. I had just sold my first company [health-care company RelayHealth] and thought: What am I going to do next? In health care, we have no transparency. We get a bill six months after we go to see a doctor, and usually there's a surprise. I started thinking, this is just crazy. This would be unacceptable in any other industry. [Cofounder]  Todd Park and I said: Why don't we create a portal where people can actually go and understand their personalized cost of care? 

 Q. What were the first steps you took to bring the idea to life? 

 A. I thought this is complex, this is really difficult, so let's bring together the best people we can. [After recruiting two people from management-consulting firm McKinsey & Co, plus a technologist and an investor from venture-capital firm Venrock] we literally brainstormed for about six months. Then we searched for visionary employers. We went directly to speak to  Steve Burd, the CEO at  Safeway Inc., and said: Can we do a pilot with you? 

 Q. Why Safeway? 

 A. He had been implementing—way before he met us— a ton of very innovative things and wanted to provide [lower-cost] health-care benefits for his employees. We showed him that you can get lab tests 10 times cheaper by going from a hospital to an outpatient lab. He's already saving. It's one of those rare situations where, just by creating the efficiency of a free market, everybody wins—except the high-cost, low-quality providers—but that's fine, right?

 Q. Cleveland Clinic is an investor. Why would a hospital want price transparency? 

 A. They believe that we are changing the way consumers approach health care, and they want a seat at the table. They're seeing this wave coming of employees that are going to approach physicians in a different way because they're going to be armed with information.

 The Top 50 Venture-Backed Companies  

 Q. Will you go straight to consumers? 

 A. We want to provide [price data] directly to consumers. Forty-million people buying health care on the exchanges [as a result of health-care reform] will just naturally cause a shift in the way people look at health care. At that point, you create much more of a consumer mentality. 

 Q. It must be a big challenge to get price data. How do you do that? 

 A. You're absolutely right. We have a partnership with the employers we work with, and we have access to the claims of their employees. We're also now building direct partnerships with health plans to get data transferred to us. The health plans have, obviously, an interest because usually when you have transparency that drives down cost, because people start competing on price and quality. 

 Q. How did you attract more than $80 million in funding?  

 A. It really wasn't that difficult. The first round we did in two weeks. The second round, we did it even faster. The business model is good. We need to decrease the cost of health care, and we need to have a market-driven approach to this, because that's the only way you are going to find a point in common between Democrats and Republicans. So you put all this together and you create the perfect storm, and you see how a technology like ours is really what America needs today. 

 Q. What's next for Castlight? 

 A. We are closing probably another three employers within the next couple of months. We are looking to partnerships that can help us acquire data, and we're rolling out nationally now. So the next couple of years is all about gaining market share and pushing hard to get as much data as we can and get ready for the exchanges. 

 Q. What's your top piece of advice for other entrepreneurs? 

 A. Don't do it for the money. That's the No. 1 one thing because there are other ways of making money that are much easier. And allow your passion to take you. Just wake up every morning saying, "I love what I do." And hopefully you see a social cause in it, too. If you're lucky, by the way, you can generate a lot of wealth. But don't do it because of that.