NEW YORK—Menthol tobacco products may not increase smokers' risk of disease more than other cigarettes, according to a draft report from a Food and Drug Administration advisory panel. 

Still, the Tobacco Products Scientific Advisory Committee, which is charged with making recommendations on menthol products to the agency, said that menthol may mask the harshness of smoking and could be more attractive to young smokers. 

According to the report, released late Monday, there is insufficient evidence to show that menthol increases smoke inhalation, exposure to nicotine or disease risk. Analysts say the results are in line with expectations and echo what panel members had said in prior public meetings. 

In 4 p.m. New York Stock Exchange composite trading Tuesday, shares of  Lorillard Inc. were up $1.21, or 1.6%, at $77.98. 

Lorillard would be most affected by an outright ban on, or other tight regulation of menthol, as the vast majority of its revenue comes from its menthol cigarettes. 

Menthol cigarettes comprise nearly one-third of all cigarette sales volume.  Reynolds American Inc.
RAI


-0.17
%




 and  Altria Group Inc.
MO


0.00
%




 also offer menthol products but don't rely on them as much for sales.

The tobacco advisory panel will meet Wednesday to further discuss the potential public health risks of menthol products and will issue a final report to the FDA by March 23. The agency isn't required to follow the committee's recommendations. 

Last week, Lorillard and Reynolds American filed a lawsuit to stop the FDA from drawing on the panel's recommendations, alleging conflicts of interest by several of the advisory group's members. 

Investors were encouraged by the draft chapters released Monday, but analysts are more measured in their response. 

"While the headlines read quite positively thus far pertaining to the release of these chapters, we believe this is quite one-sided," Stifel Nicolaus analysts wrote in a client note. "We cannot call these chapters a net positive for U.S. tobacco stocks," the firm said, as the section on youth initiation and smoking cessation was rather harsh. 

  Morgan Stanley
MS


-0.03
%




 called the chapter on physiological effects "hostile," but noted that the language used was somewhat subjective, rather than evidence-based. 

 Corrections & Amplifications 

The headline on an earlier version of this story incorrectly attributed the findings of the draft report on the risks of menthol cigarettes to the FDA.

 Write to  Melissa Korn at melissa.korn@dowjones.com 