Wouter Weylandt, a 26-year-old Belgian cyclist, died Monday from injuries sustained in a crash during the third stage of the Giro d'Italia, near the town of Rapallo in northern Italy.

Weylandt crashed while descending sharply winding roads after a climb called the Passo del Bocco. With him unconscious, medical staff worked on him furiously as a row of team cars carrying spare bicycles cautiously squeezed by the scene. He was airlifted by helicopter to a local hospital, where he was pronounced dead.

The crash itself wasn't caught on camera, and the details of how Weylandt went down are still unknown. The gruesome images of the young rider lying on the ground offered few clues. The road was shaded by trees, and the right side was bordered by a rocky cliff face. 

Weylandt was the fourth cyclist to die after crashing in the Giro d'Italia, which is one of cycling's three Grand Tours (the others are the Tour de France and the Vuelta a España). The latest death in the Italian race was Emilio Ravasio, in 1986. Since then, there have been plenty of close calls.

In May 2009, Spaniard Pedro Horrillo fell nearly 200 feet off a cliff while descending down the Culmine di San Pietro. Horrillo was basically alone and far away from the crowds and cameras when he went over the barricades. Other riders noticed his bike lying on the side of the road, and rescuers later found him down below, resting on a ledge with a broken femur, fractured knee and vertebrae, a collapsed lung and a brain contusion. He was rescued by helicopter and survived. His professional racing career ended after the crash. 

The next day, riders, including Lance Armstrong, protested the safety conditions at the race by riding slowly during a 10-lap Criterium through the streets of Milan. With narrow roads, questionable road surfaces and sharp turns, the stage was an invitation for more serious crashes. 

Monday's fatal crash happened during a stage that is comparatively innocuous compared with the roads of the higher mountains scheduled for later in the race. The mountain roads of the Giro can be so steep, narrow and sketchy that the downhill portions often decide the winner. In 2005, Italian Paolo Savoldelli beat Gilberto Simoni by out-descending him on the Colle delle Finestre. His descending skills earned him the nickname "Il Falco," or the Falcon. 

Weylandt was well-known among serious cycling fans in Europe. When he was 23, he won a stage in the 2008 Vuelta a España. He surged ahead in a blazing fast field spring to best some of the sport's top sprinters. Typically, Weylandt raced as a "lead-out" man in those situations, pushing the pace up front to create a comfortable draft for the team's designated "sprinter," who, by design, would surge ahead at the end for the victory. 

At last year's Giro, Weylandt escaped a massive pileup at the end of the 140-mile third stage that went from Amsterdam to Middelburg, Belgium. With only a handful of riders in contention in the final miles, Weylandt out-sprinted them and crossed the finish line in his home country with his arms in the air and the biggest victory of his career.

 Write to  Reed Albergotti at reed.albergotti@wsj.com 