WASHINGTON—Thousands of U.S. military families, along with other American civilians, are poised for evacuation from Japan as the country's nuclear crisis deepens. 

In a notice issued Thursday, the U.S. embassy in Tokyo said that the government would fly U.S. citizens out of Japan to havens in Asia, with repayment expected later. In addition, dependents of U.S. military personnel stationed in Japan may leave the country on a voluntary basis. 

Pentagon spokesman Col. David Lapan said that the U.S. government will charter aircraft to airlift U.S. civilians from Japan. U.S. military bases in Korea are being prepared to receive evacuees from Japan, which has seen rising fears over radiation from earthquake-stricken nuclear-power plants. 

U.S. commanders in Japan recommended that personnel at Yokosuka and on other bases remain indoors.

"We didn't believe it was a threat to health or to life, but out of precautions we urged them to stay inside," Secretary of the Navy Ray Mabus said Wednesday during a Senate hearing.

The U.S. government on Thursday reiterated a recommendation that American citizens living within 50 miles of the stricken Fukushima Daiichi nuclear facility evacuate.

The primary means for the current evacuation, Col. Lapan added, would be charter aircraft. "If necessary, U.S. military assets may be used," he added.

The State Department has authorized the voluntary departure of family members and dependents of U.S. government employees stationed in northeast Japan. 

In another sign of U.S. concern about radiation risks in Japan, U.S. customs officers began screening passengers and cargo arriving in the U.S. from Japan for radiation, in what Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano described Thursday as an "exercise of caution." The screenings have so far detected no dangerous or harmful levels of radiation, the agency said.

The U.S military presence in Japan is substantial, and U.S. Forces Japan, which is headquartered at Yokota Air Base, has a sizeable contingent of military families and civilians. The command has approximately 38,000 military personnel, along with 43,000 dependents and 5,000 Pentagon civilian employees. 

The State Department also has authorized a voluntary evacuation of about 600 diplomatic family members and dependents stationed in Tokyo, Yokohama and Nagoya. 

The U.S. late Thursday began flying U.S. citizens out of Japan from Tokyo's Narita Airport aboard civilian charter aircraft. The move follows a government travel advisory issued Wednesday cautioning all Americans against traveling to Japan. 

The U.S. Navy has positioned a sizeable fleet off both the west and east coasts of Japan to aid in the relief efforts. Mr. Mabus said the service had 14 ships and more than 10,000 personnel in Japan or off the Japanese coast. Military officials expect a total of 15 U.S. ships in the region.

"We're flying our helicopters, and we will soon have almost 70 helicopters in the region or in the area that was affected," he said. "We're moving Japanese first responders, Japanese troops by ship to the affected areas." 

The III Marine Expeditionary Force based on Okinawa sent a company with 500 Marines close to the earthquake-hit regions of Japan. Mr. Mabus said they would assist in radiological testing, humanitarian assistance and other disaster-relief planning. 

Ships of the U.S. Navy's Seventh Fleet, including carrier USS Ronald Reagan, are off the east coast of Japan. On the west coast, the Essex amphibious group is stationed with the 31st Marine Expeditionary Unit aboard. 

Capt. Caleb Eames, a spokesman for 31st Marine Expeditionary Unit, said the amphibious force was not currently performing civilian rescue missions. 

"Of course, we remain available to assist as directed by our higher headquarters, but at this point we are on the west coast of Japan preparing for humanitarian aid and disaster relief operations," he said. 

 Write to  Nathan Hodge at nathan.hodge@wsj.com and Neil King Jr. at neil.king@wsj.com 