 Birdland  315 W. 44th St., (212) 581-3080  Through Saturday 

In a sense, the late trumpeter Freddie Hubbard (1938-2008) assembled his own tribute band: Of the five players on stage at Birdland this week—tenor saxophonist Javon Jackson, pianist George Cables, bassist Dwayne Burno, drummer Lenny White and trumpeter Nicholas Payton—only the young Mr. Payton never worked with him. A natural star of his instrument, Hubbard was also an under-appreciated composer. His original songs helped make his albums some of the signature works of the hard-bop era, and in the 1970s tunes like "Red Clay" established Hubbard as a jazz star with a popular following. His greatness as a trumpeter-composer is underscored in a new expanded edition of an already famous live album, "California Concert," from 1971. The album's high point is an extended reading of "Straight Life," which also happened to be the highlight of the opening set at Birdland by Messrs. Payton, Jackson and company. Coincidence? I don't think so.

In the early part of Hubbard's career, no one would have dreamed of doing an album of his music: Hubbard played a prominent role with such acclaimed composers as Wayne Shorter, Eric Dolphy and Oliver Nelson, so it's not surprising that it took a while for his own tunes to be noticed. Conversely, in the final part of his life—an awkward period when the once-great brassman had to come to grips with having outlived his chops—the reverse was true. By 1998, when the trumpeters Tim Hagans and Marcus Printup got together for "Hub Songs: The Music of Freddie Hubbard," it seemed like everybody was playing his tunes, since he was no longer able to play them himself. (Just recently, singer Suzanne Pittston released "Out of the Hub: The Music of Freddie Hubbard.")

The opening show on Tuesday began with "Birdlike" (from 1961's "Ready for Freddie"), a fast and baroque bop-blues in the Charlie Parker tradition. It was contrasted by 1962's "Up Jumped Spring," easily Mr. Hubbard's most whimsical tune (made even more famous by a set of lyrics from the late Abbey Lincoln). "Up Jumped Spring" is an anomaly, one of the few bebop (as opposed to modal) waltzes, and Mr. Jackson brought to it a density of notes reminiscent of the sheets-of-sound approach associated with another Hubbard collaborator, John Coltrane. Messrs. Payton and Jackson then sequentially essayed one of Hubbard's favorite standards, "Body and Soul" (which he played on six different albums) with the trio, although here Mr. Cables did the best job of maintaining the mellow ballad mood.

At this point we were ready for another hard-hitting, blasting bebop blues. I was expecting Hubbard's biggest hit, "Red Clay," especially since the original recording featured drummer Lenny White. Instead, the group delivered "Straight Life," which, as suggested above, seemed to be fresh in their minds from the new "California Concert" album. Hubbard's '70s recordings are often dismissed as commercial concessions, but this concert reminds us that he was playing a lot of excellent straight-ahead bop in the earlier part of the decade—and that the public was eating it up. 

"Straight Life" would have been a worthy closer at Birdland, but Messrs. Jackson and Payton didn't feel like leaving the stage quite yet, so they concluded with "Rhythm-a-ning." It was the Thelonious Monk tune, of course, but like everything else in the program it was rich in the spirit of Freddie Hubbard.

 Carnegie Hall  57th Street & Seventh Avenue  (212) 247-7800  Friday 

At 83, the last surviving regular of "The Tonight Show with Johnny Carson" still has all his trumpet chops, and his newest musical direction is a virtual piñata of a surprises. Having lived in Mexico for the last five years, the former swing-band star is exploring Latin music in an extended orchestral collaboration with guitarist Gil Gutierrez. The program on Friday (most of which is heard on the current album "El Ritmo De La Vida") will combine jazz and Pan-Latin music, including a bolero by Django Reinhardt ("Troublant Boléro") and an all-time classic choro by Zequinha de Abreu ("Tico-Tico no Fubá"). The wildest track is "Pent Up House," on which Mr. Severinsen jams on the "I Got Rhythm" changes (courtesy Sonny Rollins) with what sounds like the Hot Club of Burbank.

 The Village Vanguard  178 Seventh Ave. South  (212) 255-4037  Through Sunday 

The threat of a blizzard kept most New Yorkers out of the clubs on Tuesday night. The storm didn't arrive until Wednesday, but fortunately there is a whole weekend left to see what might be the most entertaining jazz-piano trio working today. Mr. Terrason's favorite strategy seems to be settling into a reggae-Caribbean rhythmic groove (reminiscent of Bud Powell's "Broderick") that imbues everything he plays with an unmistakable joyfulness. On Tuesday he also featured his bassist (Ben Williams) and drummer (Jamire Williams) more extensively than most pianist-leaders ever would. Indeed, the whole show pivoted around the constant interplay of the three musicians, giving everything a playful quality that never let up. Throughout Ron Carter's "Third Plane" and a sequence of standards (most appropriately, "Smile") those of us who had braved the non-storm could—no less than the trio on stage—scarcely keep from grinning out of sheer delight. 

 Rose Hall  Broadway at 60th Street, (212) 258 9595  Saturday 

Veteran jazzmen like Charles Lloyd are frequently described as "saxophonist-composer-bandleaders," but in Mr. Lloyd's case that order is incorrect. What he does better than almost anybody is assemble bands and lead them, attracting stellar sidemen and gathering them into carefully considered ensembles. The current line-up co-stars the highly acclaimed pianist Jason Moran, bassist Reuben Rogers and drummer Eric Harland. Mr. Lloyd's leadership and direction often counts for more than his own playing and/or composing, although that isn't too shabby, either. The foursome's new album, "Mirrors," features the leader principally on soprano, which he plays with a haunting minor tone that lends the group's work a kind of world-music edge to it—even on standards like "I Fall in Love Too Easily" and Gospel perennials like "Go Down Moses."

 The Town Hall  123 W. 43 St., (212) 307-4100  Monday 

Imagine the Oscars if Sandra Bullock, instead of thanking her agent, sang "Rose's Turn." At the Nightlife Awards, conceived by the productive producer-scribe Scott Siegel, the awards themselves are strictly secondary. The main thing is the show, a concert at Town Hall in which the best and brightest artists on the New York club scene perform. Acceptance speeches are verboten. The emphasis is generally on singers, particularly of the cabaret and musical theater variety, but Mr. Siegel also makes every effort to include jazz instrumentalists and comedians. Winners scheduled to perform this year include Christine Ebersole, Jessica Molaskey, Karen Oberlin, Karen Akers, Hannibal Buress, Aaron Weinstein, Nellie McKay, Barbara Carroll, Charles Busch, Julie Halston, Jim Caruso and Billy Stritch. The host is the irrepressible Bruce Vilanch, who never met a dirty joke he didn't like.