MOSCOW—On high alert for possible radioactive contamination in Russia's Far East, officials say they have enlisted natural allies—mussels. 

Water authorities in Vladivostok said fresh-water mussels installed in the city's water-purification plant to detect heavy-metal pollution also protect against radiation. The highly sensitive Unionidae mussels close their shells as soon as they encounter contaminants in the water, triggering special electronic sensors that alert operators, the agency said.

"The biomonitoring system works well,"  Tamara Rozhkova, chief scientist at Primorsky Vodokanal, said in a release Wednesday. "The advantage over traditional monitoring is that the mollusks check the quality of the water constantly and can send signals to the operator in real time."

Officials said radiation levels in the city, which lies 500 miles northwest of Japan's stricken Fukushima nuclear plant, remain within normal ranges. Authorities have stepped up radiation monitoring across the region but so far say there is no sign of any impact from the reactor accident in Japan. The Emergency Situations Ministry posted what it said was a live webcast of a radiation monitor in Yuzhnosakhalinsk, which showed a level of 11 microrentgens per hour, below the maximum safe level of 30, it said. 

Local residents say anxiety is high, however, and pharmacies report selling out of radiation dosimeters and iodine pills, which can be used to mitigate the effects of radiation exposure. Some travel agencies in the area also reported that air tickets to Moscow and other cities further west were selling at double the normal rates.

"Of course we're worried about the situation in Japan and a possible radiation leak," said a worker at the regional art museum in Yuzhnosakhalinsk, which lies at the southern tip of Sakhalin Island. "But people are mostly concerned because our local television says, 'everything's ok, don't worry,' but doesn't explain anything. That's what makes it scary."

In Yuzhnokurilsk, a small city on one of the islands just north of Japan that are the subject of a territorial dispute between Moscow and Tokyo, residents said locals are staying put for the moment. "Of course we're worried and we watch the news all the time," said Oksana Starikevich, a clerk at the town's only drugstore, where iodine pills sold out early this week. "We're on the island that's closest to Japan."

—Olga Padorina contributed to this article.

 Write to  Gregory White at greg.white@wsj.com 