 Hong Kong 

There's a definite buzz around the community center in Chai Wan, a mostly residential area here, on a recent Thursday afternoon. The place is swarming with college students decked out in business formal. They've come for a competition in entrepreneurship. The rest of us should come for a glimpse of what the brightest young entrepreneurs in the world's most populous country are getting up to.

The event is sponsored by Students in Free Enterprise. The U.S.-based organization pits college students around the world against each other to test their business savvy. Teams develop an enterprise that must be both profitable and address a social problem. When they're good, they're good. The program attracts sponsors from Unilever to Microsoft, drawn, SIFE's organizers note, in part by the opportunity to get a jump on recruiting from the deep end of the talent pool.

A look in on competitors from the mainland proves the point. Students from Guangdong Pharmaceutical University have partnered with a local farmer to convert his property into an eco-tourism destination. They'll build a facility in which to offer seminars on traditional Chinese medicine. Customers from the nearby city also will be able to use little plots of the farm to grow their own vegetables on weekends.

The model has been successful in some other contexts, although the judges, drawn from among Hong Kong's business community, note a few weaknesses: Why target only high-income customers and not the middle class? And how sustainable is the revenue stream?

Next comes the Guangdong University of Foreign Studies, one of the strongest competitors. Their project helps local vegetable farmers adopt modern agricultural techniques while boosting the marketing of their produce. The students purport to have raised annual incomes of participating farmers to an average of 19,524 yuan ($3,000) from 8,376 yuan before. Crop yield and profitability are up. Little wonder this team will advance to the national championship in Shanghai later this month.

As a general rule, I'm told, mainland teams show well in these competitions. Their enthusiasm is palpable. And although sometimes their projects misfire, on the whole it's clear that given some more business experience these students will make something of themselves.

The teams from Hong Kong are equally smart and motivated—and suave where the mainlanders are rawly energetic—but also different in telling ways. Take the team from the Chinese University of Hong Kong. Their social problem is the propensity of Hong Kong parents to overschedule their children, leaving little time to build a parent-child relationship. They've developed a fee-based activity program. For roughly $25, parents can bring their children in on a Sunday afternoon to bond over drawing, dancing and such. They plan to offer related courses on building better parent-child relationships.

The judges have some questions. Why target the middle class? Are you sure the market will bear your prices? Is this the best way to achieve the social goal? The team flounders.

Hong Kong Baptist University fares somewhat better. Their company caters corporate events with traditional Chinese snacks procured from vendors whose street stalls are squeezed by higher rents. But judges' questions again prove a Waterloo. How will they ensure quality control? Can they stave off competition from existing caterers if the model proves a success?

The Hong Kong teams in this regional contest have struggled to identify social needs, and have had to push the entrepreneurial envelope to meet them. It's a function of Hong Kong's relative level of development. The Chinese teams need merely walk out the door and they'll stumble across a socio-economic problem to solve. They'll often be able to solve it by importing a business model (eco-tourism, modern agriculture) already in use elsewhere.

This highlights the point that while China is undoubtedly home to immense entrepreneurial talent, much of that talent is currently directed at catching up to the rest of the world—just as in any other developing economy. Those who fret about China's business rise (and America's decline) might note this diversion of talent away from envelope-pushing toward development back-filling. China is not re-inventing the developing-economy wheel after all.

More important, however, is a question: Will China know what to do with these entrepreneurs? Put another way, is China the right environment to allow them to flourish?

The SIFE program's social-responsibility mission certainly meshes with the kind of capitalism China's leaders increasingly seem to think they need. Such entrepreneurship is more socially aware, and theoretically less prone to the rapacity that causes rampant pollution, adulterated milk, flamboyant corruption and other ills guaranteed to spark popular outrage.

Yet these student projects imply that such capitalism will bring challenges for Beijing as well as benefits. The projects all involve building new and potentially unpredictable connections between individuals and businesses. Is a regime that until 2005 banned the Avon lady for fear of political agitation and has yet to make peace with the iPhone app ready for that?

The talent and enthusiasm on display in this competition speaks to the country's enormous human capital. The success of China's development project ultimately will hinge on whether these students enjoy the freedom to pursue in "real life" the kind of venture they've so successfully executed this year.

 Mr. Sternberg edits the Business Asia column. 