LONDON—U.K. unions Thursday threatened widespread industrial action if the government implements recommendations in a new report that advises making millions of public-sector employees work longer for lower pensions. 

An independent report recommended Thursday that public-sector workers be switched from lucrative final-salary pension schemes to ones based on their average earnings to help reduce the burden on the government's finances,

The report, led by former Labour minister  John Hutton, who led the Independent Public Services Pension Commission, also recommended the pension age for public-sector workers, many of whom can retire at age 60, should rise in line with the state-pension age, which is currently 65 and is set to rise to 66 in 2020. 

The government commissioned the report last June in an attempt to find ways to cut costs as it tries to tackle the country's huge budget deficit. Public-sector pensions cost the government around £32 billion ($51.85 billion) a year, with nearly one in five U.K. citizens, or 12 million people, having some claim to them. 

  Brian Strutton, national secretary for public services at the union GMB, said Mr. Hutton's conclusions would infuriate public-sector workers. UNISON, the U.K.'s largest public-sector union, and the FDA, which represents senior public servants, also threatened strikes if the government didn't negotiate with them before implementing the recommendations. The Trade Union Congress—the U.K.'s umbrella-union organization—said public-sector workers are already being squeezed by pay freezes and job cuts and the proposed reforms could leave future pensioners in poverty.

However, Mr. Hutton cautioned that if the state pension system continues in its current state it was "heading for the rocks". 

"I think the responsible thing to do is accept that because we are living longer we should work longer," he said during an interview with BBC Radio 4. 

Mr. Hutton said pensions based on career-average earnings rather than final salaries will be fairer to the majority of workers that don't have the high salary growth rewarded in final salary schemes. His report also recommends that the pension age of members of the armed forces, police and firefighters should rise to 60 from the current age of 50 or 55. 

But pension promises that have already been made should be honored, the report said. 

The Institute of Directors and the Confederation of British Industry welcomed the report, saying it was a big step towards making public-sector pensions affordable and sustainable in the long-term. 

"The key now is that the government is radical and gets on with creating public-sector pension schemes that are genuinely sustainable in the long run," said  Miles Templeman, director general of the Institute of Directors. "Against the backdrop of an ageing population and the current crisis in public finances, taxpayers can't be expected to fund public-sector pension schemes that are typically worth 40% of salary. 

The government is expected to welcome Mr. Hutton's report later Thursday, but it is not expected to say which recommendations it will implement until later in the summer.



