SACRAMENTO—California Gov. Jerry Brown on Monday will launch the opening salvo in his campaign to ask voters to help plug the state's $25.4 billion budget hole by extending temporary increases on income and sales taxes.

In a State of the State address, his first since becoming governor earlier this month, Mr. Brown plans to underscore the seriousness of the fiscal crisis facing the nation's most populous state and press lawmakers for a prompt response to his proposal for a midsummer election asking voters to extend temporary tax hikes, according to people familiar with his plans. 

Earlier this month, Mr. Brown proposed an $84.6 billion budget for the fiscal year ending June 30, 2012.

His budget calls for $12.5 billion in cuts, contingent on voter approval of a five-year tax extension that would generate $12 billion during the fiscal year.

Mr. Brown decided against simply asking the legislature for the tax extensions, which would have broken a campaign pledge. His ballot measure would specifically propose a five-year extension of a temporary increase enacted in 2009 on personal income tax, sales tax and vehicle license fees.

 In a poll last week from the Public Policy Institute of California, 53% of respondents approved of that plan, while 41% disapproved. If the tax extension fails, California's legislature will have to restart budget talks from scratch.

Whether Mr. Brown succeeds in getting his unusual tax-extension proposal put before voters will be scrutinized across the country, as governors and legislatures in other cash-strapped states face similar budget woes. 

California, which has the nation's largest general fund, is one of 35 states projecting budget gaps in the 2012 fiscal year that total at least $82.1 billion, according to the National Conference of State Legislatures, an organization made up of state legislators.

The states have "pretty much put every option on the table, and the decisions are only getting harder," said Todd Haggerty, an analyst at the organization. 

A spokesman for Mr. Brown said the governor wasn't available for comment. The people familiar with his plans said Mr. Brown will emphasize the state's great wealth and resources, which the governor believes can help California in the struggle to meet its fiscal challenges.

The governor faces many hurdles in getting the tax extension passed before the fiscal year starts in July. He must persuade two-thirds of state lawmakers to put the tax-extension proposal to voters—a feat that will require a handful of votes from Republican legislators, who generally oppose asking voters for the tax extension. Democrats generally support the proposal.

Mr. Brown has privately conferred with lawmakers on both sides of the aisle. The governor has "done an excellent job in reaching out to the legislature and recognizing that the legislature has to be a partner," said Republican Assemblyman Cameron Smyth of Santa Clarita, who, however, said he opposes the idea of proposing a tax increase to voters.

Still, the charm offensive appears to be working enough for some key Republicans to express willingness to negotiate with Democrats. "At the end of the day, if they show goodwill and give us some tangible measures to reform [government], it's possible that we would have members in our caucus who would be willing to put [the tax extensions] on the ballot," said Sen. Bob Huff, the Republican vice-chair of the Senate budget committee. Mr. Huff, however, added that he wouldn't support the measure. 

One sticking point for Republicans is that if a tax extension passes, the legislature can by law pass a budget with a simple majority—meaning it could pass without the need for Republican votes. So Republicans may ask for assurances that any concessions to them won't be revoked after the election.

On the Republican wish list: changing the public-pension system, allowing private firms to provide some state services, requiring a review of the economic impact of any new legislation, and easing certain regulations that they view as costly for business. 

 Write to  Vauhini Vara at vauhini.vara@wsj.com 