Instead of indulging in the holiday-season office cookies and after-work cocktail parties,  Kristen Silverman decided it was time to step up her already intense fitness program. 



The 35-year-old chief operating officer of Nandana, a private resort in the Bahamas, was attending hour-long group boot-camp fitness classes that mimicked the routine Marines go through in boot camp. Three to four days a week, Ms. Silverman completed obstacle courses that included hurdles, monkey bars, a six-foot rope climb and six-foot walls to scale. 

"The first day you go to class you swear you're never coming back because you're so sore. You've probably done 100 jumping jacks, 100 push-ups and run up 12 flights of stairs carrying weighted water jugs," Ms. Silverman says. 

But after eight months of the program she realized she was clearing the final six-foot wall with relative ease. "I was asking the instructors, 'What else can you throw at me?' " she says.

Ms. Silverman, who lives in New York, had regularly worked out at the gym for 60 to 90 minutes three to four days a week, lifting weights or taking spinning or yoga classes. She was introduced to boot-camp classes in 2004, when she was an aspiring actress. Looking to tone up for a photo shoot, she enrolled in a five-day-a-week, six-week boot-camp program. "I instantly saw results," she says. "I was lean and my abs were defined." 



Ms. Silverman's current job requires her to travel to the Bahamas every six weeks, plus take at least four week-long trips elsewhere each year, so she decided to add a program that she could more easily replicate on the road. 

One month ago, Ms. Silverman signed up for CrossFit, another training routine often used by military special-operations units. 

"Both programs are extreme, but CrossFit emphasizes nutrition, too, so it becomes more about lifestyle," she says. 

Ms. Silverman likes how boot-camp class and CrossFit push her beyond her limits. For example, instructors challenge participants to perform as many push-ups as possible in a set time, then do one better the next time. This contrasts with the more-usual practice of doing a certain number of repetitions without regard to time. The program pays strict attention to form, monitoring correct posture and action to ensure participants get the full benefit of the move and avoid injury. 

In a lunge, for example, the knee of the leading leg should never extend beyond the ankle, and the knee of the back leg should drop nearly to the ground.

"There is one instructor for every two people in class, making sure we adhere to form," says Ms. Silverman. "If you're there, you might as well get it right."

CrossFit classes usually consist of 10 to 20 people and demand lunges, sit-ups, push-ups and pull-ups. Participants might be asked to throw a medicine ball against a wall or complete thrusters, squats in which a weighted bar is thrust from chest height above the head as the person stands up. Ms. Silverman's least-favorite exercise is the "bear crawl"—a fast crawl on all fours with knees off the ground. 

Ms. Silverman gets to class at 7 a.m. She tries to work out with a friend once a week. "It's a great way to spend time together," she says. 

On the road, Ms. Silverman tries to replicate her routine at the hotel gym. 

"I get better results using my body weight for exercises, rather than using the weight machines," she says. Ms. Silverman might hold plank position for 20 seconds and then do sets of crunches, pull-ups, squats and lunges. 

She goes to mat- and machine-based Pilates classes once a week. "That's my stretching," she says.

Ms. Silverman started a new diet two months ago, just as the holidays were kicking into high gear. "It's made me not crave cookies or indulgent holiday foods at all," she says.

Ms. Silverman follows a modified version of the Paleo Diet, which purports to mimic the foods our hunter-gatherer ancestors ate: lean meats and fish, fresh fruits and non-starchy vegetables. The major change has been when and how frequently Ms. Silverman has her meals. 

She says: "I used to go through the work day and be so busy that I'd skip breakfast. By 3 p.m. I'd realize that I'd only had a cup of coffee." 

Now, she eats at least five meals a day. "I try to stay away from that 'hunger state' that leads to poor decisions."

After her morning workout, she makes a three-egg omelet with jalapenos and has a cup of coffee. During the work day, she snacks on fruit and cheese. For lunch, she either brings from home a salad topped with balsamic vinaigrette or orders one at a deli. 

"Always something with substance, like a chef's salad, not just lettuce," she says. She usually makes grilled pork chops, fish or chicken for dinner or stuffed peppers. "I've been cooking a lot more for myself the last two months," she says. 

When navigating a restaurant menu, she'll ask to substitute a vegetable like spinach in place of a starch like mashed potatoes. She'll have a glass of wine with dinner and her splurge is pizza loaded with crushed red peppers.

 "A sports bra and ponytail are my essential gear," jokes Ms. Silverman. She works out in yoga pants and tank tops and wears Nike running sneakers. 

Ms. Silverman spends $200 a month for unlimited classes at CrossFit NYC: The Black Box, one of five Manhattan locations. She spends $175 a month on her Equinox gym membership, which she says she will most likely get rid of now that her new apartment building has a gym. Ms. Silverman got a discount on 20 Pilates sessions at Exhale, buying the package for $60 from the website ruelala.com.

 "Find a fitness class that challenges you and even though it's hard, it will ultimately become a confidence booster. Days I work out, I feel so much more driven and find I get a lot more work done."

 When short on time, Ms. Silverman will do three or four 30-rep sets of jack-knife crunches. She lies on her back and slowly raises her outstretched arms and legs simultaneously until they touch, then slowly brings them back to the floor. 

The sound track to her boot-camp classes is "every obnoxious pop song on the radio," Ms. Silverman says.