TUSCALOOSA, Ala.—Aid for tornado-racked neighborhoods across the South began to arrive in force Friday, as authorities and relief groups brought victims medical care and food—and helped them pick through rubble from the worst storm in decades.

More than a dozen friends congregated at the remains of Donna Chambers's home in Fort Payne, Ala., trying to salvage what they could. A plaid mini-skirt sat on the driveway. A water heater lay in the grass of the front lawn. Two cars sat in what used to be the den. 

"Really, there's nothing," said Ms. Chambers, 50 years old. She was trying, she said, to find items that would be useful in some way and to save priceless mementos like family photos. But her friends filled just a few cardboard boxes with the remnants of her life in the cinder-block house. "There's not a lot," she said.

 An aerial shot of Tuscaloosa, Ala., taken April 28, shows the tornado's path across the city. 

At least 329 people were killed in the devastating tornadoes and storms in seven states on Wednesday and Thursday, authorities said, topping the death toll from a powerful storm system in 1974, when 310 people were killed. 

Across the region, National Guardsmen and local officials enforced curfews and set up checkpoints in some towns in an effort to keep out looters, as the full scope of the devastation started to become clear.

Many residents said they had not received much help from authorities yet. Barbara Davis, a retired Wal-Mart cashier in Concord, Ala., said that even though local officials had been "wonderful" in the search and rescue effort, many unmet needs remained, including a hot meal and tarps to cover holes in her damaged roof. Her biggest wish, she said, was to have her water connected. "I haven't taken a bath in three days," she said.

 Amid the wreckage, there were stories of generosity. In Rainsville, Ala., volunteers from the Alabama Baptist Convention geared up to serve 20,000 meals a day under a tent in a church parking lot.

With the power out and fuel for generators scarce, volunteers in Sylvania, Ala., raced to cook piles of thawing food before it went bad. Residents queued up at shelters to donate meat and produce from refrigerators and freezers, and volunteers grilled what they could on the spot. 

On the outskirts of Birmingham, volunteers helped law enforcement with search and rescue efforts, going from one flattened home to the next to look for victims. There were few miracles, but Capt. Mike Smith, a rescuer on the scene from Mobile, Ala., said he wasn't giving up. "It's still early in the game," he said. "You just don't want to leave nothing unturned." 

The Red Cross, Salvation Army and other relief groups opened shelters and distributed food and other supplies to the displaced across Alabama, Mississippi and other states. 

President Barack Obama and his wife, Michelle, got a first-hand look at the damage Friday morning during a visit to this devastated city.

His motorcade wound through some of Tuscaloosa's most shattered neighborhoods, where the smell of gas hung in the air and the landscape was littered with flattened homes and smashed vehicles. 

Uprooted trees, crumbled walls and parts of roofs made it hard for the motorcade to pass through some points. The city reported 45 deaths and 990 injuries from the string of tornadoes.

"Help us!" Tuscaloosa resident Ronald Rorie shouted at the president's motorcade. "My house is gone, my car is gone, everything I have is gone," said Mr. Rorie, 42. "I don't know what I'm going to do."

Mr. Obama's motorcade pulled to the curb in front of an apartment complex that had been reduced to a jagged heap of rubble, with just a few units intact. Chris Nicholson and Amanda Johnson watched from across the street. They had survived in their first-floor apartment by cowering in the bathtub with their Labrador puppy, and they spent Friday morning hauling out everything they could salvage, rolling it in shopping carts down the street and packing it into a relative's pickup truck to drive to a storage unit.

Watching the president enter the ruined apartments, Ms. Johnson, 25, said she was glad she and her fiancé had taken the initiative to hammer down some nails that had been sticking out at odd angles. "I hope he's up to date on his tetanus," she said of the president.

"You can write that on your résumé," Mr. Nicholson laughed. "Saved the president from a rusty nail."

Like many of the hardest-hit communities, Tuscaloosa is not a wealthy place. The median household income is about $30,000, and nearly one in three residents lives below the poverty line, according to Census data. The same holds true in other tornado-battered towns. In Birmingham, for instance, 26% of the population lives in poverty.

In Pratt City, a section of Birmingham where entire blocks now look like landfills, the newly homeless are unlikely to have the financial wherewithal to rebuild, said Birmingham's fire marshal, C.W. Mardis. 

"It'll take some time," Mr. Mardis said Friday morning. "It's going to need government assistance." 

Mr. Obama, who visited a school and talked with storm victims, promised maximum aid. "We are going to help these communities rebuild," he said.

Mike Hale, the sheriff of Jefferson County, Ala., said his deputies have the technical aspects of the recovery effort under control. "We know how to search, we know how to rescue, we know how to protect." What worries Mr. Hale, he said, is the emotional trauma so many citizens are suffering in Jefferson County, where 20 people were killed.

There were a few scattered reports of looting in Tuscaloosa and elsewhere: tires stolen from an auto-parts store, suitcases carried away from damaged apartments, a brand-new pair of size 13 basketball sneakers pilfered from the wreckage of a college student's home. But the Alabama National Guard has received no reports of looting, a spokeswoman said. 

Authorities have not yet determined the force of the tornadoes that blasted Northern Alabama. "There are a lot of unanswered questions," said Greg Carbin, a meteorologist at the federal Storm Prediction Center in Norman, Okla.

Officials did announce Friday that one of the funnel clouds to claw northeast Mississippi was a category EF-5, the highest rating for tornado damage and the first twister of this magnitude to hit the state since 1966.

Authorities also said at least six category EF-4 tornadoes—which pack winds of 166 to 200 miles per hour—touched down in Alabama, Mississippi, Georgia and Tennessee.

The EF-5 tornado, which raked a three-mile path of destruction through the small town of Smithville, packed 205 miles-per-hour winds, according to the National Weather Service. It killed 14 people and displaced many more; some 450 evacuees took their meals Thursday at the First Baptist Church in nearby Amory, which served as a Red Cross shelter.

"We lost everything. We have nothing now," said James Beeks, 63, a recovering stroke patient who was staying in the shelter and trying to secure help getting a motor scooter so he could move about.

"The need right now is massive," said Michael Sullivan, regional coordinator for a nonprofit group that assists individuals with disabilities. "This tornado caused a lot of head and neck injuries. The number of disabled people in northern Mississippi just went up."

The approach to Smithville's devastated town center was filled with painful sights: dead cows lying in a pasture, the remains of a crumpled semi truck in a field. In one heap of rubble, Phillip Lockhart picked through the shards of his pizza shop, Doughbelly's, which he purchased just five months ago.

"The pizza stove is fixable—I got it out of that ditch over there," he said. He searched through cinder blocks, cracked pasta bowls and chunks of pepperoni. "Everything else is lost."

As he talked to his insurance agent on his cellphone, Mr. Lockhart said he was determined to rebuild Doughbelly's. 

"It's going to be bigger and better than before," he said. "We might even put in a storm cellar this time."

—Miguel Bustillo, Ryan Dezember, Andy Pasztor, Mike Esterl, Cameron McWhirter contributed to this article.

 Write to  Doug Belkin at doug.belkin@wsj.com, Timothy W. Martin at timothy.martin@wsj.com and Ana Campoy at ana.campoy@dowjones.com 