HONG KONG— Morgan Stanley's Asia chief executive,  Owen Thomas, is returning to the U.S., handing over leadership of a region that is swiftly growing in importance for the New York firm. 

Mr. Thomas, 49 years old, will stay in his job through June to smooth the transition to an as-yet unnamed successor. He remains as chairman of Morgan Stanley's real-estate investing operations.

Mr. Thomas took over as Asia CEO in February 2008 and was based in Hong Kong as the global financial crisis deepened. "It's been an exciting three years," he said in an interview. 

Morgan Stanley's two largest investors are headquartered in Asia. China's sovereign wealth fund China Investment Corp. and Japan's  Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group acquired their stakes during the 2008 global financial crisis.

Indeed, one of the possible candidates seen as a successor to Mr. Thomas is  Wei Sun Christianson, Morgan Stanley's chief executive for China, bankers say. She was a key negotiator in the Chinese sovereign wealth fund's $5.6 billion investment in the firm. 

Earlier this year, Morgan Stanley won regulatory approval for a securities joint venture in mainland China. The venture with China Fortune Securities Co. is a chance to rebuild in the country after a failed partnership with China International Capital Corp.

While business tied to China is growing rapidly, the region as a whole is contributing a greater proportion of the group's revenues. In 2009, Morgan Stanley's Asia operations generated $2 billion of revenue, representing 9% of the firm's revenue. This increased in 2010 to $4.32 billion, or 14% of revenue, on a broad improvement in business, including investment banking, initial public offerings and trading.

"The region, for Morgan Stanley, was able to emerge quickly from the financial crisis, and since then we've increased our market share across most of the businesses in which we operate", said Mr. Thomas.

The growing revenue also reflect Morgan Stanley's larger footprint in the region. During Mr. Thomas' tenure in Asia, Morgan Stanley built up businesses such as investment banking and wealth management in India, developed brokering in Australia as well as launched joint ventures in asset management and trust services in China.

While data tracker Dealogic estimates that Morgan Stanley generated the most core investment-banking revenue in Asia excluding Japan among its rivals last year, there is still work to do in the region, Mr. Thomas said. One area is to expand its wealth-management business organically across Asia.

Core investment banking includes mergers and acquisitions as well as debt and equity-related offerings, but doesn't include stock and bond trading.

Mr. Thomas joined Morgan Stanley in 1987. The Virginia native decided to move back to the U.S. for family reasons, he said.

—Aaron Lucchetti contributed to this article.

 Write to  Alison Tudor at alison.tudor@wsj.com 