On Sunday, Americans will see the first installment of their version of the hit British TV program "Downton Abbey." Only it will be shorter than the eight-hour U.K. series and less complex. The script is by Julian Fellowes, probably the first Oscar-winning writer to have been ennobled—he was made a life peer by being given a barony in the honors list published in November.

His story is about a fictitious stately home—a very large country house—and the legal issues, an "entail," that surround its inheritance, in this case meaning that it can only be inherited by a male blood relative. Rebecca Eaton, an executive producer for PBS, told the British tabloid the Mail on Sunday that cuts were essential because she thought there were too many references to the entail: "It is not a concept people in the U.S. are very familiar with." (The entail didn't seem to bother those of the 11 million Brits who watched the final episode without many having the foggiest notion what an entail entails.)

Ms. Eaton announced that PBS also felt that the portrayal of pre-World War I upper-class life was just a little nuanced for American TV audiences, so PBS will be prefacing each of the four truncated 90-minute broadcasts with helpful hints by actress Laura Linnney, who will explain the inheritance principle. She'll also reassure viewers about the veracity of the plot line, in which the Countess of Grantham (real-life American actor Elizabeth McGovern) rescues the hard-up British aristos with her dowry of her own family's hard-earned American cash.

Indeed, many of the stately homes of England (and the rest of the U.K.) owe the fact that they continue to be inhabited by their titled owners to an Anglo-American exchange of this type. "Debrett's Peerage & Baronetage" is one of the two bibles of the British upper classes, and the recently published 2011 edition offers a window into the number of these arrangements through the potted histories of a title that can be found at the end of many entries.

 Especially in the Edwardian period, American plutocrats sent their daughters to Britain, armed with large injections of dollars, in exchange for which the girls acquired even the grandest of non-royal titles. Note that this caveat still applies. The most famous American heiress of all, though the Duchess of Windsor, was never, to her husband's chagrin, allowed to style herself "Her Royal Highness." Now that Will and Kate have made the royals so democratic, maybe Prince Harry will make amends and marry an American.

Though, as Mark Twain noted, many Britons "dearly love a lord," most of them have no idea how to address one in the vocative case or on an envelope. Even the BBC now seems to allow the odd lapse of nomenclature when dealing with the titled classes, especially with the ladies. The detailed, almost scholarly "Debrett's"—this is its 148th edition—is the fountainhead of this kind of information. But it costs £295 for the hefty 1,117-page volume, and it helps to have a magnifying glass to hand. Debrett's was founded in 1769 and the same outfit publishes everything from a competitor to "Who's Who" (called "Debrett's People of Today") to books of etiquette (see www.debretts.com). It also prints a smaller paperback volume, "Correct Form" (£17.99) that tells you or your PA how to write a letter to a nob; or whether to curtsy to a countess or bow to a baroness. (Don't—the gestures are reserved for encounters with royalty.)

Take the case of one baroness, the former prime minister. Is she "Lady Thatcher"? Or "Lady Margaret Thatcher"? To answer this, and the far more complicated questions of titles raised by "Downton Abbey," Ms. Linney will need Debrett's (or its more complete but less timely rival, "Burke's," 107th ed. published in 2004), if she's to explain to American audiences why, though the lovely American lady's given name is Cora, and it is correct for the butler, maids and the handsome gay footman to address her as "your Ladyship," she is not "Lady Cora" but "Lady Grantham." This is because she is a countess, married to the 6th Earl of Grantham (which is his title—his family name is Robert Crawley—and he's played by Hugh Bonneville). To confuse matters (and it does—there is hardly a copy editor left on a British national paper who knows the following rule), Lady Grantham's flighty elder daughter is, indeed, called Lady Mary Crawley. The rule is that the daughters of dukes, marquesses and earls are styled "Lady Given-Name Surname" and the sons of dukes and marquesses are styled "Lord," using the same formula. Eldest sons, however, are probably called by their own "courtesy" titles, as most older peerages have a string of junior titles. Seems unfair, but sons of earls are mere "Honorables," like the famous Mitford sisters and the children of viscounts and barons, except that first-born sons of earls and viscounts quite often use the title of one of dad's spare baronies.

Wives of knights and baronets (hereditary knighthoods established in 1611 when James II sold them for £1,000 a pop to finance the army in Ireland) are never formally addressed by their given names, but always as "Lady Surname." Thus "Lord" or "Lady" followed by a given name means that this courtesy title has come from daddy, so its bearer is an aristocrat. This fact appears to be unknown to the headline writers of the British press and BBC newsreaders alike.

Got that? Don't worry, hardly anyone does. And soon it may not much matter. When the coalition government gets around to deciding what to do with the House of Lords, chances are that hereditary peers will be made redundant anyway, and their titles will then become no more serious than the European ones in the Almanach de Gotha, which British milords have always found laughable. But Mr. Fellowes (he's still "Mr.", as his new title hasn't yet been "gazetted") was at pains to get it all right, though I wonder a little bit about Lady Grantham's Yank parents' supposed insistence on their money having to go to a male heir.

He's certainly correct about American money and the aristocracy. Our local Duke of Marlborough's family—one of the grandest—has married American heiresses at least twice. The ninth duke (1871-1934) famously married the very reluctant Consuelo Vanderbilt in 1895, and her vast dowry was used to restore Blenheim Palace. Amusingly she seems to have had an affair with the duke's cousin, the Hon. Reginald Fellowes (1884-1953), though Debrett's, sadly, makes no connection between him and the scriptwriter. However, the ninth duke's eyes wandered in the direction of another American heiress, and following their official separation in 1906, divorce in 1921 and annulment in 1928 (he wanted to convert to Catholicism), he married Gladys (pronounced Glay-dus) Marie Deacon (1881-1977) of Boston, daughter of Edward Parker Deacon and Florence Baldwin.

You won't read it in Debrett's, but the eccentric duchess, wanting to improve her "Greek" profile, had a then-fashionable injection of wax, which went wrong and resulted in dragon-like runnels down her face. She bred, and so adored, Blenheim spaniels, that she had nesting boxes made for them in the dance floor of the ballroom, and commissioned London's leading confectioner to make realistic chocolate dog poo, which she would pick up and eat to confound visitors. She slept with a loaded revolver in her bedroom and kept it by her plate at dinner. In the end, she succeeded in driving the duke away, and he abandoned his beloved Blenheim to her.

She was still in a nearby house in our own day. They won't be making them like that any longer. More's the pity.

 Write to  Paul Levy at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 