 Her Restaurant: London's River Café

 What She's Known For: Bringing authentic, seasonal Italian cuisine to the British food world.

Since its 1987 opening, London restaurant River Café has been a gathering spot for the city's Who's Who (Tony Blair, Paul Smith). Yet it's the food that stands out.

Ms. Rogers and her co-founder Rose Gray, who died last February, came into the restaurant business later than most. The two mothers with a shared a passion for authentic Italian cuisine started a venture that is credited with changing English dining. Ms. Rogers, originally from Woodstock, N.Y., says freshness is at the heart of everything the restaurant does. Produce is brought in twice a week from the central Milan market, menus are written twice daily and an open kitchen unites cooks and diners. 

"Whenever cooks comes to us with lots of experience we know they need to be taught to do things our way," explains Ms. Rogers. River Café has become a breeding ground for England's brightest culinary stars (Jamie Oliver and Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall among them). Teaching staff about Italian food and culture is important at River Café. Each year, Ms. Rogers takes a group to Italy for the first olive oil pressing. "It is essential to everything we do," she says.

For her second of four Slow Food Fast recipes, Ms. Rogers has adapted a pumpkin soup recipe from one of her and Ms. Gray's many cookbooks, "Italian Two Easy." Described by Ms. Rogers as "a sludge of smashed pumpkin and potato," the soup is in fact harmonious and deeply flavored.

Ms. Rogers prefers roughly textured soups to silky ones. Here, pockets of peppery olive oil and dollops of creamy mascarpone dot the dish. In the thick of winter, an extra drizzle of grassy olive oil livens things up. The few ingredients Ms. Rogers calls for—canned tomato, potato and fennel seeds—work to enhance the pumpkin's musky-sweet flavor (note: butternut squash is a good substitute). 

The final dish should be thick enough to be eaten with a fork. A controlled amount of cooking liquid ensures that it is. To achieve the desired consistency, it's essential that you add just enough broth to cover the vegetables as they cook; any more liquid will dilute the soup's intensity and risotto-like consistency. 

Ms. Rogers simply instructs readers to make absolute sure all the vegetables are soft before mashing. Hardier and more satisfying than most soups, this dish only needs a salad or some bread to make a meal. Another word of advice: while it can be eaten with a fork, spoons are better for scraping. 

—Kitty Greenwald

 Active time: 15 minutes Total time: 50 minutes

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil, plus more oil for finishing  3 cloves garlic, peeled and smashed  1 teaspoon fennel seeds, coarsely ground with a mortar and pestle or spice grinder  7 whole canned San Marzano tomatoes, drained  1 1½-2 pounds pumpkin or butternut squash, peeled, seeded and cut into ¾-inch cubes (yields 5¼ cups)  3 medium potatoes, peeled and cut into ¾-inch cubes  1¾ cup chicken stock  ½ cup grated Parmesan cheese  2/3 cup mascarpone cheese

1. In a medium pot set over low heat, heat 2 tablespoons olive oil with garlic and fennel seeds.

2. Squeeze the tomatoes over the pot so as to break up the flesh and catch all juices in the pot. Cook over low heat, stirring often, for 8 minutes or until tomatoes begin to turn dark red.

3. Turn the heat to medium-high and stir in squash and potatoes. Add enough chicken stock to just cover the vegetables and bring to a boil. Lower the heat and simmer for 35-40 minutes, stirring occasionally and checking that the vegetables are just submerged.

4. Once vegetables are tender, remove pot from heat and mash with a potato masher. The soup should be thick and creamy, the consistency of risotto. 

5. Ladle soup into four shallow bowls. Garnish with grated Parmesan, a few dollops of mascarpone cheese and a generous drizzle of good olive oil.