There are plenty of eminent economists in the U.K., but none appeared to have made it on to the guest list for Friday's royal nuptials at Westminster Abbey.

Quite right, you might think. Who needs acolytes of the dismal science bringing the mood down on such a happy occasion?

The more cynical might point to a national debt soaring toward a billion pounds, and the third-largest budget deficit relative to GDP in Europe (bigger than Portugal's, bigger than Spain's) and conclude that economics just aren't the British ruling class's strong suit.

But this week has at least provided some proof that, after all, they remain the Bank of England's. And that might have to do for now.

After all, the Old Lady has long faced criticism for losing her grip. She left interest rates at the record lows they plumbed in response to the financial crisis, even as inflation zoomed well above her government-set 2% target. Indeed it's been above that for 16 months straight, so no wonder the central bank's enthusiasm for ever hitting it again is under scrutiny.

But its rate-setters always respond with the same defense. The factors pushing up inflation are either temporary or international and therefore immune to anything nine bankers in London might do, eminent though they may be. And the U.K.'s recovery is simply too fragile to bear higher borrowing costs. Don't expect us to put a bullet through the head of this recovery with policy action that wouldn't do much to fight price pressures anyway.

Well, they got that last part right, it seems.

This week's initial look at the U.K.'s first-quarter GDP performance was sobering.

All right, so at least there was some growth. This was especially handy as another quarter of contraction would have meant two in a row and technical recession, after the shock collapse in the final three months of 2010. The U.K. is the only major economy to have come so close to slipping back into the club no one wants to join.

But the latest rise merely made good that earlier fall, and, in fact, painted the rather gloomy picture of an economy essentially flatlining since the end of last summer. This is a recovery that doesn't feel much like one.

Moreover, given that much of late 2010's dismal performance was weather-related, it seems probable that some of the latest data were actually flattered by a one-off bounce-back in activity that we can't expect to see repeated next time. In short, we were lucky to see even the modest growth we got.

This isn't obviously an economy in need of higher interest rates. In fact it still desperately needs all the stimulus it can get.

Which, of course, still leaves us with inflation, which was running at 4% in March, precisely double the BoE's mandate.

But it had slipped back. It was 4.4% in February, and the latest growth figures don't suggest much in the way of domestic price pressure, so it may yet fade further.

Indeed, the Bank of England's  Martin Weale, who in the past supported higher rates, has gone out of his way to suggest growth is turning out weaker than he had expected and that he has been encouraged, so far, by subdued wage deals.

Mr. Weale voted for higher rates every month since January, and has been in a minority of three on the nine-member Monetary Policy Committee for the past three months.

But "on the basis of the numbers we have, it does look as though the recovery has probably been weaker than one may have hoped, given the experience from previous recessions," he said late last week.

Add to all this the government's ongoing spending cuts and a whopping value-added tax increase just waiting to drop out of inflation comparisons at the start of 2012, and the Bank of England starts to look quite a lot more savvy for leaving rates alone.

And, don't forget, the U.S. Federal Reserve remains on course to stop its dollar printing presses in June. No one knows for sure what the effect on capital markets will be once the flow of liquidity is dammed, but it could be substantial. 

Even now it remains unclear how much of the equity, commodity and bond market rally has been "genuine," rather than simply the absorption of all that extraordinary liquidity.

There's a chance the markets will seem a lot less confident, and a lot less inflationary, once the dollars stop coming.

The Bank of England has clearly been right all along when it comes to the weakness of the U.K.'s fight-back. It's now arguably righter than it used to be when it comes to inflation, too.

The MPC has bet the house on prices coming back under control on their own. If that pays off, they'll all deserve an invitation to William and Kate's first-anniversary party.

 Write to  David Cottle at david.cottle@dowjones.com 