WASHINGTON—The World Bank is laying the groundwork for $500 million in development loans to Tunisia, the first step by international groups to support economic transitions in the Middle East with a mix of governance reforms and funding. 

The World Bank said Tuesday it was working with Tunisian officials to provide the loans, which it hopes will draw $700 million more from other groups as the country tries to overhaul its government and economy.

The organization is also planning initiatives across the Middle East to retrain unemployed workers and support private-sector job creation as a first step toward building confidence in the new governments, World Bank President Robert Zoellick told reporters.

"The street is looking for results," Mr. Zoellick said. "There are ways to promote job creation quickly while supporting longer-term job growth."

Tunisia, Egypt and other Middle East nations are on the agenda this week as finance officials from around the world gather in Washington for meetings of the Group of 20 and Group of Seven nations, as well as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. Regional development organizations, including the African Development Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, are expected to meet with officials from leading economies to discuss how to support the region.

Egyptian officials are expected to meet with U.S. policy makers to seek debt relief and other support. The U.S., which has dispatched teams in recent weeks to meet with officials in North African countries, plans to work through the development banks to support overhauls in governance models and rebuild the private sector.

The Overseas Private Investment Corporation, a U.S. agency, has announced plans to provide up to $2 billion for loans and guarantees supporting U.S. businesses investing in the region.

In both Egypt and Tunisia, popular uprisings drove aging, autocratic presidents from power earlier this year, leaving their economies reeling. Both had been largely state-managed economies plagued by high unemployment among their large youth populations. As new governments form, they need to create jobs in the short term to quell unrest while encouraging the kind of private-sector development likely to fuel more employment growth over time.

"Their success will hinge on building strong and inclusive economies that deliver prosperity for growing young populations," a senior U.S. Treasury official told reporters. The official said up to $4 billion overall in international funds could be available to support the region through the development banks.

The World Bank loan to Tunisia, the first major international financial support for the country since its leadership change, is designed to encourage leaders to revamp a range of government policies, such as by increasing access to information, transparency in public procurement and freedom of association. The funds would be provided after the government enacts the changes.

The IMF, in a forecast released this week, projects that the combined economies of the Middle East and North Africa will expand at a slower-than-expected pace this year because of the political upheaval there, growing 4.1%, or about half a percentage point lower than the fund projected in January. The strongest economic gains will be in oil-exporting nations.

The IMF projects the economies of Egypt and Tunisia will each grow about 1% this year, down from Egypt's 5.1 % rate last year and Tunisia's 3.7% pace. Egypt's gross domestic product, a measure of all economic output, totaled about $200 billion last year, while Tunisia's was about $40 billion.

Popular skepticism about foreign institutions could limit the direct financial involvement of the U.S. and IMF in the Middle East and North Africa in the near term.

"Their political systems are likely to be more responsive to public opinion moving forward," said Marcus Noland, a senior fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics. "We just have to accept that these governments are going to be a little skittish" about some foreign institutions.

 Write to  Sudeep Reddy at sudeep.reddy@wsj.com 