Asian stocks declined Wednesday as worries that Beijing may act soon to check inflation and a steep fall in several commodities made investors less willing to take on risk.

China's Shanghai Composite Index tumbled 2.3% to 2866.02.

Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index gave up 1.4% to 23315.24, Australia's S&P/ASX 200 lost 0.9% to 4740.1, South Korea's Kospi shed 0.9% to 2180.64 and India's Sensex fell 0.4% to 18469.36.

Japanese markets, shut for public holidays, will reopen Friday.

Steve Cheng, associate director at brokerage Shenyin Wanguo, said that in addition to fears that Beijing may lift interest rates again, concern about the approaching end to the U.S. Federal Reserve's $600 billion asset-purchase program in June was also weighing on commodities.

"Interest-rate increases are negative for the equity market," he said. "In the short term, the expiry [of the Fed's asset purchases] will also ease the fear of inflation, so investors may not buy commodities as a protection against inflation."

Over the past few months, the Fed's asset-purchase program has been cited as a reason for plentiful global liquidity and as a force behind a sharp rally in commodities.

Dow Jones Industrial Average futures were up 19 points in electronic trading.

Resource-sector stocks were among those hit after prices of several commodities declined overnight and stretched those losses well into the Asian day.

Jiangxi Copper slumped 6% and PetroChina gave up 2.2% in Shanghai; they fell 1.9% and 1.5%, respectively, in Hong Kong.

Woodside Petroleum sank 2.5% and Rio Tinto Ltd. shed 1.5% in Sydney.

The cooling toward commodities was also driven by a report in The Wall Street Journal, citing people familiar with the matter, that several big hedge-fund managers, including George Soros, and other leading investment firms have been selling gold and silver.

In commodities trading, spot gold fell as low as $1,530.60, and was more recently at $1,536.50, down 60 cents from its New York settlement. Spot silver was at $42.12 an ounce, up 46 cents after heavy losses earlier this week.

June Nymex crude-oil futures were down two cents at $111.03 a barrel on Globex, after tumbling 2.2% overnight.

"The fact that more commodities are now actually weakening after weeks of dizzying advances is telling us that the bullish impact of the weaker dollar may be getting overplayed…by more-bearish fundamentals and concern about slowing growth amid higher inflation and interest rates," MF Global wrote in a note to clients. The analysts were pointing to a recent correction in some agricultural commodities.

Chinese property shares also lost ground after an official at China Citic Bank warned of a "severe" risk in China's real estate market this year amid government efforts to cool demand. China Vanke dropped 2% in Shenzhen, Poly Real Estate Group fell 2.3% in Shanghai and China Overseas Land & Investment declined 2.6% in Hong Kong.

Also weighing on the sector was a report in the state-run Shanghai Securities News, citing source close to the Ministry of Housing and Urban-Rural Development, that China could expand home-purchase limits to more cities to prevent speculative capital from flowing into third- and fourth-tier cities.

In Sydney, Westpac Banking's first-half results failed to offer the market any support.

"Cash earnings are 7% higher, but when looking at core earnings—excluding the money set aside for bad loans, also known as impairment costs—they actually fell by around 3%," said Peter Esho, chief market analyst at City Index.

Shares of Westpac dropped 2.5%, while National Australia Bank fell 2.4%.

Coca-Cola Amatil slipped 0.8% after saying natural disasters, input costs and the strong Australian dollar were likely to limit first-half profit growth to 5%.

South Korean shares were pressured as foreign investors turned net sellers after a 10-session buying spree. Samsung Electronics dropped 2.5% and Hyundai Heavy Industries lost 4.1%.

In Mumbai trading, shares of State Bank of India rose 1.3% after a string of recent losses, including a 4% tumble Tuesday after the Reserve Bank of India raised interest rates by 0.5 percentage point. But concerns that the RBI might raise rates further in coming months helped pull down shares of Maruti Suzuki by 1.5% and Tata Motors by 0.3%.

Elsewhere, Singapore's Straits Times Index shed 1.3%, Indonesian stocks and New Zealand's NZX 50 ended little changed, and Thailand's SET shed gained 0.3%.

In foreign-exchange markets, the euro came off its early lows and was recently buying $1.4863 compared with $1.4824 in late New York trade Tuesday, and ¥120.33 yen against ¥120.03.

The dollar was at ¥80.99 versus ¥80.94. The Australian dollar was at US$1.0861, compared with the day's high at US$1.0877.

 Write to  Colin Ng at colin.ng@dowjones.com 