SYDNEY—Australia's trade balance turned back to a surplus in March, suggesting the coal-producing region of Queensland has resumed booming operations after devastating floods earlier this year.

The Australian dollar gained after release of the numbers, with traders and economists saying the implications of the report were stronger national incomes and investment—which would serve to push the country's central bank to resume an interest-rate-raising cycle sooner rather than later.

For March, Australia posted a seasonally adjusted trade surplus of 1.74 billion Australian dollars (US$1.87 billion), compared with a revised deficit of A$87 million in February, the Australian Bureau of Statistics said Tuesday. The surplus was more than three times the A$500 million that analysts forecast.

"We expect coal output to continue improving as producers negotiate environmental issues associated with removing water from mining pits," said  Ben Jarman, an economist with  JPMorgan in Sydney, though he cautioned that the post-earthquake industrial slowdown in Japan, Australia's second-largest export partner, may mean softer demand in months ahead.

By volume, exports of hard coking coal were up a huge 39% from February. Flooding ground coal production in Queensland state to a halt during the first couple of months this year. Mr. Jarman noted the pick-up exactly matched the initial decline posted in January when the floods were at their most intense.

Signalling the mining boom is picking up pace beyond just coal, exports of metal ores and minerals were 15% on the month, while exports to China recovered from a weak start to the year to reach a new record in March.

Imports were also higher in March, largely due to the impact of higher oil prices, which are hitting sectors such as manufacturing and tourism hard.

"In a sign of the still-subdued Australian consumer, consumption good imports fell 1.3%," said Australia & New Zealand Bank Economist Andrew McManus.

The Australian dollar rose to US$1.0790 from US$1.0764 before the report; it pared some of those gains as news emerged that China's April trade surplus had surged to $11.4 billion, far beyond the forecast $1 billion. The Australian dollar was recently at US$1.0769.

Uncertainty about Australian employment data, due Thursday, is also acting as a cap on the dollar's value, said  Michael Turner, a strategist with RBC Capital Markets.

"It was quite a large upside surprise, but keep in mind it took a while to push through US$1.08 on the way up and we probably need decent employment numbers Thursday to keep the Aussie on an uptrend," he said.

Rebecca Thurlow in Sydney contributed to this article.

 Write to  Geoffrey Rogow at geoffrey.rogow@dowjones.com 