WASHINGTON—The U.S. Justice Department is widening a probe of Blue Cross Blue Shield health insurance plans in several states, examining whether they are effectively raising health-insurance premiums by striking agreements with hospitals that stifle competition from rival insurers.

Federal investigators, as well as some state attorneys general, have sent civil subpoenas to "Blue" health plans in Missouri, Ohio, Kansas, West Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina and the District of Columbia, according to people familiar with the matter.

The investigation is looking at whether dominant health plans around the country are forcing hospitals to sign anticompetitive contracts that inhibit them in doing business with their rivals.

The Justice Department's investigation comes amid efforts by the administration of President Barack Obama to rein in rising costs as part of its sweeping health-care overhaul. 

Republicans have said the Affordable Care Act, Mr. Obama's signature domestic policy achievement, will lead to higher insurance premiums. Showing that the administration can counter rising premiums by encouraging greater competition could help win support for the law from a skeptical public. The contractual provisions under scrutiny are known as "most-favored nation" clauses, which usually stipulate that hospitals must charge the insurers' competitors equal or higher prices for medical services. 

Such clauses can simply be guarantees to get the best pricing available, but they can violate antitrust laws if used improperly by a dominant company to hobble competitors.

Blue plans tend to be state- or region-based and can have the market clout to strike such deals with hospitals. National plans, such as  UnitedHealth Group Inc.
UNH


0.30
%




 and  Aetna Inc.,
AET


-0.23
%




 typically lack the concentration of a Blue plan in a given local market.

A Justice Department spokeswoman said: "The antitrust division is investigating the possibility of anticompetitive practices involving MFN clauses in various parts of the country."

  WellPoint Inc., a for-profit insurer that runs the Blue plans in Ohio and Missouri, confirmed it had received civil investigative demands from state authorities. The company said its contracts merely helped ensure that it is not being disadvantaged.

Such clauses "are a prudent buying practice and produce real cost benefits and efficiencies for our members," a WellPoint spokeswoman said. 

Last fall, the Justice Department filed suit against Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan, accusing it of hobbling rivals through anticompetitive agreements with hospitals that, it said, likely raised health-care costs and insurance premiums for state residents.

The government's lawsuit accused Michigan's Blue Cross of inking agreements with about half the state's acute care hospitals, stipulating that they must charge its rivals equal or higher prices for health-care procedures. In some cases, the Justice Department suit alleged, the contracts required that hospitals charge Blue Cross's competitors up to 40% more.

In effect, the Justice Department alleged, Blue Cross allowed hospitals to raise their prices — as long as they raised them even more for its competitors.

"These kinds of anticompetitive MFNs affect health-care delivery in a very fundamental way," Christine Varney, head of the Justice Department's antitrust division, said in October. At the time, she promised to challenge "similar anti-competitive behavior anywhere else in the United States."

Michigan's Blue Cross has called the suit "flawed" and is fighting the charges in court. In December, that insurer defended its contracts, saying that the Justice Department failed to show that they caused economic harm. 

The widening investigation suggests the Justice Department has found evidence that other insurers across the country are engaging in similar practices. At the same time, the Justice Department is also taking on the reverse situation, in which a dominant hospital uses its clout to stop insurers from dealing with competing hospitals. 

Last month, it sued United Regional Health Care System of Wichita Falls, Texas, for allegedly using such contracts to maintain its monopoly for hospital services in the area, forcing patients to pay higher prices for services. The Justice Department said United Regional's in-patient rates were around 70 percent higher than those of its closest rival.

The hospital settled the case the same day, agreeing to stop entering into the agreements. It didn't admit any wrongdoing.

One expert said the government action on exclusionary contract provisions could help stimulate price competition. But he cautioned that it could have a limited impact on insurance premiums because new entrants might not have the scale to match the Blue plan's prices.

"Philosophically, MFN is a bad thing because it ensures the incumbent will get the best discounts and seals off the ability of others to compete," said Robert Laszewski, a consultant who runs Health Policy and Strategy Associates. "Practically, the dominant insurer will get less discounts and the difference would narrow but the Blue plan would still have a substantial price advantage."

CareFirst BlueCross BlueShield, a Blue plan that operates in Washington, D.C., Maryland and northern Virginia, confirmed it had received a civil investigative demand from Justice but declined to comment further. A spokesman for Blue Cross and Blue Shield of North Carolina declined to confirm whether or not the insurer had received a request and a spokeswoman for Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Kansas declined to comment. 

A representative for BlueCross BlueShield of South Carolina said the company has received an inquiry from Justice and is working with its counsel to respond, and a spokeswoman for Highmark Blue Cross Blue Shield of West Virginia said it has received both state and federal requests and is looking into them now.

The attorneys general of Missouri, Ohio and the District of Columbia, who also are investigating, declined to comment.

 Write to  Thomas Catan at thomas.catan@wsj.com and Avery Johnson at avery.johnson@WSJ.com 