BEIJING— A Chinese central bank adviser said Monday that Beijing should push ahead with a gradual increase in interest rates to combat inflation, and that the 5.3% rise in the consumer price index in April from a year earlier was too high. 

While April's inflation rate was below the 5.4% rise in March, it still surpassed economists' expectations, increasing market expectations that the central bank will need to introduce further tightening measures. 

The PBOC has used interest rate increases in its campaign to keep inflation in check, but its preferred tool has been to increase the portion of deposits that banks must park with the central bank. The central bank has raised the bank reserve requirement ratio five times this year and six times last year, while it has increased interest rates four times since October. 

At a forum in Beijing on Monday, People's Bank of China adviser Li Daokui said he expects the country's CPI to rise 4.2%-4.3% this year, exceeding the government's target of a 4% increase, but he is more concerned about inflation over the next five to 10 years. 

He added Beijing should adopt a relatively tight monetary policy and a relatively loose fiscal policy over that period to guard against the formation of asset bubbles. 

However, interest rate increases pose a challenge to the central bank as it fears higher interest rates will attract hot money, which will put upward pressure on the yuan. 

"If China's interest rates are too high...hot money will flow in. Because [the yuan] is gradually being internationalized, our interest rates have to be carefully, carefully managed. If they're too high, then too much capital will enter the country, too many U.S. dollars will be here. Then our central bank will need to print more [yuan] to offset [this], which again will become inflationary," he said. 

Mr. Li also said the central bank needs to ensure a healthy spread for the nation's banks. 

"If interest rates are too high, our commercial banks, which are run very differently from commercial banks in Europe and the U.S., will have a harder time than before because our commercial banks rely so much on the gap between lending rates and deposit rates," he said. 

The central bank-set reference rate for one-year loans is now 6.31%, while the one-year deposit rate is 3.25%. 

Mr. Li also said the government's target of 7% annual economic growth over the next five years is too low to create enough jobs and support development, and that 9% would be more appropriate. 

China's economy expanded by 9.7% in the first quarter and 10.3% last year. 

Mr. Li's call for faster growth runs somewhat counter to Beijing's push for an increased focus on the quality of growth rather than just a fast pace. 

—Eliot Gao 