WASHINGTON—House Republicans are launching their long-promised effort to scale back federal spending to the levels in place before President Barack Obama took office. But the GOP is divided over how quickly to try to meet that target.

The first formal step in the effort comes Tuesday: Just hours before Mr. Obama delivers his State of the Union address to a joint session of Congress, the House will vote on a resolution endorsing a reduction in spending to 2008 levels.

Behind the scenes, Republicans are at odds over whether to hit that target immediately—in the months remaining in the current fiscal year that ends Sept. 30—or to take longer to make cuts that even conservatives say will be painful.

"What you see is a work in progress, of us trying to figure out what is practical, what is possible," said Rep. Jack Kingston (R., Ga.), an appropriations committee member. "The jury's out about what the market will bear. Most people haven't realized that these are serious cuts of lots of popular programs."

If the House passes a bill that slashes spending, the Democratic-controlled Senate likely would pass a more generous version of the measure. The differences between the two would have to be reconciled in a compromise before the bill can become law. So while Republicans' budget-cutting efforts are unlikely to succeed in the Senate, they may shape the final compromise.

Democrats charge that Republican efforts to slash spending to 2008 levels is misguided at a time when the economy remains sluggish. "While our economy is still fragile, I believe that precipitous and steep reductions could reverse the gains that have been made and could actually increase unemployment and extend the recession," said Rep. Norm Dicks of Washington, ranking Democrat on the Appropriations Committee.

During the 2010 midterm campaign, Republicans promised to bring discretionary spending down to the $1.029 trillion level set in 2008, the last year of the Bush administration. That is about $100 billion less than the amount Mr. Obama requested for the current fiscal year.

Because of partisan gridlock over the budget last year, the government is now operating on a short-term spending measure that expires March 4. The resolution the House votes on Tuesday will authorize House Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan (R., Wis.) to set a ceiling on spending for the rest of the fiscal year.

That target will guide the Appropriations Committee when it drafts spending plans for the rest of the year. But panel leaders have argued that it would be too difficult and disruptive to bring spending down to 2008 levels in that measure alone. 

Instead, Jennifer Hing, spokeswoman for the committee, said the committee will make a "down payment" on that effort in the remaining months of the 2011 budget year, then finish the job when it works this summer on spending bills for 2012.

Other conservative Republicans, worried about backsliding on GOP spending promises, have demanded that the House make the full set of budget cuts in 2011, not over two budget years. 

Members of the Republican Study Committee, a conservative group that includes more than half the GOP conference, on Thursday produced a plan for cutting even more deeply—to 2006 levels—for the next decade.

The plan, which would save $2.5 trillion over ten years, was welcomed but not specifically endorsed by the party leadership. House Majority Leader Eric Cantor (R., Va.), a member of the study committee, "applauded" the proposal and said elements of it could be considered as amendments during House debate on spending plans for the rest of the year.

The study committee's proposal would end federal control of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, reduce federal subsidies for Medicaid and abolish or diminish support for dozens of programs and agencies, such as the Corporation for Public Broadcasting and Amtrak. 

The list of cuts is laden with agencies that have long been targeted by Republicans without success, such as the National Endowment for the Arts, but also programs that enjoy bipartisan support, such as farm subsidies and support for airline service to remote airports.

Rep. Chris Van Hollen (D., Md.) denounced the Republican vote planned for Tuesday as a political gimmick to upstage the president's speech, in which Mr. Obama is expected to propose a new effort to curb the federal deficit.