PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti—An international panel examining the results of November's violently disputed presidential elections found the government-backed candidate came in third, which should eliminate him in the runoff in favor of a pop star, diplomats said Monday. 

The report said Jude Celestin, the government-backed candidate, came behind Michel Martelly, a singer of romantic ballads who polled third in the preliminary results. Mirlande Manigat, the widow of a former president, led the vote.

The report was expected to be given to Haitian President Rene Preval by Tuesday, diplomat said. Election authorities, who will decide which two candidates advance to a second round, already have the report in hand, the diplomats said. No date for that final vote has been set. 

If electoral officials accept the panel's recommendation, which they are expected to do, Mr. Martelly will replace Mr. Celestin on the ballot. 

The report was written by a team from the Organization of American States, the U.S., Canada, France and Jamaica. It is not expected to be made public until Thursday, the day after the one year anniversary of the earthquake that devastated the capital Jan 12. 

Rioting broke out in the capital and other Haitian cities after officials announced Mr. Celestin had edged out Mr. Martelly in the Nov. 28 elections. Mr. Martelly and other candidates refused to accept the official results, which they said were flawed.

The elections were carried out in the middle of a cholera epidemic which so far has killed more than 3,000 people. They were marred by widespread allegations of fraud and complaints by thousands of Haitians living in squalid refugee tents camps that they had not received ballots or otherwise had been unable to cast their votes. 

Since then, the resulting political unrest and continuing uncertainty has cast a deep shadow over Haiti's already sluggish efforts to rebuild after last year's quake killed 230,000 people and devastated the capital. Mr. Preval's term is scheduled to end on Feb. 7, but he could legally remain in power until May 14.