ONAGAWA, Japan—With half of its 10,000 residents missing since the tsunami annihilated most of this scenic coastal town in the path of the tsunami, search efforts are underway.

In one grisly scene, Japanese firefighters on Wednesday found a body trapped underneath a toppled vending machine within a giant mound of twisted metal, snapped lumber and overturned cars.

During a steady snowfall, a firefighter from Wakayama prefecture wearing a face mask, head lamp and white helmet jams a long metal bar and lifted the vending machine. 

He peered underneath at the body below.

A few hundred feet away, another firefighter with a clipboard and bullhorn asked: "What is the sex?"

"Woman," replied the firefighter atop the pile where a liquor store once stood in this now-flattened fishing village. 

"How old?" "In the seventies."

Two more firemen walk over with a blue plastic sheet. Once unfurled, they place the sheet underneath the blue vending machine adorned with a Boss Coffee logo. 

As a final act, they place a single piece of red tape, a marker that a body had been found.

"We'd ideally like to move it now, but we don't have the time for that," said one firefighter. "Another crew will come by later to pick up the body. For now, we make sure it's covered."

A glance in any direction provides a testament to the tsunami's force. A few hundred feet away, an upside-down car dangles off the edge of a hollowed-out office building. A three-story building has been tipped over on its side and the only sign of its former existence is the hollowed shell made of metal beams.

All over the ground are signs of the life left behind: a bicycle twisted within cabling and metal scraps, a children's sled and, most prominently, fish everywhere. 

Legions of birds swarm above looking to swoop in to grab the mackerel pike scattered all over the wreckage.

Onagawa is one of the many small towns sitting along the deeply indented, sawtooth shore that lines the coast of northern Miyagi prefecture. This jagged coastline has made the region ideal for oyster and salmon farming but the very estuaries that make for rich sea life can also trigger more powerful waves.

Victims from fishing villages like Onagawa make up a substantial portion of the more than 4,300 dead found in the aftermath of Friday's earthquake and tsunami, including 106 bodies in Onagawa as of Tuesday evening. The flooding limited access for search crews, and the devastation was so extensive that clearing the roads created giant walls of debris encasing the streets like a tunnel.

Toshiaki Yaginuma, Onagawa's city planning official, said he wasn't willing to say that the missing were dead. Since all forms of communication are down except one satellite phone in the central offices, the missing may not be able to alert townspeople to their safety. 

"You saw what the tsunami did to our town," Mr. Yaginuma said. "Completely and utterly annihilated."

Firefighters from across Japan are splitting the city into sections to simplify the searches. In a subtle nuance of language to indicate the slim hopes of finding any survivors, firefighters used the Japanese word for "search" instead of the more commonly used "rescue."

Looking at an old map of the city, firefighters tried to identify what stood in areas where mounds of debris gather. There are still many parts of town largely untouched by rescue crews, and the snow is making the mission more difficult. Walking over metal beams, downed cable wires and slabs of concrete, the firefighters struggle to maintain their footing. 

Behind Onagawa's athletic stadium, police have created a missing person's center and a morgue to hold the bodies. A list of 100 found bodies is affixed with brown packing tape onto a concrete wall.

Some on the list have been identified. The descriptions of the missing offer the person's sex, the time and location of where they were found as well as a brief description. 

One reads: "White hair, black sweats, white sweater, heading facing east, lying face down, half the body was hanging over a second-floor veranda."

Next to the missing person's desk, two officials backed up a cart to a set of doors leading into the stadium. Two bodies wrapped in blue tarps and atop gurneys were pushed inside.

One woman walked out as the two officials entered. She was crying, and a man consoled her, his arm across her shoulder. Police say family members with missing persons' reports that match the description of the deceased walk into a holding area where the body is, and a sheet is pulled back to show the face.

Seeing an elderly man she knows outside, she sobbed and said, "Did you hear?"

