NEW DELHI—India's finance minister unveiled a national budget Monday that surprised markets with his aggressive plans to shrink the deficit, which has risen in recent years. 

In doing so, Finance Minister Pranab Mukherjee dismissed critics' assertions that India would fail to curb its budget deficit at 5.1% of gross domestic product this year. 

Mr. Mukherjee is also facing political pressure to increase social-welfare spending to help his party in state elections set for later this calendar year. But instead, he is reining in overall government spending in his 12.58 trillion-rupee ($277.89 billion) budget for the fiscal year beginning April 1, reflecting a spending increase of 3.4% from the current year. Recent budgets have had spending increases of as much as 20% year to year.

Mr. Mukherjee is betting on substantially higher tax revenues to shrink this year's fiscal deficit to 5.1% of gross domestic product, down from an earlier target of 5.5%. He set the target for next year's deficit at 4.6% of GDP, less than the 4.8% target for the current year. The government projects the deficit will decline to 4.1% in 2012-13. 

"By targeting a lower-than-planned deficit, the government certainly signaled its commitment to fiscal consolidation and its intent to help the Reserve Bank of India contain inflation pressures," said  Leif Lybecker Eskesen, chief economist for India and Asean at HSBC. 

The budget presentation, following months of parliamentary paralysis in the wake of corruption scandals last year, marked a political victory for the Congress party-led ruling coalition. It offered a sign that the government might be able to pass its major policy initiatives, including plans to substantially increase the food subsidy to the poor and ease the acquisition of farmland by companies for infrastructure and industrial projects. 

Disappointing foreign investors, the government didn't announce big-ticket economic reforms, such as higher foreign ownership limits in the retail and insurance sectors. But it did raise the cap on the amount foreign investors can put into infrastructure bonds for Indian projects, to $25 billion from $5 billion. That should help the government finance plans to improve decrepit roads, airports and other infrastructure. 

"This budget matches the challenges that our economy faces—sustained growth and a determined effort to curb inflationary expectations," Prime Minister Manmohan Singh said. 

Parliament is expected to approve the budget this month.

 A billion plus country's annual budget is less than half the budget of the Pentagon! 

—Harry Mitnick

To boost revenue, Mr. Mukherjee said, the government will continue to sell stakes in state-run companies without ceding control. He said the government would raise 1.25 trillion rupees in nontax revenue; 400 billion rupees of that will come from sales of stakes in state-owned enterprises such as Steel Authority of India and Indian Oil Corp. 

The signs of stricter fiscal discipline encouraged analysts, though some expressed caution. Some said there are doubts over whether the government will be able to stick to the budget amid rising crude-oil prices and the ruling party's commitment to substantially increase food subsidies. The parameters of the "food security" bill are still being debated by the ruling party, Mr. Mukherjee said. Experts have predicted it could cost between $15 billion and $30 billion.



  Aninda Mitra, an analyst at Moody's Investors Service, said India's local-currency debt rating could be upgraded if the government meets its fiscal-deficit aims in the medium term. India is rated Ba1 by Moody's, one notch below its foreign-currency rating of Baa3. 

Fitch Ratings sovereign analyst  Art Woo said the government stood a good chance of meeting the budget projections given the broad base of revenue. But he said "there is scope for disappointment" if the economy doesn't meet the official estimate for growth of 8.75% to 9.25% for the coming year beginning April 1. 

India's benchmark 8.13% 2022 bond rose slightly to 100.55 rupees, or $2.22, from 100.30 rupees, or $22.21, on the budget news. It ended the day at 100.32 rupees, or $2.23. The benchmark 30-share BSE Sensex rose following the budget announcement but shed gains later to close at 17823.40, up 0.7%. 

Mr. Mukherjee said India's GDP growth would rise to 8.6% in the current fiscal year from 8% last year, reflecting the country's quick rebound from the global crisis. 

 Write to  Abhrajit Gangopadhyay at Abhrajit.gangopadhyay@dowjones.com 