 Ford is planning to shut down its auto plant in Genk, Belgium, for five days starting April 4, in an effort to conserve auto parts in the wake of Japan's earthquake. The Genk plant had been scheduled to be idled for five days in May, but the company moved up the stoppage. 

 Schaeffler Group, the German ball-bearings giant, disclosed plans to reduce its massive debt load by selling some of its controlling stake in rival auto supplier Continental that it acquired in an $18 billion hostile bid more than two years ago. 

 Dutch automaker Spyker Cars said Saab Automobile Chief Executive Jan Ake Jonsson will retire after the company's annual general meeting May 19.  

 A shortage of a type of shiny pigment that is used in automobile paints and is only made in a single plant in Japan has emerged as the newest headache for the auto industry, affecting many of the world's car makers, including Ford, Chrysler, Volkswagen, BMW, Toyota and General Motors. 

The share of Credit Suisse Group's profits generated in the fast-growing economies of the Asian-Pacific region should quadruple within four years, said Osama Abbasi, the Swiss bank's chief executive for Asia-Pacific, who also expects the region to shake off the impact of Japan's disaster quickly and investors to return to the region en masse within months. 

 Kabul Bank, Afghanistan's biggest lender, will be liquidated starting next month, in a step required by the International Monetary Fund to renew financial assistance to the country, Afghan officials said. Kabul Bank experienced a run on deposits last fall after massive fraud at the lender was exposed.  

Investors who lost money from investing in minibonds linked to Lehman Brothers Holdings, which collapsed in 2008, will receive compensation of up to 96.5% of their investments, up from about 60% agreed to in 2009, said 16 of Hong Kong's banks. 

 A U.S. federal judge in New York said Deutsche Bank and a unit of BNP Paribas can proceed with lawsuits against Bank of America for losses they sustained when a subsidiary of scandal-scarred mortgage lender Taylor Bean & Whitaker collapsed.  

 Siemens plans a radical restructuring aimed at better positioning the German engineering giant in the growing market for green infrastructure, especially in the world's expanding urban areas, according to people familiar with the matter.  

 BP and Rosneft scrambled to salvage their landmark alliance after BP's Russian partners in its TNK-BP joint venture blocked it. But it is unclear how a deal so mired in legal challenges and high-stakes Russian power struggles can now be rescued.  

Canada's federal government has proposed a plan to revamp environmental monitoring in the country's oil-sands industry in response to criticism of the current system and amid growing environmental and regulatory scrutiny in Canada and the U.S. 

China Petroleum & Chemical said its full-year net profit rose 14% to 71.8 billion yuan ($10.95 billion) as higher oil prices and fuel sales offset lower refining margins. 

 U.S. mortgage giant Fannie Mae was warned in a 2006 internal report of abuses in the way lenders and their law firms handled foreclosures, long before regulators launched investigations into the mortgage industry's practices.  

 Assicurazioni Generali Chairman Cesare Geronzi is planning to call an extraordinary board meeting in the coming days to clarify the governance of Europe's third largest insurer, people with knowledge of the situation said. 

 Longreach Group, a private-equity fund, will announce it has closed the first round of fund raising for its second $750 million Japan fund, defying arguments that the country's devastating natural disaster will have a negative impact on raising capital and deal-making.  

Italian mutual lender Banco Popolare posted a fourth-quarter net loss on lower net interest income and commissions and higher costs and provisions, but reported a profit for the full year and said it will pay a dividend. 

 Nasdaq OMX Group and IntercontinentalExchange have continued talks in recent days about a possible joint bid for NYSE Euronext, but the two companies still are working to overcome hurdles, according to people familiar with the matter.  

 Swiss commodities trader Glencore International plans to kick off the Hong Kong retail portion of a stock offering aimed at raising up to $10 billion toward the end of April, a person familiar with the matter said. 



 The six proposed board members of Swiss biotech Actelion vowed to focus on fixing the firm's business but said a potential sale of Europe's largest biotech was still one of the possible strategic options.  

 As drug companies shake up their research and development operations, the industry risks narrowing its focus to the most profitable areas, raising the prospect that some fields of medicine may be neglected, experts say, with the chief among these being neuroscience—research into disorders of the brain.  

 Alliance Boots has become the latest retailer to lose its chief executive as Andy Hornby stepped down "with immediate effect."  

 Google is teaming up with MasterCard and Citigroup to embed technology in Android mobile devices to allow consumers to make purchases by waving their smartphone in front of a small reader at the checkout counter, said people familiar with the matter. 

A U.S. trade panel judge sided with Apple in a patent dispute with Nokia, making an initial determination that technology used in popular devices like iPhones and iPods doesn't infringe on the Finnish cellphone maker's patents. 

 As Google co-founder Larry Page prepares to reclaim his role as chief executive on April 4, he has already taken steps to assume greater command of the Internet company.  

Research In Motion's product strategy got a vote of no confidence, as investors doubted the release of the PlayBook tablet and new BlackBerry models later this year can revive its flagging fortunes in the key U.S. market. 