ATLANTA—Advanced radar, a new satellite, lightning-tracking antennas and low-frequency microphones are among the technologies scientists are developing to warn people earlier about approaching tornadoes.

Warnings were issued for more than 90% of the tornadoes that struck last week across the South, and people were told of the twisters an average of 24 minutes before they hit, according to the National Weather Service. That is far better than in the 1990s, when the weather service was able to detect and issue warnings for only about half of tornadoes. Those warnings came an average of about five minutes before the tornadoes hit. 

But despite improved warnings, the latest storms killed an estimated 329 people, making it one of the deadliest storm systems in American history. Government scientists, university researchers and private companies are developing technologies to provide even earlier and more precise warnings. 

"The hope is research like this will help reduce the loss of life in such storms," said John Trostel, director of the Georgia Institute of Technology's Severe Storms Research Center near Atlanta.

The push comes as the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's budget was cut by 3.2%, or $152 million, in fiscal 2011, which could slow some of its storm-predicting projects, according to NOAA officials. 

About 70% of all tornadoes globally occur in the U.S. Understanding how they develop in thunderstorms is difficult, because storm systems are chaotic, often moving at rapid speeds and in multiple directions. Radar—the most common way to track tornadoes—rotates and scans the full sky only every five or six minutes, which isn't rapidly enough to keep up with a fast-moving or changing storm. "It's very, very hard to follow what's happening," said Mr. Trostel.

NOAA plans to replace its current radar system—made up of 160 radars across the U.S.—in coming years with a system that scans the sky in less than one minute. The current radar rotates on a stand, but the new version, called MPAR, for Multi-Function Phased Array Radar, is stationary and four-sided.

The technology has been used on Navy ships for decades but hasn't been used widely on land. NOAA is operating a prototype and officials believe it could speed detection of approaching tornadoes by six to eight minutes.

At the same time, scientists are developing computer models they hope will help them more precisely predict the paths and dimensions of chaotic storms. In 2009, scientists from the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colo., and other organizations, finished a two-year field study, called Vortex 2, to collect data on how tornadoes formed in the Midwest. The group used mobile radar trucks to gather information and feed it into computer simulations. The group is still analyzing the data, said Roger Wakimoto, the center's director. 

Only about 15% to 20% of large rotating storms form tornadoes, Mr. Wakimoto said, and scientists don't fully understand why some major storms produce tornadoes and others don't. 

"People understand, 'Gee, we need to have a better understanding of these storms,' " he said. "One of the clear goals is to lengthen the lead times" for warnings.

One system now starting to be used in some places is a network of antennas that track cloud-to-cloud lightning, which is often invisible from the ground. Lightning strikes 10 times as often within clouds as it does from clouds to the ground, and scientists believe understanding this lightning could help predict the likelihood of a tornado. Data seem to indicate that the number of lightning strikes drops sharply in a storm just before a tornado develops, Mr. Trostel said. The reasons aren't clear. 

NOAA officials also hope to launch an advanced satellite by 2015 to better map cloud-to-cloud lightning.

Georgia Tech's center is testing highly sensitive "infrasonic" microphones that pick up sounds whose frequencies are too low to be detected by the human ear. The technology, developed by the military during the Cold War to listen for nuclear blasts over vast distances, allows sound waves to be picked up from a storm that is as far as 500 miles away, Mr. Trostel said. Weeding out extraneous sounds—trucks, airplanes, trains—requires complicated algorithms Georgia Tech is trying to develop. The goal would be to use sound to track a severe storm and possible tornadoes much sooner than scientists can do now with ground radar.

North Carolina-based AirDat LLC has developed a storm-forecasting system that crunches data from sensors mounted on 200 commercial airplanes, as an alternative to NOAA's decades-long use of weather balloons. NOAA buys some of its data.

 Write to  Mike Esterl at mike.esterl@wsj.com 