For investors who want their TIPS exposure undiluted, there are two ways to go: buying individual Treasury inflation-protected securities or buying through mutual funds. 

Read the complete Investing in Funds report. 

You can buy TIPS in five-, 10- or 30-year maturities at one of the U.S. Treasury's periodic online auctions, at treasurydirect.gov, with a minimum purchase of $100. The Treasury auctions five- and 30-year TIPS three times a year and 10-year TIPS six times a year. Or you can buy the bonds anytime through a broker. 

Alternatively, you can choose from among more than three dozen conventional mutual funds and exchange-traded funds that exclusively or primarily hold these bonds.

However you invest, one concern is price volatility. Like all bonds with top, triple-A ratings, TIPS are very sensitive to any broad moves in interest rates, and their prices move the opposite way as their yields. So if yields were to rise because of signs that economic growth was accelerating, the value of your TIPS investment would drop significantly, at least on paper, says  Robert Tipp, chief investment strategist of the fixed-income management unit of  Prudential Financial Inc.
PRU


-0.25
%




 "Anyone who thinks they can hedge against a bear market in bonds by buying TIPS is in for an unpleasant surprise,'' Mr. Tipp says.

If interest rates rise and you hold individual bonds, you would have the option to hold on until maturity, at which time you would receive the bond's initial face amount, plus adjustments to reflect increases in consumer prices. So you would never realize the paper loss.

Mutual funds are a different story. A drop in the resale value of a mutual fund's TIPS holdings would show up immediately in the fund's net asset value, and there's typically no "maturity" at which you're assured of getting at least your full initial investment back. But fund managers can move pre-emptively to reduce that threat by shifting into shorter, less-volatile maturities. You can check a fund's prospectus for the degree to which managers will adjust maturities to respond to market conditions. 

There are also some funds that primarily hold short-maturity TIPS. Pacific Investment Management Co. has an ETF,  Pimco 1-5 Year U.S. TIPS Index,
STPZ


0.06
%




 that focuses on those less volatile maturities. Pimco also has two mutual funds that primarily hold TIPS that will mature in a specified year:  Pimco Real Income 2019 and  Pimco Real Income 2029.

Another issue to consider: Holding individual TIPS can cause a tax quandary unless you own them within a tax-sheltered account such as a 401(k) or individual retirement account. If you hold TIPS elsewhere, you must pay federal tax on interest and on any upward adjustment of principal due to inflation, even though you won't receive any of the principal until you sell the securities or they mature.

In contrast, with TIPS mutual funds, you get a monthly distribution from these funds that is taxable. But at least you have received the money before you have to pay tax on it.

Funds also offer another advantage over individual TIPS: With some exceptions, it's generally much easier to take your money out whenever you choose. 

Selling a modest quantity of TIPS into the institutional-investor-dominated and often illiquid market for older bonds through a broker virtually guarantees an unattractive bid for the securities, cautions  Jeffery Elswick, who heads the fixed-income team at San Antonio-based Frost Investment Advisors LLC. You can't sell TIPS through the site where the Treasury auctions them. Sales need to be done through a broker. 

Mr. Elswick says investors who want the flexibility of being able to sell without such hassles should consider a mutual fund or ETF. 

  Loretta Nolan, a financial planner in Old Greenwich, Conn., gets around the secondary market's illiquidity by building ladders of TIPS holdings for clients—staggering maturities so that some come due each year, providing a steady stream of money to meet clients' needs.

—Mr. Pollock is a writer in Ridgewood, N.J. Email him at reports@wsj.com.