Executives at  Time Warner Cable 
TWC


1.47
%




Inc. and  Comcast Corp.
CMCSA


0.68
%




 would be unlikely to allow the owners of the New York Mets to sell part of their stake in the jointly owned regional cable channel Sportsnet New York, according to people familiar with the executives' thinking.

The stance could complicate the team owners' efforts to sell a minority stake in the franchise to raise cash. The team owners want to complete a sale by the end of June to ensure they have enough money to cover their costs for the next two seasons, a person familiar with the sale process says.

Also, one of the people said prospective investors in the Mets won't be provided with financial information about the team's cable network, another indication that the lucrative sports channel won't be included in any deal for a minority stake in the team.

In recent weeks, people involved with the sales process said the regional sports network, SNY, might become a part of the deal, though the Mets said when they first announced their sale plans in January that SNY wouldn't be included.

Gaining a portion SNY, valued at more the $1 billion, was seen as a major carrot for potential buyers since the team itself usually doesn't turn a significant profit and lost millions last year as the team lost games and attendance dropped nearly 20% from the previous year, according to people with knowledge of the team's finances.

Mets owners  Fred Wilpon and  Saul Katz control 65% of the cable channel, which broadcasts Mets games and other New York area sports. Time Warner Cable owns 27% of the network, while Comcast controls 8% through its majority interest in NBCUniversal.

People who have reviewed the ownership agreement for the channel said both minority stakeholders can block any sale of part of the network to a competitor and have the right to buy any shares of the network the Mets owners want to make available to an outside investor.

The cable companies would be reluctant to pass up an opportunity to increase their ownership in the channel because it is profitable, the people say. Regional sports networks play a large role in both companies' businesses.

There are scenarios in which the companies might approve a potential buyer, for example if the buyer could provide certain strategic advantages or significant resources, one of the people said.

Messrs. Wilpon and Katz are trying to raise roughly $200 million by selling a noncontrolling stake in the Mets as part of a plan to recapitalize the debt-laden franchise. The Mets began this week to share confidential financial information with individuals and groups of bidders approved by Major League Baseball.

Messrs. Wilpon and Katz and their associates are being sued for more than $1 billion by the court-appointed trustee recovering assets for victims of  Bernard Madoff's Ponzi scheme. The trustee maintains the team owners, who invested with Mr. Madoff, knew or should have known of his fraud. They deny the allegations. The trustee filed an amended suit Friday, which Messrs. Wilpon and Katz called "fiction."

When the Mets were launching SNY six years ago, they made a strategic decision to sell a portion of the venture to Comcast and Time Warner Cable. Selling a portion of the channel to the cable companies virtually guaranteed that SNY would be widely distributed from the start.

Indeed, by the beginning of the 2006 season, SNY was available on the expanded basic-cable tier nearly everywhere in the region, generating about $15 million a month in subscriber fees.

 Write to  Matthew Futterman at matthew.futterman@wsj.com and Sam Schechner at sam.schechner@wsj.com 