Having grown more optimistic about the U.S. economy, some financial planners say bond investments may pose a bigger risk to investors in 2011 than stocks.

Read the complete  Quarterly Investing in Funds report .

That's because economic growth can lead to inflation and higher interest rates, which are inversely related to bond prices. Long-term bonds tend to lose the most value during interest-rate increases, so some financial planners have been cutting back on those and buying short-term bond funds instead. 

In this column, we feature model portfolios from prominent financial advisers who invest in mutual funds and exchange-traded funds. We reconnected with some advisers we featured last year to see how they navigated 2010 and what they expect in 2011.

The advisers generally expressed confidence that the U.S. economy will accelerate this year, even if slowly, which typically is good for stocks. Still, many of them have been inching up investments in developing countries such as China and India, saying they believe these economies will grow faster than the developed world, resulting in faster stock-market growth. 

  Jane Williams and her investment team have expected an increase in interest rates since late 2008, so they've shied away from U.S. Treasurys, which went on a tear in recent years.

Treasurys performed well through the third quarter of 2010, acting as a "detriment to our performance," says Ms. Williams, chief executive officer of Sand Hill Global Advisors LLC in Palo Alto, Calif. In the fourth quarter, however, Treasurys lost value as yields rose. (At one point last month, the yield on the 10-year Treasury note topped 3.5%, a seven-month high.) Ms. Williams says the firm's decision was the right thing to do for clients for whom the firm is aiming to generate income in excess of Treasury yields. Also, she says she is minimizing the risk of real losses for clients in case of interest-rate increases. 

Like many advisers, Ms. Williams is keeping a big part of her clients' bond investments in short-term bond funds, which may own some government bonds at the discretion of the fund manager. 

Ms. Williams expected 2010 to be a positive year for stocks, albeit with a lot of volatility. That panned out. 

To boost income for clients, Ms. Williams last year added a 2% allocation to an ETF that provides exposure to master limited partnerships, which have higher yields than bonds. MLPs trade on securities exchanges and often own energy pipelines.

She also increased the allocation to stocks of developing countries to 4%, for clients with a moderate risk appetite. Ms. Williams hopes to increase exposure to these markets, potentially by buying stocks of U.S. companies that have large businesses in developing countries. 

Ms. Williams expects a "moderate acceleration of economic growth" this year and a 15% or more gain in the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index, making stocks preferable to many other investments, she says. She sees "growth" stocks outperforming cheap or "value" stocks.

Still, Ms. Williams advises investors to reassess the risk in their portfolio. Investors who were shaken by the sharp stock downturn of 2008, she says, could cut back on stocks if they haven't already. "Planning and managing risk is extremely important," she says.

Sand Hill clients with a moderate risk appetite and with assets of more than $500,000 have gained on average 0.17% annually for the three years ended Nov. 30. This is before the firm's management fee of 0.72% for such clients. (The S&P 500 lost around 5% annually over this period.) The firm manages about $900 million in assets. 

  Allan Roth, founder of Wealth Logic LLC in Denver, believes in buying a few funds that provide exposure to the broad stock and bond markets, and holding them long-term. He has stuck with the six to seven ETFs he owned for moderate-risk clients in 2010. 

In the summer, he cut back on clients' stock and real-estate funds that had gained in value, bringing those positions back to their target allocations. Mr. Roth believes that such "rebalancing" is key to earning good long-term returns because it forces investors to sell high and buy low. 

He's been using the sale proceeds to buy bond funds or certificates of deposit for clients. 

In recent months, several of Mr. Roth's clients have chosen to replace a part of their bond-fund investments with high-yielding five-year certificates of deposit. Mr. Roth says he likes the Ally Bank five-year CD, which has an annual percentage yield of 2.4% and a penalty of 60 days' interest for early withdrawal. An investor who holds this only for one year gets a 2% yield even after the penalty, says Mr. Roth. That's better than, say, the  Vanguard Short-Term Bond Index fund, which is yielding just 1.2%. 

Mr. Roth doesn't have a specific forecast for stocks this year but says that "in the long run, stocks will produce a real return (after inflation) of 5%." That "is much lower than in the last 50 to 60 years," when real return averaged around 7.7%, he adds. 

His advice to investors: "Ignore the predictions of 2011 and accept that we don't know what the market is going to do." He says investors should focus on rebalancing and suggests selling investments when they grow to five percentage points more than their target allocation. 

Mr. Roth's typical client with a moderate risk appetite gained an average 0.5% annually for the three years ended Nov 30. He charges $300 per hour, and manages about $500 million.

  Andrei Voicu, managing director of Fragasso Financial Advisors, expected modest returns from U.S. stocks in 2010 and was relieved to not get "the correction we were fearing," he says. 

To protect clients from a downturn, he had bought some nontraditional funds, including a market-neutral fund designed to do well even in falling markets. The fund was a drag on the portfolio as stocks raced ahead in the fall, so Mr. Voicu plans to sell it. For now, "we want to track the equity markets a little bit closer," he says. 

He increased the foreign-stock allocation slightly by buying a German-stock ETF and a global stock ETF, the  iShares MSCI All Country World Index
ACWI


0.61
%




 fund. He hopes to use the global ETF as a tool to reduce risk quickly in case of another market crisis. He would quickly sell it if the environment changes. "Volatility is here with us to stay," says Mr. Voicu. 

Last year, the best performer in his portfolio for moderate-risk clients was  T. Rowe Price New Horizons, which buys small stocks and was up 35%. "We did not expect that," says Mr. Voicu, adding that the lesson is to stay diversified. "You really never know where your biggest gainers are going to come from." 

Mr. Voicu advises avoiding U.S. Treasurys this year. "They'll either go down (in value) or not move at all," he says. 

He is optimistic about stocks, particularly of companies that pay dividends. He says these will be in demand as investors look for ways to increase income. 

He plans to increase exposure to emerging markets from the current 6% for a moderate-risk client. "Everybody seems to like emerging markets. I do, too," says Mr. Voicu. 

Fragasso Financial's typical client with a moderate risk appetite gained about 0.9% annually for the three years through Nov. 30. This excludes the firm's fee, which ranges from 1.35% down to 0.5%. The Pittsburgh firm manages $700 million.

In the first half of 2010,  Jonathan Guyton, founder of Cornerstone Wealth Advisors Inc., was betting on small-company U.S. stocks and mortgage-backed bonds for his clients. Both gained sharply. 

In a model portfolio meant for retired clients who are withdrawing 5% every year, Mr. Guyton allocated 10% to small stocks and 10% to a fund that buys mortgage-backed securities. In the fall, he increased his small-company allocation to 12%, because he believes small businesses will benefit tremendously from an accelerating economy. 

Meanwhile, he has cut his mortgage-bonds allocation to 8% as part of an overall reduction in medium- and longer-term bonds. He has increased holdings of short-term bonds and cash. 

He advises caution on precious-metals investments, which he says could fall sharply if interest rates rise. 

Mr. Guyton suggests that investors assess how safe their municipal-bond investments are. For instance, general-obligation bonds of a state might be safer than revenue bonds, which the state isn't obliged to back. 

Finally, Mr. Guyton emphasizes the need to manage and plan for tax issues. In 2011, he says, investors can expect to get capital-gains distributions from some stock funds that gained value last year. Since such distributions typically come from actively managed funds—where managers pick stocks in an effort to beat the broad market—Mr. Guyton prefers to own such funds in clients' tax-deferred accounts. In clients' taxable brokerage accounts, he buys tax-efficient ETFs. 

Mr. Guyton's typical client who takes a 5% distribution from his or her portfolio lost 1.4% annually for the three years ended Nov. 30. Mr. Guyton charges a management fee of 0.9% or less, and manages $160 million from his Edina, Minn., office.

 Ms. Anand is a personal-finance columnist for The Wall Street Journal in New Delhi. She can be reached at shefali.anand@wsj.com.  