A new device called a personal dust monitor could soon bring the hazardous and dirty job of underground coal mining a step further into the 21st century. 

But even some fans of the technology say its broad adoption by the mining industry faces hurdles, as business, regulators and labor all weigh in on how it should be used. 

  Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.
TMO


-1.01
%




 of Waltham, Mass., a maker of equipment for high-tech laboratories, spent more than a decade developing and testing the so-called PDM 3600 in conjunction with the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, or NIOSH. 

During that time there has been an alarming rise in coal workers' pneumoconiosis, or black lung disease, among miners in parts of southern West Virginia and neighboring Appalachian states, according to NIOSH. The disease is caused by breathing coal dust, which is also a fuel for underground explosions. Government experts attribute the increased disease rates to more powerful equipment that churns up dust faster and to longer shifts worked by miners. 

The aim of the new $13,000 monitoring device is to help miners limit how much dust they breathe. The monitor is worn on the hip, weighs about six pounds and displays how much coal dust a miner is being exposed to—at a given moment and cumulatively over a shift. 

"This will be the first major advancement in monitoring miners' exposure to respirable coal dust," said  Ed Thimons, branch chief for dust control, ventilation and toxic substances at NIOSH.

Indeed the technology is a leap from the current 40-year-old method of testing for coal dust. Today, coal miners wear a dust monitor for several eight-hour shifts every two months. Filter samples are mailed to a lab, and results come back several weeks later. 

Mr. Thimons said real-time data will enable miners to find ways to reduce their exposure, by changing their location or improving ventilation. The data will also be used by health researchers to help explain the recent resurgence in black lung disease. 

Adoption of the technology, however, isn't entirely free of controversy, or at least concern among both industry and labor. 

The federal Mine Safety and Health Administration is proposing that all coal operators be required to use Thermo Fisher Scientific's PDM 3600 underground as a way to lower the incidence of black lung disease. The agency has requested $2.1 million in the next federal budget to purchase monitors for its own use. Thermo Fisher Scientific is the device's only manufacturer and declines to say what it spent developing the PDM 3600.

At the same time, the agency wants to cut in half the amount of coal dust that miners can be continuously exposed to during an eight-hour shift, to 1 milligram per cubic meter of air. The public comment period ended Monday, and a new rule could take effect this fall. 

While the coal industry has been a supporter of personal dust monitors, the new exposure standard and the idea of using data from the monitors to fine companies for violating the standard have caused some friction. 

"There are questions that remain as to whether or not the device has been tested adequately and whether its current configuration makes it ready for prime-time use as a compliance sampling tool," said  Bruce Watzman, vice president of safety, health and human resources for the National Mining Association, a trade group. 

Mr. Watzman said the industry accepts that there are pockets of increased black lung prevalence based on a NIOSH program in which miners voluntarily submit to chest X-rays. But he said it isn't clear whether there is an increase industry-wide. 

Meanwhile,  Phil Smith, a spokesman for the United Mine Workers of America, said the union doesn't want workers who wear the monitor and have high exposures to be switched to lower-paid jobs. "As a piece of technology we're in favor of it," he added. "We think it's going to save miners' lives." 

It's unlikely most of the 47,000 miners at the nation's 400 underground coal mines would ever be required to wear a personal dust monitor, especially with a current price tag. Thermo Fisher Scientific estimates it could sell 3,500 monitors over the next two to three years, if certain underground mine personnel are required to wear them under MSHA's final rule. 

"That becomes a debate with the coal mine workers [union] and industry as to what's practical," said  Mike Nemergut, general manager of air quality instruments at Thermo Fisher Scientific. The company is also exploring overseas markets. 

Mr. Nemergut said the company has already sold 250 monitors to U.S. mining companies that are using them to measure where dust is being produced, rather than for individual miner exposures. 

He said miners quickly learn how to lower their dust exposure by changing how close they stand to equipment. One surprise, he said, is that miners can breathe in a significant amount of dust just putting on their work clothes before they even head underground.

 Write to  Kris Maher at kris.maher@wsj.com 