The law of unintended consequences is a cornerstone of economics. Policy makers are confident they have learned the lessons of the Great Depression and other financial crises. Governments have run vast fiscal deficits; central banks have kept interest rates ultra-low and expanded the money supply; the world has so far avoided protectionism. 

If there is a policy error this time, it is likely to be the attempt to undertake root-and-branch reform of the global banking system even before the crisis is played out, forcing banks to hold vastly higher quantities of capital and short-term liquid assets. The unintended consequences of this drive for banking perfection are just starting to become apparent and may yet prove deflationary, particularly for a highly leveraged economy like the U.K.

Take HSBC chairman Douglas Flint's warning this week that the Basel III liquidity rules, predictably gold-plated by the Financial Services Authority, could restrict the supply of lending. Given HSBC has plenty of surplus deposits to fund its own lending, Mr. Flint's comments can't be dismissed as special pleading. U.K. banks raised a staggering €141 billion ($195 billion) from bond markets in 2010 yet lending contracted. Banks are hoarding cash to refinance existing debt and repay the BOE's Special Liquidity Scheme, an emergency funding program that expires in early 2012. U.K. banks need to refinance an estimated £500 billion ($814 billion) in the next two years just to replace existing debt. Bank funding costs are already rising sharply and will lead to higher interest rates for borrowers. 

Mr. Flint also warned of the likely consequences of the G-20's plan to impose a Too Big To Fail capital surcharge for banks such as HSBC. This will further depress returns on equity for the biggest banks, causing them to lend less or charge more, which will harm the economy. At the same time, Too Big To Fail banks may come to be seen as safer and carrying official approval, leading to their increasing market share—in other words, increasing banking sector concentration, the opposite of what is intended

Other unintended consequences are only now becoming apparent. With capital requirements and risk-weightings rising, banks are under pressure to dump legacy assets that will no longer bring an economic return on capital. Barclays is seeking early repayment of the $12 billion loan to Protium, a portfolio of structured credit assets, after the capital requirement trebled. Lloyds Banking Group and Royal Bank of Scotland say they are likely to accelerate the sale of vast holdings of commercial real estate in anticipation of the new rules even if that triggers losses. 

Similarly, it is clear that Basel III liquidity rules forcing banks to hold more long-term debt is at odds with Solvency II which requires insurers to hold more short-term securities. Europe's regulators have created a situation where institutions that traditionally provide long-term bank funding are discouraged from doing so, raising doubts about who will buy the bonds and at what price.With credit markets already concerned about the ability of European banks to refinance an estimated €1.7 trillion in three years, this is an extra headache the banks do not need.

Underlying these unintended consequences is a single misjudgment: policy makers assumed—despite warnings from the industry—that if they allowed long enough for banks to adjust to the new regime, the economic impact could be contained. But the story of the recent bank reporting season is that the market is applying the new standards now. Investors are demanding banks explain how they will achieve a 15% return on equity on a 10% core Tier 1 capital ratio on a Basel III basis. Banks that fail to convince will find their shares trading below book value and will come under pressure to deleverage.

Banks are having to raise capital ratios and increase holdings of liquid assets just when credit is most needed to fund the recovery. UBS estimates the impact of Basel III will be to inflate the risk-weighted assets of U.K. banks by £400 billion while reducing capital by up to £90 billion. To make up the shortfall, UBS forecasts banks will shrink their assets by £500 billion. No wonder lending and money supply growth remain flat.

Yet the Bank of England and the Financial Services Authority continue to call for ever higher capital requirements. FSA chairman Adair Turner has made no secret he thinks the Basel minimum core Tier 1 ratio was set too low at 7%. Mr. King's repeated calls for much higher capital requirements have spooked the banking industry because the BOE will soon become responsible for banking supervision. Mr. King's BOE colleague David Miles has argued the optimal core Tier 1 ratio is close to 20%. Whatever the Independent Banking Commission recommends is likely to involve higher capital requirements.

Of course, these policy makers are well aware their decisions have consequences for the real economy in terms of a higher cost of capital and lower future growth. They argue these costs are worth paying to avoid a repeat of the crisis of 2007/8. There is also an understandable political desire to shield the government balance sheet from the costs of future bank bailouts. Yet it is also clear some of the consequences are unanticipated: Mr. King has more than once expressed surprise that money supply growth remains so flat despite £200 billion of quantitative easing and lending rates in the real economy remain so high relative to ultra-low central bank base rates.

Regulatory overkill is now the biggest risk to the recovery. It is vital to create a more robust banking system free from official support, but not at the price of choking off the credit growth needed to fund recovery, potentially threatening financial stability. The euro crisis has shown that in times of stress the market does not distinguish between public, private and banking sector debt. The U.K. is still massively leveraged. Making the banking system bombproof won't reduce risks to the economy; it just pushes them deeper into the private sector—into the commercial and residential property markets, onto retailers and small and medium-sized businesses. It's time to back off.

 Write to  Simon Nixon at simon.nixon@wsj.com 