 China has been increasing its holdings of EU countries' debt, since the outbreak of the European sovereign-debt crisis, Chinese Vice Commerce Minister Gao Hucheng said. The comments come as political and corporate leaders increasingly see China as a source of capital.  

 Vice Premier Li Keqiang said China will continue to strengthen intellectual-property protection and improve the business environment for foreign firms.  

 U.S. retailers appear to have overestimated the spending momentum of consumers, as December sales showed the poor economy still has the upper hand.  

 Apple launched an app store for its Macintosh computers as it seeks to extend the popularity of the store concept beyond its mobile devices. 

 Goldman Sachs planned to stop taking orders for Facebook shares Thursday due to high demand and told some would-be investors to expect just a small fraction of the shares they requested.  

 Food prices in India are continuing their sharp rise, increasing concerns about inflation.  

 Investors in BP welcomed a U.S. report on last year's Gulf oil spill, saying it reduced the likelihood the company would be found guilty of gross negligence.  

 Asian steelmakers are watching warily as floods choke off vital coal supplies from Australia. 

Tourism has fallen off in Queensland, even as the industry across Australia grapples with a rising currency and higher interest rates. 

 Renault said a case of corporate espionage in electric vehicles has led to the suspension of three managers and was serious enough to "threaten strategic assets."  

 The White House and congressional Republicans are moving toward a consensus on the need for an overhaul of the corporate tax code.  

 Woori Finance and Hana Financial said they may buy South Korean savings banks weighed down by bad real-estate loans.  

 MasterCard acquired the right to put its name on the former Beijing Olympics basketball stadium, the first foreign firm to obtain commercial naming rights over an arena in China's capital.  

 Moody's raised its credit-rating outlook for the Philippines a day after the government raised $1.25 billion in a global peso bond.  

 Car sales in Australia surged last year, as the nation's robust economy fueled demand.  

 HTC posted a more than doubling of its unaudited net for the fourth quarter as the smartphone maker's results were driven by growth in handset shipments.  

 Disappointing reports from retailers for December and a drop in telecom stocks dented the DJIA, while the Nikkei led Asia gains.  

 Pakistan's government gave in to popular pressure to withdraw an increase in fuel prices, which could derail the IMF's economic-overhaul program for the nation.  

 The U.S. protested Vietnam's treatment of a U.S. diplomat who was detained by police while attempting to visit a dissident Roman Catholic priest.  

 The death toll from tobacco-related illnesses in China could triple in two decades, experts warned, ahead of a deadline for China to implement international commitments to curb smoking.  

Twenty-four children were hospitalized with lead poisoning caused by an illegal battery factory near their village in eastern China, state media said.