Another dramatic explosion at a crippled nuclear plant and chilling warnings of radiation leaks had many in Japan moving closer to the exits.



  Ashley Burns had 20 minutes to pack a bag and meet her friend on the other side of town. After sharing a $300 cab ride to Narita International Airport, she bought a ticket on the first available flight to Hong Kong. The flight wouldn't take off for another day, so she spent the night sleeping on a windowsill in the airport.

"I just wanted to leave," Ms. Burns, a 30-year-old American, said when reached by phone about 30 minutes before her departure Tuesday.

Companies were queuing up as well. Auto makers  BMW AG
BMW


-1.18
%




 and  Daimler AG
DDAIY


-0.25
%




, and parts supplier Robert Bosch GmbH, have flown hundreds of employees and family members out of the country. 

Meanwhile, software developer  SAP AG has reserved 530 hotel rooms in Osaka and Kobe south and west of Tokyo, for employees and families who want to move farther away from the stricken reactors to the north.

The fast-changing developments and piecemeal, sometimes contradictory information flow, created a tricky environment for companies trying to balance the needs of customers with the safety of workers, many of whom didn't want to leave.

Coca-Cola Japan Co.'s Tokyo office left the decision up to each employee whether or not to show up for work. "There's a lot of rumors and uninformed speculation," said spokesman  Kei Sakaguchi, noting that more than a dozen Coke expatriates remain in Tokyo. "Frankly, it's not easy to make a decisive judgment at this stage."

French nuclear engineering company Areva SA was among those preparing to move employees farther out of the path of a possible radioactive fallout. The company said Tuesday it would relocate staffers who wanted to leave Tokyo to hotels in the Kyushu region to the south, along with their families.

Areva, which has 18 French employees in Japan, said only the expatriate families chose to move. Most of its local staff decided to stay in Tokyo.

Some companies didn't give their employees a choice. Thai Airways International PCL ordered its cabin crews not to remain overnight in Japan, to reduce the risk from radiation and aftershocks.



  Air France-KLM
AFLYY


0.43
%




 and  Deutsche Lufthansa AG
DLAKY


0.84
%




 amended their Japan flights to add stops in Seoul, where crews are sleeping after long flights instead of in Tokyo. The change is aimed at protecting pilots and flight attendants from the danger of nuclear-plant accidents, and to ensure staff get sufficient rest as Tokyo suffers from power outages and water shortages.

Ovation Corporate Travel, a New York-based travel management company for hedge funds, investment banks and private-equity firms, said companies are starting to look at moving mission-critical staff to Hong Kong or Singapore.

Concerns about the physical damage from the earthquake and tsunami have been overshadowed by the threat of radiation, said  Michael Steiner, Ovation's executive vice president. Businesses clearly are preparing to go further in moving their employees, he said.

Getting people out now isn't a problem, Mr. Steiner said, "but the next two days will be very interesting." 

Travel agencies in Tokyo reported unseasonably high bookings from foreigners, but tickets for many flights were still available Tuesday. A day earlier,  Cathay Pacific Airways Ltd.
CPCAY


-2.19
%




 said it would extend a special one-way economy class fare of 5,755 Hong Kong dollars (US$739) for flights from Japan to Hong Kong through March 30 in order to "help those without any confirmed bookings who want to fly back to Hong Kong as soon as possible." 

The varied reactions underscore the disconnect in Tokyo between the wait-and-see attitude of many American expats and large companies and diplomats and their European counterparts, who seemed more willing to leave.

In a twist, carriers say demand is strong for flights into Japan, too, probably as Japanese citizens working abroad scramble to get home.

Still, in Japan many are packing up. Over the weekend, American  Lina Lee went to the grocery store in Tokyo to buy diapers for her 6-month-old son. The shelves had been laid bare.

By Monday morning, she and her husband, both 33, decided to leave Tokyo, where they had lived for a year, because of "the rolling blackouts, lack of access of food as well as the nuclear issue." They arrived in Hong Kong later that day. "We felt like Monday morning, things weren't improving. If anything, things were getting worse."

As foreign children and their parents streamed out of Tokyo, the American School in Japan closed through March 28, starting its spring break a week early. "There are simply too many unknowns at this time to hold classes this week," the head of the school,  Ed Ladd, wrote on the school's website.

Many of those who remained in Tokyo had trouble making it into work due to irregular train schedules and blackouts affecting traffic lights in bedroom communities outside Tokyo. Others said that their offices had turned off all but the most critical lights in order to save energy in line with the Japanese government's request due to the absence of the electricity generated by the damaged nuclear power plants. 

The small corner of Tokyo's economy devoted to serving Western expatriates also had gone into sleep mode. The Tokyo American Club, a hub for Western corporate expats and their families, was operating on shortened hours to cut energy usage. 

Many expatriates who decided to take a wait-and-see attitude and remain in Tokyo are employed by Japanese firms.

  Nissan Motor Co. said it has advised its employees to make their own decisions, but several members of its executive committee have remained in Yokohama, where the company is based. Those executives include the company's American Chief Financial Officer  Joseph Peter and British national  Andy Palmer, both of whom were named executive vice presidents last week. 

"There is no plan to repatriate anybody, but if someone specifically requests it, then we will take that under advice," said Nissan spokesman  Simon Sproule. "We've suspended all business travel to Japan, but the sense is that we want to stand shoulder-to-shoulder with our Japanese colleagues."

That sense of esprit de corps was even evident in the dwindling French expatriate community in Tokyo. One French native who decided to stay said he did so out of a sense of solidarity with the Japanese.  Olivier Voisin, a civil engineer by training who now owns a trio of restaurants in the Tokyo area, said that he had 100% cancellation rates—from both foreigners and Japanese—at his European cuisine establishments for the next three days. Even his staff departed Tokyo for home or points farther south this morning. "Everybody has left, basically."

—Dan Michaels, Gustov Sandstrom and Chana Schoenberger contributed to this article.

 Write to  Vanessa Fuhrmans at vanessa.fuhrmans@wsj.com 