RICHMOND, Va.—A federal appeals-court panel Tuesday questioned the state of Virginia's right to sue to overturn the federal health-care overhaul and showed sympathy to the Obama administration's arguments on the substance of the law.

The three judges on the panel, chosen at random using a computer program, provided a favorable forum for the administration. All are Democratic appointees, with two named by President Barack Obama and one by President Bill Clinton.

In two and a half hours of rapid-fire questioning, the panel at the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit here heard arguments in two suits challenging the 2010 health overhaul. Plaintiffs contend the law violates the Constitution by requiring Americans to either carry insurance or pay a fee.

The hearing previewed how the Obama administration likely will argue before Supreme Court, which is expected ultimately to decide the case perhaps as soon as its 2011-12 term. It was the first oral argument before a federal appellate court, with the Fourth Circuit hearing two challenges side by side. 

Tuesday's arguments didn't involve the biggest challenge to the health law, brought by 26 states. Federal District Judge Roger Vinson of Pensacola, Fla., ruled in favor of those states in January and wrote that the entire health law must be voided.

So far, 31 lawsuits have been filed against the overhaul law. Five courts have ruled, and the decisions have broken down along party lines. Three judges who are Democratic appointees upheld the law, and two judges who are Republican appointees ruled against it. Nineteen cases have been dismissed with no appeal pending.

One of the two cases aired Tuesday is led by Virginia Attorney General Ken Cuccinelli, a Republican. U.S. District Judge Henry E. Hudson of Richmond last year sided with the state of Virginia in that case and ruled the law's coverage requirement goes beyond Congress's powers under the Constitution. He didn't block the remainder of the law from proceeding.

In Tuesday's hearing, the three appellate judges sharply questioned what gives Virginia "standing," or the right to sue the federal government in the case. Virginia ties its standing to a 2010 state law that says people in the state can't be forced to pay a penalty for lacking health coverage.

"How on earth can there be standing if all it takes is Virginia to pass a statute and for the attorney general to come to court?" asked Judge Andre M. Davis, an Obama appointee. Judge James A. Wynn Jr.,also appointed by Mr. Obama, raised the question of whether the state law was created simply to gain standing.

E. Duncan Getchell, Jr., solicitor general of Virginia, ticked off a list of what he called similar cases in which states including Oregon and Wyoming have sued on behalf of residents' interests. "We can't give ourselves standing by declaration," he told the court. 

"Isn't that exactly what you just did?"Judge Davis shot back

After Tuesday's hearing, Mr. Cuccinelli said he would appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court if the appeals court finds he lacks standing. 

The other case at issue Tuesday was brought by Liberty University, which contended that failing to have health coverage is "inactivity" and can't be regulated under the Constitution's Commerce Clause. Courts have found that Congress has the power to regulate economic activity under that clause.

Liberty lost at the district-court level and ran into more trouble with the appellate panel. Judge Diana Gribbon Motz, a Clinton appointee, noted that the penalty would be levied through an individual's federal income tax returns, which must be filed. "Is it not an activity?" she asked, referring to the filing of taxes.

Acting U.S. Solicitor General Neal Katyal, who argued for the Obama administration, said almost all Americans get health care and having insurance is just a mechanism of helping pay for it first. He said the mandate will prevent those who are covered from being forced to absorb $43 billion a year in uncompensated care. "We don't know the chance that we will get hit by a bus or struck by cancer," he said. 

Mathew D. Staver, counsel for Liberty University, argued that some Americans "chose not to put themselves into that stream," he said. "They want to be left alone."

 Write to  Janet Adamy at janet.adamy@wsj.com 