SEOUL—Samsung Electronics Co. Friday announced a weaker-than-expected fourth-quarter earnings forecast, strengthening the view that the economic slowdown in Europe took a toll on demand for consumer electronics.

The slowdown has mainly impacted personal computers and flat-panel televisions, leading to price erosion at the South Korean electronics giant's mainstay memory chip and flat panel divisions and hurting profitability. But analysts expect earnings to start to improve from the beginning of this year as brisk sales of smartphones, tablet devices and Web-connected TVs are likely to drive sales. 

Samsung, the world's largest memory chip, television and liquid-crystal-display maker by revenue, said in a statement it estimates a fourth-quarter operating profit of between 2.8 trillion and 3.2 trillion South Korean won (about $2.5 billion to $2.86 billion). That's below market expectations for an operating profit of 3.28 trillion won based on a Dow Jones Newswires poll of analysts. 

The company said sales likely came in between 40 trillion to 42 trillion won. Analysts expect fourth-quarter sales of 41.31 trillion won. 

Exports make up nearly 90% of all of Samsung's sales, with Europe accounting for 30% of the overall amount. 

The announcement drove Samsung's shares sharply lower initially as investors had been hoping for a strong performance in the key end-of-year holiday sales season, though shares regained some ground. In morning trading in Seoul, Samsung was down 0.5%.

In the fourth quarter a year earlier, Samsung posted an operating profit of 3.44 trillion won on sales of 39.25 trillion won. In the third quarter of 2010, Samsung posted an operating profit of 4.86 trillion won on sales of 40.23 trillion won. 

Although analysts expect Samsung's semiconductor business to continue to suffer from falling chip prices amid an industry slowdown—Samsung's chip division accounts for more than half of its total profit—they are more optimistic about the outlook, noting easing marketing costs and brighter prospects for the company's mobile business. Samsung is the world's second-largest maker of cellphones behind  Nokia Corp.
NOK


-0.74
%




 of Finland by shipment and revenue. 

"Samsung's quarterly operating profit is expected to have hit bottom in the fourth quarter of last year and will continue to rise this year with first-quarter operating profit of about 4 trillion won," said Lee Sun-tae, an analyst at Meritz Securities. 

Samsung said the forecasts, based on International Financial Reporting Standards, may differ from actual earnings because it hasn't completed an audit. The company is expected to announce actual numbers later this month. 