WASHINGTON—A House Republican leader said Tuesday that an overhaul of the U.S. tax code was a policy goal his party could work with Democrats to achieve. 

Rep. Eric Cantor (R., Va.), who will become majority leader when Republicans assume control of the House Wednesday, said changes to the tax code could be "a significant boost" to U.S. competitiveness. 

Mr. Cantor said Republicans would be looking at President Barack Obama's State of the Union Address and subsequent budget request to see what ideas he has about changes to the tax code. 

As Mr. Cantor outlined areas of possible cooperation, the two parties were preparing to do battle once again over health care. 

House Republicans have already announced that they plan to vote Jan. 12 on a repeal of the Democrats' new health-care law, which the GOP has called an example of federal overreach. But their chances of success seemed remote as Democrats retained a majority in the Senate and hold the White House.

Departing House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and other Democratic leaders said Tuesday they would be willing to work with Republicans on areas of agreement, but would fight attempts to undo the health-care overhaul and other legislation enacted by Democrats over the past two years.

The Democrats also criticized Republicans for using what they portrayed as budget gimmickry to circumvent promises to reduce the deficit.

Rep. John Boehner (R., Ohio), who is expected to be elected speaker on Wednesday, has announced the GOP's intention to cut discretionary spending to 2008 levels, which would save $100 billion a year. But GOP leaders have so far detailed only a limited set of spending cuts.

Rep. Greg Walden (R., Ore.), who heads Mr. Boehner's transition team, announced Tuesday that by cutting the budget of House offices by 5%, lawmakers would save $35 million in the first year.

That is a small fraction of government spending, but Mr. Walden argued it was a case of leading by example. 

"While only a first step, these cuts provide real savings," Mr. Walden said, calling it a "first installment" of the savings the GOP will produce.

See the average age of the House of Representatives and the Senate, from 1949 to 2011.

Take a look at Republican lawmakers who are taking the reins of key House committees.

Democrats on Tuesday noted that the health-care law Republicans want to repeal was estimated to save about $138 billion over the next 10 years. 

Democrats also listed what they saw as the most popular elements of the health law, such as the prohibition on insurance companies denying coverage to children due to pre-existing conditions. 

As lawmakers prepared to be sworn in Wednesday for the new Congress, Republicans used symbolism to underscore their message about limiting the federal government's reach.

Chief Justice John Roberts swore in Mr. Boehner's staff in a private ceremony Tuesday on Capitol Hill. 

By inviting Mr. Roberts, Mr. Boehner was signaling his intent to adhere to the Constitution when he becomes speaker.

The notion that government has strayed from the Constitution has been a big argument of tea-party activists and Republicans were making an effort to show they agreed. 

On Thursday, lawmakers will read the Constitution on the House floor, and Republicans are adopting a rule that every law must state the constitutional authority on which it rests.

The ceremonial rituals of a new Congress will unfold Wednesday, though Mr. Boehner's office has said he intends to restrain the pomp, given the country's economic struggles. 

After new members are sworn in and Mr. Boehner is elected as speaker, he will be escorted to the chamber, where Ms. Pelosi will hand him the gavel.

Rep. Darrell Issa (R., Calif.), the incoming chairman of the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, said Tuesday that he had sent a letter to more than 150 companies, trade associations and think tanks, asking what regulations had hurt their ability to create jobs.

Democrats criticized the move as an early sign Republicans were catering to big business at the expense of middle-class Americans. 

"House Democrats will continue to protect the gains we have made in terms of health and economic security of the American people," Ms. Pelosi said.

—Janet Hook  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Naftali Bendavid at naftali.bendavid@wsj.com and Corey Boles at corey.boles@dowjones.com 