  Rajat Gupta stayed on as a director of three public companies after securities regulators warned him that they intended to accuse him of leaking inside information, prompting regulators to file an enforcement action against him on the eve of a related criminal trial.

One of the companies,  Procter & Gamble Co.
PG


0.26
%




, says it was aware for "a few weeks" of the planned Securities and Exchange Commission civil case against Mr. Gupta, but didn't tell shareholders. 

Criminal complaints and developing disclosures in the Galleon insider trading case allege a far-reaching and complex scheme. Review the known and alleged relationships.

"Members of our board were advised of" the planned SEC action by Mr. Gupta, P&G said in a statement. "Mr. Gupta provided the company with written assurances that the allegations had no merit." P&G said it wasn't required to disclose the information and "as always, we acted in the best interest of our shareholders."

  AMR Corp. declined to comment.  Harman International Industries 
HAR


-1.48
%




Industries Inc. didn't return calls seeking comment. Mr. Gupta didn't resign from the boards of the companies until after the SEC filed its case against him. 

Gary Naftalis, a lawyer for Mr. Gupta, said his client had "promptly notified" P&G of the SEC warning letter. Before bringing charges, the SEC did not at any time indicate to Mr. Gupta any concern about his "continuing to serve as a director before there had been a full and fair adjudication of the merits," Mr. Naftalis said.

A spokesman for the SEC declined to comment.

The financial world was abuzz on March 1, when the SEC filed a civil administrative proceeding accusing Mr. Gupta, for years one of America's most respected corporate directors, of passing inside information gleaned from his board duties to hedge-fund titan  Raj Rajaratnam. Messrs. Gupta and Rajaratnam have denied wrongdoing.



Corporate-governance specialists said Mr. Gupta's situation reinforces the need for clearer guidelines on what a company needs to tell shareholders about legal issues affecting directors. 

Currently, companies have leeway not to disclose information if they believe it isn't "material" to their stock price. If a director is the subject of a criminal proceeding, companies must disclose that information to investors in a regulatory filing if it is deemed to materially affect the director's abilities or integrity.

At the same time, Mr. Gupta would have had a clear duty to disclose receiving the SEC's enforcement-warning notice in his proxy statement to investors if he were to seek re-election, securities lawyers say.

This lack of clear guidance on disclosing investigations into directors is part of a wider problem, said  Charles Elson, head of the Weinberg Center for Corporate Governance at University of Delaware's business school.

"The disclosure rules scream out for clarification from the regulators," Mr. Elson said. 

  Mary Schapiro, the SEC's chairman, declined to comment through a spokesman on whether there is a need for clearer disclosure guidelines.

In its case, the SEC alleged that Mr. Gupta used his position on the boards of P&G and  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS


0.18
%




 to leak confidential information that helped Mr. Rajaratnam generate about $45 million in illicit profits. Mr. Gupta hasn't been accused of tipping any inside information in relation to AMR or Harman. 

None of the companies has been accused of any wrongdoing. Mr. Gupta stepped down from Goldman's board in May 2010. Goldman declined to comment.

The timing of the SEC case came one week before the start of a related criminal trial against Mr. Rajaratnam, founder of the Galleon Group hedge fund.

The SEC alleged that Mr. Gupta provided improper tips regarding P&G's quarter that ended in December 2008. Mr. Gupta allegedly called Mr. Rajaratnam in January 2009 after participating in a P&G audit committee meeting and told him the company's sales would be lower than publicly predicted. 

Events leading to the regulatory case against Rajat Gupta

Galleon funds then sold short approximately 180,000 P&G shares, making profits of more than $570,000, the SEC alleges. 

Prosecutors have said that Mr. Gupta is an unindicted co-conspirator in the criminal case. In that case, the government has filed 14 charges of securities fraud and conspiracy against Mr. Rajaratnam. 

In the Galleon trial, jurors have heard tapes of calls between Messrs. Gupta and Rajaratnam in which Mr. Gupta allegedly passed inside information about confidential Goldman financial results and transactions.

In testimony this week in the Galleon trial, Goldman Chief Executive  Lloyd Blankfein said he had "an awareness of—I want to say inkling"—that Mr. Gupta's activities were under scrutiny by prosecutors in March 2010, when Goldman announced he wouldn't stand for re-election. 

  John Dowd, Mr. Rajaratnam's lawyer, had urged the SEC not to bring its case so close to the March 8 start of the Galleon trial. He accused the agency of a "reckless" bid to "destroy a favorable witness" for his client.

But the SEC believed it needed to act because of Mr. Gupta's position on the boards of P&G, AMR and its American Airlines unit and Harman, people familiar with the matter say.

The SEC hoped Mr. Gupta would step down from his public directorships after it warned him in a letter in January that it planned to file a civil enforcement case against him, the people say.

The SEC has no power to force people to resign from boards, short of attempting to get a court order banning an individual from being a director. 

The SEC believed that the announcement of an enforcement action would prompt Mr. Gupta to resign from his remaining board directorships, the people familiar with the matter say.

Mr. Gupta sued the SEC on March 18, alleging that the agency's administrative action would deny him his right to a jury trial and other procedural safeguards available if the case had instead been brought in a court.

— Liz Rappaport contributed to this article.

 Write to  Susan Pulliam at susan.pulliam@wsj.com 