U.S. regulators Monday announced an initiative, primarily aimed at targeting private pilots, to reduce general-aviation accidents 10% by 2018.

Spanning everything from corporate jets to weekend pilots of small propeller airplanes, the plan reflects frustration among Federal Aviation Administration officials that the fatal accident rate in this segment has remained basically flat for almost a decade. 

Using an unusual grassroots approach, the FAA intends starting this weekend to use more than 3,120 staffers and volunteers to reach out to private pilots at air shows and other events during April.

The effort also includes more pilot-training and stepped-up efforts to systematically analyze accident and incident trends, then develop proactive initiatives to reduce accidents. 

On its website, the FAA said the public outreach "will provide a springboard for identifying specific non-regulatory measures that can be used to improve flight training and reduce accidents." 

The nationwide fatal accident rate for general aviation has been stuck above 1.1 crashes per 100,000 flight hours since 2001. That compares with a multi-year average of one major accident for roughly 2.5 million commercial flights in the U.S. In some recent years, U.S. airlines didn't have any fatal accidents.

Part of the latest safety drive is patterned after a comprehensive data-collection and analysis effort used by federal officials, airline safety experts and pilot union leaders to reduce U.S. commercial-aviation accident rates by more than 80 percent starting in the late 1990s.

But unlike the coordinated safety program for airlines, commercial pilots, mechanics and air-traffic controllers, the general aviation effort won't mandate more training and testing. Instead, it will depend heavily on voluntary participation in educational opportunities emphasizing the importance of pilot attitude, preflight aircraft checks and improving skills in low-speed maneuvers.

Federal air-accident investigators have concluded that overall, more-sophisticated cockpit instruments and devices haven't appreciably reduced the rate of pilot-caused accidents involving private aircraft. 

In 2010, the FAA recorded 268 general aviation accidents, with 457 fatalities. That compares with more than 320 fatal accidents in 2001. But since total flight time dropped significantly during that stretch, the FAA's fact sheet indicates that "the general aviation accident rate has remained static" and "significant work is needed to further improve" that safety record

 Write to  Andy Pasztor at andy.pasztor@wsj.com 