Mumbai--Jyothy Laboratories Ltd will bid to acquire Henkel India Ltd from  Henkel AG
HENKY


0.30
%




, the company said.

The move comes on the back of the home-care maker's announcement Wednesday that it would pick up a 14.9% stake in the unit from Tamilnadu Petroproducts Ltd. 

Henkel, which has sought bids from prospective buyers by the first week of April for its 50.97% stake in Henkel India, will auction its holding in the Indian venture, and give up on its attempts to emulate the success of Unilever in India through its joint venture, Hindustan Unliver Ltd. Henkel's home-care and personal-care brands in India include Henko, Mr. White, Pril, Fa, Neem and Margo.

Henkel India and Jyothy Laboratories both compete in the home care, fabric care, dish-washing soap, personal care and household-cleaning segments. 

"Our bid is under process," said Ullas Kamath, deputy managing director of Jyothy Labs, adding he expects the sale to be completed over the next three to four weeks.

"We got to know about the deal Tuesday, and moved fast and closed it within 24 hours," Mr. Kamath said. 

He has been eyeing Henkel India for the past three years, and was able to convince his board to make the offer.

Meanwhile, Jyothy Labs paid 607.3 million rupees to purchase Tamilnadu Petroproducts' 14.9% stake, according to the company's filing to the Bombay Stock Exchange. This puts the price per share at 35 rupees, about 10 rupees lower than the market price. Tamilnadu Petroproducts still retains 1.7% stake in Henkel.

Jyothy Laboratories, which owns brands such as Ujala fabric whitener and Ujala techno bright detergent, deliberately kept its purchase below the 15% threshold that would have required a mandatory open offer for a further 20% holding, Mr. Kamath said. 

The company raised a war chest of 2.28 billion rupees through qualified institutional placements in August last year to pay for acquisitions. 

"We can raise another [5 to 6 billion] rupees from the banks in debt if required," he said.

Jyothy is not the only bidder for Henkel. Others in the race for the remaining stake include Godrej Consumer Products Ltd,  Wipro Ltd's consumer arm Wipro Consumer Care and Lighting, and Emami Ltd, Mr. Kamath said. Deals India couldn't verify this independently and was unable to reach the firms for immediate comment.

But analysts say Jyothy may have an edge over the competition. 

"Jyothy ...has a similar portfolio to Henkel, which has close to 60% of its sales from detergents," said Anand Mour, an analyst at Indiabulls Securities Ltd. 

The sale of the stake comes after Henkel tried to turn things around and boost India revenue, including a change of managing director a little less than two years ago, he said. 

  Celine Pannuti and Ankur Gupta, analysts at JPMorgan Securities Ltd, had highlighted that the company face significant challenges this year from increased competition and rising input costs. 

Jyothy Laboratories, which was founded in 1983, with an initial capital of 5,000 rupees by  M. P. Ramachandran, the current chairman and managing director of the company.

MAPE Advisory Group Pvt. Ltd is Jyothy Labs' advisor on its bid. HSBC Securities and Capital Markets (India) Pvt. Ltd and HSBC Trinkaus and Burkhardt AG are advisers to Henkel.