As municipal borrowers look to renegotiate bond deals, banks are drawing a tough line in the refinancing talks. 

Some banks that helped borrowers get cash are less willing to or able to do so now. Stronger banks that still can provide backstops, called letters of credit, will do them only with strings attached. Costs for the letters have risen.

"The terrain has changed quite dramatically," says  Lee White, executive vice president at investment-banking firm George K. Baum & Co. in Denver. 

The change in banks' stance and its effect on municipal borrowers' finances shows interrelationships in the credit market that are often out of view.

Before the 2008 financial crisis, banks provided letters of credit as backstops that effectively guaranteed payment on floating-rate debt sold by municipal-debt issuers. They were an easy source of fee income for at least a dozen U.S. and European banks that relied on their high credit ratings to land the business. Meanwhile, variable-rate debt allowed a municipality or other entity to raise money for long periods, but at lower rates typically associated with short-term bonds.

But since the credit crisis, some banks have been downgraded by credit-ratings firms, making their guarantee less appealing to the investors that buy municipal bonds. Also, banks globally have tightened lending standards and are under new requirements to set aside more capital as a buffer against losses.

The result: As letters of credit that banks provided expire this year, fewer banks are willing to provide them, and those that are doing so are demanding more for them. This comes as many issuers are in weaker financial shape than they were three years ago, and investor appetite for municipal bonds lately has been declining.

"The cost for procuring letters of credit is substantially higher than it was before the prices exploded in 2008, and the number of banks that are offering the product has shrunk," said  Tom Dresslar, a spokesman for the California Treasurer's Office. 

Before 2008, issuers paid 0.65 percentage point to one percentage point of the debt being sold for letters of credit. Today, the cost is 1.50 percentage points to 2.25 percentage points if a letter of credit is available at all, said  Jerimi Ullom, head of the health-care finance project group at law firm Hall, Render, Killian, Heath & Lyman in Indianapolis.

Banks are offering substitute letters of credit or other financing options, at a cost. One avenue is to allow borrowers to replace floating-rate debt with debt that a bank buys and keeps for itself in what is called a bank-qualified placement transaction.

  Jeff Previdi, a senior director in the State and Local Government group in Standard & Poor's Ratings Services' U.S. Public Finance division says the ratings firm is scrutinizing deals in which banks purchase debt directly rather than providing a letter of credit.

"This is a bit of a new product," Mr. Previdi said, adding that one concern is whether it could leave a borrower in a bind under certain circumstances.

In one case, a bank required a small school district in Pennsylvania to pay back $30 million in debt in as little as seven days if the school violated certain terms of the debt deal. The terms were later amended to allow the district 180 days to repay the bank, according to S&P.

Banks that provide letters of credit, meanwhile, are insisting that the borrower move fee-generating businesses such as deposits, trust management and affinity cards to the new bank, industry participants say. J.P. Morgan Chase & Co., for example, may ask for cash-management business such as handling deposits, says a person familiar with the matter. 

Banks are "using this as leverage to extend their franchise," said George K. Baum's Mr. White.

In Ohio, Lancaster Pollard & Co. represented a hospital that needed to replace a letter of credit in November, said  Tanya Hahn, senior vice president at the investment-banking firm, which specializes in the hospital and senior-living sectors. The hospital opted to pay off $15 million of a $45 million bond and then sell $30 million of debt to a bank in a bank-qualified deal. 

Ms. Hahn declined to make public the parties in the transaction. But to seal the deal, the hospital had to move its primary banking-transaction business to the bank buying the bonds, she said. 

Municipalities are finding other ways to deal with bank partners that have been downgraded. But the solution can end up as a short-term bandage.

In 2009, Lakeland, Fla., began paying higher interest costs on $200 million of floating-rate debt. The reason: Half the debt was supported by a letter of credit from regional lender  SunTrust Banks Inc.
STI


0.78
%




 in Atlanta, which had been downgraded because of concerns about credit losses. As investors bailed on the bonds, the debt began to trade at a higher interest cost, according to a report from the city's finance committee.

Lakeland, a city of 94,000 located between Tampa and Orlando, asked SunTrust to find another bank to effectively join with the lender on providing the backstop, said  Greg Finch, the city's finance director. SunTrust didn't for reasons that weren't provided, he said.

The city then replaced the debt with debt maturing in three and five years. The move paid off: The interest cost on the bonds fell to the level it was before the SunTrust downgrade. But Lakeland now is considering how to deal with the $100 million coming due Oct. 1, 2012.

In a statement, SunTrust said, "We have worked with our clients to find the most attractive financing options through the financial downturn and therefore the recent ratings actions have not had a material impact on our clients or us."

A SunTrust spokesman declined to discuss specific clients.

 Write to  Carrick Mollenkamp at carrick.mollenkamp@wsj.com and Michael Corkery at michael.corkery@wsj.com 