In the history of TV, not many producers have had more than one show on the air at one time. This fall, Shonda Rhimes could have four. 

Now in its seventh season on ABC, "Grey's Anatomy" runs in syndication on cable and is licensed in 230 foreign countries. In 2007 Ms. Rhimes launched spinoff "Private Practice." She executive-produces ABC's "Off the Map." On Tuesday, the network is likely to add to its fall schedule her drama "Scandal," with Kerry Washington as a political fixer in D.C. 

As ABC makes its upfront presentation to advertisers next week, Ms. Rhimes, 41, won't be there—she'll be in Los Angeles managing her shows. But she is closely linked to the network's fortunes. Her trademark soapy female-centric dramas have come to define ABC at a time when broadcast networks need more and more to build identifiable brands.

"Grey's" premiered in 2005 as a midseason replacement and quickly drew 20 million viewers. Ratings have since fallen to around 12 million, according to Nielsen Co. The seventh-season finale airs Thursday. 

"Private Practice" and other ABC stalwarts such as "Desperate Housewives" are also aging. ABC needs to replace them, and also to seek out shows that will appeal to both sexes.

"If we don't invite guys, that's not a smart move," says ABC Entertainment Group President  Paul Lee. "But if we go out there and just do male dramas, they're not going to work because men won't find us." 

The genesis of "Scandal" reflects the power that Ms. Rhimes's footprint on the ABC schedule gives her. She based the show on Judy Smith, an African-American woman who was former deputy press secretary to President George H.W. Bush and is now a prominent public-relations consultant in Washington. "I get to have a land, that land is called Shonda. In that land, we're not going to have a black, drug-dealing single mother selling crack. Not on one of my shows," says Ms. Rhimes. 

The pressure is on the producer not only to help ABC expand its brand but to maintain her own. "Off the Map," the latest series from her production company (called Shondaland), is a medical drama set in a South American rain forest. One critic likened it to " 'Grey's Anatomy' with flies." It averaged a paltry five million viewers and could face cancellation. 

 Ms. Rhimes has managed turnarounds before. In its first few years, "Grey's" was plagued by turmoil among the cast and ensuing bad press. "There was a time when there was more drama on set than there was on the show," says Ms. Rhimes. No one, including her, was prepared for it, but she says she's learned it was a mistake to close ranks rather than take charge.

 "I was like, 'I'm a writer, I didn't sign up to be a show mama.' But that's what I am. I'm the show mama and I'm fine with that." 

Ms. Rhimes is fearless about experimenting. Last March, a risky musical episode designed to be "event TV" lifted "Grey's" ratings 30% among viewers ages 18 to 49 to 12.7 million. Other attempts at offbeat episodes have misfired, as when hunky stroke victim Denny Duquette's ghost apparently returned from the dead.

Thursday night's episode, "Unaccompanied Minor," will be a nailbiter: she announces her planned finales to writers at the start of each season. "Last year I walked in and said 'There's going to be a mass shooting [at the hospital].' The year before that I said, 'George is going to be hit by a bus.' " 

That means each new season on "Grey's" must start fresh after major characters have been killed, wounded or left in otherwise perilous situations. "You put everything in there and the next season you might have nothing," she says. 

 Write to  Amy Chozick at amy.chozick@wsj.com 