SHANGHAI—Exports from China's small but critical rare-earth metal industry declined last year, but still exceeded by a third the government's own quota allocation.

China has kept a tight grip on its exports of rare-earth elements, important to many high-technology companies, raising fears of tightening supply, since more than 95% of world supply emerges from its mines and processing centers. 

China's export of rare-earth ore, metals and compounds slipped 9.3% to 39,813 metric tons in 2010, according to figures published Wednesday by the quasi-official China Customs Statistics Information Centre.

That was still well above a Commerce Ministry quota that was designed to slash exports by 40% last year to 30,258 tons.

China's quotas, which have been tightened several years in a row but especially so in 2010, have discomforted governments fearful that Beijing could use industry dominance as a trade weapon. U.S. legislators and industry groups like the Alliance for American Manufacturing are among those pressing President Barack Obama to seek supply assurances from Chinese President Hu Jintao in their meetings this week.

Beijing says its quotas, which in the first half of 2011 represent a 35% tightening of the export allotment set for last year, are part of a strategy to restructure the heavily polluting rare-earth industry, to conserve its reserves of about a third of the world total and combat widespread smuggling in the elements.

Reflecting how supply fears has sent global rare-earth prices soaring, China's exports of the elements tripled in value last year, Wednesday's data show. Just the same, even at the higher levels, the overseas market was valued at $939.72 million in 2010, about what China made exporting leather gloves.

The 17 chemically similar elements have unique properties that have paved the way for miniaturized electronics such as the iPhone and specialized magnets used in wind turbines, as well as advances in petroleum refining and glass making.

A U.S. Department of Energy study recently warned of short-term supply disruptions for elements such as dysprosium and neodymium needed to make wind turbines and electric cars. 

But the supply fears have also sparked a rush of investment into rare-earth miners such as Colorado-based Molycorp Inc. that are seeking to challenge China's dominance. Toyota Motor Corp., a user of rare-earth elements for its Prius vehicles, caused a stir last week when it revealed plans to develop an efficient engine that doesn't need the elements.

Traders in China say they have faced long delays in getting product out through the country's ports. "China has taken significant steps in recent months to ensure its customs officers are well aware of what the quotas are," said Dudley Kingsnorth, a Perth-based analyst from Industrial Minerals Company of Australia.

Mr. Kingsnorth, whose reduced Chinese supply estimates last year helped stoke global concern about the policy, said he expects tougher enforcement of quotas in 2011. Though he hasn't seen the latest trade data, he said various factors could explain a mismatch between actual 2010 exports and the quota levels, including delays in booking sales in customs registries and how the tonnage of rare-earth elements is measured by trade officials.

Figures from Japan, the largest importer of rare earths, have also suggested China exported more rare earth last year than stipulated by its quotas. According to the Finance Ministry in Tokyo, Japan imports in some cases soared. Japan's imports of lanthanum oxide, an important ingredient for making hybrid-car batteries, more than tripled in the first 11 months of 2010 from the same period the previous year.

—Yue Li contributed  to this article.

 Write to  James T. Areddy at james.areddy@wsj.com 