French car maker Renault said it has suspended three employees, including one management committee executive, on suspicion of ethical breaches. A spokeswoman said the company's compliance committee had been alerted to possible unethical practices involving the three employees at the end of August.

Japan's auto makers had a year of mixed fortunes in 2010, industry sales data showed. Bolstered by government incentives for purchases of fuel-efficient vehicles in the first eight months, domestic sales rebounded from 2009 lows stretching back at least 30 years, only to slide again after subsidies expired in September. 

Reliance Industries hired global consultancy firms to advise on driving India's biggest company by market value toward the next stage of expansion, a person familiar with the matter said. Reliance, the country's biggest natural gas producer, announced in June plans to get into the electricity business and re-enter the telecommunications sector as part of a diversification process. 

 Germany's financial regulator BaFin is looking into the takeover offer by Spanish construction company Actividades de Construcción y Servicios for Germany's Hochtief. The financial regulator, which approved the offer in principle in November, now is looking into whether ACS may have violated any German securities laws regarding the offer with U.S. investment fund Southeastern Asset Management, which holds stakes in both ACS and Hochtief, a financial ministry spokesman said.  

BP has been forced to shut down the Raven oil field in Alaska after losing a lawsuit against the owner of the land where the field is located, a company spokesman said. The oil giant shut down two producing wells and one injector well on the Raven field on Dec. 30. The lawsuit was brought by the Oengas, a native Inupiat family who own the land around Heald Point, on Alaska's North Slope.

India proceeded with its ambitious 400 billion rupee ($8.9 billion) disinvestment program by inviting initial bids from investment banks to manage Oil & Natural Gas Corp.'s proposed $3.05 billion follow-on public offering. ONGC plans to hire six merchant bankers to manage the share sale, which is likely in March, its chairman said. 

South Korea's financial watchdog will check banks' exposure to project-financing loans later this month amid concerns about the weak domestic property market's impact on the financial sector. 

 Global food prices rose to a record high in December, according to the monthly Food Price Index published by the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, above a previous high in 2008. The high food prices and likelihood of further increases in the year ahead are raising the possibility of a repeat of the food riots that broke out in 2007-08, an FAO senior economist said.  

 Turkey's largest media group, Dogan Yayin Holding, is in talks to sell its flagship daily newspaper Hurriyet, according to people familiar with the matter, a move that would be widely seen as an act of surrender as the company battles multibillion-dollar tax fines. Goldman Sachs is advising on the sale, to be conducted separately from a sale of other assets in the group that is already under way, one person familiar with the matter said. 

Chinese marble miner Kingstone Marble is seeking to raise $300 million to $500 million from an IPO in the first quarter ahead of a listing in Hong Kong, people familiar with the situation said, joining three other firms likely to list there in the current quarter. 

The chairman of state-run Steel Authority of India said he expects the first tranche of SAIL's follow-on public offering to float in the second week of February. The success of these offers will determine whether the federal government will meet its financial year disinvestment revenue target of 400 billion rupees ($8.9 billion). It has already raised 227.63 billion rupees this year by selling small stakes in six companies.

Buyout firms Blackstone Group, Dinamia Capital Privado, Sociedad de Capital Riesgo and N+1 Private Equity Fund II have agreed to buy Spanish canmaker Mivisa after earlier bidders for the business withdrew from the auction process. Financial details of the transaction weren't disclosed but people familiar with the situation said the total amount was between €850 million ($1.13 billion) and €900 million. 

Almost 600 women in the U.K. have become pregnant despite using Implanon, the contraceptive implant fitted in their arms, but the device's manufacturer Merck said the product, which has been on the market for 13 years, is safe and effective. 

Bayer submitted its most valuable pipeline asset, blood thinner pill Xarelto, for European approval in preventing stroke, following positive study results. Bayer, which is co-developing Xarelto with Johnson & Johnson, said it filed for the pill's use in Europe for preventing stroke in patients with irregular heart rhythm.



 Coffee giant Starbucks unveiled a new logo as it prepared to celebrate its 40th anniversary and focus on becoming more of a consumer packaged-goods company. It showed off a simpler logo that no longer includes the green circle that says "Starbucks coffee." In addition, the mermaid in the center is now larger.  

 Clothing retailer Next was affected by severe weather in the U.K. and discounting by competitors, but also ran out of stock of some of its best-selling items in the run-up to Christmas.  

Entertainment retailer HMV announced plans to close about 60 U.K. stores following a poor sales performance over the crucial Christmas trading period and said compliance with its April covenant test will be tight. 

Waitrose plans to open 39 new stores this year as U.K. grocers continue their push into the convenience store space. The company said it will open 12 full-sized supermarkets and 27 smaller convenience stores across the U.K. and the Channel Islands. 

U.S. bookseller Borders Group, which has stopped writing checks to key suppliers, is expected to ask publishers to push back the due dates on bills as it works out a refinancing plan, according to people familiar with the situation. 

Hewlett-Packard Chief Marketing Officer Michael Mendenhall has resigned, according to people familiar with the matter, one of the first departures from among H-P's senior ranks since Leo Apotheker became chief executive in November. Mendenhall, who is also an H-P senior vice president, is leaving for a new job, these people said. 

Google won a key ruling in its lawsuit against the U.S. Interior Department, two months after the Web giant accused the agency of improperly favoring rival Microsoft in a contract bid to provide a new email system. 

 Qualcomm agreed to buy fellow chip maker Atheros Communications for $3.1 billion in cash as it aims to address growing demand for devices that use Wi-Fi to connect to the Internet. The deal is expected to close in the first half.  

 The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission has begun examining whether disclosure rules for privately held firms need to be rewritten as a result of recent deals allowing investors to buy shares in Internet companies such as Facebook and Twitter, according to people familiar with the situation.  

Philip Morris International officially ended its $452 million bid to acquire privately owned cigarette maker Productora Tabacalera de Colombia, or Protabaco, after a filing deadline with regulators in Bogota came and went. 

 First Solar said it is partnering with China Guangdong Nuclear Solar Energy Development in a plan to build a solar field in China's Inner Mongolia region it expects will be the world's largest solar-energy project. First Solar didn't say how much the two companies will invest in the project. 