LONDON—U.K. consumers face a brutal squeeze in 2011 as wage increases fail to keep pace with soaring inflation and the threat of rising unemployment tempers people's ability to negotiate pay increases. 

Data showed Wednesday that in the three months to November, growth in pay, excluding bonuses, remained at 2.3%, while data Tuesday showed annual inflation jumped to 3.7% in December from 3.3% in November. 

This means many households find themselves in the situation of being worse off now than they were last year, which will constrain consumer spending at a time when the recovery remains fragile. 

"Sky-high consumer-price inflation coupled with subdued wage inflation and little, if any, rise in employment means that household real incomes are being squeezed," said  Alan Clarke, an economist at BNP Paribas SA. "This reaffirms our belief that consumer spending growth will be much weaker than consensus expectations this year." 

And with many economists picking that inflation will rise above 4% this spring—double the Bank of England's target rate—the situation is unlikely to ease any time soon. 

Tuesday's headline-grabbing inflation figures have increased the pressure on the Bank of England to lift its key interest rate—an action that would heap more pain on households because any rise in rates will push up the cost of servicing mortgages. 

Interest-rate investors are betting that the BOE will lift rates twice before the end of the year. The sterling overnight index average rate, or Sonia, the weighted average rate of all unsecured sterling overnight cash transactions brokered in London, is seen at 1.085% by the time of the December meeting, implying two rate rises by the end of the year, according to ICAP, an interdealer broker. 

The BOE's Monetary Policy Committee has found itself in the difficult position of trying to balance encouraging the economic recovery and keeping the public's inflation expectations under control. 

Earlier this month the MPC voted to keep its quantitative-easing program of buying bonds with freshly created money at the previously agreed level of £200 billion ($318.96 billion) and to maintain its key interest rate at 0.5%. But opinion has been divided at recent meetings, illustrating the difficulty of the choices the central bank faces, with MPC member  Andrew Sentance calling for an immediate rate rise, and  Adam Posen for more bond purchases. 

Wednesday's wage-growth figures will therefore come as some relief to the MPC because they show that higher consumer-price inflation so far hasn't pushed up wages, which is considered an indication of an upward price spiral. 

"It suggests that there is little chance of a wage-price spiral developing and supports the argument that inflation will come back down to target next year once the temporary factors have fallen out of the calculation," said  Andrew Goodwin, senior economic advisor to the Ernst & Young ITEM Club. 

The MPC will, however, be carefully watching wage growth from now until April—the period when most private-sector wage deals are negotiated. Data collection firm IDS says it expects pay settlements to rise to around 3% in 2011. 

The subdued wage-growth data Wednesday led sterling to fall against the dollar to $1.5970 from $1.6010 while the euro gained against the pound, rising to £0.8437 from £0.8406. 

One trader said market participants have already priced in rate rises but that they need to keep seeing strong data to keep their expectations alive. Because Wednesday's wage data didn't support a rate increase, the pound slipped, he said. 

The 2.3% rate of wage growth is significantly below prerecession days—when it stood at between 3.5% and 4%—and economists agree that there is little prospect of its picking up in the near future. 

One factor keeping wage growth in check is rising unemployment. Figures from the Office of National Statistics Wednesday showed that the official international measure of unemployment, formerly known as the International Labor Organization measure, rose by 49,000 in the three months to the end of November to 2.5 million, giving an unemployment rate of 7.9%. 

The unemployment rate is expected to increase further as the coalition government's austerity drive—which includes large-scale public-sector job cuts—hits. In November, the U.K.'s Office for Budget Responsibility said there would be around 330,000 public-sector job losses by 2014-15. 

  George Buckley, U.K. economist at Deutsche Bank, said that in addition to job losses in the public sector, the fact that private firms hoarded labor during the downturn could suggest that the recovery in employment will be more muted going forward. 

"After all, why not work the existing labor force harder before hiring more workers in order to raise productivity?" he asked. "As a result, while the resilience of the labor market through the downturn might have been helpful to the economy, it may hold back household income, and thus economic growth, in the recovery phase." 

—Gary Stride and Natasha Brereton contributed to this article.

 Write to  Ainsley Thomson at ainsley.thomson@dowjones.com 