Gadget makers will gather this week in Las Vegas for their massive trade show, with booths full of new wares and a spring in their step. And many hotels are posting a notice not seen in the recession-wracked city for some time: sold out.

The official attendance projection for this year's Consumer Electronics Show is 120,000, but the group that organizes the closely watched event sounds confident that improved economic conditions will help top that target easily. "Everybody who is anybody will be at the show in some fashion," says  Gary Shapiro, president of the Consumer Electronics Association. 

CES, as the event is universally called, is used by many high-tech companies to show off what they have developed—as well as product plans for the rest of the year. The event has assumed increased importance as consumer purchases of goods have topped revenue from business customers for many electronics companies.

The show formally opens Wednesday night, with a keynote address by  Steve Ballmer, Microsoft Corp.'s
MSFT


0.18
%




 chief executive, while exhibits are open Thursday through Sunday. It is only open to industry professionals.

Some 2,500 exhibitors are expected this year, including more than 1,200 from outside the U.S.—a 25% increase over the 2010 CES. Mr. Shapiro says the only notable company missing is Apple Inc.; the Silicon Valley trend-setter has long stuck to a strategy of introducing new products at its own events.

Many different kinds of products are represented, including audio and video gear, car accessories, digital cameras, software, computer chips, cables and connectors. But much of the industry's growth has been driven in recent years by a few high-profile product categories, particularly the shift by consumers to high-definition TVs.

Finding a similarly sized sales engine for consumer-electronics companies hasn't been easy. Yet industry executives and analysts say the buzz this year is at a high pitch, much of it focusing on smartphones, tablet-style computers and enhancements to TVs such as 3-D effects and Internet services.

Economic swings have played havoc with industry predictions. The association two years ago projected flat U.S. sales in 2009, a year in which revenue wound up declining 7.86%. At last year's CES, the group projected sales would stay flat in 2010, only to boost its projection in July to growth of 3%—putting revenue at $174.9 billion—and it predicted 4% growth in 2011. It will update its forecast during the show.

Corporate budgets for travel to trade shows went through a similar pattern; CES attendance in 2009 plunged 20% to 113,000. The mood was noticeably better at last year's show, though the rebound to 126,641 attendees was still well below the 2006 peak of 152,203. 

Mr. Shapiro says his organization had independently concluded that 150,000 people was too many. So the association took various steps to limit attendees by raising fees and tightening requirements to attend, he says. It also reduced exhibition space for CES, which mainly occupies the Las Vegas Convention Center but had temporarily expanded to the nearby Sands Convention Center.

Without that extra space, Mr. Shapiro says, this year's show may feel quite crowded. "It's not going to be the biggest show ever; that was never our goal," he says. "But it will be the best show ever."

Such talk is very welcome in Las Vegas, where the sudden end of a long construction boom has kept unemployment rates above 14%. 

The Las Vegas Convention and Visitors Authority estimates the 2011 CES will bring about $118 million in nongaming revenue to the city, much of it attributable to spending on lodging.

  Chris Meyer, the organization's vice president of sales, says this year's CES may be the first broad sellout of most major hotels in the city since January 2007. That feat is more notable, he says, in view of the fact about 16,000 rooms have been added since then, including such high-end properties as the Cosmopolitan of Las Vegas and the Aria hotel and casino in the CityCenter development.

"The energy is very high," Mr. Meyer says. 

 The Week Ahead looks at coming corporate events. 

 Write to  Don Clark at don.clark@wsj.com 