India's Congress party resolved differences with a regional ally in the southern state of Tamil Nadu on Tuesday, averting a political crisis that threatened Prime Minister Manmohan Singh's government.

Congress and the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam party agreed to a seat-sharing compromise at the upcoming assembly elections in Tamil Nadu, in which they will run as allies. The elections are set to take place April 13.

The agreement comes days after the DMK threatened to pull its ministers out of the federal cabinet over the issue of how many seats each would contest at the state election.

On Tuesday, the DMK said it would accept Congress' request to contest 63 of the assembly's 234-seats in Tamil Nadu. This is 15 more seats than Congress contested in previous state elections there in 2006. Initially, the DMK had refused to give in to Congress's request, pushing instead for it to settle for 60—an issue which threatened to break the alliance between the two parties. The DMK, which leads the coalition government in the state, will contest 121 seats.

"Both sides have unanimously come to this conclusion. The alliance will work together and ensure it comes back to power like earlier occasions," said Ghulam Nabi Azad, a senior Congress leader who is in charge of the party's affairs in Tamil Nadu, speaking to reporters in New Delhi.

Senior DMK leader Dayanidhi Maran said: "We have reached a winning formula."

Though the latest standoff had been triggered by a seat-sharing dispute in local elections, tensions between the two parties have been mounting ever since DMK party members were named in connection with an alleged corruption scandal involving the allocation of second-generation telecom licenses. An audit body estimated irregularities and mismanagement related to this cost the government up to around $40 billion in missed revenue.

Senior DMK leader and former telecom minister Andimuthu Raja had resigned as a result of these allegations in early February. He has repeatedly denied any wrongdoing.

At present, the DMK supports the ruling Congress-led-alliance with 18 seats in the 543-member Lower House of Parliament, giving Congress a narrow parliamentary majority. Congress has 206 seats.

Political analyst  Mahesh Rangarajan at New Delhi's Jawaharlal Nehru University said the DMK has a "tough fight" ahead. "The party is entangled in various dimensions of the telecom scandal and dependent on power at the center," he said.