BEIJING—Chinese President Hu Jintao in a meeting with U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates confirmed that China conducted a test flight of its stealth aircraft Tuesday, and said it was unrelated to Mr. Gates' visit.

In a round table with reporters Tuesday, Mr. Gates said he asked Mr. Hu about the timing of the flight.

"I asked President Hu about it directly and he said the test had nothing to do with my visit and had been a preplanned test and that is where we left it," Mr. Gates said.

But a senior defense official said that Chinese civilian leadership, including Mr. Hu, initially did not seem to know about the test flight of a new stealth fighter.

Mr. Hu eventually answered that the flight was unrelated to Mr. Gates' visit. Mr. Gates said he had concerns about why the test was conducted during his visit but said he accepted Mr. Hu's assurances.

Mr. Gates was greeted warmly Wednesday by civilian Chinese leaders who appeared anxious to improve military-to-military ties with Washington.

If indeed the People's Liberation Army did not inform its own leadership of the test, it could signal that relations between military and civilian leadership may be less cohesive than previously thought.

During the round table, Mr. Gates was asked whether the military was acting independently of the civilian leadership.

"I have had concerns about this over time," he said "And frankly, that is one of the reasons I attach importance to a dialogue between the two sides that includes both civilian and military."



The flight of the J-20 suggests the stealth fighter is further along than U.S. military intelligence analysts had believed previously. However, Mr. Gates said the test flight did not cause him to re-evaluate his estimate that the U.S. will retain a significant advantage in stealth aircraft for the next 15 years.

"Let's be very precise: what I said was that in 2020 or 2025, there would be a great disparity in the numbers of stealth aircraft that the United States had and those of any other country," Mr. Gates said

The test flight of the J-20 is likely to increase the urgency for Japan to purchase a new generation of fighter jets. After visiting China, Mr. Gates will visit Tokyo, where he is to make the case that Japan's self-defense forces should invest in the F-35, a stealth aircraft

"The Japanese government is considering the purchase of its next generation of fighter aircraft, the F-X, and so that would give Japan the opportunity, if they bought the right airplane, to have fifth-generation capability," Mr. Gates said. "And I might have a few suggestions for them."