BERLIN—German manufacturing orders rose by a greater-than-expected 2.9% in January, amid strong domestic demand, particularly for intermediate goods, the economics ministry said Tuesday. 

"Building on an already strong level of orders, industry is starting into the new year with a reasonable rise in orders," the industry ministry said in a release. Despite "strong fluctuations in single months, manufacturing orders stay on a clear upward trend," the statement added. 

Analysts had predicted a 2.5% month-to-month rise in January orders, following a revised 3.6% monthly decline in December. 

The January rise was led by a 4.5% increase in domestic orders, while foreign orders went up 1.6%. Orders from the 17-country euro zone rose 2.3%, a sign that a recovery of the currency area was continuing. 

By sector, demand for intermediate goods rose most, up 4.6% in January, after a 2% decline in the previous month. Demand for investment goods rose 2% month-to-month, while demand for consumer goods rose 0.8% in January from December. 

In annual terms, manufacturing orders rose an unadjusted 19.7% in January, following a revised 22.2% jump in December. 

The two-month comparison, which irons out some fluctuations in the data, shows that manufacturing orders were up a more modest 0.4% in the December-January period compared with the October-November period. 

Separately Tuesday, European Central Bank governing-council member  Axel Weber said Germany's brisk economic recovery will continue in 2011, although at a somewhat slower pace than the 3.6% achieved last year, underpinned by buoyant private consumption. 

Growth will be supported by an increase in private consumption amid "continued positive labor-market developments," as well as rising foreign demand for German machinery and equipment, he said. 

Presenting the annual results of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Mr. Weber said the ECB should consider winding down special liquidity measures, such as its monthly tender operation, as strains in interbank markets recede. He said he doubted that the extra liquidity measures would be necessary in the long term. 

The ECB introduced refinancing operations on a roughly monthly basis at the height of the financial crisis to provide cash-strapped banks with extra liquidity. It isn't clear whether the ECB will maintain those tenders permanently. 

Mr. Weber said the ECB has advanced in its efforts to work a solution for "addicted banks," those reliant on the ECB's special liquidity measures. A solution is likely to be announced "in the next quarter", he said. 

In his valedictory presentation of the Bundesbank's annual report, Mr. Weber warned that inflation showed a "tendency to rise" in the short-term due to surging oil prices and that a subsequent drop wasn't certain. 

A return to lower inflation depends on a drop in oil prices that might not materialize, he said. 

Mr. Weber said he met with U.S. Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner on Tuesday to discuss structural reform in the euro-zone and the next round of European bank "stress tests." 

German banks are likely to pass the next round of tests and new problem cases within Germany are unlikely, Mr. Weber added. That said, banks like WestLB AG and Hypo Real Estate Holding AG, which are undergoing major restructuring, shouldn't be compared directly with healthy institutions during the testing, he said. 

Mr. Weber, who is set to leave the Bundesbank at the end of April after seven years, said he will spend a year as a guest professor at the University of Chicago from June and will then return to Cologne University. He didn't rule out non-academic jobs later. 



 Write to  Bernd Radowitz at bernd.radowitz@dowjones.com, Tom Fairless at tom.fairless@dowjones.com and William Launder at william.launder@dowjones.com 