At the top of my list of comfort foods, and I suspect that of many other red-blooded, red-meat-eating Americans, would be a cheeseburger and fries. If there's one talent comfort food must possess, it's to deliver a culinary experience you can count on. You're not seeking risk or adventure. If you were, you might order live lobster sushi. (I'm not making the dish up. Some p.r. person recently pitched it to me, and I politely declined for obvious reasons.)

Another quality I believe in when it comes to comfort foods is that cardiovascular health shouldn't be your top priority. If you feel in desperate need of a cheeseburger or, perhaps, Southern fried chicken, it's for existential reasons beyond mere nourishment. It's sort of the equivalent of climbing back into bed and pulling the covers over your head. Tofu, seaweed and omega-3s may have their day, but this isn't that day. 

It's also hard to argue that butter and heavy cream, which many comfort foods have in common, don't improve any dish—in the same way that it's hard to go wrong ending any meal with a hot-fudge sundae (another comfort food, and one about which I've yet to find the waiter who takes me seriously when I ask to err on the side of hot fudge and go easy on the ice-cream).

"Nobody does comfort food like the Swiss," my sister-in-law Victoire, who's French, once observed. Part of the reason, I'm sure, is that the Swiss suffer no remorse over the abundant, one might go so far as to say profligate, use of cream and cheese in their favorite dishes. Indeed, my recollection is that Victoire made the comment while digging into a gratin montagnard. That's a dish consisting of potatoes, ham, milk and cream, garlic, oil and butter, salt and pepper. (Oh, and I almost forgot—all of it is layered and leavened, feathered and filigreed in gruyere cheese.) Or maybe she offered this culinary insight as she watched me devour the dish—with an egg on top, for good measure.

Ah, eggs! Ah, breakfast! At any time of the day. Almost by definition it's another comfort food, an entire category of comfort food. It's hard to beat eggs and bacon, or eggs and sausage, or an omelet. If consistency and taste are among the hallmarks of comfort food, what more dependable food-delivery system is there than the humble egg? 

 (Recipe below.) 

Many years ago I checked into a fairly seedy hotel late in the evening in Lisbon, which likewise seemed fairly seedy itself. But the cousin with whom I was traveling and I were directed to a local restaurant, where the specialty was delicious steak with an egg on top. As soon as we dug into our meal, Lisbon could do no wrong. It became the friendliest, most beautiful city on earth. An egg on anything will do that for a meal, for a culture, for an entire continent.

Which brings me to spaghetti Bolognese. Lovers of Italian cuisine could probably name a dozen dishes that meet the qualifications for comfort food. But I would argue that no dish, in any culture, exceeds the spiritual succor provided by fresh pasta in a meat sauce. This belief was reinforced on a recent visit to Sfoglia, an Italian restaurant on Lexington Avenue and 92nd Street. 

When food is great, it stops you in your tracks. It brings an involuntary smile to your face. It's your brain synapses singing in unison, like the Vienna Boys Choir, and what they're singing is this: You can worry about your career or your marriage or your mortgage later. Now it's time to eat, to enjoy, to savor the sunny side of life.

Indeed, so transporting was the dish—at Sfoglia, it's actually made with fresh pappardelle, a thick noodle, rather than spaghetti—that I returned on a recent afternoon to learn how to make it from  John Carr, the restaurant's young chef. "It's an eight-hour process," he explained, "normally started at the very beginning of the day." 

I suppose that's one of the reasons I've never seriously attempted it before. I don't have the patience to devote the entire day to cooking, or anything else. Mr. Carr started by browning pork sausage, removed from its casing, as well as ground lamb and ground veal, in grapeseed oil. The sausage came from Salumeria Biellese in Chelsea; the other meats were in plastic bags, pre-ground. "The only wrinkle in ours is the lamb," Mr. Carr explained. "The lamb is unusual," and apparently not all that easy to source. "It helps to have a butcher you like and talk to on a regular basis."

But I was encouraged by his casual, almost offhand method. He didn't worry about precise measurements; he just dumped lots of great ingredients in a giant pot and stirred. These included, alongside the meat, a dozen or more garlic cloves, fresh herbs such as rosemary and sage, a small amount of oregano, red table wine, a puree of chicken livers and plum  San Marzano tomatoes from a can. According to  Adrien Martin, Sfoglia's general manager, Italian San Marzano tomatoes are considered the best in the world for making sauce. I didn't know that. I do now.

A perhaps even more important revelation was offered by  Jennifer Ioele, Sfoglia's sous chef, as she stood in the basement producing sheets of pasta for that evening's pappardelle. She declared that not all packaged pasta, which is what I normally use, are created equal. My assumption was that Prince was no different than Ronzoni, which was no different than some of the pricier imported Italian pastas. As soon as you succumbed to the concept of pasta in a bag or a box, the main challenge was finding one on sale. But Ms. Ioele recommended De Cecco. "Even the cooking times are different," she explained.

Mr. Carr pulled out from the 320-degree oven a bubbling pot of Bolognese similar to the one he'd been preparing upstairs but six hours further along. "The whole idea is to brown every part of it," he explained. "That's where the taste comes from."

Well, not all of it. He also dumps in a generous amount of heavy cream at the end. It's comfort food. What did you expect?

 Serving Size: approximately 8

 Cooking Time: 4-5 hours, with 45 minutes of active time and the rest of the process taking place in a low oven, requiring occasional checking and stirring

The finished product freezes well. At the restaurant, the ragu is served with fresh pappardelle, which is traditional, but use the pasta you like. 

 INGREDIENTS 

 DIRECTIONS 

1. Place an ovenproof casserole or Dutch oven on the stove over high heat. Coat the bottom of the dutch oven with grapeseed oil. When the oil just begins to smoke, add the sausage and brown it on all sides. After the sausage is well browned, add the pureed chicken livers and stir the mixture until the both the sausage and the livers are well browned.

2. Add the ground veal, ground pork and ground lamb to the liver and sausage mixture, stirring occasionally until the contents of the pot have lost their raw appearance and are well mixed. 

3. Add the red wine and 2 of the cans of whole tomatoes along with the herbs and garlic cloves. Reduce the heat of the dutch oven to medium. Allow the ragu to simmer gently, but not boil, for 20 to 30 minutes, while you set your oven to 325 degrees. 

4. Place the Dutch oven or casserole in the oven uncovered and stir occasionally. This part of the cooking process develops much of the flavor in the ragu, so developing a brown, but not burned exterior on the top of the ragu before stirring it is very important. This process will take 4 hours or so depending on the calibration of your oven and the fat and water content of the meats. The extra wine and tomato are left to add in case the sauce appears to be drying out excessively during this time in the cooking process. A layer of fat will accumulate at the top of the ragu during this process, this is natural and will be reincorporated into the ragu later.

5. For ideal results, the sauce is best left to cool overnight in a refrigerator and then mixed again with a wooden spoon to ensure consistent flavor, texture and appearance in the ragu. 

6. To serve, heat the ragu in a wide-bottomed sauté pan over low heat with heavy cream, salt and pepper to taste. The cream is used to add richness and a smooth consistency to the ragu, use as much as needed to achieve the consistency you like. Add fresh or dried pasta that has been three-quarters cooked in well-seasoned water and cook the pasta in the ragu with a few spoonfuls of the pasta cooking water until the sauce adheres to the noodles. Serve immediately with grated Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese. 

—ralph.gardner@wsj.com