BUDAPEST—A senior Hungarian finance official said he is confident that new government budget plans will boost the country's drooping credit ratings and revive investor confidence ahead of a planned bond offering later this year.

The new fiscal program, announced this month, "helps draw a clearer picture" of state finances for the capital markets, Andras Karman, state secretary in the Economy Ministry, said in an interview Thursday.

"I hope they will have a positive opinion of the plans and, eventually, this will be reflected in our ratings once they learn about the details and their implementation," Mr. Karman said.

All three major rating agencies downgraded Hungary last year—leaving the country's sovereign debt ratings one notch above junk-bond status—and voiced concerns that Hungary was relying too much on special crisis taxes to shore up state finances, instead of trimming spending.

The European Union and International Monetary Fund, which saved Hungary from insolvency with a massive bailout loan in 2008, have also chided Budapest for focusing on short-term measures rather than more-enduring cuts.

In the wake of that criticism, Hungary now says it will curb social spending, reduce unemployment benefits, limit drug subsidies and take other steps that could be painful for many ordinary Hungarians.

But the government is preparing to face interest groups that will be negatively affected. "The government is ready to address upcoming challenges because this would lead to a fairer state of affairs for the majority of the people, in particular for those legally employed," Mr. Karman said.

The result, the government says, will be a budget deficit below 3% of gross domestic product this year, followed by deficits of 2.5% in 2012 and 2.2% in 2013. Public debt is also expected to fall sharply.

"I have been communicating with several rating agencies in recent days but this is mutual interest and nothing out of the ordinary," Mr. Karman said.

Mr. Karman also said Hungary plans to halve the extraordinary bank-sector tax—which was imposed last year—in 2013, a year later than originally planned, and added that the other windfall taxes "are not in the budget calculations from 2013 onward."

The new budget is also designed to pass muster with EU monitors. Hungary will submit its updated euro convergence plan to the EU in mid-April. Hungary has been in the EU's so-called excessive deficit procedure for seven years—ever since it joined the EU.

Hungary underwent its deepest economic contraction for nearly two decades in 2009, when hit by the global economic downturn.

"When we started to calculate how much savings we have to target to reach the budget deficit goals set in the [euro] convergence program, we used a conservative growth path, and that's 3.5%," Mr. Karman said.

"But we are more optimistic about the outlook as the measures will have a positive impact on growth in two to three years' time, which this 3.5% figure doesn't include. A 4% to 6% growth rate is attainable for the [2014] end of the projection period," Mr. Karman said.