EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J.—Quarterback Mark Sanchez lined up under center and made eight handoffs without attempting a pass. This was his first and only series at New Meadowlands Stadium on Sunday, and the Jets punctuated the drive with a field goal.

"He handed the hell out of the ball," tight end Dustin Keller said. "Flawless technique."

The Jets rendered their regular-season finale into little more than an exhibition, and Mr. Sanchez watched the rest of their 38-7 victory over the Buffalo Bills play out from the comfort and security of the sideline. It was a game that ultimately had no bearing on their playoff position, and the Jets treated it as such. Reserves rose from the pits of the depth chart to run and block and tackle, and the moribund Bills proved worthy punching bags.

For the Jets (11-5), whose season has had more ebbs and flows than the Bay of Fundy, everything went according to script for a change. Rookie running back Joe McKnight rushed for 158 yards on 32 carries, cornerback Marquice Cole had two interceptions, and veteran quarterback Mark Brunell came off the bench to throw two touchdown passes—including his first since 2006. And yes, this was the script, executed to near perfection.

The Jets will hit the road for a first-round playoff game against the Indianapolis Colts at 8:20 p.m. Saturday. It will be a rematch of last season's AFC Championship Game, which the Colts won.

"I think we're going to win it this year," Mr. Ryan said, referring to the Super Bowl. "We think we're better than any team out there." 

The Jets celebrated their most successful regular season since 1998 with a victory lap, and that was the hardest many of the players had to run all afternoon. If nothing else, they should be well-rested as they embark on their second straight postseason appearance.

Their inactive list, distributed 90 minutes before kickoff, read like the starting roster. Among those who got the day off: running backs LaDainian Tomlinson and Shonn Greene, cornerbacks Antonio Cromartie and Darrelle Revis, safeties Eric Smith and James Ihedigbo, and offensive tackle Damien Woody.

 Some, such as Mr. Woody, were recovering from injuries. Others, such as Mr. Tomlinson, were looking to avoid them.

Mr. Ryan left little to chance, and that included his approach with Mr. Sanchez, whose lone series was robotic. Any late-arriving fans whiffed on witnessing Mr. Sanchez in action (phrase used loosely). Mr. Ryan treated Mr. Sanchez like a Fabergé egg, albeit for good reason. In the Jets' 22-17 victory over the Pittsburgh Steelers on Dec. 19, Mr. Sanchez injured his throwing shoulder. And while he played well in the Jets' loss to the Chicago Bears last weekend, the right-handed Mr. Sanchez has been sore enough to toss the ball with his left hand at certain practices.

So heading into Sunday's game, Mr. Ryan was caught in a precarious situation. On the one hand, he wanted to make sure Mr. Sanchez kept his momentum and maintained his routine heading into the postseason.

 On the other, Mr. Ryan deemed it essential that no defender come within about 20 miles of his young quarterback. The solution was to have him prepare as if he were the starter all week, even if that title was nominal.

"I never wanted him to get hit or anything else," Mr. Ryan said.

After his series of electrifying handoffs, Mr. Sanchez gave way to Mr. Brunell. Several other starters soon joined Mr. Sanchez on the sideline, including center Nick Mangold and right guard Brandon Moore, who was replaced by Vladimir Ducasse, a rookie and second-round draft pick.

By all accounts, Mr. Ducasse acquitted himself well, as did a handful of other reserves.

The star of the show was Mr. McKnight, whose early-season struggles had the coaching staff questioning whether he might be better off playing cornerback. But Mr. Ryan has been praising him in recent weeks, and Mr. McKnight exploited the Bills' horrendous run defense. He topped 100 rushing yards by the middle of the third quarter, the game somehow devolving into even more of a glorified scrimmage with each and every snap.

During Saturday night's team meeting, Mr. Ryan told Mr. McKnight to expect 40 carries. Considering Mr. McKnight had carried the ball seven times all season, this was jarring news. He got seven on the first series alone, then found special teams coordinator Mike Westhoff waiting for him on the sideline. Mr. Westhoff told him to turn around and cover the kickoff. Mr. McKnight had no complaints.

"He just needed an opportunity," said Mr. Ryan, whose team has earned another of its own.

 Write to  Scott Cacciola at scott.cacciola@wsj.com 