MUMBAI -- Tata Steel Ltd.'s 34.77 billion rupees ($762.5 million) public offering was subscribed nearly six times the shares on offer with an hour to go on the final day of the share sale Friday, as investors put in bids to take part in the Indian steelmaker's growth story.

Most investors usually wait until the final day of a public issue to put in their bids due to rules that they must pay the entire bid amount up front, a change from the earlier practice of only paying a fraction up front.

Investor faith in the world's seventh-largest steelmaker by capacity will boost the confidence of Tata Steel's management, which was saddled with $10.7 billion of net debt as of Sept. 30 and wanted to cut some of that using the proceeds from the share sale.

The issue of 48.68 million shares, which opened Wednesday, received bids for nearly 290.67 million shares, or 5.97 times the shares on offer, data on the National Stock Exchange showed at 1130 GMT.

Investment bankers involved in the share sale said the institutional book was covered 10.41 times while the section reserved for wealthy individuals was subscribed 7.21 times. The retail book was still open but was covered 1.46 times, the bankers said.

"The retail book will remain open till 0100 GMT but we are trying to get an extension of 30 minutes so more bids can be accomodated," one of the bankers involved, who didn't wish to be named, said.

Earlier Thursday, the share sale had received bids for more than 23.36 million shares, or about 48% of the total, mostly at the upper end of the 594 rupees-610 rupees price range. The share sale was covered about 20% at Wednesday's close.

Tuesday, 25 funds, including the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority, Macquarie Bank Ltd., Credit Suisse (Singapore) Ltd., the government of Singapore and entities of HDFC Bank Ltd. and ICICI Bank Ltd. successfully bid for the anchor investor portion of the offer.

Tata Steel's board approved the allotment of about 8.3 million shares at 610 rupees each to the anchor investors, raising 5.08 billion rupees.

Anchor investors, or cornerstone investors, help ensure an issue's success by agreeing not to sell shares for a set period of time, providing subsequent investors a degree of confidence. They are allocated shares before an issue opens to the public.

The company, part of the $67.4 billion salt-to-software Tata group, took on most the $10.7 billion debt to fund its $12 billion acquisition of Anglo-Dutch steelmaker Corus in 2007 and for local expansion. It recently refinanced £3.5 billion of the debt.

Earlier, there were concerns over the issue's pricing after last week's sell-off in Indian stocks. The main index of the Bombay Stock Exchange slumped to a four-month low last Friday, while shares of Tata Steel also fell to their lowest level in a month.

Subsequently, both the benchmark Sensex and Tata Steel's shares have recovered 0.7% and 1.2% respectively this week. The company's shares closed 0.8% lower at 629.60 rupees, underperforming the 0.2% fall in the benchmark Sensex.

The company also plans to use the issue proceeds to partly finance expansion of its plant in the eastern Indian city of Jamshedpur, pay back some debt and for general corporate purposes.

Tata Steel is expanding the capacity of its Jamshedpur plant to 10.0 million metric tons a year from 6.8 million tons. The company, which has plants in Singapore, Thailand, the U.K., South Africa and the Netherlands, plans to build two more factories in India.

It currently produces 27.2 million tons of steel annually.

 Write to  John Satish Kumar at john.kumar@dowjones.com 