Officials from more than 30 public transit systems came to Washington this week to tell Congress that most of them don't have the money to keep up with demand as rising gas prices boost ridership. 

But a key House Republican said Tuesday that transit systems needed to streamline their operations, and not count on Congress for more money.

The American Public Transportation Association, a Washington trade group, said that most of its member transit systems that responded to a survey reported ridership increases of at least 4% in January or February, compared with a year ago. 

The SEPTA system in Philadelphia saw a 10% increase in February. A month earlier, ridership on the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority rose 4.6%, and LYNX in Orlando was up 10.7%.

Many of the increases were larger than in similar periods during 2010. Ridership in 2009 actually fell from the year before.

Triangle Transit, which serves the Research Triangle Park area of North Carolina, said ridership rose 22.8% last month.

Wib Gulley, Triangle Transit's general counsel, said officials would like to introduce larger coach buses to allow more rush hour riders to sit down during their trips. He estimates it would cost about $5 million to buy ten such buses. "We're in the on-deck circle and without the [funding] authorization and more funding, we're never going to get up to bat," he said. 

President Barack Obama's 2012 budget requested $22.4 billion for public transit, more than double the amount he sought for fiscal 2010. A separate proposal would pump $119 billion into public transportation programs over six years as part of a $556 billion highway, transit and rail infrastructure bill.

But the fate of both proposals is uncertain. The last multiyear highway and transit bill expired in 2009. Since then, Congress has passed seven extensions to continue funding, but the heads of many transit systems say their plans for growth and upkeep have already been stymied by funding uncertainty. 

Mr. Obama hasn't offered a specific proposal for how to fund the multiyear highway bill. 

Current federal gasoline taxes aren't providing enough money to cover the budget proposal, and neither Mr. Obama nor House Transportation Committee Chairman John Mica (R., Fla.) want to boost the gas tax.

In an interview Tuesday, Rep. Mica said a six-year-bill is "the only thing I will consider." But more funding for public transit seems unlikely. "I think it's going to have to stay about the same," he said.

Mr. Mica said he told transit leaders at an APTA conference Tuesday "that they're going to have to be much more creative and look at consolidation of some of their operations."

Transit systems are funded through a variety of sources in addition to fares, including federal, state and local funds. Most capital funding typically comes from federal sources, but the $14 billion for public transportation each year is far less than the $60 billion that industry officials say is needed.

APTA estimates that gas prices of $4 a gallon would result in 670 million more mass transit passenger trips a year, pushing totals to 10.8 billion. When gas prices rose in 2007 and topped $4 in mid-2008, 85% of transit agencies reported experiencing capacity constraints on parts of their systems, APTA said.

Richard Sarles, the general manager of Washington's Metro system, used by many members of Congress and their staffs, said budget constraints have made it difficult to replace and maintain aging equipment, including faulty escalators. Metro has started to address the backlog but it could take years to complete, and delays or cuts in funding won't help, he said.

"The longer it takes means that we are very conservative about making investments" in improvements such as revamped signal systems and upgraded track, he said. 

Last year, Metro received about $400 million in federal funds and would like to get 6% more annually, said Mr. Sarles, who said labor and material costs continue to rise. 

 Write to  Melanie Trottman at melanie.trottman@wsj.com 