The new year is off to a rough start for Europe, and strategists expect more trouble ahead as European governments prepare to tap the bond markets to borrow money.

The euro fell 3.4% last week against the U.S. dollar and is now at its lowest level since September. Against currencies from countries with healthier economies and fiscal positions, such as Switzerland, the damage to the euro has been even worse. 

Meanwhile, bond yields on debt issued by struggling European countries are at or near new highs, heightening the pressure on their finances.

An area of concern is European banks. Share prices are sliding and in some cases the cost of borrowing money is rising. Because European banks hold hefty quantities of European Union government debt, they have long been seen as vulnerable to contagion from the sovereign-debt crisis.

But in the wake of Ireland's bailout, which was essentially forced by the government's need to shore up banks struggling with bad real-estate loans, more market watchers are citing bank credit problems as a potential flash point.

Fuel was thrown on that fire last week by the circulation of an EU proposal in which holders of senior debt issued by banks would share the cost of future bank bailouts.

The Euro Stoxx Banks index fell almost 1% last week and is down 3% over the past month. That may not seem like much of a loss, but the KBW Bank Index, which tracks U.S. banks, has gained roughly 11% in the same time frame.

The overriding concern remains the ability of struggling European countries to borrow money, and this week could be a preview of what is to come in 2011 for European bond markets. Greece is set to sell €1.5 billion ($1.94 billion) of short-term debt on Tuesday, and Portugal will sell as much as €1.25 billion in government bonds Wednesday, followed by Spanish and Italian bond sales Thursday.

Last week, Portugal was able to attract solid investor interest in €500 million of six-month bills, but at a yield that was roughly 1.6 percentage points higher than the last six-month auction in September.

Going into this period of heavy issuance, yields on debt from weaker euro-zone nations have been pushing higher compared with yields on benchmark German issues. Portuguese 10-year notes are yielding 4.07 percentage points above comparable German debt, which is yielding roughly 2.86%. That spread is up from 3.45 percentage points just one week ago and 2.86 percentage points in early December, according to Tradeweb.

Belgium's 10-year notes finished last week yielding 1.23 percentage points above German bonds, up from 0.99 percentage point a week ago. 

For the euro, this has translated into renewed declines after a pop in the final weeks of 2010. Against the U.S. dollar, the euro fell below $1.30 Friday, marking a drop of nearly 9% since early November. But the euro is still well above its low of $1.1917 hit last June.

The common currency's weakness has been more pronounced against currencies backed by stronger economies and fiscal outlooks. Against the Swiss franc and the Australian dollar, the euro has hit all-time lows in the past month and just last week sank to a record low against the Swedish krona.

Investors are nervous in part because they believe European governments will continue to respond slowly to the crisis and worry that elected officials will be under intense pressure to avoid further bailouts. That is especially true in Germany, where the Greek bailout was deeply unpopular and a series of crucial state elections will be kicking off in late February.

There is also nervousness that problems at European banks may get worse. "We're facing a banking crisis [in Europe] that runs the risk of overwhelming the public-sector finances," says  Carl Weinberg, chief economist at High Frequency Economics in Valhalla, N.Y. Analysts at J.P. Morgan Chase wrote last week that across the continent banks appear to be finding it harder to attract investors to unsecured debt, which is backed only by banks' creditworthiness.

Instead, banks have been issuing more so-called covered bonds, which are usually secured by a pool of mortgages. Last week, 56% of the €32 billion issued in bank debt was in covered bonds, a "high percentage," J.P. Morgan says. "In periods of funding stress, banks find it easier to issue covered bonds," the analysts wrote.

They noted that two major Spanish banks,  Banco Santander SA and  Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria SA,
BBVA


0.90
%




 still had to pay a premium to investors on their covered bonds. "It's becoming harder and more costly for even the biggest Spanish banks to refinance their debt," J.P. Morgan wrote. 

All this uncertainty is adding up to an environment where the euro is expected to face continued downward pressure. For non-European investors, that makes stepping up and buying European debt extra risky. Not only might they lose money on falling bond prices, but declines in the euro would magnify those losses.

  David Woo, head of global rates and currencies research at Bank of America Merrill Lynch, says inaction by European governments could lead to a big decline in the euro. "If Europe doesn't do anything to pre-empt the crisis, the euro will have to fall all the more in order to make the euro zone attractive to investors," says Mr. Woo, adding that it could fall well below its 2010 low near $1.19 and even hit $1.10.

But, he adds, at that level bond buyers would view the cheap currency as a boon to the European economy and could actually step up and buy the bonds. "At $1.10, all their problems will go away…A lot of investors will be prepared to buy euro-zone peripheral debt, and they'll be eating the U.S. and China's lunch, dinner and breakfast from an economic competitiveness standpoint."

—Emese Bartha contributed to this article.

 Write to  Tom Lauricella at tom.lauricella@wsj.com 