Read the full  ECO:nomics report .

The federal commission that investigated last year's Deepwater Horizon oil spill issued a report in January saying government oversight of the industry needs to be fundamentally reformed and oil companies need to dramatically improve safety practices. The Wall Street Journal's Jeffrey Ball sat down with  William Reilly, co-chairman of that commission and a former head of the Environmental Protection Agency, to discuss the spill and its fallout. 

Here are edited excerpts of their conversation:

  MR. BALL: One of the headline conclusions from the report of the commission was that this was a systemic problem, not a problem isolated to one or two companies. Talk about that.  

 MR. REILLY: That's probably, from the point of view of the oil and gas industry, the most controversial conclusion that we drew. I know it's very upsetting to CEOs of companies with splendid records of environment and safety, but the reason for it and the basis for it was three companies: Halliburton Co., [rig owner] Transocean Ltd. and, most importantly, the operator, BP PLC.

If you are dealing with Transocean, which has 40% of the rigs world-wide, in virtually every oil-extracting area of the sea, you're talking about somebody who works almost for every company. Turned out something very similar had happened in the North Sea just a year before with Transocean.

With respect to Halliburton, they provided cement that failed nine different tests that Chevron subjected it to at our request. Is it conceivable that they would only have provided that faulty cement to one company or one rig? Absolutely out of the question, I think. [Editor's note: Halliburton has said it disagreed with some commission findings; Transocean has said its procedures in the final hours were directed by BP and cleared by regulators.] 

Now, what some of the big companies will say is on a well of that sort, with that pressure and that formation, we would have subjected that slurry to our own test. Very few companies have independent testing capability anymore. They rely much more on contractors. 

The fatality rate in the Gulf is five times what it is in the North Sea, and the North Sea is a much more punishing environment. Moreover, we have had 79 losses of well control in the 10 years ending in 2009 in the Gulf.

That suggests we've got a big problem.

  MR. BALL: Last week, the administration approved the first deep-water drilling permit since the spill and signaled that it plans to approve more in the coming weeks and months. Are you comfortable with this?  

 MR. REILLY: The truth is that within a few days after that spill, virtually every company had stood down, had checked for their own vulnerability, their own possible weaknesses. Then the [Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and Enforcement, or BOEMRE] inspected all of those rigs, found seven or eight violations and had them corrected. So we saw no reason to suspend action permitting on the remaining rigs. I thought they stretched it out too long, frankly.

 The secretary of the interior may not have confidence in his agency. This is, after all, an agency that is fully implicated in what happened. It was a group of inspectors who were underpaid, undertrained, overworked.

That will change slowly, if at all. And if Congress doesn't provide more money—particularly better compensation for these people and to get some engineers and better-trained people—then I think the regulatory apparatus isn't yet one we can rely on.



  MR. BALL: It's clearly a bearish outlook that you're painting. Will this spill fundamentally change practices in a way the Exxon Valdez spill in 1989 did not, or is this going to continue to be a kind of a reactive situation?  

 MR. REILLY: Exxon made itself into the gold standard for safety in environment protection. One has to hope that will happen again. Remarkable what a catastrophe does to a company, or to an industry, or to a country.

If you look back at that history, [after Valdez] we started out with research-and-development expenditure to improve the response capability, and it steadily declined until it was hardly consequential. What I saw by way of skimmers, booms, all of the techniques to capture oil in the Gulf, even though flying over the rigs it looked like the Normandy invasion, there were so many ships doing it, they collected 5% or 6% of what was spilled.

That was really pathetic, and reflects badly on the industry and badly on the government, both of which had failed to develop that technology. 

  MR. BALL: You have talked about one regulatory model for the industry being something called INPO [the Institute of Nuclear Power Operations], which was fashioned by the nuclear industry after the Three Mile Island accident. The notion is essentially self-policing peer pressure. Where does that stand?  

 MR. REILLY: The oil industry, based on my conversations with CEOs of the major companies, is taking this very seriously. 

I think they will go forward with something of this sort and I think it's a very positive move, particularly if you aren't entirely confident that Congress will appropriate the funds necessary to improve the BOEMRE.

The industry has had a wake-up call. They now know they are all at risk in the event that something happens.