ATLANTA—How's this for a quick turnaround: 24 hours after a glitzy win over LeBron James and the Miami Heat in a jam-packed, celebrity-filled Madison Square Garden, the Knicks strolled into a lifeless, half-empty arena here, where they lacked energy and were beaten soundly in a 111-102 loss. 

The glamour was gone on Friday night, and in fact, it was downright ugly.

With 43 seconds left, Hawks forward Marvin Williams and Knicks forward Shawne Williams exchanged punches after Marvin Williams shoved Shawne Williams while walking down the court. The confrontation was diffused after a few punches from both sides, none of which seriously connected, and the fight was broken up by, among others, Knicks forward Amar'e Stoudemire and Hawks forward Josh Smith.

Shawne Williams said after the game that he made a fist but did not throw any punches. He said the shove "came out of the blue" and that he didn't think it would escalate the way it did.

On the matter of a potential suspension, he said he feels he'll get a chance to tell his side of the story, but he wouldn't speculate further.

"Its unfortunate—nobody likes it," Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni said. "The league will interpret it...but it seems like in my opinion, [Shawne Williams] did not throw a punch—he blocked it." 

It was a somewhat predictable loss. The team was without starting forward Wilson Chandler, who is nursing a sore left calf. Shawne Williams started in his absence and the rotation was not expanded, stretching the minutes for an already tired team.

Mr. Stoudemire scored 27 points and Raymond Felton had 21. The Knicks are now 6-6 in back-to-back games.

The Knicks struggled out of the gate, missing 10 of their first 11 3-pointers, and they were outrebounded 46 to 34 on the night.

Not even a solid fourth quarter could erase their early mistakes.

The Knicks' comeback began early in the fourth when they cut the Hawks' lead to 10 points with a 7-2 run capped off with a Toney Douglas layup. Shawne Williams missed a 3-pointer with nine minutes to go, and on the next possession Jamal Crawford hit a fadeaway jumper wit to squash it temporarily. With four minutes, to go, Mr. Stoudemire hit a jump shot to make it 102-97. On the next trip down the court, however, Mr. Smith drained a 3-pointer in front of the Knicks' bench.

Mr. D'Antoni said he didn't go out of his way to address a letdown after the dramatic win over the Heat. All five Knicks starters were in double figures, though they mustered only 15 bench points.

Joe Johnson, who excelled for Mr. D'Antoni while both were a part of the Phoenix Suns, scored 34 points with seven assists and eight rebounds.

Though the Hawks had two days of rest after a loss on Wednesday, they are not exactly rolling. In their last home game, the Hawks lost to the New Orleans Hornets 100-59. They had energy on Friday, however, and it was on display most notably in the second quarter when Marvin Williams threw a high alley-oop to forward Josh Smith for a hard, athletic slam dunk.

Mr. Chandler, meanwhile, said he hoped to play on Sunday at Madison Square Garden against the Detroit Pistons. Mr. D'Antoni said that Mr. Chandler, who is famously reserved, has probably been playing with the injury recently but did not say anything. He has struggled of late, scoring fewer than 10 points in three of his past four games.

The Knicks lost to the Hawks 99-90 on Nov. 27 in perhaps their previous low point for energy, which Mr. D'Antoni blamed on the Thanksgiving holiday.

Mr. Stoudemire was not on the floor to start the fourth quarter. He appeared injured in the third quarter, and he was down for two Knicks possessions until recovering a moment later.

An exhausted team was accented by bad luck—for example, with two minutes left in the second quarter, Shawne Williams missed four putbacks on the same possession. 

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 