WASHINGTON—Japan's nuclear disaster and the Middle East political unrest have combined to stall the Obama administration's efforts to export peaceful nuclear technology to key Arab and Asian countries, a central platform of U.S. nonproliferation strategy, according to officials briefed on the negotiations.

Planned nuclear-power deals with Jordan, Bahrain and other countries now appear shaky, with the U.S. worried about the stability of their governments and the other countries worried about the safety of nuclear energy. Germany and China are among the leading nations that say they are re-evaluating their development of atomic power because of Japan's crisis.

 Jordan: Initial agreement was signed in 2007

 South Korea: 1974 agreement is being renegotiated

 Chile: Initial agreement was signed in March

 Saudi Arabia: Initial agreement was signed in 2009

 Bahrain: Initial agreement was signed in 2009

 Vietnam: Initial agreement was signed in 2010

 United Arab Emirates: Final agreement was signed in 2009

"I think it's going to be quite some time before deals are finalized, given what's happening in the region," said an Arab diplomat whose country is pursuing a nuclear-cooperation agreement.

The delaying—and perhaps derailing—of the nuclear pacts is the latest sign of how Washington's national-security strategy is being altered by turmoil engulfing the Mideast, North Africa and now Japan. The State Department is reviewing billions of dollars of prospective arms sales and military assistance to allied Arab states, such as Bahrain and Saudi Arabia, because of political crackdowns and the changing leadership in the region, according to U.S. officials.

"The White House is reassessing," said a congressional official briefed on the nuclear-cooperation deals. "It's accurate to say they've been delayed, though they're certainly not dead."

State Department and White House spokesmen both declined to comment on the status of the nuclear-cooperation pacts. But an administration official briefed on the nuclear pacts said that "nothing that has happened has altered what we are trying to do. We see these agreements as a positive for both parties involved."

In recent months, the Department of Energy and the State Department have been discussing nuclear-cooperation agreements with a range of developing nations, including Jordan, Bahrain, Saudi Arabia and Vietnam, according to U.S. officials.

President Barack Obama has argued that assisting these countries in developing nuclear power, and tying them to strict regulations to guard against their diverting sensitive material to military programs, will help stanch the spread of atomic weapons globally.

The White House contrasts these peaceful, transparent programs with the secretive ones in Iran and North Korea. The U.S. accuses Tehran of using nuclear energy as a cover for developing nuclear weapons, a charge Iran denies.

The U.S. wants to use nuclear-power agreements to persuade allied countries not to produce nuclear fuel indigenously—a key component in any atomic-weapons program—and instead purchase it from foreign suppliers. The Obama administration's 2009 pact with the United Arab Emirates is now viewed as the "gold standard," as Abu Dhabi renounced its rights to enrich uranium domestically as part of the deal.

U.S. plans to finalize agreements with other countries are now being slowed as political upheaval continues to engulf the Middle East, said diplomats and congressional officials briefed on the negotiations.

The rulers of Jordan and Bahrain, who just months ago appeared firmly in power, are now facing significant challenges to their rule. Lawmakers have voiced concerns to the administration that any nuclear technology shared with these countries risks ending up in the hands of new governments hostile to the U.S. U.S. nuclear-cooperation agreements have the legal status of treaties and require congressional approval. Arab diplomats and congressional staff said it would be very difficult to gain U.S. lawmakers' support amid so much uncertainty in the region.

Jordan's largest opposition party is an Islamist body with ties to Hamas, the Palestinian group the U.S. brands a terrorist organization. U.S. officials worry that Bahrain's largely Shiite protest movement has ties with Iran and the Lebanese militant group Hezbollah.

Jordan's King Abdullah II has made the development of nuclear power a cornerstone of his country's economic model. His government has discovered vast amounts of uranium ore in the country's central region and hopes to earn revenues through the export of processed uranium yellowcake. Jordan, which imports nearly all of its oil, also plans to generate as much 30% of its electricity from nuclear power by 2030.

Amman nearly finalized a nuclear-cooperation agreement with the George W. Bush administration, and Jordanian officials said they were making significant progress before political unrest gripped the region in January. 

The Jordanian Embassy in Washington said the kingdom remains committed to the agreement. But an official briefed on the negotiations said Japan's nuclear disaster would likely make it more difficult for Jordan's government to push ahead with nuclear-power plans in the near term because of growing domestic concerns about its safety.

U.S. lawmakers have also been closely monitoring talks between the Obama administration and Saudi Arabia on a nuclear-cooperation agreement. Saudi Arabia had been among the fiercest Middle East critics of Iran's nuclear program. But lawmakers are concerned that Riyadh won't give up its rights to enrich uranium and reprocess spent fuel. These technologies could allow Saudi Arabia to develop its own weapons program in a bid to counter its historical rival in Tehran.

Saudi officials say they are continuing to weigh the safety of nuclear energy and are opposed to the development of atomic weapons. A delegation from Saudi Arabia's private sector visited the U.S. earlier this year to discuss nuclear power options. 

Still, despite these challenges, the Obama administration is pushing ahead with nuclear cooperation on other fronts.

The Obama administration signed a preliminary agreement with Chile in March to explore ways to develop civilian nuclear power. The head of the country's Nuclear Energy Commission said Santiago will use the agreement to develop domestic expertise and ensure the safety of nuclear power, particularly because of the significant seismic activity in the country.

The U.S. also will need to renegotiate expiring nuclear pacts with South Korea and Taiwan in the coming months. Both countries are significant users of nuclear power, and Seoul is seeking the right to reprocess spent fuel domestically as a means to better store its waste. Critics note this could also allow them the technologies to produce the plutonium needed for atomic weapons.

—Anthony Esposito in Santiago, Chile, contributed to this article.