SACRAMENTO, Calif.—California Gov. Jerry Brown proposed Monday to close the state's $25 billion budget shortfall by making steep service cuts and by asking voters to extend temporary increases on sales and income taxes by five years.

Mr. Brown, a Democrat sworn in as governor last week, proposed an $84.6 billion general-fund budget that would rely on $12.5 billion of cuts—with higher education and health programs hit especially hard—and $12 billion of revenue from extending the higher taxes.

The draft budget doesn't call for borrowing or accounting maneuvers that figured in the budgets of Mr. Brown's predecessor, Republican Arnold Schwarzenegger.

"We're going to face the music," Mr. Brown said at a news conference.

The governor's austere budget blueprint underlines the tough choices many U.S. governors face amid the nation's struggling economy. The woes of California, the most populous state, are particularly magnified because of the size of its economy, which is the largest of the 50 states and produces more than most countries. In all, California faces a projected $25.4 billion shortfall, including $8.2 billion for the current fiscal year and $17.2 billion for the 2011-2012 fiscal year.

Mr. Brown's budget proposal immediately raised the prospect of further political gridlock in Sacramento, where budget stalemates over the past two years have forced state officials to issue IOUs as lawmakers squabbled over closing a cumulative $90 billion budget gap. 

Republicans, who hold slightly more than a third of the seats in the Assembly and Senate, said they would object to maintaining higher taxes. That is likely to raise hurdles to the governor's proposals, since Mr. Brown needs two-thirds of lawmakers' support to call a special election asking voters to prolong the tax increases. 

"There isn't any support for those tax extensions," said Jim Nielsen, the top Republican on the Assembly's budget committee. He added that Californians rejected a similar tax-increase extension in a May 2009 election.

The increases Mr. Brown wants to extend went into effect in 2009 and are set to expire this year. The state sales tax had been boosted by one percentage point and the state income tax by 0.25%, while the state vehicle-license fee was doubled to 1.15%.

Mr. Brown said he believed he had some Republican support for extending the tax increase and planned to work with Republicans to win the two-thirds support needed. He declined to comment when asked whether he would try to place the measure on the ballot with a simple-majority vote. The election would have to be held before July, before the next fiscal year begins.

Mr. Brown said more cuts would be needed if voters were to reject the tax measures. "If we don't have the taxes, it's going to be extremely difficult, even draconian," he said. Funding to kindergarten-to-12th grade education was maintained in the governor's budget proposal, but he suggested that state leaders would have to cut that funding if the tax-increase measure failed.

Democratic leaders backed Mr. Brown's plan. "The governor's proposed budget is complete and it is balanced," said Darrell Steinberg, the Democratic leader of the Senate. "As unappealing and as painful as this budget is, the only thing worse is to allow this fiscal crisis to linger."

But higher-education officials and health-care advocates derided the budget plan. Mr. Brown proposed cutting a combined $1 billion from the University of California and California State University systems, which had a combined $5.6 billion general-fund budget last year. He also aimed to cut community-college funding by $400 million.

"This is a sad day for California," said Mark Yudof, president of the University of California system. "The collective tuition payments made by University of California students for the first time in history would exceed what the state contributes to the system's general fund."

Mr. Yudof said he would ask chancellors of the system's 10 universities to meet specific budget goals, and would reduce the budget of the overall system. The University of California, once the envy of other state higher-education systems, has slashed budgets the past two years and in November 2009 boosted the equivalent of tuition by 32%. 

The governor's budget plan also called for cuts to services that Mr. Schwarzenegger often targeted: $1.5 billion from the state's welfare-to-work program and $1.7 billion from Medi-Cal, the state's Medicaid program.

"It's still balancing the budgets on the backs of people," said Dr. Diana Sylvestre, a member of a health-group coalition protesting Monday on the Capitol steps. 

At the news conference, Mr. Brown defended his proposal. "We're still reasonably well," he said of social services, while acknowledging that "compared to where we were, it's a reduction."

The governor also proposed cutting the pay of state workers by 10% and restoring local-government authority over programs such as firefighting, court security and mental-health services. California's major public-sector unions called Mr. Brown's plan an acceptable start to the budget process.

 Write to  Stu Woo at Stu.Woo@wsj.com 