Bit by bit, Uncle Sam is preparing to remove the training wheels from the economy and financial markets.

In recent days, U.S. policy makers have taken a series of small steps to remove their extraordinary, crisis-era support.

The Treasury Department announced plans to sell its $142 billion portfolio of federal agency mortgage-backed securities bought at the worst of the crisis. The Federal Reserve moved to the next stage of a plan to drain liquidity from the financial system through reverse repurchase agreements, or "reverse repos." The Fed also is considering an auction for some of the subprime-mortgage securities acquired in the bailout of  American International Group Inc.
AIG


0.89
%






Washington also gave banks more wiggle room, letting some borrow to repay bailout cash and others to raise dividends for the first time since the crisis.

Combined with statements from Fed officials expressing a desire to end their extraordinary market support and thus lower the risks of inflation, these developments were reminders that markets will eventually be made to travel under their own power.

"The Fed is independent of the Treasury, but there's certainly some thought process common to both, mainly that they need to support the economy less," said  Kemal Askar, head of North American linear rates trading for J.P. Morgan Chase. "I don't think the Fed is going to be hiking [interest rates] any time soon, but you can hear the footsteps."

These footsteps are still baby steps, of course, and they have been going on for several months already. The Fed first started testing reverse repos in the fall of 2009. It and the Treasury Department long ago ended the emergency-lending programs that greased the skids of the credit markets during and after the crisis. Wednesday, the Fed rejected  Bank of America's
BAC


3.33
%




 dividend plan, suggesting it hasn't fully loosened its grip on banks.

Far and away the largest government prop for the economy is still in place: the Fed's $2.4 trillion balance sheet, which has expanded from below $900 billion before the crisis. The balance sheet is still expanding, in fact, with the Fed scheduled to buy as much as $600 billion in Treasury debt through the end of June. 

Included in the expanded balance sheet total is nearly $1 trillion in mortgage-backed securities, which are rolling off slowly as mortgages are repaid or default. That cash is, for now, being used to buy more Treasurys to keep the Fed's balance sheet steady. Along with its mortgage holdings, the Fed eventually will have several-hundred-billion dollars in excess Treasury debt on its portfolio that it may need to shed.

Until that point, the Fed will be supporting prices for mortgage and Treasury debt, even if it isn't actively buying.

Meanwhile, along with the mortgage portfolio, the Treasury still holds nearly $150 billion of the nearly $411 billion in investments made under the Troubled Assets Relief Program. "As the economy heals, Treasury is continuing to successfully exit from its temporary TARP investments and recover taxpayer dollars," a Treasury spokesman said.

Some of that is money extended to institutions that will have to raise cash in the market to pay it back.  KeyCorp
KEY


0.92
%




 and  SunTrust Banks Inc.
STI


1.34
%




 did just that this past week by selling bonds. AIG hopes to hold an initial public offering in the spring to repay some of its debt to Treasury.

The government even appears to have an eager lineup of buyers for some assets that were among the most toxic a few years ago.

Many already have expressed interest in the Fed's sale of the AIG private-label mortgage securities. Treasury has a stake in a similar portfolio with a market value recently estimated at about $21.5 billion, as part of the Public-Private Investment Program.

—Randall Smith contributed to this article.

 Write to  Mark Gongloff at mark.gongloff@wsj.com 