As U.S. regulators home in on at least three banks in a probe of manipulation of a key benchmark rate, investigators face challenges proving wrongdoing because banks report and obtain borrowing costs in an opaque process that leaves a scant evidence trail, according to people familiar with the situation.

Even if the case does identify manipulation, it could present regulators with the larger challenge of either preventing further abuses of the London interbank offered rate, which currently is tied to $10 trillion in loans and $350 trillion in interest-rate derivatives, or finding an alternative. 

Regulators are focusing on Bank of America Corp., Citigroup Inc. and UBS AG, which are part of a group of 16 banks that reported dollar borrowing costs used to calculate Libor, between 2006 and 2008—a period that has drawn the focus of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Justice Department. The dollar Libor panel was expanded to 20 banks in February.

Investigators are examining whether some banks deliberately tried to skew Libor by deliberately submitting inaccurate data, according to government and industry officials. Authorities are examining whether banks whose funding costs were rising as the financial crisis intensified tried to mask that trend by submitting artificially low readings of their daily borrowing costs, the people said.

But making a case may be difficult because the Libor process doesn't take place over an exchange and is cloaked in secrecy. Internal bank emails may prove to be key evidence in the probe because of the difficulty in proving that banks reported borrowing costs for Libor at one rate and obtained funding at another. 

For example, banks report borrowing costs used to calculate Libor every day around 11 a.m. According to one person familiar with the banks, a junior-level person in a bank treasury department typically reports borrowing-cost figures received from elsewhere in the bank, but may not have any idea of what his employer's actual funding costs are. The individual bank quotes are publicly available.

From 2006 through 2008, as the crisis worsened, banks that did seek funds often did so by telephone, leaving a limited electronic trail of borrowing costs.

Several academics and market experts analyzed how Libor is calculated after The Wall Street Journal in 2008 identified questionable Libor quotes submitted by banks. In February, a group—led by  Rosa Abrantes-Metz of New York University's Stern School of Business and Oakland, Calif., economic firm AFE Consulting, and co-authors  Albert Metz, Gim Seow and  Michael Kraten—identified questionable patterns but not hard evidence.

"We find some anomalous individual quotes, but the evidence is inconsistent with a material manipulation of the U.S. one month Libor rate," the group said. 

Both the Journal and Ms. Abrantes-Metz's analysis relied on the use of prices for credit-default insurance to analyze whether banks submitted accurate Libor quotes. The report said that a potentially more reliable way for investigators to identify whether actual bank funding costs matched Libor quotes would be to compare the quotes and rates on short-term bank IOUs known as commercial paper. But those short-term debt costs aren't publicly available.

The SEC has sent subpoenas to several banks, including Bank of America, Citigroup and UBS, said people familiar with the probe. The agency also has summoned officials from those three banks to testify to investigators as part of the probe. It isn't clear how many other banks have received subpoenas or been asked to testify. 

It also isn't clear whether the investigation will result in either civil or criminal charges against any banks. UBS disclosed the probe in its annual report earlier this week and acknowledged it had received subpoenas 

Libor is increasingly viewed as a relic in many parts of the financial community. Despite its role as a proxy for stress in the banking system, Libor is comprised of data that many bankers say is largely irrelevant, since institutions no longer rely heavily on super-short-term funding from other banks. Critics also say Libor is flawed because it is easy for banks to report inaccurate data, but the British Bankers' Association, which oversees Libor, has defended its integrity. 

Libor retains a significant role because of the fact that trillions of dollars of loans and derivatives are pegged to it. Changing to a market rate that is less opaque would be akin to "turning around an ocean liner of enormous proportions," said Darrell Duffie, a Stanford University finance professor, who suggested one possible change would be to switch to a market rate called overnight indexed swaps, which tracks the expected path of the Federal Reserve's federal-funds rate. Mr. Duffie added it likely would be "treacherous to renegotiate legacy contracts on a new standard."

 Write to  David Enrich at david.enrich@wsj.com 