It just posted its highest-ever sales figure for a single quarter, but Maruti Suzuki India Ltd. has little to be happy about.

Sales rose nearly 27% in the October-December period, thanks to surging incomes and a strong job market. Maruti, which commands nearly half of the Indian auto market by units, is well placed to profit from this. Despite its Japanese origins, Maruti projects the image of a home-grown company. It has been around for nearly three decades and mostly makes the small, inexpensive cars that are favored by first-time buyers. 

Nevertheless earnings dropped 18% in the three-month period from a year earlier. Investors had reasons to expect this drop. Maruti relies on  Suzuki Motor Corp.
7269


-0.02
%




 for technology—everything from engines to transmissions—and pays its Japanese parent a royalty for this. A strengthening yen last year meant these royalty payments grew sharply in rupee terms, rising to 5.2% of revenue from 3.6% a year earlier.

Beyond the royalty payments, Maruti also buys parts from Japan. But despite all this exposure to Japan, which Citi Investment Research estimates is worth 25% to 30% of revenue, the company isn't hedged against moves in the yen after March. Worryingly, one of the reasons the company isn't seeking protection is because Maruti's management believes yen appreciation this year is unlikely, according to Citi.

Meanwhile, some of Maruti's long-standing saving graces are waning. Newer rivals are targeting its bread-and-butter business of selling to first-time car buyers.  Toyota Motor Corp., for example, priced its new Etios sedan to compete with one of Maruti's best sellers, the Swift DZire. Others, like  Volkswagen
VLKAY


-2.19
%




 and its Skoda unit, are also focusing on this segment. 

Maruti can take some relief from the fact that its exports now make up less than 10% of overall sales, leaving it less vulnerable to sluggish demand overseas. But maintaining sales momentum in India could also be a challenge as interest rates, fuel costs and car prices rise.

Overall, things aren't looking so bright for India's most familiar foreign car maker.

—Harsh Joshi

 Write to  Harsh Joshi at harsh.joshi@dowjones.com 