 Jakarta, Indonesia 

  Chris John is a 13-time defending world boxing champion. He has proven so unbeatable in the ring that he is a "super champion," a rare title earned after 10 successive defenses of his World Boxing Association featherweight title.

So why doesn't "The Dragon," unbeaten in 46 professional fights, have his name up in lights in Las Vegas as he prepares for his next title defense on April 17? Well, mainly because the fight is being held in Jakarta, the capital of Indonesia, which happens to be John's home country.

The theories behind this apparent snub by boxing promoters are many. John's knockout record might have something to do with it. Compare him with Filipino sensation Manny "Pacman" Pacquiao, who has knocked out his opponents 38 times in 57 fights. John has only put away 22 opponents in 46 bouts—less than half of the time.

"Chris doesn't have that international appeal because he doesn't have what we say in boxing is 'the killer punch'—he doesn't knock people out," said  Syamsul Anwar Harahap, an Indonesian Boxing Association official and former Asian amateur champion. "Boxing is about killing people."

While Pacquiao, a global star who spends time between fights meeting presidents and pop stars, is arguably the best pound-for-pound fighter in the world, John is considered the best of all the featherweight divisions.

But despite holding the WBA featherweight belt since September 2003, John has fought only once in Las Vegas—boxing's Mecca and the primary site of the sport's biggest title bouts—for a purse estimated at $250,000. He fought one other time in the U.S., a battle that ended in a draw in Houston. 

Pacquiao, meanwhile, is an eight-division world champion whose past 10 fights have been in the U.S., eight of them in Las Vegas. "Pacman" has also been guaranteed a purse of at least $15 million in his coming fight with WBO welterweight champion Shane Mosley, to be held May 7 at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in—where else?—Las Vegas.

For his part, John is often called kind, down-to-earth, laid back—anything but a killer. He's quite happy to make his opponents look foolish in the ring with his unrivaled skills and conditioning while racking up unanimous decisions, as long as he keeps his belt. And the 31-year-old champion says he is similarly unconcerned about his lack of international face recognition, even among Las Vegas fight promoters.

"They knew my name before I went to Vegas, but they didn't recognize me when they met me. It was like, 'Oh hey, this is Chris John!" he said, laughing, during a recent interview in Jakarta. 

Back in Indonesia, it is another story. John is a national hero among his 237 million countrymen. His face has been plastered on billboards and public buses, promoting energy drinks he used to promote, and he frequently volunteers his time for charity events, including appearing on a telethon to support Indonesians displaced by the Mount Merapi volcanic eruptions in late 2010.

But his appeal hasn't translated into the kind of money, either inside or outside the ring, that John's financial advisors want him to earn to secure his financial future after he eventually retires. Most big-money advertising endorsements in Indonesia go to singers, television personalities, and soap-opera actors and actresses, whose popularity is fueled by racy gossip television shows that detail their personal lives.

Those kinds of shows would never feature John, who has a squeaky-clean image, all the way down to spending time with his family in Central Java in between training sessions in Australia.

"Chris is just a really nice guy, very humble, very straight forward, with a warm spirit to anybody who comes to him, willing to get in and help on any social cause," said John Russell, an Australian who is one the boxer's financial advisors. "He's not a [Mike] Tyson."

As he hopes to work his way back to Vegas, John can benefit from the fact that boxing is the second most popular televised sport in Indonesia after football, and he has many avid upper-class and wealthy Indonesian fans, in particular businessmen. This prompted John's advisers to think outside the box: they let his energy-drink endorsements lapse and are negotiating with Indonesian and multinational companies to have the boxer become a corporate ambassador and the face of corporate social-responsibility programs.

Some of the world's most diverse companies, including ExxonMobil, Unilever and McDonald's, have operations in Indonesia. Russell thinks companies like these could gain from John's reputation.

"There's a lot of interest and almost obligation of these companies to engage in these social programs. With oil and mining companies, there's huge social issues attached to their activity," Russell said. "And clear and open communication with the communities involved is a necessary part of it. We're not talking about flogging something that isn't socially acceptable.

John did consume the energy drinks he once marketed, and he and his financial advisers insist that this attitude will carry over into his ambassadorial role. In short, he will not be a proverbial mouthpiece for big business.

"If they are helping people, then yes," John said. "It's not really me doing business. It's me supporting business," he said. "Things like education, health care, are important for me."