Nicola Formichetti was in Amsterdam a couple of months ago when his close friend and collaborator Lady Gaga, who was mulling the concept of rebirth, sent him a text message containing a picture of a human embryo. 

The picture led Mr. Formichetti's mind to footwear. For the Grammy Awards, where Lady Gaga was to sing her new single "Born This Way," Mr. Formichetti suggested creating "egg [shaped] shoes—like you were born that way, with eggs as feet." Lady Gaga wanted to take the egg notion further, a thought that resulted in the most dramatic moment of the night, when the pop star was carried down the red carpet in an egg-shaped structure. 

"One thing leads to another," said Mr. Formichetti. "It starts small and then explodes." 

Mr. Formichetti, the 33-year-old stylist and new creative director for the French fashion house Thierry Mugler, communicates in images. His computer contains a trove of unusual photographs, cartoons and abstract art, arranged in no particular order. He periodically culls through them for certain themes and mixes them up to see if the reconfiguration sparks something new. 

Sometimes, an individual picture "doesn't mean anything when you look at it alone," he said. "But when you put it next to something"—like looking at the embryo image next to shoes—"it can become an idea." 

To convey his inspiration for his debut fall 2011 women's collection, unveiled Wednesday evening in a Paris runway show starring and featuring music by Lady Gaga, Mr. Formichetti emailed a series of photos to collaborators, like hairstylist Sam McKnight. The audience cheered as Lady Gaga made her entrance, smoking a cigarette and dancing down the runway in tall platforms. Models wore body-hugging ensembles, some made of unusual materials like neoprene. After the show, Lady Gaga placed an order for the entire collection. 

Less than a week before the show, all Mr. McKnight had been told was that the look Mr. Formichetti was going for was "tribal and alien." Mr. McKnight, who styled Lady Gaga's hair to match her red-meat dress dreamed up by Mr. Formichetti for the MTV Video Music Awards, said he's learned to "always be prepared for anything." 

Mr. Formichetti said he used to keep his ideas in sketchpads, but the iPhone has changed the way he organizes and shares information. He constantly communicates with his 40,000-plus followers on Twitter, recently posting a photo of a metallic sculpture of an alien-like woman. "When I was younger, I always wished I could send messages to people, like Thierry Mugler, and say, 'Oh, how fabulous you are!'" 

Like Mr. Mugler, Mr. Formichetti has no formal design training. The son of an Italian pilot and a Japanese stewardess, he grew up aware of his surroundings, he said, as he tried to assimilate into both countries. 

He later got into architecture school but quit and partied for four years, becoming an avid student of London nightlife and street wear. While he worked at a boutique, his unique style caught the eye of fashion editor Katy England, who offered him a job editing a page in the niche magazine Dazed & Confused. 

These days, Mr. Formichetti shuttles among his homes in New York, London and Paris, in addition to monthly visits to Japan to see family and work for the Uniqlo brand and Vogue Hommes Japan. To quiet his mind, Mr. Formichetti learned to meditate. 

If he hits a logjam, Mr. Formichetti Googles random words, surfs his network on Tumblr (which he describes as a "Facebook for images") and visits blogs of people he follows. In early January he found a picture of Rick Genest, a man completely covered in tattoos depicting skeletal and muscle structure. 

Mr. Formichetti said Mr. Genest embodied the spirit of "transformation" that he wanted to convey with his Mugler's men's collection. "I was like, 'Oh, my God, he's the one. This is the one I've been looking for.'"

For his Mugler men's collection presentation in January, Mr. Formichetti was initially planning something small with five models. But Mr. Genest inspired him to do something grand. He cut a high-concept video of Mr. Genest and used it as a backdrop for the show, live-streamed over the Internet with an original score by Lady Gaga. 

Since then, Mr. Genest has walked the runway for the fall 2011 women's collection and can be seen dancing with Lady Gaga in her "Born This Way" video. "Isn't that amazing?" Mr. Formichetti says, pulling up a photo of Mr. Genest on his computer. "Insane."

• Nicola Formichetti trained as a classical pianist as a child and said that playing piano helps calm him down. He's planning on renting a piano—with a plug for headphones so that he doesn't disturb his neighbors in New York.

• Mr. Formichetti said that he has always drawn inspiration from unusual-looking people. He found two of his assistants via Facebook, attracted to their unique style. 

• Mr. Formichetti joined Tumblr last month. On his page, he has been sharing things he finds compelling—like a recent alternating flash of Elmo and Cookie Monster—and often will track who reblogged his pictures and check out their sites for inspiration. He also keeps a private Tumblr account, so that he can assemble his ideas without ruining the element of surprise when his vision is revealed to the public. 

• Mr. Formichetti says going to clubs with friends helps him stay balanced and focused. "I work really hard and take it seriously, and I party really hard and take it seriously," he said. 

 Write to  Rachel Dodes at rachel.dodes@wsj.com 