 (See Corrections & Amplifications item below.) 

Soccer doesn't have an equivalent of the 1972 Miami Dolphins alumni who get together and celebrate when each season's last undefeated NFL team loses its first game, thereby preserving their record. But maybe soccer should. If you go an entire campaign without a loss in a major European league, you deserve a double dose of Champagne.

A number of clubs in Europe's five most popular domestic leagues have enjoyed undefeated seasons dating back to Preston North End, in 1888-89, the inaugural season of the English league. But that was in soccer's equivalent of baseball's Dead Ball Era, when teams played fewer games and many competitions were regional. In post-war Europe, after the creation of national round-robin leagues and the advent of widespread professionalism, only three have achieved this feat. Perugia went undefeated in the 1978-79 season but, amazingly, did not win the Italian title (a result of drawing nearly two-thirds of matches that season). AC Milan was invincible in the 1991-92 Serie A season, amidst a record streak of 58 league games without loss. And in 2003-04, Arsenal achieved the feat on its way to winning the Premier League title.

We're only at the halfway mark, but Manchester United sits atop the Premier League undefeated, leaving some to wonder whether it could join those illustrious predecessors. The curious thing about this United team however is that, far from being a juggernaut, it has limped through much of the season, squeezing out results through guile and resilience rather than sheer brilliance. While not losing, it's also tied (eight) nearly as many games as it's won (11).

All those draws put United on pace to finish the season with 82 points, which would be its lowest total since 2004-05. It has conceded 0.95 goals per game, its highest total since 2001-02. Most surprising perhaps is United's record away from home: the team's projected four road wins would be the lowest since 1988-89.

Saturday's away win at West Bromwich Albion neatly encapsulated United's season for better and worse. It took the lead after just three minutes but then found itself on the back foot as West Brom, an unheralded but ambitious side, streamed forward, dominating the midfield and leveling the score. Referee Chris Foy then failed to spot United rightback Gary Neville's penalty-area foul on Graham Dorrans. And, when Mr. Foy did give West Brom a penalty kick in the second half, Peter Odemwingie fired wide. Just as United seemed content to hang on for a point, up popped substitute Javier Hernandez, 15 minutes from the final whistle, to give the visitors the win.

It was the kind of game in which United was thoroughly outplayed and is left with vague terms like "mental toughness" and "resilience" to explain the result. But it was also typical of the way Sir Alex Ferguson's team has had to scrap and get creative. On Saturday, with United getting overrun in midfield, Sir Alex made a key tactical shift, moving forward Wayne Rooney to the wing and switching to a 4-5-1 formation, which slowed West Brom's onslaught. Replacing his top goalscorer, Dimitar Berbatov, with Hernandez was an equally inspired move. 

Yet the sight of Sir Alex having to rely on managerial finesse and good fortune is an unfamiliar one. And much of it has to do with the fact that United has been hit hard by injuries and loss of form, while being nowhere near as talented as in previous seasons.

When it reached the Champions League final two years ago, in addition to Mr. Rooney and Mr. Berbatov, it could count on Cristiano Ronaldo and Carlos Tevez to round out its strike force. Those two have effectively been replaced by Michael Owen, who has been sidelined for three months (and, in any case, has scored just four league goals since joining United in the summer of 2009) and Mr. Hernandez, who is in his first season at Old Trafford.

Compounding the problem, Mr. Rooney, United's best player, has struggled. Before Saturday, he had not scored a goal for United from open play since March, a drought lasting an incredible 1,417 minutes. Throw in injuries and a nasty contract dispute which saw him label the club as "unambitious" (a statement he has since retracted, after signing a contract extension) and you can see why he's probably glad 2010 is over. His strike partner, Mr. Berbatov, has scored an impressive 14 goals in 16 Premier League appearances. The problem is, his scoring is streaky: 10 of those goals have come in just three matches, all of them at home. Indeed, before a five-goal outburst against Blackburn in November, he had gone 10 games without scoring.

At the back, legendary goalkeeper Edwin Van der Sar turned 40 in October and has shown signs that age is catching up with him. Leftback Patrice Evra, normally a paragon of consistency, captained France's ill-fated World Cup campaign and suffered a major post-South Africa hangover as a result. Winger Antonio Valencia has been out since mid-September and won't return for another two months at the earliest. Michael Carrick, once an automatic choice in midfield, has seen his playing time dwindle every year since 2007. And defensive stalwart Rio Ferdinand, tormented by injuries for the previous 18 months, only made his first Premier League appearance in October.

And despite all this, there's that great big goose-egg in the loss column. The difficulties encountered this season have arguably stretched Sir Alex's managerial skills more than any in recent history. He has had to push, prod and cajole his squad like never before. He has used his golden oldies – 37-year-old Ryan Giggs and 36-year-old Paul Scholes – judiciously, doling out their minutes effectively. At different times, he has found different people to step up, without anyone – with the possible exception of defender Nemanja Vidic, winger Nani and midfielder Darren Fletcher – being consistently productive all season long. 

The odds say United won't finish the Premier League season undefeated. Tricky away trips to Chelsea, Liverpool, Arsenal and Tottenham remain. But if it does, it will be an astounding achievement, precisely because of the difficulties it has encountered and the flaws it has had to paper over.

Who said undefeated teams had to be outstanding and dominant anyway?

Ronaldinho, not that long ago universally acclaimed as the best player in the world, left AC Milan's winter training camp in Dubai to return home to Brazil Saturday. A meeting is scheduled in Rio de Janeiro between the Brazilian forward, his agent and brother Roberto Assis and Adriano Galliani, Milan's chief executive. Just one item is on the agenda: finding Ronaldinho a home.

He becomes a free agent at the end of the season and, with the signing of another forward, Antonio Cassano, there's no room for him at Milan, a club whose frontline already includes Zlatan Ibrahimovic, Robinho and Pato Alexandre. The club has said it's prepared to let him go for a relatively modest fee, which would get his $7 million a year salary off Milan's books. While there was talk of a move to Major League Soccer and the Los Angeles Galaxy it appears as if his future will be in Brazil, at either Gremio or Flamengo. Either way, he'll be taking a big pay cut, as neither MLS nor the Brazilian league can compete with European salaries.

What seems extraordinary is that Ronaldinho is still just 30 years old. He's a two-time FIFA World Player of the Year and, just last season, scored 15 goals for Milan, not a bad return for a player who is not a center-forward. Furthermore, he's been relatively injury-free since joining Milan from Barcelona in the summer of 2008.

Yet now a new – and possibly final – chapter begins in the career of a player whose fancy skills and permanent smile bewitched the world. Ronaldinho hopes to relaunch his career with the Brazilian national team (coach Mano Menezes recalled him to the Selecao in November after an 18-month hiatus) in this summer's Copa America and, possibly, next summer's Olympics in London.

It's hard not to wish him well. It would be a shame if one of the most iconic and recongizable players of the last decade were to disappear into oblivion without a proper curtain call.

— Gabriele Marcotti is the world soccer columnist for The Times of London and a regular broadcaster for the BBC. 

 Corrections & Amplifications 

Three teams in the five most popular European soccer leagues have gone undefeated during a season since World War II. An earlier version of this story did not include Perugia. It also incorrectly stated that Preston North End was the only undefeated team among those countries' top teams before that point. Other clubs in Spain, France, Italy and Germany did so, though in shorter seasons than those played today.