How does the Obama administration plan to pay for its military operations in Libya? Perhaps President Obama will tell us in his address to the nation this evening. But it's a question that Democratic Rep. Bruce Braley of Iowa asked last week in a letter to the president. And White House spokesman Jay Carney responded by admitting he didn't have a specific number for how much the no-fly zone was costing but assured reporters that "there are contingency funds . . . for this kind of thing."

"The fact that funds for contingency military operations exist doesn't answer the question of how much we're spending, and will continue to spend, in Libya," Rep. Braley replied. Indeed, Indiana Senator Richard Lugar, a Republican, is also worried about where the money for Libya will come from. National Journal magazine estimates that the no-fly zone cost $100 million in Tomahawk missiles alone in its first day. 

Yet administration officials insist that they will not be asking for any supplementary spending for Congress. "The operation in Libya is being funded with existing resources at this point," Office of Management and Budget spokesman Kenneth Baer said last week. "We are not planning to request a supplemental at this time." But former Pentagon officials say that is an unrealistic stance. "They really start to feel the pressure once [the cost] goes over $1 billion," said Dov Zakheim, a top Pentagon budget official under Ronald Reagan and George W. Bush. 

Senator Lugar cites estimates that the operation has already cost about $1 billion. "Who knows how long this goes on? And furthermore, who has really budgeted for Libya at all?"

David Drucker, a reporter for Roll Call, says it's almost inevitable that the administration will ask for emergency funding for Libyan operations but is hesitant to go that route immediately because of the debate that would ensue in Congress. But regardless of whether the Libyan operation was necessary for humanitarian or other considerations, the Obama administration is once again making a mockery of its claims of transparency.

To read more stories like this one, please subscribe to Political Diary.