SINGAPORE -- Singapore's People's Action Party remained in power in Saturday's general election, maintaining the political structure that has led the city-state since independence despite the toughest fight the opposition has ever mustered. 

In results announced Sunday, the PAP, led by Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong, won 81 of 87 parliamentary seats, but with only 60.1% of the popular vote--the ruling party's lowest share since Singapore become a nation in 1965. 

Opposition parties collectively contested a record 82 seats, with the Workers' Party winning six seats. The poll was the most competitive since the city-state's independence, with the highest number of seats ever secured by the opposition. In 1991, the opposition won four seats. 

The remaining five opposition parties failed to win seats, but came close to doing so in some contests. 

The PAP was always expected to win handily, but the election saw unprecedented competition for seats and an unusually spirited opposition drive. The election was seen as a vote on the ruling party's economic policies, which evoked strong criticism on issues like rising housing and transport costs, the influx of foreign labor and widening income inequality. 

Formed by Singapore's guiding architect, Lee Kuan Yew, the PAP has run the country for nearly half a century. In the last poll in 2006, the ruling party won 82 out of 84 seats with nearly 67% of the popular vote. 

Singapore's opposition candidates are looking stronger than ever in the general election being held Saturday. Take a look at the key players, including Nicole Seah, below, one of the youngest candidates on the ballot.

Saturday's general election is expected to be the most fiercely contested in the country since its independence in 1965. Opposition parties collectively are challenging 82 out of 87 parliamentary seats. Review the major parties.

Prime Minister Lee, the founding father's son, won his second poll since becoming premier in 2004. He campaigned on a theme that this election would usher in Singapore's next generation of leaders, including a possible future prime minister. The win also provides a mandate for another generation of the PAP to carry on when 87-year-old Lee Kuan Yew is gone. 

The elder Lee already won his parliamentary seat on April 27, the day candidates filed nominations, as he was unopposed in his five-seat constituency. 

Apart from Prime Minister Lee, who retained his parliamentary seat, key ministers such as Finance Minister Tharman Shanmugaratnam, Trade and Industry Minister Lim Hng Kiang, and Senior Minister Goh Chok Tong were also re-elected. 

"While voters have given the PAP a strong mandate, many voters--including some of those who voted for us--have also clearly expressed their significant concerns, both on the issues and our approach to government," Prime Minister Lee said at his postvictory conference Sunday. 

But, the biggest blow to the ruling PAP came when it lost two cabinet ministers--Foreign Affairs Minister George Yeo and Lim Hwee Hua, minister in the Prime Minister's Office and second minister for finance and transport--to Workers' Party candidates. 

"You have made history tonight. This is a political landmark in modern Singapore," Workers' Party Secretary-General Low Thia Khiang said. Low's team defeated PAP's Yeo and his team in a five-seat constituency--the first-ever opposition victory in a multiseat district. 

Even though the PAP has grabbed a majority of the seats, its 6.5-percentage-point slide in vote share from the 2006 poll will likely intensify pressure on leaders to fine-tune economic policies to make growth more inclusive, including more social-welfare schemes to redistribute wealth, which economists say could slow growth in the years ahead. 

"In terms of promoting economic growth and making sure that every Singaporean benefits from growth, I think that's fundamental. I don't think that will change," Prime Minister Lee said. "How exactly you go about doing that, where you calibrate the balance and the trade-off...that we will continue to study." 

The PAP is credited with creating a financial dynamo on the small, resource-poor island of 5.1 million people, but critics say Singapore's economic success hasn't benefited many middle- and lower-income residents, and comes at the expense of individual liberty, with stifling controls on freedom of speech and assembly. 

Singapore's economy grew 14.5% last year, the fastest since independence. It is expected to grow 4% to 6% this year, but inflation is eroding that growth. Consumer prices in March rose 5% from a year earlier, staying near a two-year high touched in January. 

"Growing concerns over the social ramifications of the widening income gap may moderate future growth rates if the electorate chooses a growth path that is slower but 'more inclusive,'" Patrick Yau, an analyst at Citigroup, said in a note before the vote. 

Markets are unlikely to react much to the poll results, although the property sector may be weighed as investors worry about further government action to temper high housing prices. 

Daiwa Capital Markets analyst Mun Hon Tham wrote before the election that whatever the electoral swing, the brokerage was keeping a neutral weighting on Singapore shares. "That said, over the short term, the proposed measures by the various political parties are likely to weigh on the share prices of the property developers, especially those most exposed to the mid- to mass-market private residential segments." 

The vote drew attention elsewhere in Asia, where several other governments hold elections with weaker oppositions than is common in the West. Lee Kuan Yew has argued that Western-style democracy isn't appropriate for every country, and many Asian political theorists have looked upon Singapore as a template for maintaining single-party control over time. 

Nonetheless, the poll marks a step forward for Singapore's opposition parties, which recruited a much improved slate of candidates, including former senior civil servants and high-achieving private-sector professionals. 

Among them, the candidacy of corporate lawyer Chen Show Mao of the Workers' Party--the Harvard, Oxford and Stanford alumnus has advised on some of the world's largest initial public offerings--helped blunt the government's perennial claims that the opposition isn't competent to lead. Chen was elected as an opposition lawmaker as part of Low's team. 

For its part, the PAP stressed the poll's significance as part of its leadership renewal process, and fielded 24 new candidates, including Heng Swee Keat, former managing director of the country's central bank, and former army chief Chan Chun Sing. 

Prime Minister Lee also said that the opposition will be offered three "nonconstituency" seats to bring the total number of opposition lawmakers to nine. However, "nonconstituency" members have limited voting rights, and analysts have discounted their significance in Parliament.

 Write to  Chun Han Wong at chunhan.wong@dowjones.com and P.R. Venkat at venkat.pr@dowjones.com 