 Boston 

Paul Hindemith's youthful opera "Cardillac" (1926) was written to shock rather than please, and Opera Boston's recent production of this rarely heard piece stayed true to that ambition. It was updated by director Nic Muni to the "near future" from the 17th century; its chorus was scantily clad by Gabriel Berry in lederhosen, corsets, cone bras and what looked like glittery plastic wrap; and two characters gave their all to an explicit sex scene. Perhaps the most shocking aspect, however, was the innate chilliness of the piece. Listening to Hindemith's deft weaving together of disparate musical materials ranging from screeching Expressionism to conservative choral laments, skillfully led by conductor Gil Rose, you were never entirely sure if the composer was sincere or having you on. 

Ferdinand Lion's libretto, based on a macabre story by E.T.A. Hoffmann, is about a famous Paris goldsmith, Cardillac, who is so obsessed with his creations that he murders their purchasers in order to get them back. The populace is terrified by the unknown serial killer and by his association with the artist they worship; the government even creates a "Burning Chamber" to torture suspects into confession. Cardillac's Daughter (she is given no other name) and the Officer with whom she plans to elope discover the truth. But although Cardillac cares only for his jewels and nothing for the Daughter, she and her fiancé protect him, and deliver an innocent man, the Gold Merchant, to the authorities. Cardillac boasts that he alone knows the true identity of the murderer, and when the crowd threatens to destroy his work, he confesses, and the crowd kills him. 

Mr. Rose shaped "Cardillac" into a relentless, intermission-free 95 minutes, effectively carrying the audience along with the piece's dramatic shifts in tone: the flute duet for the breathlessly erotic scene of the Lady and the Cavalier, who are aroused by the confluence of luxury and murder; the insinuating saxophone that accompanies Cardillac's outbursts; the violent, clashing sounds for the torture of the Gold Merchant; and the delicate, neoclassical violin and woodwind orchestration of the Daughter's avowal of devotion to the unloving Cardillac. One may think that the Daughter is a sympathetic character, but what are we to make of the finale in which she leads the chorus in an impassioned tonal salute to her murdered father, justifying his crimes in the name of devotion to art? The moral compass of this opera is deliberately hard to gauge.

Mr. Muni made the most of its uncertainties. Erhard Rohm's set suggested an ultramodern art gallery, with one exposed brick wall and Cardillac's creations glowing out of jagged, iceberg-like display cases. (Christopher Ostrom did the lighting.) The choristers, with exaggerated hairdos and makeup complementing Ms. Berry's outlandish outfits, seemed like the richest and trendiest consumers of avant-garde luxury objects. When Cardillac confesses his crimes, bodies sheathed in plastic descend head-downward from the flies, looking like a giant spider's captured prey (the immediate resonance was Shelob's Lair, from the "The Lord of the Rings"). 

It was fascinating to hear Sanford Sylvan, who in the past has brought intense, poignant feeling to such characters as Chou En-Lai in John Adams's "Nixon in China," carry off the fierce one-dimensionality of Cardillac. With corpse-hued makeup, a severe expression, and a hard edge to his usually mellifluous baritone, Mr. Sylvan made Cardillac a monster with no redeeming qualities other than his artistic talent. Sol Kim Bentley brought a bright, penetrating soprano to the role of the Daughter, and in the final scene she narrowed her sound to a straight tone that sounded like a boy treble's, making the scene's weird religious resonances even weirder. Janna Baty's lush mezzo and Frank Kelley's edgy tenor pungently created the chemistry of the Lady and the Cavalier. Tenor Steven Sanders was powerful as the Officer, and David Kravitz captured both the imperiousness of the Provost Marshall and the hesitating terror of the Gold Merchant. The chorus acquitted itself admirably in difficult music, though the choristers could have used more specific stage business to match their costumes. If you're going to do decadence, best to go all the way. 

 Ms. Waleson writes about opera for the Journal.  