SAN'A, Yemen—Yemeni President Ali Abdullah Saleh refused to give in to a towering array of opponents demanding he quit to make way for a military-backed democratic transition, and tried to salvage his 32-year rule through negotiations.

Talks between the controversial U.S. ally, Saudi Arabia and Maj. Gen. Ali Mohsen al-Ahmar—a top commander who abandoned the president Monday—haven't yet yielded a clear transition of power. 

As of late Tuesday, the political process had kept military conflict at bay. Tanks commanded by units loyal to Mr. Saleh and others by forces loyal to Gen. Ahmar took up positions outside the presidential palace and near sensitive government buildings, according to residents. 

Mr. Saleh's repeated his offers to step down by the end of the year, his spokesman said, a move immediately rejected by the umbrella group of opposition political parties that have been pushing for political reforms for months. 

Monday's military defections left Mr. Saleh only with the loyalty of elite forces commanded by his son and nephews, many of them trained and equipped by the U.S. to fight terrorism.

That put the U.S. in the uncomfortable position of seeing U.S.-trained forces loyal to a controversial ally face off against troops on the side of a pro-democracy movement. 

U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates on Tuesday declined to say whether the U.S. continued to support Mr. Saleh or whether it believed it was time for him to step down as president. 

Opposition and government officials said Saudi Arabia, the president's longtime benefactor and giant neighbor to the north, was weighing what political solution would be best for its own national interests. Saudi officials couldn't be reached to comment.

Track events day by day.

America and Saudis have watched with alarm in recent years as Yemen, under President Saleh, has devolved into a failed state with shrinking oil revenues, an exploding population and conflicts with secessionists in the south, rebels in the north and an al Qaeda affiliate in the rugged tribal regions.

U.S. officials said that it appeared Mr. Saleh faced an increasingly uphill fight to remain in power and that Washington was growing increasingly alarmed by the diversion of attention from the fight against Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, as the Yemeni-based group is known.

"Instability and diversion of attention from dealing with AQAP is certainly my primary concern about the situation," Mr. Gates said. 

U.S. officials usually work most closely on counterterrorism with Mr. Saleh's son Ahmad Abdullah Saleh, the commander of the Republican Guard, and nephew Yahya, who heads the internal security force.

U.S. officials said the Pentagon has had limited contact with Gen. Ahmar, commander of Yemen's northwestern military district, and that Gen. Ahmar's forces haven't been recipients of direct U.S. counterterrorism funding or training.

For years, Washington has encouraged Mr. Saleh to loosen the reins and adopt democratic reforms, while the U.S. has spent tens of millions of dollars to train his forces to aid in counterterrorism operations. 

But ahead of the current crisis, multiple rounds of political negotiations between the president and opposition had dissolved without agreement amid mutual acrimony and allegations that the president was insincere in sharing power.

Opposition to Mr. Saleh has swelled in reaction to a bloody crackdown by security forces against unarmed protesters Friday. Gunmen, whom the opposition alleges were soldiers from units commanded by President Saleh's son opened fire into the crowd, killing dozens of people. President Saleh said a special investigation would look into the killings, and a number of arrests have been made.

By late Tuesday, Saudi and Yemeni tribal leaders had joined political negotiations, according to people familiar with the situation. The threat of military conflict remained a possibility, they said.

With the opposition in a stronger bartering position in the wake of the defections of key military leaders, religious figures and tribal elders, opposition leaders said they would accept nothing short of Mr. Saleh's immediate resignation. 

An umbrella group of opposition parties said Gen. Ahmar on Tuesday had delivered their demands to Mr. Saleh: that he step down immediately in favor of a transitional governing council, which could preserve stability while ushering in political reforms. 

Mr. Saleh, however, was lobbying his allies in Saudi Arabia to support his bid to stay in power for the rest of the year, allowing him time to oversee a political transition, said people familiar with the situation.

Mr. Saleh, in a televised speech, said Gen. Ahmar's actions were nothing but a selfish power grab. 

Yemen's umbrella group of political opposition parties, called the Joint Meeting Parties, says it wouldn't accept a military leader taking over as that would threaten the group's democratic goals and usher in more instability.

"Military commanders will not steal the revolution from the people," said Mohammed Qahtan, the JMP spokesperson.

—Matthew Rosenberg  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Margaret Coker at margaret.coker@wsj.com 