While India's national savings rate of 35% is healthy, changing dynamics at the individual and corporate levels are likely to pull down this rate over the next decade.

What the nation needs are plans and programs to woo youngsters, and create a new generation of savers.

A high savings rate, assuming it can be channeled, provides investment capital. It eases pressure on fiscal deficit, and reduces dependence on fickle foreign capital. In other words, in capital-starved economies such as India, a high savings rate can propel a virtuous cycle of higher growth, higher income and higher savings.

Right now, India's gross domestic savings rate compares favorably with developed economies like the U.K. and the U.S., and most developing economies except for some notable exceptions like China (50%) and Malaysia (40%).

History, however, has shown that as economies develop the savings rate normally drops as people prefer consuming to saving. Some economists worry that the Indian economy's rapid growth trajectory could trigger a similar pattern. 

This hasn't happened yet.

In the last decade, India's saving rate rose to 35% from 25%, according to data from the Ministry of Finance and Central Statistical Organization.

While household savings rate stayed flat at around 10% over the decade, household physical savings rate, which includes the purchase of a home or investment in gold, went up marginally to 12% from 10%.

What really pulled the overall savings rate up was private sector savings that doubled to 9% from 4.5%. Public sector savings swung to 4% from negative 1%. 

A buoyant economy made companies more efficient and profitable, enabling them gain incremental savings.

But, with inflationary trends and margin pressures on the rise, it is unlikely that private and public sectors can ramp up savings by much more. Households, therefore, will assume a critical role in maintaining the overall savings rate. 

However, the changing demographic profile is more likely to impact the savings pattern adversely.

The current generation joining the workforce belongs to a post-liberalized economy, and is different from their parents. They have enjoyed the benefits of liberalization and have not experienced the painful lessons of a recession. (While the reverberations of the 2008 global financial crisis were felt in India, it was too short and muted.)

Driven by high aspirations and a consumer lifestyle, today's youth is unlikely to save for the future unless there are appropriate products wooing them, aggressively. 

Given India's need for large amounts of capital, the government wants to maintain a high household savings rate. In addition to fiscal incentives, which have been used effectively in the past, the market is clearly ripe for new products and greater financial intermediation.