Twice a week, Wall Street executive Robert H. Lessin takes a meeting with his most important clients. But he's not making deals. He's doing what he enjoys most—teaching middle-school students.

Mr. Lessin, a 56-year-old vice chairman of Jefferies & Co., a New York-based investment bank, has for five years taught elective classes in current events and economics at De La Salle Academy on the Upper West Side and at George Jackson Academy in the East Village.

The affiliated schools are nonsectarian, private academies that teach gifted students from lower-income families.

"It's my greatest joy," says Mr. Lessin. The classes leave him "ecstatic," he says, "which I can't always say about the business world."

Beyond the teaching, Mr. Lessin has contributed more than $300,000, has raised more than $500,000 and donates proceeds from his book, "Lessin's Lessons," a 97-page primer on life and Wall Street, to George Jackson Academy.

The school, founded in 2003 and named for a late Motown Records executive, teaches fourth- to eighth-grade boys. More than a third of the 130 George Jackson students come from families on public assistance or with an annual income of less than $25,000. The majority of them live in the South Bronx. 

The education costs about $15,000 and, on average, families pay $100 a month. The school operates on about $2 million a year.

Mr. Lessin says that the young men he teaches are "way smarter" than him. The young men think Mr. Lessin is a "rock star," says David Arnold, head of George Jackson.

On Wednesday, Mr. Lessin walked his students through the week's main topics: Libya, the national debt, unemployment, gas prices and Donald Trump's possibility as a presidential candidate.

"Who do you think Donald Trump's biggest supporter is?" asks Mr. Lessin, smiling. 

It's a trick question, but the young men consider it and throw out four or five names before one gets it right.

"Obama! Thank you," says Mr. Lessin, becoming animated and getting the room to laugh. "Of course Obama wants him to win. He loves it. He's saying, 'Go Donald Trump,' because that's how he'll win the election."

At a minimum, Mr. Lessin teaches the cause and effect of world events and how to think critically. But he's also passing on lessons on how to banter, and be witty and skeptical.

Mr. Lessin, who has more than 30 years experience in investment banking, decided that teaching was the way to give back for his "privileged life."

He initially thought he'd find a gig teaching undergraduates, but a friend encouraged him to try teaching middle-school. He was reluctant, at first, but says he wouldn't trade the experience. "They are without agenda, without selfishness," says Mr. Lessin. "They just want to learn."

 Write to  Melanie Grayce West at melanie.west@wsj.com 