MUMBAI -- India's state-run oil companies raised gasoline prices by about 5 rupees (11 U.S. cents) per liter effective Sunday, soon after the ruling Congress party and its allies won elections in three out of five states.

Congress ally the All India Trinamool Congress party defeated a coalition led by the Communist Party of India (Marxist), a Left Front alliance, ending about three-and-a-half decades of Communist rule in the state of West Bengal.

Congress and its allies also won in the states of Assam and Kerala.

Although gasoline prices are no longer government controlled, analysts say the government had informally asked oil companies to hold back price increases in the wake of the elections because of their impact on inflation.

This is also the first increase in gasoline prices since January and is expected to help the oil companies trim revenue losses that have been widening due to rising crude prices.

The gasoline price hike is effective from midnight and is against under-recoveries of 10 rupees per liter, a senior company executive at one of the oil companies said Saturday.

"Gasoline prices have been deregulated on paper but government-owned companies continue to sell gasoline below market prices," Kotak Institutional Equities said in a note earlier this month.

The latest 5 rupees a liter increase too falls short of the losses incurred on gasoline sales.

"Against a desired price of 10.50 rupees per liter in petrol, Indian Oil Corp. Ltd. has effected a reduced price increase of only INR5," the company said, adding that "the increase is only moderate keeping the consumers' interest in view."

Gasoline will now be priced at 63.37 rupees a liter in the capital of New Delhi, compared to 58.37 rupees earlier.

A ministerial panel is expected to meet in the coming week to consider raising diesel and cooking fuel prices too as the government seeks to help retailers trim losses and cut fiscal deficit.

The government lifted state-control over gasoline prices in June last year when it also raised prices of diesel and cooking fuels. Since then the price of the Indian basket of crude has risen to $121.90 a barrel as of April 28 from an average of $73.54 a barrel in June last year.

Global crude prices have surged to their highest in two and a half years.

State oil companies Indian Oil, Bharat Petroleum Corp. and Hindustan Petroleum Corp. are not subsidized by the government for gasoline sales but are partly compensated for discounted fuel sales of other fuels like diesel and cooking gas.

According to government data, state oil retailers are losing 16.17 rupees a liter on diesel sales, 28.28 rupees a liter on kerosene and 329.73 rupees per cooking gas cylinder. The retailers' daily revenue losses on discounted sales is INR4.95 billion.

Diesel, cooking gas and gasoline are the most heavily consumed oil products driven by increasing vehicle sales, rising need for transportation, rising income levels and rapid urbanization.

 Write to  Eric Yep at eric.yep@dowjones.com and Rakesh Sharma at rakesh.sharma@dowjones.com 