Pakistan's spy agency is facing unprecedented public condemnation for its failure to catch Osama bin Laden or anticipate the U.S. raid that killed him, putting its influential and powerful chief, Lt. Gen.  Shuja Ahmad Pasha, under pressure to take responsibility for the lapses amid calls for his resignation.

There was confusion within Pakistan about Gen. Pasha's whereabouts Saturday. One senior Pakistani security official said Gen. Pasha had left for Washington Friday night to meet with senior U.S. officials. But a military spokesman denied that Gen. Pasha was in Washington and said he would not resign. "There is no truth to the report that Gen. Pasha is resigning or is visiting Washington," the spokesman said.

For Pakistan, the critical focus on the Inter-Services Intelligence, the nation's top spy agency, represents a dramatic shift that underscores the deep crisis in national confidence brought on by the American raid. 

"Someone at the top must resign and some heads must roll," parliamentary opposition leader  Chaudhry Nisar Ali Khan said Thursday.

Pakistan's government has said it plans to launch an investigation into intelligence failures surrounding bin Laden's discovery by the U.S. and killing by U.S. Navy SEALs.

An ISI spokesman couldn't be reached to comment Friday evening.

The ISI has for decades held an almost mythical status in the Pakistani imagination as the hidden power behind events big and small, a force that both protects and persecutes. Many Pakistanis often won't even refer to it by name in casual conversation, preferring to talk simply of "the agencies."

The chief of the ISI, which is technically part of the military, is one of the most powerful people in Pakistan, a country where the military remains the dominant power broker, despite the democratically elected government.

In Gen. Pasha's case, his influence has been magnified by his role at the vanguard of Pakistan's fight against Islamist militancy and as a key interlocutor with Pakistan's American allies.

After Gen. Pasha took the helm of the ISI in 2008, the agency expanded its relationship with the Central Intelligence Agency, increasing cooperation on an American campaign of drone strikes against militant targets in Pakistan, an unpopular move even among some elements of the Pakistani military.

Yet Gen. Pasha has also shown a willingness to stand up to American pressure; the ISI, for example, is now scaling back its cooperation with CIA drone strikes because the tempo of attacks—and the death toll from them—has risen to what Pakistan's military brass considers unacceptable levels.

Gen. Pasha also has faced a barrage of criticism from U.S. officials, who now openly accuse the ISI of aiding elements of the Afghan insurgency and other militant groups that are focused on India, Pakistan's rival. Some U.S. officials say they believe elements of the ISI may also have aided bin Laden, though they acknowledge that they lack evidence and are now investigating.

The ISI denies giving any help to bin Laden or al Qaeda, pointing out that al Qaeda attacked Pakistani targets, too.

Yet Gen. Pasha's position may not be secure enough to weather the tempest. Pakistan has criticized the raid as an invasion of its sovereignty, but also admitted to embarrassment that bin Laden had been hiding in a garrison town for years.

In a further humiliation, the U.S. didn't share information about the raid with Pakistani security officials until after it was over. Pakistan has been forced to defend its response to the arrival of a foreign military by noting that it scrambled two fighter jets, but by the time they were in the air, the Americans were across the border in Afghanistan with bin Laden's corpse.

More important to Gen. Pasha's fate than public anger is the frustration among the military's influential top generals, known as the corps commanders, who met with Gen. Pasha and his boss, military chief Gen.  Ashfaq Kayani, on Thursday.

A senior U.S. defense official who is familiar with the Pakistani military, said, "the corps commanders were angry, they were asking, 'Was anyone aware this was going to happen?' "

The senior generals who serve as corps commanders have long been enormously influential, especially in times of political turmoil.

Some U.S. officials believe the senior generals were looking for a "scapegoat" to blame, both for not knowing about the U.S. incursion and for not detecting the presence of bin Laden.