Ken Griffin, the chief executive of Citadel in Chicago, has bought an oceanfront home at the Four Seasons' Hualalai resort in Hawaii for just under $17 million.

The seller was originally asking $20.5 million in August for the 0.6-acre property, which Mr. Griffin bought in a limited-liability company. There's a 5,600-square-foot, Balinese-style home with four bedrooms; some bedroom walls open up to the outside. There's a lanai and a gazebo, plus an infinity pool. Mr. Griffin, 42, paid $11.38 million in 2009 for about four acres elsewhere in the resort. A spokeswoman for Mr. Griffin declined to comment.

  Edward Rapoza of Island Land Company and  Brandon Wood of Pacific Resort Realty shared the listing, according to records, and  Robert Kildow of Hualalai Realty represented Mr. Griffin. 

  Daniel E. Straus is asking $38 million for a five-story townhouse on the Upper East Side being used as an office building by the Whitney Museum of American Art.

Mr. Straus, who is in the senior healthcare business in New Jersey and is a trustee of the New York University School of Law, bought the townhouse, along with seven other buildings owned by the Whitney, in 2010 for $95 million. The brick-and-limestone mansion measures about 12,600 square feet and is being sold as a future private residence. It was designed in 1901 by Grosvenor Atterbury and has a terrace with Central Park views on the fifth floor.

Mr. Straus has indicated in the past he planned commercial and residential uses for the buildings; a spokeswoman declined to comment on why he was selling the building.  Paula Del Nunzio of Brown Harris Stevens, a Christie's International Real Estate affiliate, has the listing.

Kluge Estate Winery, the roughly 900-acre winery in Charlottesville, Va. that formerly belonged to Patricia Kluge, an ex-wife of Metromedia founder  John Kluge, is scheduled for an April 7 absolute auction, meaning no minimum bid is required.

The seller, though a limited-liability company, is Farm Credit Bank, which bought the winery in a foreclosure auction in late 2010 for $19 million. The winery, located in the foothills of the Blue Ridge Mountains, will be auctioned off in six tracts by J. P. King. The winery is planted with roughly 164 acres of grapes and has additional, plant-able acreage. Structures include a production-and-bottling facility, an underground cave, a shop and tasting room and seven cottages

A representative for Bank of America said it plans to have listed another property previously owned by Ms. Kluge, a 300-acre estate with a 43,500-square-foot mansion, in the near future.

—Juliet Chung

—Email: privateproperties@wsj.com 