Most companies and promoters tend to be focused on valuation. In their single-minded pursuit of getting the highest number possible, the risk-reward equation often is not given the attention it deserves.

Now that private equity has become an integral source of financing for Indian companies, companies that contemplate tapping this fund pool should understand and evaluate the risks and rewards of such financing.

In 2010, Indian companies raised nearly $6.2 billion from private equity investors with an average deal size of $25 million, according to data from Grant Thornton India. There are over 500 private equity funds active in India and the number is increasing by the day.

Equity is essentially risk capital. Unlike lenders who have a prior claim on capital and earn a fixed return, equity holders take the maximum risk and in lieu of that get the maximum reward. Private equity by definition is long-term equity capital which is availed by companies before they reach the scale and operations that allow them to access public capital markets. 

However, in India, most private equity deals really are not equity but structured debt deals wherein the fund agrees to buy equity at a pre-agreed valuation number with the caveat that the promoter or owner of company will ensure the fund a certain minimum internal rate of return. 

While there is nothing wrong in doing a structured deal per se, companies should be conscious that such a structure provides only capital and does not perform the all important function of distributing risk. 

In a structured deal, if the business fails, the investor is still entitled to his fixed return but if the business performs, the investor is entitled to his share of the returns. In other words, while the equity is distributed between the promoters and the fund, the entire risk vests with the promoter. 

The reason for this is simple. With increasing competition, funds struggle to find and close attractive deals, and, with owners focused on achieving the highest valuation, private equity funds that do not quote an attractive valuation number find themselves out of the equity sale process. 

So, it is far easier for funds to give an attractive headline valuation to strike a deal and then put in a lot of caveats to protect their interests. With a structure that offers downside protection, funds can be more relaxed in giving a higher valuation number than they would if it was a pure equity deal without any backstops. In the latter, since the fund is fully exposed, it will be more conservative in its assumptions and assign a lower value to the same business. 

While this may appear unfair, much of the blame lies with companies. 

In a number of instances, when given a choice between a pure equity deal where risk and reward are shared and a structured deal with backstop guarantees that offers a 20% higher valuation number, companies have chosen the latter despite advise to the contrary.

The risk-reward equation is an axiom that companies cannot afford to forget or wish away. Those that do will find themselves caught between the proverbial devil and the deep sea when the going gets tough.