Think the axis of American ingenuity lies squarely in sun-drenched California? Think again. And direct your gaze at an unremarkable corporate park in the icy reaches of Minnesota.

This is the home of  3M,
MMM


-0.06
%




 and people around the world interact daily with its products -- from Scotch tape to Scotchgard to Post-it notes.

On any given day, you can find 3M's inventors working on such products as ultra-skinny panels for solar cells or anti-microbial touch screens that let your fingers dodge co-workers' germs. Yet 3M's stock (MMM) lagged the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index last year as investors shunned mega-capitalization stocks.

That's about to change.

Shares of 3M, formerly Minnesota Mining & Manufacturing, are entering a sweet spot, thanks to a blizzard of new products and the rising popularity of the company's wares outside the U.S. Over the next several years, 3M brass say, sustainable top-line growth will double, to 7% to 8% a year. That's good news for earnings.

The main hand behind 3M's revival is that of CEO  George Buckley, who took the helm in 2005. Even in the Great Recession, he pushed to boost sales abroad and broaden 3M's product lines, without stanching its lifeblood -- research and development.

The holder of 16 patents himself, Mr. Buckley was an excellent candidate to head a company whose stock in trade is innovation. The results include ultra-thin solar panels that weigh much less and are cheaper to make than their glass counterparts.

Meanwhile, the push into emerging markets was a key reason earnings, sales and cash flow all hit records last year.

To savvy investors, 3M shares look tremendously appealing.  Bruce Geller, chief executive of  Dalton, Greiner, Hartman, Maher & Co.
BPFH


0.15
%




, a value-oriented shop in New York, and the manager of DGHM All Cap Value Fund, thinks 3M is worth $115 to $120 a share, up from a current $91 and change.

"It's one of the most innovative industrials around," Mr. Geller says. "Its margins and ROA [return on assets] are second to nobody's."

One caveat: Mr. Buckley, at 64 years old, is nearing 3M's mandatory retirement age. But the company has a deep bench and doesn't look like it will run out of ideas any time soon.

—For more stories, see barrons.com.