The rich are different than other home buyers, both in the Hamptons and in the most affluent neighborhoods on Long Island's north shore, market reports show. 

A recovery in sales of the most expensive Long Island properties pushed up median and average prices last year, as well-compensated Wall Street executives regained confidence, according to the reports. At the same time. prices continued to sink in less affluent neighborhoods across Long Island.

A report by Prudential Douglas Elliman found that the number of sales in the Hamptons were up 45% in 2010, compared with dismal sales in 2009 when sales fell to the lowest level in a decade.

The median price on a home in the Hamptons rose to $906,000 in 2010, an increase of nearly 10% and the second highest annual figure on record, according to Elliman. The average Hamptons home sold last year went for $1.66 million.

But analysts cautioned that the blip in median sales prices could be largely attributed to a change in the mix of properties that sold last year. 

Sales of the most expensive properties increased, as wealthy buyers regained their appetite for expensive summer homes, analysts said, while sales of lower priced properties fell in the second half of the year following the expiration of federal housing tax credits. 

"In the Hamptons you are seeing higher priced properties at much lower prices," said  Dottie Herman, president of Prudential Douglas Elliman. "People who were priced out of the market are now trying to get back in."

  Rick Hoffman, who oversees sales at Corcoran Group on the east end of Long Island, said there was more buyer confidence in the Hamptons, though prices remain subdued and inventory is above the level of a year ago,

He noted that 26 listings by brokers in the Hamptons sold for more than $10 million last year, compared with only 13 the year before.

The highest price sale of the year was the $43.5 million purchase by  David Tepper, the hedge-fund manager, of a 6,200-square-foot house on a dune overlooking the ocean in Sagaponack. 

The seller was  Joanne Corzine, the former wife of  Jon Corzine, the former New Jersey governor and senator.

This was followed by the $32.5 million sale of an estate on Ox Pasture Road in Southampton that had been owned by late  Howard Gittis, a close adviser to the financier  Ronald Perelman. The estate was sold off in two separate parcels.

In the rest of Long Island, the Elliman report found that in the 4th quarter of 2010 sales were off 28.4% from the same quarter a year earlier. The median price, $356,050, was down 1.4%. 

  Jonathan Miller, an appraiser and president of Miller Samuel Inc., who prepared the Elliman market reports, found that median prices were up only in the most expensive markets. He cited the affluent North Shore of Nassau County, an area with a short compute to Manhattan, and closely linked with Wall Street. 

The median price on the North Shore was up 15.2% from the same period a year earlier.

He said that he expected the market had now worked through much of the effects of the tax credits and was likely to see less volatility in sales and prices in the months ahead and "perhaps more disparity between the high end and low end of the market."

  Gregory J. Heym, an economist who prepared a market report for Brown Harris Stevens, said that he expected the market in the east end to strengthen with an improving economic outlook, and an increase in hiring in the financial sector.

But  Paul Brennan, the Hamptons regional manager for Prudential Douglas Elliman, was more cautious. He said than some sellers worried about increasing tax rates rushed to complete sales before the end of last year. 

Now he said activity had slowed a bit, even though the peak sales season in the Hamptons runs from January through Memorial Day. "I don't think that everyone is in a rush to buy," he said. "But if there is a good deal, there is money to buy it."