As the world focuses on the killing of Osama bin Laden, dissident Republicans in Northern Ireland—an older terrorist threat—are trying to emerge from the shadows by raising money in the U.S., security officials and a dissident group say. 

These people say the small dissident groups—which go by names including the Real IRA, Continuity IRA and Oglaigh na hEireann—have held private fund-raisers in New York, Boston, Chicago and other cities even though they are explicitly banned from raising money in the U.S. 

The dissident groups have been "rattling tins in [U.S.] bars," a security official said. 

The effort comes at a time when the dissidents have signaled their intent to carry out violent attacks in both the mainland U.K. and Northern Ireland as part of their long struggle to unite with the Republic of Ireland.

 Security officials are concerned the dissidents may try to launch attacks in Northern Ireland around local elections on Thursday, which is also the 30th anniversary of the death of Bobby Sands, a member of the Irish Republican Army who died while on a hunger strike in jail.

 U.K. officials say the groups, which splintered from the IRA, have become more dangerous as they develop bomb-making skills and as they have been more active over the past two years. 

Last month, a Catholic policeman was killed in a car bombing, by suspected dissidents, the first such killing in Northern Ireland since 2009, when two British soldiers and another policeman where killed. In April, dissident groups threatened to kill more police. Officials say other attempts to target the police and other symbols of what dissidents consider to be British power have failed, mainly due to devices that haven't exploded. 

"As their confidence grows, it makes perfect sense for the dissidents to try and raise funds from the U.S., a traditional bastion for hard-line Irish Republicanism," said Martyn Frampton, an expert on Irish dissident terrorism at Queen Mary, University of London.

The U.S. fund-raising efforts haven't so far achieved much success because the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks have led to a widespread revulsion against any terrorist activity in the U.S. 

The U.S. was also a major backer of the 1998 Good Friday peace accord that mostly ended the Protestant-Catholic strife that had defined Northern Ireland for three decades starting in the late 1960s. 

That period, known as "the Troubles," was fought between a Protestant majority that wished to remain a part of the U.K. and Catholic Republicans who sought union with the Republic of Ireland. Nationalist IRA and Loyalist paramilitaries agreed to lay down their weapons in 2005.

However, some dissident nationalist groups have continued to fight. Their membership is small and the threat is splintered across several groups with little backing in traditional nationalist communities, which reject the dissidents' tactics.

The political wings of these dissident groups have failed to win votes at elections. Around 95% of the Catholic community voted for the Good Friday agreement in a 1998 referendum that paved the way to peace, nationalist leaders point out.

Still, during the height of the Troubles the IRA never had big backing in the Republican community but still managed to maintain a deadly and long campaign of violence, Dr. Frampton said.

Meanwhile, the dissident groups have again begun looking to the U.S., which was once a fertile IRA fund-raising target. 

Such efforts are often conducted through political groups in Northern Ireland that security experts say are connected to the IRA splinter groups.

One group, Republican Sinn Fein, acknowledges holding fund-raisers in the U.S. 

"Well of course we would always try and raise money from" the U.S., said Geraldine Taylor, the vice president of Republican Sinn Fein, a movement that split from the mainstream Sinn Fein, the longtime political arm of IRA, in the 1980s. 

Recently, Ms. Taylor said, she attended a fund-raising "testimonial" lunch held for her and other dissidents in a Manhattan restaurant. Ms. Taylor declined to comment on claims by U.K. and U.S. security officials that Republican Sinn Fein is the political arm of the Continuity IRA. 

The U.S. Treasury lists Republican Sinn Fein as an a.k.a. for Continuity IRA on its "specially designated nationals list." This means both are banned from using the U.S. financial system or fund-raising in the U.S. A Treasury spokeswoman didn't address the fundraisers, but pointed to the agency's past sanctions against the Irish Republican groups.

 Ms. Taylor acknowledges her group is banned from U.S. fund-raising but said the thousands of dollars it has raised in U.S. events don't go directly to the Continuity IRA, but to imprisoned relatives of its members. "We hope to crank up the fund-raising in America," she said.

—Evan Perez in Washington contributed to this article.

 Write to  Alistair MacDonald at alistair.macdonald@wsj.com 