The news this week that  Goldman Sachs
GS


0.97
%




 was privately offering a minority stake in Facebook to new investors—and that Facebook would become a public company by early next year—has set off a buying frenzy, even among people who can't tell "LOL" from a Roman numeral.

If you've been left out, don't fret. Expectations are already so high that most of the future gain already may be gone.

Less than seven years after its launch in a dormitory room at Harvard University, Facebook is already booming past $2 billion in annual revenues, reports suggest—nearly triple its sales from the year before. 

Yet to keep growing at anything like that pace, Facebook needs more capital. Employees and investors, meanwhile, also want to turn some shares into cash, say people familiar with the company. Under Securities and Exchange Commission rules, all companies with 500 or more holders of any class of stock are required to register with the SEC, triggering detailed financial disclosures. According to a filing Facebook made with the SEC in 2008, even its terminated employees can retain their restricted stock, so it was inevitable that the company would breach the 500-investor threshold.

So Facebook's best option for selling equity and remaining private was to tap into the kind of wealthy investor network that Goldman can provide. By offering shares to its most favored clients and forcing them to commit or decline in less than a week, Goldman made investing in Facebook seem like a precious privilege. The remarkable price for Facebook's stock, reportedly around $50 billion, or some 25 times the company's revenues, has been set in a closed feedback loop rather than in an open market. Facebook and Goldman declined to comment.

Investors are buying more than hope, of course. With roughly 600 million users and closing in on $500 million in annual profit, Facebook looks unstoppable. 

Yet even with such a huge network, the company could falter. "Facebook is going to be extremely difficult to dethrone," says an industry veteran familiar with the company's operations. "But social trends online are completely unpredictable. If a new trend comes along that's really engaging to people and a different way of interacting, then Facebook could become the old way of social networking."

Even if Facebook continues to hit the mother lode of social-network profits, new investors could end up with little to show for it. In January 1875, during the Nevada silver rush, the price of Consolidated Virginia Mine hit $700 a share or a total value of $75.6 million (roughly $1.5 billion today). That was 15 times the company's revenues the year before, according to records compiled in 1883 by researcher Eliot Lord. Over the next four years, investors earned some $42 million in dividends—and, even so, the stock collapsed to $3 a share by the end of 1879. Investors who bought in on the ground floor in 1870, at $1 a share, tripled their money. Those who came later were wiped out, even though they owned a stake in an immensely profitable business.

The exceptions are obvious— Google with its own IPO in 2004, when the company sold stock at more than 10 times its revenues for the current year, or  Apple
AAPL


-0.04
%




 at its last peak in 2000 at more than 22 times its profits the year before. Today Apple is the world's second-largest stock by market value, and Google remains the unquestioned king of Internet search. 

But the exceptions also are incredibly rare. For every Google, there are hundreds of companies like eToys and Lycos; for every Apple, there are countless casualties like Thinking Machines or Network Computing Devices. 

Says  Ralph Wanger, the retired manager of the Acorn Fund, who has analyzed fast-growing companies for decades: "Starting from such a high valuation, Facebook would have to grow at least as successfully as any company in history has ever done to deliver even a market return."

  Jay Ritter, a University of Florida finance professor and an expert on initial public offerings, offers a simple way to think about valuing Facebook.

Let's say the company grows so fast over the next decade that it will match the size of the world's largest stock,  Exxon Mobil,
XOM


0.84
%




 whose shares this week had a total value of around $380 billion. So, if the company grew in total value from its current $50 billion to $380 billion over the next 10 years, Facebook's stock would generate an average annual return of 22.5%. "As a maximum upside," Prof. Ritter says, "that's not as rosy as I think some investors might hope." 

Facebook might someday end up as the world's largest company. But starting at the price already set for it, it isn't likely to end up as one of the world's best investments.

— intelligentinvestor@wsj.com; twitter.com/jasonzweigwsj 