 Melbourne, Australia 

Those of you who are looking for a respite from the hoary battlefields of the NFL playoffs, rest easy: the tennis season kicks into high gear Monday. 

The Australian Open may not be the most celebrated Grand Slam, but it's the clear leader in tantalizing and yet-unanswered questions. Here's our take on some of the juicier plotlines: 

 Are Rafael Nadal's injuries behind him? 

About this time last year, Mr. Nadal was writhing in pain on the court as a recurring knee injury forced him to retire from his Australian Open quarterfinal. The tennis world was a little premature to predict the end of his playing days, as Mr. Nadal proceeded to pull off the best season of his career. 

Perhaps the most overlooked of Mr. Nadal's qualities is his problem-solving ability. To manage his ailing knees, he decided to skip some events and resorted to blood spinning, a treatment used to speed up tendon recovery. The strategy has worked spectacularly, and in Melbourne Mr. Nadal will try to win his fourth consecutive Slam—a feat that hasn't been realized in men's tennis in more than 40 years. Mr. Nadal himself says winning all four Slams in the same calendar year  is impossible, but the rest of us might not be so quick to rule it out.

 What about Roger? 

By his own lofty standards, Roger Federer had an unsatisfying season last year. By the standards of every other sentient being who has followed his career, his strong finish is a sign he's liable to continue his end-of-year form into this season (as he's often done in the past). 

The Swiss No. 2 is keen on rewriting the tennis record books, particularly his own mark of 16 Grand Slam titles. Mr. Federer is also just one week shy of breaking Pete Sampras's record of 286 total weeks at No. 1. (Given Mr. Nadal's current form, that seems an uphill task). 

Paul Annacone, who joined the Federer camp last summer, says four additional Majors is a realistic goal. Tennis observers have long been clamoring for Mr. Federer to be more aggressive. With Mr. Annacone's guidance he has done just that, especially on his service returns. 

 Who are the other challengers on the men's side? 

As it's been for years, men's tennis is extremely top-heavy—two men dominate while everyone else fights for the crumbs. Of the last 20 Grand Slams contested, Mr. Nadal and Mr. Federer have won a combined 18. The ones that got away went to Novak Djokovic, the 2008 Australian Open champion, and Juan Martin del Potro, who won the 2009 U.S. Open. 

Mr. del Potro won his first match in nearly a year this week after a wrist injury hampered his 2010 season. But Mr. Federer said the No. 259-ranked Argentine could still vie for the No. 1 spot later in the year. More likely to strike early are Robin Soderling and Andy Murray, but Melbourne's draw ensures that only one of the two will progress past the quarterfinals here. 

 Is this the year of the Woz? 

If the current men's field is gushing with talent, the women's is anything but. Thanks to a solid second-half of the season, Caroline Wozniacki has emerged as the tour's leading player, even though she failed to reach a single Grand Slam final last year. The 20-year-old Dane may not have a big weapon, but she is consistent at a time when nobody else is. Ms. Wozniacki has had a worrying start to the season, though, after swapping her Babolat rackets for Yonex frames during the off-season. She has refused to blame recent losses on her equipment, but she may not have much more time to tweak. She faces a potential quarterfinal matchup here with 2010 runner-up Justine Henin.

 Is the women's ranking system legitimate? 

Former tennis great Ivan Lendl wasn't addressing Ms. Wozniacki's situation specifically, but he made his stance clear when he said during the draw Friday "if you don't win Majors and you're still No. 1 then there is something wrong with the rankings." 

If Ms. Wozniacki's case is grating to purists, most of the blame lies with her competition. Serena Williams won the Australian Open and Wimbledon but a foot injury has sidelined her since. Kim Clijsters won the U.S. Open but played too few tournaments to boost her ranking and the French Open winner, Francesca Schiavone, played unevenly all season.

 Write to  Nicolas Brulliard at nicolas.brulliard@dowjones.com 