As Hong Kong kicked off the new year with a slew of wine auctions last weekend, two questions loom large among Asian buyers: Where exactly have all the bottles come from? And how have they been stored?

"There's so much wine traveling around auction houses, and retailers don't always tell you the history," says Henning Thoresen, chairman of Bordeaux Winebank. "The risk is you spend 10,000 Hong Kong dollars (US$1,286) on a bottle that is spoilt.

As bottles are moved to Asia, stored by successive owners, subjected to different temperatures and sometimes even shaken by inexperienced handlers, the fragile wine inside can easily be damaged. Plus there's the growing worry of fakes as cheats seek to capitalize on the rising prices of fine wines.

After decades in the wine trade, Mr. Thoresen, a native of Norway, has patented and trademarked a proprietary system that he says can guarantee quality and authenticity. He showcased it at a Sotheby's sale of wines from Bordeaux Winebank's collection on Sunday. The company specializes in selling wine that has passed his "Five Star Provenance" system: They are sourced directly from the ch창teaux, have remained in professional storage in Bordeaux since bottling, and arrive in their original wooden cases with tamper-proof seals and accompanied by extensive documentation.

The Sotheby's Hong Kong sale pulled in $9 million. The most expensive lot was a "caisse prestige" that sold for $124,102 and featured 12 bottles of 2000 vintage from four top Bordeaux ch창teaus: Petrus, Latour, Margaux and Haut-Brion. 

As for the "Five Star Provenance" system,  Robert Sleigh, head of wine in Asia for Sotheby's, says it may drive demand for the Bordeaux Winebank wines in Asia.

Asia "is more of a novice market, so buyers want to be more careful and make sure they get it right," he says. "Whatever they're buying, whether it's shoes, clothes or anything else, they want to make sure it's the real thing."

 Wine with a guaranteed provenance can carry a premium in Asia, as seen at a Sotheby's Hong Kong sale last year: Three rare bottles of Lafite 1869, sourced from the ch창teau, sold for a record HK$1.8 million each, many times the top estimate.

Sellers and wine producers are joining the move to ensure authenticity and traceability of bottles for wealthy buyers. Ch창teau Margaux, which holds the top Bordeaux ranking of Premier Cru, recently outlined in Hong Kong its many built-in security devices, including unique numbers etched on each bottle, special ink in foil capsules and anticopy devices on labels.

Hong Kong was packed with other sales this weekend. The most-buzzed about sale was Sotheby's auction on Saturday of French wines owned by British composer Andrew Lloyd Webber, which hauled $5.6 million. Across town, auction house Acker Merrall & Condit sold $10.8 million over its two-day sale held Friday and Saturday. There, the most expensive lot was the sale of eight bottles of rare 1985 Henri Jayer Richebourg that went for $100,103.

 Write to  Jake Lee at jake.lee@wsj.com 