VATICAN CITY—Pope Benedict XVI beatified his predecessor, John Paul II, on Sunday before a crowd of 1.5 million to honor one of Roman Catholicism's most celebrated figures, in a ceremony that gave the controversy-laden Vatican a chance to bask in his legacy and popularity. 

Pope Benedict XVI moved through St. Peter's Square aboard a popemobile that cut through a sea of multicolored flags and banners carried by the faithful—a crowd that overflowed onto a thoroughfare that leads into the Vatican.

"The longed-for day has come. It came quickly because this is what was pleasing to the Lord: John Paul II is blessed," Pope Benedict proclaimed. 

The pontiff recalled how John Paul II's death in 2005 brought more than four million faithful to Rome and prompted chants of "Santo Subito!"—or Sainthood Now—at his funeral.

He also acknowledged the unusual speed of the Vatican's push to beatify John Paul, a process that was carried out in record time after Benedict XVI lifted the traditional five-year waiting period for sainthood candidacies, allowing the beatification process to begin weeks after his death.

"We perceived the fragrance of his sanctity, and in any number of ways God's people showed their veneration for him. For this reason, with all due respect for the Church's canonical norms, I wanted his cause of beatification to move forward with reasonable haste," Pope Benedict said.

To beatify John Paul II, Vatican officials confirmed the occurrence of one miracle attributed to the late pope's intercession: the recovery of Sister Marie-Simone-Pierre Normand, a French nun with the Little Sisters of the Catholic Motherhood, from a debilitating case of Parkinson's, the same disease that afflicted the late pope.

To be declared a saint, John Paul II needs one more miracle attributed to him and confirmed by Benedict XVI. Under Vatican rules, a second miracle is considered definitive proof that a candidate is in heaven—the very definition of sainthood—answering the prayers of the faithful. Pope Benedict would then be expected to formalize John Paul II's sainthood during a canonization ceremony.

Sister Marie-Simone-Pierre appeared healthy as she participated in the beatification ceremony Sunday, accompanying a vial of the late pope's blood through the square. John Paul II's coffin was later placed on display inside St. Peter's Basilica, where it will remain for public viewing until early Monday.

The Vatican is moving his tomb from the basilica's crypt—the traditional burial place of popes—to a more prominent location inside the basilica, adjacent to Michelangelo's statue, the Pietà.

In preparing for the beatification, Vatican officials and Catholic faithful have championed John Paul II as a figure who towered over the 20th century, globe-trotting to every corner of the Catholic map, meeting with world leaders and confronting dictatorships.

John Paul II's papacy has drawn criticism, however, among liberal Catholics who fault the pope for reinforcing conservative Church teachings, such as opposition to birth control and to women entering the priesthood. 

Those tensions resurfaced in the run-up to the beatification as critics questioned whether the Vatican's push to beatify John Paul II will discourage internal questioning of his legacy.

In the U.S., support groups for victims of sexual abuse by priests distributed leaflets outside churches over the weekend, highlighting what they consider the pope's sluggish response to a scandal that festered on his watch before exploding across the globe last year.

"Nothing can stop this callous PR juggernaut honoring the pope who presided over much of the ongoing crisis. But we can help redirect some people's energies into stopping child sex crimes and cover ups," said Barbara Blaine, president of the Survivors Network of those Abused by Priests.

In Rome, however, supporters of the pope shrugged off the criticism amid a highly festive mood that underscored the pope's role in reinvigorating Catholicism's global flock.

Banners hung from the oval colonnade that surrounds the square, recalling well-known moments in the pope's life, including a photo of his trips to Poland, where he stood up to the country's communist rulers, helping to usher in the fall of Soviet communism. 

Another banner showed the pope struck by a bullet during an assassination attempt in the square in 1981. (The pope later forgave his would-be assassin in a visit to his jail cell.)

"He did so many historic things, like ending communism … He was always in my life," said Christopher Strojny, a 25-year-old student who hitchhiked a 20-hour car ride to reach Rome from the Southern Polish town of Dobrodzien. "I don't understand the criticism really," he added.

Carl Anderson, supreme knight of the Catholic organization Knights of Columbus, based in New Haven, Conn., credited John Paul II with renewing the internal life of the church, which was racked by a crisis of vocations among priests and nuns when he took office in 1978. 

"Now that he's [becoming] a saint, you'll have more devotion to him, more people looking at his writings and holding him up as an example of how to live," said Mr. Anderson, who traveled to Rome for the ceremony.

Although the late pope routinely drew huge crowds during his reign, Vatican officials had played down the expected turnout, saying about 250,000 pilgrims were expected to arrive in Rome.

That prediction was quickly discarded this weekend as the faithful began to arrive in Rome for a candlelight vigil Saturday in memory of the late pope.

The influx started as pilgrims from Poland and other parts of the world began to arrive in Rome Saturday, and the arrivals intensified in the early hours of Sunday as the faithful lined city streets waiting for officials to open blockades to the square. Dozens of pilgrims camped on antique bridges that stretch over the Tiber River. Others found refuge inside churches, sleeping beneath altar pieces or beside sarcophagi.

The ceremony also drew a number of dignitaries, including the presidents of Poland and Italy as well as controversial figures like Zimbabwe's president,  Robert Mugabe.

Catholics from the pontiff's native Poland were among the most visible attendees, waving hundreds of red and white Polish flags. 

Jerzy Yurek Majcherczyk, 58, arrived in the square with a group of Polish Americans who were forced to flee Poland in the late 1970s and 1980s for their role in supporting Poland's solidarity movement.

"We're here to reconnect," said Mr. Yurek, who now lives in Wallington, N.J., as he showed off photos of private audiences he had with John Paul II inside the Vatican.

Urszula Kubik, 51, of Bellingham, Wash., recalled how John Paul II's first trip to Poland after his election in 1978 inspired her to become a solidarity movement leader in the Polish town of Czstochowa, a role that landed her in a Soviet prison in 1981. "He gave us power to stand together—to not be afraid—and I was never afraid," she said.

 Write to  Stacy Meichtry at stacy.meichtry@wsj.com 