To hitting coach Kevin Long, the adjustments Curtis Granderson made to his swing last August constituted a major overhaul—a revamp that conjures images of hours in the cage, endless analysis and sputtering pitching machines.

The way Granderson tells it, it was much simpler than that. Just a straightforward process that unfolded in five- and 10-minute increments of batting practice. He made the careful advice dispensed by his coach sound like a couple of pointers casually tossed his way in the clubhouse.

"The things that we ended up doing were very minimal, very easy to remember," Granderson said.

Whether or not the changes are minimal, there is no doubt the results are becoming easy to remember, too. Swinging freely, he slammed a three-run shot into the right-field seats on Sunday afternoon to lift the Yankees over the Toronto Blue Jays, 5-2.

"You look all the way back to August, Curtis has been a different player for us," manager Joe Girardi said.

It was the eighth home run of what could be shaping up to be the most productive season of Granderson's career. Last year, his first with the Yankees, it took him until late July to notch his eighth home run on the way to a total of 24. 

Now, Granderson is much closer to the pace he maintained in 2009, when he picked up his eighth on May 2. He finished that season with a career-high 30 home runs for the Detroit Tigers, despite only slugging three in the entire month of August. 

"It's been constantly a work in progress and I still can't seem to lock it all the way in," Granderson said of his swing after his 2-for-4 performance. "Something may feel good for X amount of months or a year, and then we change it again."

Girardi compared Granderson's progress with Andres Galarraga's in the mid-1990s. Galarraga had been in the major leagues for 11 years before his first of three 40-home-run seasons, and Girardi seems to believe that similar production could be on the way from his center fielder. 

"I'm not so sure that I've really seen a 29-year-old guy adjust the way he has," Girardi said of Granderson.

But Granderson's contributions on Sunday didn't end at the plate. He also contributed on defense, snagging a hard line drive off the bat of Jose Bautista in the first inning. That, he said, was just a matter of paying starter Ivan Nova what he owed. Granderson had blown a catch during Nova's previous start on Tuesday and promised that he would make it up to him.

And at that point in the afternoon, Nova was grateful for all the help he could get. It took him until the third inning to settle down and get his outing back on track. Nova ultimately allowed six hits and two runs, while striking out five and walking four over the course of 6 1/3 innings. His performance was enough to earn a standing ovation from large clusters of the 43,363 fans in attendance.

"He didn't have command of his fastball early today," Girardi said. "Then he started using the curveball, and everything changed for him."

Meanwhile, little is changing for Derek Jeter. On an afternoon when Granderson thrived, Mark Teixeira homered and even the slumping Jorge Posada broke out of his 0-for-19 funk with a double, Jeter continued to struggle, and his batting average fell to .242. 

Still, his statistical dip came with a bizarre twist on Sunday. Despite going 0-for-3, Jeter managed to reach base three times without drawing a walk. His afternoon included a hit-by-pitch, a fielder's choice and a dropped third strike that managed to elude the catcher. 

Granderson needed no such luck.