For months now I've been struggling to find the right way to talk to one of my closest friends about money.

He lost his job more than a year ago, and I've watched over the months as he drained his cash and laid waste to his retirement accounts. He has almost nothing left. And yet, he isn't out hunting for a job. And that frustrates and confuses me.

All of which leads to my current struggle: Should I say something to him? Should I tell him where I think he's going wrong and what he needs to do?

In others words: Is his financial crisis any of my business?

* * *

Because I've written so many articles and books on money and investing, friends and family often ask me for financial advice. I'm happy to offer it.

I have not, however, made a habit of doling out financial advice uninvited. As far as I'm concerned, injecting my opinions into the financial affairs of my friends is both presumptuous and arrogant, and generally a waste of everybody's time.

But the situation with this particular friend seems unique.

I've known this friend for decades, and I've sat by, silently, as he has made a series of monumental financial blunders. I've offered some brief, cautionary comments along the way. But I've often delivered them in a joking manner, allowing me to make my thoughts known, while trying to remove any hint of judgment.

I know: It's a wimpy approach. But I didn't want to overstep and risk damaging an important relationship.

Besides, my friend never took any of my advice, anyway. That has left me wondering: Did he disregard my advice because he disagrees with my approach to personal finance? Or did my joking delivery lead him to believe I wasn't serious?

In talking to others, I found that everybody has their own definition of what being a "friend" means in these situations.

For instance, Dana, a friend in New York, says he "lives by the rule: Only give advice when asked."

He says he once gave unsolicited advice to a friend about a delicate financial situation. "Although I thought it was well received, I learned that was not the case," he says. "After giving him advice, he immediately put some distance in our relationship. He stopped calling me. Email and text conversations were curt and infrequent. I don't know if he was mad, embarrassed or whatever. However, clearly he didn't want/appreciate my advice. Perhaps he was merely looking for empathy as he discussed his situation. We eventually got our relationship back to normal, but it took about four to six months."

A longtime friend, Christie, in Los Angeles, is a bit less rigid in her approach. She says she "tiptoes around the offer of advice, like offering to offer." But her many experiences with friends and family members facing financial difficulty have led her to the view that "you can't make people take financial responsibility for themselves -- and life's too short to agonize over another person's self-destructive behaviors."

Christie says she will offer herself as a resource to friends struggling with money issues, "but I back off unless they return the interest."

For her own sanity, she says, "I've learned to be completely uninvested in whether they follow my advice or not. I am of the 'let them hang themselves' school of thinking. If they don't see value in what I'm saying, I'm not going to fight to win the argument. I'm going to let them hang themselves."

Then there's Alex, a friend in New York. "Of course you offer unsolicited advice," she says. "But don't preach and don't be pissed if your advice is ignored or causes the other person to be cross at you, [because the tactic] definitely backfires from time to time."

Alex compares such advice to "a public service" -- and says it reflects caring and compassion. "True friendship requires you to understand why a person is behaving so stupidly," she says. "Only by understanding how the other person thinks can you help the person find the right path."

To that end, Alex believes, the most critical question to ask is: "[nbsp ]'How can I be most helpful to you now?' You have to let your friend know you're worried about how they're handling this rough patch."

* * *

I'm determined to let my friend know how I feel. (For those who are wondering: No, he doesn't read this column.) He clearly needs a kick in the pants to get his financial life turned around. But I'm wondering if my advice should come from me...or someone who might have a stronger impact on him.

I often receive emails from readers asking how to communicate with a financially wayward spouse who refuses to listen. I typically suggest the worried spouse buy the wayward spouse an hour or two of time with a fee-only financial planner -- and then to stack the deck by calling ahead and explaining to the planner the message you're trying to get across.

I wonder if the same approach would work with a friend.

Will he see my lining up a financial planner as a gesture of concern, or will he see it as an arrogant implication that he's not capable of managing his own finances?

I guess I'll have to find out. But in writing this column, I've answered my original question, at least for me: As a friend, I believe it is my business. Now I just have to see whether he agrees.

—Jeff D. Opdyke writes about investing and finance from Baton Rouge, La. Email: lovemoney@wsj.com 