The Knicks must taste the sweet crimson blood of revenge.

It has to happen. Past injustices must be corrected. Losses must be recovered. A brutal history must be exorcised, or New York's trapped basketball souls will wander the earth for a thousand years, wearing Walt Frazier's leopard jacket but no pants, wondering how they let this crime against the sport occur. 

No, we're not talking about the NBA playoffs. 

We're talking about Cleveland.

The Knicks have a problem, and it lives, barely, out in Ohio. The Cleveland Cavaliers—those Cleveland Cavaliers, the 12-50 ones depleted of Talents, shivering on the cellar floor of the NBA standings, south of the Minnesota TenderHamsters—have beaten the Knicks three straight times this season. 

That's right—three for three. A full 25% of Cleveland's meager happiness this season has come against the franchise loudly proclaiming that New York basketball is back.

If you want to feel really bad, you can tack on the eight consecutive games the Cavaliers won over the Knicks before LeBron James left to make a soap opera in Miami. 

There's no charitable way to put it. The Cavs run the Knicks. Don't try and get the talking heads to spin it. It cannot be spun. 

New York's suddenly in a Cleveland State of Mind. Haven't you seen all the swaggering Cavs fans walking all over the city? They're obnoxious and everywhere. Can't walk a block without hearing someone scream "CAVS RULE" or seeing a business person strutting down the street in an Anderson Varejao jersey. 

If you look really closely, even Cleveland guy Drew Carey seems to be sending a secret message to Knicks fans during episodes of "The Price is Right":

"Who's your Daddy?"

The latest loss came at Madison Square Garden on Friday. That was supposed to be what Carmelo Anthony called a Payback Game, after the Cavs humbled New York in Cleveland in 'Melo's second game as a Knick.

Instead, it was another disaster. The Knicks surrendered a 12-point fourth-quarter lead, and Cleveland crawled back with a late charge led by new Cavalier Baron Davis. 

"I really don't want to say it's embarrassing, but it's a tough loss." Anthony said afterward.

New York will say it for you, Carmelo: It's embarrassing. Until Friday, the Cavaliers hadn't won a road game in 26 tries. (They also lost 26 straight, period, earlier this winter.) Now they've taken a home-and-home from the Carmelo and Amar'e Show. They should get a spinoff on the MSG network.

(The Cavaliers are a bizarre outfit. Of their 12 wins, three came versus New York, but they also have victories over Boston and the Lakers. Of course, they'd swap them all for one thumping of You Know Who.)

For the Knicks, the Cleveland Crisis is unacceptable. This is a team—before the Anthony trade, and after—that gets up for big opponents (Miami, Boston, San Antonio) only to go limp against NBA flotsam. The Knicks turned around Sunday and won on the road against Atlanta, a far better club. These are signals of an unfocused outfit. 

The Bully of Ohio must be humbled. The next and last Knicks-Cleveland contest is April 3 at the Garden. The Knicks should make it fun. Get Jim Brown and Drew Carey to sit courtside. Ask Eric Mangini and Bill Belichick for some anti-Cleveland sorcery. Bring in Jim Gray and the Boys & Girls Club kids from Greenwich, Conn. 

And, for the love of New York, win. 

 Write to  Jason Gay at jason.gay@wsj.com 