NEW YORK—Investors wasted no time in sending the dollar to new three-year lows after the Federal Reserve gave them little reason to support it.

Weak U.S. growth and unemployment data quickened the dollar's fall. Initial employment claims jumped back above the 400,000 level in the latest week. Meanwhile, gross domestic product data showed that economic growth slowed sharply in the first quarter, led by surging food and energy costs that sent a key gauge of inflation, the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index, soaring to its highest level in nearly three years. 

Late Thursday, the euro was at $1.4821 from $1.4794 late Wednesday. The dollar traded at ¥81.54 from ¥82.04, while the euro was at ¥120.85 from ¥121.37. The U.K. pound bought $1.6640 from $1.6636. The dollar fetched 0.8733 Swiss franc from 0.8738 franc, plunging to a new record low.

The ICE Dollar Index, which tracks the U.S. dollar against a trade-weighted basket of currencies, was at 73.12 from 73.519, its lowest level since July 2008. 

The Australian dollar, helped by rising interest-rate expectations and surging oil, rose to a new 29-year high at $1.0920 from $1.0872 late Wednesday.

The Federal Open Market Committee's decision Wednesday to maintain its bias toward cheap credit loomed larger than ever for the beleaguered U.S. currency. At a time when traders are nervous about global inflation and rewarding the currencies of countries that raise interest rates, the dollar has lacked any yield advantage.

In a much-anticipated news conference, Fed Chairman  Ben Bernanke tracked the FOMC statement and did little to deter dollar bears, who have profited from anti-dollar bets for months and appear willing to continue the rout.

"The FOMC statement, forecast changes and press conference all added up to a continuation of the dual-mandate mantra" of maximizing employment and maintaining stable prices, said  Ken Dickson, investment director of currency at U.K.-based Standard Life Investments, which manages $250 billion in assets.

"Under this approach, easier monetary conditions will continue near term and the current weaker dollar trend looks likely to extend further," Mr. Dickson added, given the landscape of weak employment and sluggish growth.

The immediate beneficiaries of the Fed's easy money predilection have been the surging euro and pound. Both the euro zone and the U.K. are on a path toward tighter monetary policy, which has pushed both of their currencies to their highest levels against the dollar since late 2009.

The yen strengthened broadly after the Bank of Japan kept both its policy rate and size of its Asset Purchase Program (APP) unchanged. This encouraged some investors that had expected more liquidity—which would weaken the currency—to unwind some of those positions. 

But more liquidity is the last thing the dollar needs. The Fed's controversial asset purchases have helped bid up risk-related assets like stocks, but surging gold and a relentlessly strong Swiss franc indicate some investors are still nervous about global risks.

Meanwhile, the disappointing U.S. jobless and growth figures are raising eyebrows. The Fed is due to end its quantitative easing program at the end of June. While market watchers aren't entirely sure of what will come next, weakening data may spur talk of a new round of easing, which would likely trigger a new round of dollar weakness.

  Ronald S. Temple, a portfolio manager at Lazard Asset Management, said the Fed should preserve the option of easing anew to ward off more weakness in the economy. "We are moving from a secular era of adding to leverage to a secular era of deleveraging, and the Fed needs to have those tools at its disposal," he said.