TUCSON, Ariz.—Jared Lee Loughner sent a goodbye note to the online world less than six hours before he allegedly went on a shooting rampage at a political event outside a supermarket here Saturday that left six people dead and 14 injured. 

The Pima County Sheriffs' Department released a timeline Friday of Mr. Loughner's activities prior to the attack that suggests he had little, if any, sleep the night before.

Law enforcement authorities say Jared Loughner posted a bulletin saying goodbye to his friends on his MySpace page hours before he shot and killed six people and wounded 14 others. This link appears to contain a screen shot of that page, which was taken down after the shooting. A MySpace spokeswoman said she couldn't comment because of the pending criminal investigation. Mr. Loughner's lawyer couldn't immediately be reached.

According to the timeline, Mr. Loughner dropped off a roll of film to be developed at a Walgreens drugstore at 11:35 p.m. on the Friday before the attack. At 12:24 a.m., he made a purchase at a Circle K store.

At 12:29 a.m., he checked into a Motel 6, sheriff's department officials said. At 2:19 a.m., he went back to the Walgreens to pick up his photos and make a purchase. At least one of the photos shows him wearing nothing but red thong underwear, posing with what appears to be a Glock 9 mm handgun. Walgreens employees gave copies of the photos to police after the attack.

Fifteen minutes later, he bought something at a store at a Chevron gasoline station.

At 4:12 a.m, Mr. Loughner made a Myspace posting titled "Goodbye friends," and included a picture he had picked up at Walgreens. He continued buying items at different stores between 6 a.m. and 7 a.m., according to the Sheriff's Department. At 7:04 a.m., he went to a Wal-Mart and tried to buy ammunition but left before completing the purchase.

He bought ammunition and a black diaper bag at 7:27 a.m. from a second Wal-Mart. Three minutes later, a fish-and-game officer stopped him for allegedly running a red light.

Mr. Loughner then returned home, where he ran away from his father, Randy Loughner, who had questioned him about the contents of the black bag. It was later found to have contained ammunition, according to police.

At 9:41 a.m., the suspect was picked up by a taxi driver who took him to the Safeway where the shootings occurred.

 Write to  Michael Rothfeld at michael.rothfeld@wsj.com and Evan Perez at evan.perez@wsj.com 