WASHINGTON — Carol Browner is leaving her position as White House "energy czar," and a staff shake-up is likely to eliminate her post altogether, according to Democrats familiar with events.

The czar position, and Ms. Browner herself, have been lightning rods for critics of the president's environmental-policy agenda and a reassurance to its supporters, who liked having a top official in the White House devoted to their priorities.

The White House health czar position may also be eliminated, said people familiar with the process. 

Ms. Browner led the administration's effort to gather votes in Congress for legislation to limit emissions of greenhouse gases. The effort unraveled in the Senate last year, amid opposition from Republicans and some Democrats fearful of its impact on energy prices and jobs.

Ms. Browner was also a heroine to many environmentalists who cheered her decisions when she led the EPA in the 1990s and viewed her as an ally in internal administration debates over environmental regulation. Her influence within the administration within the White House has long been a source of concern to Republicans critical of her record in the Clinton administration. Fred Upton, the new chairman of the House Energy and Commerce (R., Mich.), had suggested in recent weeks that he intended to investigate Ms. Browner's authority.

Both czars were charged by President Barack Obama with coordinating policy among multiple government agencies, a function that some members of Congress argued should be left to agency directors who are confirmed by the Senate and would be subject more directly to congressional scrutiny.

Ms. Browner, whose formal title is assistant to the president for energy and climate change, was a leading candidate in the current White House reorganization for one of two positions as deputy chief of staff to Mr. Obama.

But those positions are now likely to go to Nancy-Ann DeParle, the health policy czar, and Alyssa Mastromonaco, Mr. Obama's longtime scheduler. Ms. DeParle will oversee policy issues, and Ms. Mastromonaco will oversee operations, people familiar with events said.

They will replace Jim Messina, who is leaving to run Mr. Obama's re-election campaign, and Mona Sutphen, who is leaving the White House. 

The office that Ms. DeParle leads as health czar, formally called the White House Office of Health Reform, could be trimmed as implementation of the health overhaul shifts to the Department of Health and Human Services. Already, Mike Hash, Ms. DeParle's deputy, has moved to a post at the agency.

Eliminating Ms. Browner's position is more politically complex. Unlike with health care, Mr. Obama has not succeeded in persuading Congress to pass an energy bill. Mr. Obama has said that the Republican takeover of the House of Representatives means he is unlikely to pass legislation making it more expensive for industry to emit carbon. Environmental activists say such a measure is needed to combat global warming, but Republicans view it as an "energy tax" that would kill jobs. 

Eliminating Ms. Browner's position would be another signal that the White House is giving up the effort.

The action comes at a time when the White House is reaching out to business leaders on several fronts. Democrats familiar with the White House thinking cited other reasons for the step. But eliminating the energy czar post would likely be welcomed by many business leaders, who view Ms. Browner as a leading advocate for environmental regulations they oppose.

One Democrat close to the White House said there is "no question" that Ms. Browner's post would be eliminated. Asked why, he noted that cabinet secretaries do not like having high-level policy officials at the White House working in their fields. He also said the job will be eliminated "because there will be no climate or carbon bill in the next two years."

Another Democrat who is also close to the White House said it is possible the position will remain in a downgraded form, either filled by a lower-level official or merged into another White House office.

The decisions about top jobs are being made under the direction of Bill Daley, the new chief of staff. Officials close to the process said there were several top aides who Mr. Obama wanted to promote, but not enough top jobs for all of them. 

Ms. Browner's departure was confirmed by a White House official Monday evening.

The president has been looking for a top position for another Obama aide, Stephanie Cutter, who has been working on communications strategy on health care and other issues. She is likely to work on overall strategy and communications with David Plouffe, who recently began work as a senior adviser to Mr. Obama. 

Phil Schiliro, White House director of legislative affairs, was also a candidate for deputy White House chief of staff but is not likely to get the post and may leave the White House after two intense years of congressional action, Democrats said. That will open up the job of top White House lobbyist. Rob Nabors, now at the Office of Management and Budget, is seen as a top contender for the post.

The other major job to be filled is White House press secretary. Five people have been interviewed for the post, an official said: Bill Burton and Josh Earnest, who are now deputy press secretaries; Jay Carney, Vice President Joe Biden's communications director; Jen Psaki, the deputy communications director; and Karen Finney, a Democratic consultant and former communications director for the Democratic National Committee.