Welcome to the first international crisis in the new era of American austerity. As you may have noticed, it feels a bit different.

The distinctive approach the U.S. has taken to military intervention in Libya—with Washington less leading the world than joining it in acting, and setting distinctly limited goals for itself—is attributed mostly to the world view of President Barack Obama. And that's correct.

But another, deeper reality also has helped shaped the American response: Libya is the first military response to crisis in which we can see the consequences of an America stretched thin militarily and low on money. 

Half a century ago, John F. Kennedy said the U.S. would bear any burden, and pay any price, to defend liberty. An America deeply in debt and bleeding money on other foreign entanglements seems to be saying it will bear some of the burden, and pay part of the price.

For those wondering whether America's posture in the world would be affected by the staggering costs of wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, combined with the 2008 financial meltdown and resulting trillion-dollar deficits—well, we seem to have our answer. Listen to some prominent Washington voices as they discussed action in Libya:

"The Arab League should be approached to pay for that war," Republican Sen. Richard Lugar told reporters just before hostilities began. He also noted: "We're discussing here on the floor [of the Senate] almost exclusively the budget, the deficit."

Democratic Sen. Bob Casey said of the Arab League: "I'd love to have them help us pay for it—have everybody pay for it—because we have very little revenue here."

Democratic Sen. Jack Reed said international support for the operation was crucial both militarily and financially, "particularly at this critical moment when we're struggling with a deficit."

Even those pushing for military action praised the limited American role President Obama sketched out. Republican Rep. Mike Rogers, head of the House Intelligence Committee, said in a statement after meeting with the president: "I was glad to hear that the president's plan puts the U.S. military in a supporting role, and that no U.S. ground troops will be deployed."

All this is a far cry from the feeling around the nation's capital as it entered the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. Supporters of those actions assumed money would be no object when it came to an important national-security objective, and opponents based their arguments on the wisdom of the undertakings rather than their costs.

Track the latest events in Libya.

It is true that in the early 1990s, during the run-up to the first Persian Gulf war that drove Iraqi troops out of Kuwait, then-Secretary of State James Baker flew around allied capitals seeking contributions to help with war costs, a journey reporters dubbed the tin-cup tour. But in that case, there was little doubt that, while allied financial aid was welcome, it wasn't crucial to the decision to act.

And that was at a time when the budget deficit was 4.5% of the gross domestic product. Today, the deficit is 10.9% of GDP; in other words, the deficit today is eating up more than twice as much of the nation's economy. Meantime, annual spending on national defense, thanks largely to Iraq and Afghanistan, has risen 150% over the past decade.

As that suggests, military action is indeed expensive, even in limited form. In firing off more than 110 cruise missiles in the opening salvo against Libya's air defenses, U.S. and British forces in the Mediterranean burned through somewhere in the neighborhood of $100 million of equipment in just a few hours. 

At a time when the two parties are flirting with the possibility of shutting down the whole government over a series of proposed Republican budgets cuts, many in the same cost range as that cruise-missile salvo, even that much expense has deep political significance. The goal of most leaders in both parties at this stage is to reduce spending on defense, not increase it.

The broader question is whether all this represents a temporary reaction to budget pressures, or the beginning of a turn inward born of war fatigue as well as financial stress. 

When The Wall Street Journal and NBC News three weeks ago asked Americans to list the most important issues for the government to address, 37% said jobs and the economy, and just 1% said the political unrest in Libya, Egypt and other Arab countries.

Certainly Americans turned inward after the Great Depression, the last economic crisis comparable to the recent deep recession. That phase didn't turn out so well; it led to World War II, which merely shows there are risks in letting the level of global engagement swing too far in either direction.

 Write to  Gerald F. Seib at jerry.seib@wsj.com 