 Anthology Film Archives  32 2nd Ave., (212) 505-5181  Friday-May 19 

Ken Jacobs was 3-D before 3-D was cool. At least, in regard to its current, post-"Avatar" vogue. The downtown New York filmmaker, who turns 78 on May 25, began toying with the form in the late 1960s. He's returned to it with a vengeance during the past decade, making richly exploratory projects both short and long, using the medium as a tool to expand and engage the possibilities of visual perception. "I'm old," Mr. Jacobs said recently, commenting on his abundant body of work, which has grown significantly in the past decade thanks both to his retirement from teaching and his embrace of inexpensive digital technology. "I've had a lot of time to make films." 

A surprising percentage of them employ creative variations on the 3-D format, which is the theme of this voluminous, weeklong retrospective. Mr. Jacobs, a beloved figure in American avant-garde cinema, has long been invested in a mode he considers far more natural than the two-dimensional standard. "It's a miracle," he said, disappointed that a conventionally minded industry dismissed the form, in its earlier incarnations, as all about people wearing funny glasses. "Not every animal species has it. It's really rare on the planet."

The 30-plus films include a wide selection of shorts, which use techniques such as Anaglyph 3-D, requiring viewers to wear those very glasses that have, say, one red and one blue lens. But what of Eternalism 3-D, which derives its illusory sensations from a flicker effect? Or a phenomenon like "Disorient Express," a 1996 film that Mr. Jacobs created by optically reprinting footage from a 1906 film of a train in motion? The half-hour exercise in celluloid reconstruction creates 3-D effects in the darkroom. It shares a program with an assortment of films, some shot for Pulfrich 3-D, realized when the moviegoer covers one eye with a single dark filter.

If this all sounds like enormous fun rediscovering formal possibilities that have, generally, been part of the cinema since it began, that's exactly what it is. As seminal American avant-garde filmmakers go, Mr. Jacobs has a showman's zest for creating unique spectacles out of light and shadow. His affection for early cinematic artifacts goes hand-in-hand with a desire to conjure the mystery of movies at their most fundamental. As such, he'll be giving three performances of his Nervous Magic Lantern, a celluloid-and-pixel free manifestation that boasts of "space, time, and light sculpted, expanded, and exploded. Like nothing you could ever expect, or will see anywhere else."

After the dazzle, if you need any explication, there's now a book that does exactly that. On Saturday afternoon, Mr. Jacobs will be present to sign copies of a new anthology, "Optic Antics: The Cinema of Ken Jacobs" (Oxford), along with editors David E. James and Michele Pierson. And as the filmmaker delightedly noted, the miracles never cease. He made the discovery that certain of his films interact with the nervous system in such a way that "even if you only have one eye, you can see 3-D!"



 reRun Gastropub Theater  147 Front St., Brooklyn, (718) 797-2322  Through May 19 

Ladies on a rampage is the theme of this antic (and sometimes Sapphic) misadventure from Brooklyn filmmaker Zach Clark ("Modern Love Is Automatic"). Making inventive use of lo-fi techniques borrowed from Saturday-morning kiddie shows and Grade Z sci-fi, the movie is a something of an adult, live-action cartoon. Four happening urban gals—played by Trieste Kelly Dunn, Lydia Hyslop, Maggie Ross and Melodie Sisk—head to an Outer Banks beach house to bond over frisky chatter, bikini romps and piña coladas, concocted, for one indelible scene, in a most imaginative way. But the frolic takes a dark and unexpected turn as unrequited crushes and petty jealousies intrude, and a fateful acid trip sends the gals down the rabbit hole to a vertiginous destiny.



 BAMcinématek  30 Lafayette Ave., Brooklyn, (718) 636-4100  Through May 24 

Hal Ashby was a key figure in the New Hollywood of the 1970s, with such era-defining films as "Shampoo" and the Oscar-winning "Coming Home," one of the first features to consider the social effects of the Vietnam War. In 1970, he debuted with "The Landlord," a comedy-drama about race and class in America with the young Beau Bridges as its title character—a spoiled Richie Rich who buys a brownstone in the ungentrified Park Slope and gets schooled by his African-American tenants. The cinematography, by the late, great Gordon Willis, is only one of the film's many distinctive elements, which include a screenplay by Bill Gunn ("Ganja and Hess") and appearances by Louis Gossett Jr., Robert Klein and Pearl Bailey. This BAM screening is part of an ongoing Ashby retrospective, and features a post-show discussion with Lee Grant (who plays Mr. Bridges's socialite mother) and Ashby friend, filmmaker Robert Downey Sr.



 92Y Tribeca  200 Hudson St., (212) 601-1000  Saturday 

How many actors have played both a villain and a good guy in different James Bond movies? Only Joe Don Baker (and, well, OK, two other guys, but you'd never recognize their names). The son of Groesbeck, Texas, now 75 years old, is one of the all-time great American character actors, a beefy SOB whose good ol' boy charms are deceptive. On screen, at least, the man lives to stomp butt. And that's exactly what he does in "Walking Tall," the 1973 box-office bonanza with Mr. Baker playing a glorified version of legendary Tennessee sheriff Buford Pusser. A man who won't let the law stand in the way of order, he beats down men armed with four-foot clubs carved from hickory. Also on the bill is Don Siegel's "Charley Varrick," with Mr. Baker as a demented and highly self-amused hit man tracking master thief Walter Matthau.



 Museum of Modern Art  11 W. 53rd St., (212) 708-9400  Through Monday 

There's a movie here for every year in the decade that Cinema Tropical, a New York-based media nonprofit, has promoted Latin American cinema. The celebratory series looks back at some of the highlights in recent documentary and feature filmmaking from Argentina, Chile, Mexico, Uruguay and Colombia. Notable selections include the minimalist drama "Crab Trap" (2009), in which a white drifter is drawn into the Africanized culture of a remote village, and "Toro Negro," a 2005 film from Pedro González-Rubio (director of the remarkable "Alamar"), which surveys the existential travail of a small-time bullfighter in the Yucatán Peninsula. The filmmaker will introduce Friday's screening.