 (Please see Corrections & Amplifications item below.) 

A man was killed and eight others injured Wednesday when a fire engine heading to a Staten Island emergency drove through a red light and collided in the intersection with a van carrying disabled passengers.

State law allows emergency vehicles to "proceed past a steady red signal, a flashing red signal or a stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation."

A preliminary investigation by the New York Police Department's Highway Unit indicates that Ladder Engine 81, which had its flashing lights and sirens on, did not stop at the intersection of Richmond Road at Burgher Avenue, law-enforcement officials with knowledge of the incident said.

Fire Department spokesman  Frank Gribbon declined to comment, citing an investigation.

Fire officials said that the truck was responding to a report of a car fire off the Staten Island Expressway and was heading north on Richmond Road. 

Shortly after noon, the fire engine crashed into the driver's side of the van, which was headed west on Burgher Avenue. and carrying two workers and seven developmentally disabled men from a Staten Island day rehabilitation facility called Lifestyles for the Disabled, officials said.

  Eric Perry, 51 years old, was pronounced dead at Staten Island North Shore Hospital.  Joseph Evacqua, 22, was in critical condition at the same hospital. Fire Department officials said one of the injured men was ejected from the van. The other passengers and the workers were hospitalized with less serious injuries, police said. It was unclear if the passengers were wearing seatbelts. 

Six firefighters were taken to Richmond Hospital Staten Island with minor injuries, officials said.

Lifestyles for Disabled is located on the grounds of the former Willowbrook State School, a scandal-plagued institution for children with mental illness that was finally closed in 1987 after decades of allegations of overcrowding, unsanitary conditions, questionable medical experiments and physical and sexual abuse by staff members. 

A woman who answered the phone at the home declined to comment.

 Corrections & Amplifications  According to state law, emergency vehicles can "proceed past a steady red signal, a flashing red signal or a stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation." An earlier version of this article incorrectly said that fire engines are required to come to a stop before driving through a red light. Also, the van involved in the collision was carrying passengers from Lifestyles for the Disabled, a day rehabilitation facility. The article incorrectly described the organization as a group home.

 Write to  Sean Gardiner at sean.gardiner@wsj.com 