Federal prosecutors charged 10 alleged members and associates of a Southwest border gang with killing a U.S. consulate worker and two others last year in Mexico. 

The charges were part of a wide-ranging indictment unsealed Wednesday in federal court in El Paso, Texas, targeting Barrio Azteca, a group formed in Texas prisons that has become a violent force in the drug trade.

Seven of the 10 defendants were in custody in Mexico, and U.S. authorities said they would work to extradite them. The other three remained at large. All 10 are Mexican citizens. Mexican authorities made the arrests with help from U.S. personnel, according to U.S. officials. 

Track the increasing violence in an interactive map.

Consulate worker Lesley Enriquez and her husband, Arthur Redelfs, were gunned down in Ciudad Juarez last March after they left a birthday party in a sport-utility vehicle. Jorge Alberto Salcido, the husband of a Mexican employee of the consulate, also was killed by gunmen after leaving the same event. The killings heightened concerns that U.S. employees were becoming targets of the rampant drug cartel violence in Mexico.

Federal authorities didn't spell out a motive Wednesday for the attacks, but said the three people killed may have been victims in a case of mistaken identity. While the killings occurred in Mexico, the U.S. government often seeks to prosecute murders of its citizens abroad.

In the indictment, authorities charged that Ricardo Valles de la Rosa, also known as "Chino,'' telephoned a person in western Texas on March 13, 2010, and verified a description of the intended murder target. That same day, according to the indictment, 10 members of the gang and other suspects participated in the shootings. An attorney for Mr. de la Rosa couldn't be identified Wednesday. 

"The victims—like so many other victims of the Mexican drug wars—were senselessly caught in the crosshairs of a violent criminal enterprise,'' said Assistant Attorney General Lanny Breuer. "This is, at times, a gruesome battle. But let there be no mistake: We will devote our might to bringing Barrio Azteca and other gangs to justice."

Ms. Enriquez was pregnant when she was killed. The couple's infant daughter was in the vehicle at the time of the shooting but wasn't injured. Police who responded to the crime scene found the child crying in the back seat.

The indictment charges a total of 35 suspected gang members and associates with crimes including murder, drug distribution, racketeering and money laundering. Most of those charged were in custody but seven of the 35 were fugitives, according to the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Drug Enforcement Administration.

Officials say Barrio Azteca is a violent gang operating on both sides of the border, and since its creation in the 1980s has grown into a significant force in the drug trade. The gang has formed an alliance with the Vicente Carrillo-Fuentes drug trafficking organization in Mexico, acting as muscle against rival dealers, according to U.S. authorities. In return, the trafficking group allegedly provides drugs to Barrio Azteca at discounted prices. 

Last month, a U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement agent was gunned down in Mexico, renewing concerns about the safety of U.S. personnel there.

 Write to  Devlin Barrett at devlin.barrett@wsj.com 