TOKYO—Most Japanese in Tokyo calmly went about their business Thursday, even as foreigners continued to leave the nation's capital following an abrupt reversal by the U.S., which instructed its troops and citizens to stay at least 50 miles away from the crippled reactors.

Tokyo Station, the capital's main gateway to other points in Japan, was relatively empty and there were no lines at the ticket counters for shinkansen, or bullet trains.

"I had to wait zero minutes to buy a ticket and in 10 minutes I'll be on a shinkansen to Osaka," said Marc Bernabe, a 34-year-old Spaniard who was in Tokyo for the International Anime Fair.

"The situation is not normal, but life in Tokyo is perfectly normal." said Mr. Bernabe, who has been in the city for three months for work. He said he was a little concerned about the situation, but that he is moving to Osaka more for his family, who have been calling incessantly from Spain, crying and begging him to leave Tokyo.He said the broadcasts from Spain were invoking the Chernobyl disaster frequently, alarming his family.

His comments echo the vast disconnect between the foreign media, which have been running alarmist reports saying, among other things, that radiation has hit Tokyo, and the Japanese media. On Thursday morning, all ofJapan's major newspapers—the Yomiuri, Asahi and Mainichi—didn't have news on their homepages of the U.S. widening the "no-go" zone. The reactors are 150 miles from Tokyo.

"I've been seeing a lot of foreigners leaving, but for the Japanese, we are staying—this is our country and our home," said Koichi Takeuchi, a taxi driver in central Tokyo. "There is no traffic to Osaka on the highways, and for the majority of people, this is business as normal. The Japanese are curious that way—they can't stop working."

Many shops and convenience stores in the central Tokyo area were still out of many essentials, such as toilet paper, produce and instant noodles, but it was mostly due to shoppers rushing to buy enough supplies for their families in case they had to stay indoors for a long time.

Kikuo Nagata, 70, and Eikyu Nagata, 72, were at Tokyo Station with their grandson. Ms. Nagata was taking her grandson to Kyushu, though Mr. Nagata was staying behind in Tokyo.

"We made this decision last night. We cannot trust the government," said Mr. Nagata. "But I am not going—I'm old anyway and I'm going to die soon anyway."

 Write to  Mariko Sanchanta at mariko.sanchanta@wsj.com 