In 1975, slightly more than one in four major-league ballplayers was an African-American. A mere dozen were from the Dominican Republic. Those numbers have since shifted so dramatically—in opposing directions—that last year each group accounted for about one-tenth of major leaguers. Latino representation in the majors is now estimated to be slightly above 25%, including substantial populations of Mexican, Puerto Rican and Venezuelan players. This is one of the most radical changes in the history of professional baseball.

Rob Ruck, a historian at the University of Pittsburgh, explores this transformation in "Raceball," a twinned history of black and Latino baseball. He traces the decline of black participation in baseball to the way in which Major League Baseball handled integration—by uprooting or replacing institutions linked to the Negro Leagues. Ominously, he suggests that MLB is at risk of making those same mistakes again as it asserts what he sees as tighter control over Caribbean baseball, marginalizing long- established scouts, for instance, and threatening to extend the amateur draft to include overseas players. By "imposing its imperial will on black America and the Caribbean," Mr. Ruck contends, "MLB has achieved unprecedented prosperity, but gutted the game at the grass roots."

In the broadest sense, this claim isn't entirely convincing. The history of baseball's development is simply too haphazard to serve as a parable for cultural imperialism. But "Raceball" reminds us of the long, independent history of baseball in Latin America and of how it was intertwined with North America's Negro Leagues. Long before Jackie Robinson broke the color line, the region boasted a truly international game in which the best American players of all races could play. Throughout the 1930s and 1940s, Negro Leaguers played their major-league peers in off-season barnstorming exhibitions throughout the Caribbean, while all players were welcome to compete in the regular seasons of the Dominican, Mexican and Venezuelan leagues.

Mr. Ruck's book sings most in these early chapters, especially where he lays out the early history of baseball in Cuba. "For several decades," Mr. Ruck writes, "no other place on earth boasted such a diverse and talented collection of ballplayers." Such cross-cultural comparisons can be questionable, though: Comparing the level of play among the Negro Leagues, the Major Leagues and the Caribbean game may be impossible at this distance. Most likely, to see the highest level of team play, one had to pay for a major-league ticket. To see the highest level of individual baseball genius, though—the level reached, for instance, by Negro Leaguer Josh Gibson, possibly the best player in the history of the game, a catcher who hit like Ted Williams—one had to enter a parallel baseball dimension. There, Cuban Negro Leaguers like Cristóbal Torriente and Martin Dihigo played a game of speed and intensity not to be seen in the majors for decades. 

 By Rob Ruck  (Beacon, 273 pages, $22.95)

Mr. Ruck doesn't need to insist on the quality of this game, though, since his big point is that the Caribbean, like the Negro Leagues, boasted an entire structure of organized, integrated baseball. Today, a few Latin American institutions survive that trace a lineal descent from this brand of truly cosmopolitan baseball, including the off-season Winter Leagues for professionals and the Dominican academies that train teenage prospects.

In the U.S., such locally controlled organizations were gradually eroded by integration, a process that saw the major leagues, from the late 1940s through the 1950s, absorb the athletic talent of the Negro Leagues without absorbing their entrepreneurial and off-field talent. There was room for Jackie Robinson in the major leagues but not for J.L. Wilkinson, the longtime owner of the Kansas City Monarchs and the man who signed Robinson to his first contract. Similarly, there were no black umpires in the majors before 1966. MLB thus severed the traditional ties between black communities and the baseball players they had nourished. "Corporate sport," he contends, "overwhelmed community-based sport."

This is a bit too neat. There are probably two main reasons why fewer African-Americans play baseball than they once did, and neither has to do with MLB's policies. The past few decades saw the rise of the National Football League and National Basketball Association as competitors to MLB, while America's population shifted toward the suburbs and the west. If baseball were still a sport of the industrial cities of the northeast and the rural South—and if it weren't competing with football and basketball for top athletes—it would probably enjoy a higher rate of black participation. It isn't, and it doesn't.

In retrospect, the high percentage of black major leaguers in the mid-1970s can be seen as the peak of a trend that saw their participation rapidly expand as more teams integrated and began to compete for talent. Broad social forces were always going to bring that percentage back down, but there is no reason that they had to come down as far as they have. So to say that Mr. Ruck's argument is a bit too neat is not to say that it is wrong: The major leagues did indeed pluck the flowers of the Negro Leagues and ignore their soil. 

Has MLB learned from its past? Its recent moves to assume tighter control over the game in the Caribbean have been sparked, in part, by corruption scandals and the rampant forging of documents to pass off players as younger than they are. Rather than being an expression of imperial will, these steps may be seen as necessary to protect vulnerable teenagers from exploitation by agents and scouts. The question is whether MLB can—or wants to—preserve the delicate, century-old networks that have produced such geniuses as Pedro Martinez and Albert Pujols and have helped to lift the caliber of major-league play. One would like to think it possible; Mr. Ruck's history suggests it might be but a dream.

 Mr. Marchman, a baseball writer, can be contacted at tlmarchman@gmail.com.  