WASHINGTON—When Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke goes before lawmakers this week to deliver his semiannual report, the grilling is likely to focus on heightened fears about inflation despite continued worries about job creation.

Rising prices for oil, wheat and other commodities are energizing some GOP lawmakers who want the Fed to focus mostly on inflation risks. Under current law, the Fed has a dual mandate to keep both inflation and unemployment low. 

The central bank's current policy aims to spur stronger economic growth, and thus more job creation, by holding short-term interest rates near zero and by buying $600 billion in Treasury bonds through June. Fed policy makers are unlikely to change course unless higher food and energy prices spark broader inflation problems.

But critics of these policies, mainly Republicans, say the Fed's approach could cause inflation to take off, and they are likely to press Mr. Bernanke on the topic during his appearances before the Senate on Tuesday and the House on Wednesday.

"We're going to hear the Fed being challenged as being too liberal and too easy in terms of its accommodative monetary policy, and now we're going to hear a discussion of commodity prices going up," said Wells Fargo chief economist  John Silvia.

The attention on inflation marks a shift to familiar turf for the Fed, after years of defending its actions during the financial crisis. Mr. Bernanke fielded criticism from Congress after the Fed's extraordinary move to ease J.P. Morgan Chase's rescue of Bear Stearns, and its subsequent decisions that allowed Lehman Brothers to fail and American International Group Inc. to receive government support.

Some lawmakers have questioned whether the Fed's bond-buying program would pump so much extra money into the economy that it could cause consumer prices to soar. Top GOP lawmakers, such as House Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan of Wisconsin, have ramped up pressure on the Fed since Republicans won control of the House in the November elections, pushing for a single mandate focused mostly on inflation.

"My concern is that the cost of the Fed's current monetary policy—the money creation and massive balance-sheet expansion—will come to outweigh the perceived short-term benefits," Mr. Ryan said recently.

He is among the House Republicans concerned about inflation who are tying the call for a "sound dollar" to their drive to cut the budget deficit and government regulation in a bid to provide more predictable government policies. 

Stanford University economist  John Taylor, who has advised Mr. Ryan, said replacing the Fed's dual mandate with a single focus on price stability within a "framework of overall economic stability" would give the central bank latitude to respond to financial crises while providing monetary policy "that doesn't have a lot of surprises."

"We've seen a major departure from more steady, rules-based policies in recent years," he said. "It's gotten very highly discretionary."

 The Fed's past efforts to boost employment, such as its decision to keep interest rates very low for a lengthy period after the 2001 recession, "have so often backfired and led to higher unemployment," Mr. Taylor said. Focusing on keeping purchasing power stable is "the best way to deliver good economic performance." 

Republican lawmakers are unlikely to succeed in changing the Fed's mandate any time soon, given Democrats' control of the Senate and White House. Democrats are already using the single-mandate movement to argue that Republican lawmakers aren't focused enough on addressing the high U.S. unemployment rate, which stood at 9% in January.

"This effort to take the Fed out of the fight for jobs is curious," said Rep. Carolyn Maloney (D., N.Y.). "Washington needs all hands on deck to help get the job-creation engine going again. We all need to focus on it, including the Federal Reserve."

The Fed has chosen not to take a position on the debate over its mandate, given the extensive research among economists supporting both approaches.

 Many lawmakers acknowledge that the Fed still could have supported its current bond-buying program even under a single mandate due to concerns about the risk of deflation, or a persistent decline in the overall price level.

Sen. Bob Corker (R., Tenn.), who expressed his support for a single mandate in November after the Fed launched its bond-buying program, said the change could help insulate the Fed politically—at home and abroad—from charges that it was trying to drive down the dollar or create advantages for U.S. exports. 

"A single mandate in many ways would help dissipate this whole issue of politicization of the Fed," he said. "Giving them a more specific mandate would certainly alleviate some of the questions people are asking." 

 Write to  Sudeep Reddy at sudeep.reddy@wsj.com 