A charter school rooted in a Swedish educational philosophy that gives middle-schoolers greater autonomy in choosing classes is set to open in September, but the school's potential location is causing angst among some Lower Manhattan community leaders concerned about overcrowding.

 The school—named Innovate Manhattan Charter School—will adopt the education model of Kunskapsskolan, which runs 33 schools in Sweden, and three in the United Kingdom. The mission of the school is to put students in control of their learning. Students meet with a teacher once a week to plan out the tasks the student will set as goals for the following week. 

"It's structured to allow kids to drive their own learning, set their own goals and move at the level" that is most appropriate for them, said the school's director  Eileen Coppola, the former principal of Hunter College High School. 

The Department of Education has said at past meetings that it intended to allow the school to open in September with a sixth- and seventh-grade class at the department's administrative offices, the former Tweed courthouse. A spokesman for the DOE,  Jack Zarin-Rosenfeld, said Tuesday, "We'll be finalizing our plans for the Tweed space in the coming days."

Activists in the neighborhood said the space should be used for elementary-school grades, where there is the greatest need. 

"We're over 900 seats short in the lower grades," said  Julie Menin, chairwoman of Community Board 1 in Lower Manhattan. "The DOE's decision to overlook that and bring in a charter school for middle school shows a fundamental lack of long-range planning." 

The powerful state Assembly speaker, Sheldon Silver, also weighed in on the space. The DOE "owes it to this community to use the space at Tweed to address our shortage of elementary school seats," Mr. Silver said through a spokesman. 

Despite the controversy, parents are filling out applications for the school's lottery, scheduled for April 6. One is  Mirian Natal, who said the school is at the top of her list for middle schools she is considering for her fifth-grader. "I love the attention to the individual learning needs" of each student, Ms. Natal said.

Ms. Coppola said the school addresses many of the challenges that she's seen in urban education over the past 20 years, including encouraging student motivation. Rather than the "factory model" approach of students moving as a large group from class to class, Ms. Coppola said the Kunskapsskolan model is based on a "theory of childhood that trusts the child" to make decisions and help guide his or her own goals and pace. 

The individual scheduling process allows for smaller work groups with teachers when students need such help, Ms. Coppola said. She added that the model also in many ways resembles what the students would experience in college. In some classes, for instance, rooms will be stadium-like, as in college lecture halls. 

The school's charter allows it to contract with a for-profit company—in this case Kunskapsskolan USA, the New York-based subsidiary of the Swedish company. Innovate is one of the last charter schools allowed to contract with a for-profit company to help run the school because it is one of the last charters granted under the old charter school law. Current state law, which also increased the number of charter schools allowed in the state, bans for-profit charter-management organizations. 

Kunskapsskolan is providing the educational concept of the school, along with professional development, support services, manuals and the technology portal, said  Peg Hoey, president of Kunskapsskolan USA. The company has agreed to waive its management fees for the school's first five years, which it estimates to be valued at $1,368,800, she said. 

 Write to  Barbara Martinez at Barbara.Martinez@wsj.com 