SINGAPORE—Singapore's nonoil export growth slowed to a 13-month low in December as shipments of key electronics products and pharmaceuticals declined, signaling more moderate growth in 2011. 

Exports rose 9.4% year-to-year after growing a downwardly revised 9.9% in November, trade promotion agency International Enterprise Singapore said Monday. The pace was slower than the median 10.5% expansion forecast by 10 economists in a Dow Jones Newswires poll. 

"The records are behind us and we are likely to go back to a more normal performance of exports," said Song Seng Wun, an economist at CIMB in Singapore. "The high base of comparison will damp the headline numbers and we expect a business-as-usual pace of 8%-10% growth in exports." 

Singapore's $300 billion economy, a bellwether for Southeast Asia, bounced back from a 2009 recession to grow an estimated 14.7% in 2010, the fastest pace of expansion on record since independence in 1965. 

Exports dominate Singapore's economy and are often seen as an indicator of global economic health. In 2010 trade was helped by a rebound in global demand for electronics goods such as tablet computers and smart phones, and by strong performance by Singapore's volatile pharmaceuticals sector.

Electronics exports declined 1.1% year-to-year in December, compared with a 10.8% rise in November. Pharmaceutical exports, described as a "wild card" because of their highly volatile nature, were down 2.8% in December after November's 34.2% plunge, the data showed.

The electronics contraction "could get worse in the coming months as the base effect turns unfavorable, on top of weaker external demand and the drying-up of support from inventory rebuilding," Alvin Liew, an economist at Standard Chartered Bank, said in a note. 

Pharmaceuticals will continue to be volatile, Mr. Liew said, as the value of production and exports change dramatically as plants shut for long periods of maintenance or produce very expensive or cheap drugs.

The data showed that Singapore's exports to the European Union rose 20.9% in December from a year earlier, after growing 19.8% in the previous month.

Exports to the U.S., Singapore's biggest trading partner, fell 0.3% year-to-year after gaining 12.7% in November. Exports to China grew 10% after November's 36.5% rise.

In one bright spot, exports rose 8.9% month-to-month in seasonally adjusted terms, after falling 13% month-to-month in November. The poll had projected a median 7% increase. 

That gave some economists confidence that exports would stay robust this year.

"The general sense is that global demand finished last year on a solid footing after a soft patch in the middle of the year," said David Cohen, director of Asian economic forecasting at Action Economics. "Global demand remains healthy as we start the new year. The global economic recovery is continuing and that should benefit Singapore." 

 Write to  Gaurav Raghuvanshi at gaurav.raghuvanshi@dowjones.com 