A few years back, a defense lawyer representing an insider-trading client got a lesson in the quiet toughness of federal Judge Richard J. Holwell.

  Edward Little asked the judge in 2008 for probation for a Wall Street analyst who pleaded guilty in an insider-trading ring. Judge Holwell rejected the request, emphasizing that insider trading was serious—and sentenced the analyst to 57 months in prison.

Judge Holwell will be center stage in a New York federal court Tuesday, presiding over the largest insider-trading case in a generation. The U.S. accused hedge-fund titan  Raj Rajaratnam of criminal securities fraud and conspiracy, alleging he reaped $45 million through illicit stock tips; 19 of 26 defendants in the case have pleaded guilty.

"He has good control over the courtroom—not because he's loud or aggressive, but because he has this quiet quality," says  Gerald Shargel, a friend and defense lawyer who has represented mob figures. "Holwell won't be bullied."

The 64-year-old Judge Holwell—a former White & Case LLP litigator with a thick white mustache—won't let Mr. Rajaratnam's high profile, or the attention his case has drawn, influence a trial that is expected to last at least six weeks, according to a dozen lawyers who have tried cases before him or know him socially.

Judge Holwell's demeanor could provide a foil to the more combative style of John Dowd, Mr. Rajaratnam's lead attorney, who is leading a team of eight other Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP lawyers for the defense. Judge Holwell and Mr. Dowd declined to comment.

Already, the judge has issued a key ruling in the case. Mr. Dowd in the fall vehemently argued that prosecutors and the Federal Bureau of Investigation had lied to obtain approval of wiretaps crucial to the case.

In incendiary remarks before Judge Holwell in October, Mr. Dowd asserted that prosecutors had "gamed the system" and misrepresented the circumstances of key wiretap requests "in a desperate attempt" to get the court to approve them.

"Thank you, Mr. Dowd," Judge Holwell replied, according to a transcript of the hearing. The next month, he rejected Mr. Dowd's request to throw out the wiretaps, saying the government had shown "ample reason" to allow the wiretaps as evidence.

But in a 68-page opinion, he also had some harsh words for prosecutors, writing that Mr. Rajaratnam had shown "that the government's application omitted and misstated important information" about a key informant in the case.

Judge Holwell's quiet control was on display Feb. 28 during a hearing over a decision by the Securities and Exchange Commission to file a separate civil case against a former  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS


0.04
%




 director, accusing him of passing inside information about Goldman to Mr. Rajaratnam.

"Mr. Dowd, you're standing up. Looks like you're ready to talk," Judge Holwell said, according to a transcript unsealed this week. Over the next several minutes, Mr. Dowd appealed to the judge to support a prosecutor request that the SEC charges not be made public so close to Mr. Rajaratnam's trial. Mr. Dowd argued the resulting publicity would taint potential jurors.

Wrapping up his impassioned statement, Mr. Dowd said he and a federal prosecutor "just felt an obligation, both of us, to..."

"All right," Judge Holwell said, interrupting him. 

"...apprise you of these circumstances," Mr. Dowd continued. 

"All right, I understand," Judge Holwell said.

Judge Holwell thanked the lawyers, then said he wouldn't rule because the issue wasn't in his power to address.

The SEC filed the civil allegations against the director,  Rajat Gupta, the next day. Mr. Gupta has denied wrongdoing.

Judge Holwell has presided over insider-trading cases before, including the civil insider-trading case against design entrepreneur Martha Stewart, which she settled in 2006 before the case went to trial. 

Ms. Stewart separately was convicted in 2004 on criminal charges and served five months in a West Virginia prison.

In the 2008 criminal insider-trading sentencing handled by Judge Holwell, former Goldman Sachs Group Inc. bond analyst  Eugene Plotkin was among defendants accused of reaping more than $6 million through a Wall Street insider-trading ring. 

In asking for probation, his lawyer, Mr. Little, asked Judge Holwell to consider Mr. Plotkin's youth—he was 28—and secondary role in a scheme he described as part foolish prank. 

Mr. Little recalls the judge saying he could "appreciate" the circumstances, but noted that the crime was a serious matter and stuck with nonbinding federal sentencing guidelines. Mr. Plotkin was released from prison last year. "While he'll give both sides a fair trial," he says of Judge Holwell, "he'll treat the case very seriously."

In nearly eight years on the bench, Judge Holwell has been selected for a range of cases outside of Wall Street. In 2007, he presided over a civil case in which fast-food restaurants fought a New York City health regulation that they post calorie counts for their menu items. Judge Holwell struck down the city regulation, saying it butted heads with existing federal law related to how some restaurants already voluntarily posted calorie information. But he rejected restaurants' argument that their free-speech rights were under attack.

In 2008, Judge Holwell upheld the city's retooled regulation, which survived an appeals-court challenge. Said  Kent Yalowitz, who represented the restaurants' side in the case: "I don't think anybody's going to ride over Judge Holwell." 

—Chad Bray contributed to this article.

 Write to  Jenny Strasburg at jenny.strasburg@wsj.com 