  David Elkins jumped through a lot of hoops before  Becton, Dickinson & Co.
BDX


-0.33
%




 hired him as its chief financial officer in December 2008. After eight interviews with company officials, he underwent an executive "assessment.''

The day-long process included a business-simulation exercise involving role playing, a two-hour session with an educational psychologist and online personality tests that gauged key traits such as strategic thinking. Becton says it assessed 95 internal and external prospects for executive posts last year, up from six in 2008. (The increase was not related to additional executive hiring.) 



Sample scenarios of these role-playing sessions:







"Getting the right people is paramount to what we're trying to do now,'' explains  Thomas Ruddy, vice president of talent management at the medical-technology concern. Becton expanded its use of assessments after gaining confidence in their value, says  Colleen White, a company spokeswoman. 

Management assessments are booming again as companies scramble to find the best leaders amid a hiring rebound. "Our U.S. executive-assessment business increased more than 30% in 2010," says  Matt Paese, a vice president of Development Dimensions International. The human-resources consultancy is a major provider of assessments for picking or promoting top managers. Major rivals such as PDI Ninth House describe similar recent gains. 

About 72% of 516 employers now use assessments to help make executive promotion decisions, nearly twice the proportion doing so in a 2010 survey, reports Aberdeen Group, a market-research firm. Those polled this year said their evaluations comprise a variety of cognitive, behavioral, simulation and motivational tests.

Assessing a C-suite candidate can cost up to $30,000 and last two days. Outside experts typically handle assessments. Their psychological interviews probe deeply into a person's strengths and weaknesses. "It's far more comprehensive than any job interview,'' says  Stuart Crandell, a senior vice president of PDI Ninth House, a leadership consultancy in Minneapolis. 

During a simulation, an individual plays the part of an executive of a fictional company who must deal with a pretend boss, subordinate or customer to solve a difficult dilemma. Participants almost never get eliminated solely due to poor performance on online tests, typically taken from home. Employers receive written reports about the evaluation. 

Nonetheless, prospective executives can easily veer off track. Managers sometimes knock themselves out of the race because they mistakenly try to "ace" a process where there rarely are right answers. 

Experts say candidates should do their homework about the screening process, the assessor and their roles in deciding the outcome. They also should ask upfront for feedback regardless of the outcome, 

Prospects eager to "learn about themselves through these exercises are prone to be viewed stronger than others,'' notes  Stephen P. Mader, a vice chairman of recruiters  Korn/Ferry International.
KFY


0.91
%




 He feels that the ability to learn fast represents an important factor in the success of a leader in a new role. 

Earlier this year, Mr. Paese of  DDI assessed an applicant hoping to become a regional executive for a global management consultancy. The man didn't request feedback, so he never learned that he lacked sufficient experience handling clients with difficult demands, according to Mr. Paese. He didn't land the job. 

Careful preparation counts at Becton, too. Mr. Ruddy says he encourages aspiring executives to spend six to eight hours getting ready for the simulation portion of an assessment. Mr. Elkins prepared over a weekend after he received a broad overview of his simulation exercise. 

His simulation: figuring out whether a fictitious consumer-products company "had the wrong people executing the right strategy.'' Complicating things, role players unexpectedly supplied additional details on the day of his exercise. 

Potential executives should try to keep their cool during a simulation because companies prefer bosses "who don't get anxious in a situation like this,'' notes  Dan Zdon, executive vice president and chief operating officer of Liberty Diversified International Inc. in Minneapolis.

Easier said than done. Mr. Zdon says he felt too nervous to eat lunch during his first Liberty simulation in late 2000. But he did fine anyway. Since then, he has used assessments to fill 50 executive positions for the diversified manufacturer over the past decade. 

Three years ago, a middle manager seeking a C-suite promotion at a conglomerate abrasively challenged the outside assessor, recalls  John Beeson, principal (CQ) of Beeson Consulting Inc., the New York firm that screened him. "Losing composure under stress cost the person the job,'' Mr. Beeson says. Maintaining poise during a stressful assessment can be more important than an individual's answers, according to PDI's Mr. Crandell. 

Stretching the truth during the psychological interview also could crimp candidates' chances. "The best thing you can do is not fake people out,'' advises  Steve Kelner, a leader of the executive-assessment practice at recruiters Egon Zehnder International. He sometimes sees introverts "try to come across as extroverts,'' while other executives claiming to be change leaders simply follow orders.

Trained as a motivational psychologist, Dr. Kelner assessed the sales vice president of a U.S. biotech company for a possible promotion a few years ago. She exaggerated her ability to coach lieutenants, according to Dr. Kelner. Three subordinates told him, "She's a great leader. Just take her word for it.,'' indicating they didn't view her as a great leader. 

Dr. Kelner says he warned the woman's boss that "she is not as good as she thinks she is,'' and cited her high staff turnover. The sales executive soon took early retirement. 

It's equally difficult to walk the fine line between answering honestly and divulging irrelevant personal details during an assessment. Asked about their leadership values, some executives describe being abandoned by their parents at a young age, says  Sandra Davis, chief executive of MDA Leadership Consulting in Minneapolis. "I am not looking for personal, private stories.'' 

  Dee Soder, managing partner of CEO Perspective Group in New York, has assessed executives who mention a romantic affair as the reason they quit a job. "Don't tell me you had an affair,'' she warns. "It's going to set off all kinds of alarm bells.''

On the other hand, a senior executive disclosed the challenge of growing up with an alcoholic mother during her six-hour assessment interview for the No. 1 spot at a financial-services company in 2009. "I let it all hang out,'' she recollects. 

The revelation apparently made a positive impression. The company offered her its CEO job. The executive turned down the offer, however. "The fit wasn't quite right,'' she says. 

 Write to  Joann S. Lublin at joann.lublin@wsj.com 