TUCSON, Ariz.— As a high school student in May 2006,  Jared Lee Loughner once drank so much vodka that he had to be hospitalized. He told a sheriff's deputy that he drank because he was "very upset" that his father had yelled at him.

The Pima County Sheriff's Office on Wednesday released 12 incident reports concerning Mr. Loughner and his family, including the drinking episode for which he was charged as a juvenile.

Mr. Loughner is accused of a shooting rampage that left six dead and 14 injured, including U.S. Rep.  Gabrielle Giffords. He has been charged with two counts of murder, two counts of attempted murder and a count of attempted assassination of a member of Congress in connection with a shooting at a  Safeway supermarket here Saturday.

The incident reports released Wednesday range from the merely odd and mundane, such as Mr. Loughner's 2004 complaint that a classmate poked him with a needle (no charges pressed), to his more serious 2007 arrest for possession of drug paraphernalia. They also include recent complaints by neighbors of the Loughner family about media coverage in the wake of last Saturday's mayhem.

The underage drinking charge is the only report to provide a glimpse at the internal dynamics of a family that neighbors say kept to themselves.

On May 12, 2006, the assistant principal of Mountain View High School, where Mr. Loughner attended, contacted the sheriff's office to report that the teen was "so extremely intoxicated" that he had to be taken to the emergency room.

Mr. Loughner advised the officer that he drank approximately 350 milliliters of vodka between 1:30 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., stolen from his father's liquor cabinet. "He advised he drank the alcohol because he was very upset as his father yelled at him." His eyes were red and he was crying, the officer wrote.

Mr. Loughner's parents arrived at the hospital, but the officer did not report their reaction.

The incident reports also indicate that the Loughner's ranch-style Tucson home was visited by the sheriff's department for other reasons over the past few years.

In 2008, Mr. Loughner called the sheriff's office with a concern that someone had posted a photo of him at 16 years old with long curly hair on peekyou.com. Apparently, there was a link on the website to a Myspace page which showed the name "Jared" as the profile name.

"Jared advised me that he believed possibly an old school friend named Alex … who he believed was 19 years old. . . had possibly created these accounts with Jared's name and picture," the officer wrote.

The officer noted that Mr. Loughner was slow to respond to his questions. "He often hesitated as if he was trying to think of an explanation. I asked him where Alex lived. He hesitated for a long time."

Mr. Loughner followed up with a phone call saying that he asked Alex about the matter, and that Alex said he didn't know what he was talking about. Officers were subsequently unable to contact Mr. Loughner by phone or by mail.

The more recent activity at the Loughner's home was prompted by the incident Saturday.

At 1:20 a.m. Monday, a neighbor of the Loughner's,  Wayne Smith, called the sheriff's department about a large truck parked by the Loughner residence, which had driven around with lights off before parking. 

On inspection, it was a large freightliner truck with "North American TV" on its side. The officer interviewed the driver and determined that he was an employee of Good Morning America, who said he was setting up for a TV broadcast. The officer determined that the vehicle was not a traffic hazard and left.

Then at 3:45 a.m., another neighbor called the sheriff's office to complain about a vehicle. After conversing with the neighbor, the officer noted: "There was probably going to be more media vehicles in front of the residence again today."