BEIJING—China's economy unexpectedly accelerated in the fourth quarter of 2010, starkly pointing out the diverging paths of the world's two key economic players.

The data, coming just as President Hu Jintao's U.S. visit is helping to cement China's status as a major world power, highlighted that China's economy is growing around two-to-three times as fast as America's, and put in relief how the two, in some ways, are mirror opposites. While China sees inflation as its top problem, Washington still worries about prices stagnating, a trend that could sap economic vitality.

The fourth quarter's 9.8% expansion in gross domestic product from a year earlier, after a 9.6% increase in the third quarter, defied Beijing's repeated attempts to tap the brakes and rein in inflation, fueling concerns that the government will resort to tougher measures in its struggle to contain inflation, potentially stalling the world's main engine of growth.

As Washington has announced tax cuts and other stimulus measures in recent months, and the U.S. Federal Reserve has continued pumping cash into the economy through its quantitative-easing program, Beijing has raised interest rates twice, tried to drain liquidity by ordering banks several times to increase deposits held in reserve, and imposed price controls on some staple goods.

The fourth-quarter GDP numbers make it all but certain that China became the world's second-largest economy in 2010, ending Japan's 42-year reign in that position—though Japan doesn't report its year-end economic data until next month.

China's faster-than-expected growth is in some ways good news for the global economy, in that it partly reflects improving demand for Chinese goods overseas. And China's growth is driving big imports of raw materials, machinery and consumer goods from the rest of the world, beefing up returns for the global corporations that increasingly rely on its economy.

But the faster rise and inflationary pressure that has continued despite repeated vows by China's leaders to tame prices, also risk upsetting the delicate balance policy makers must maintain between keeping the economy cruising at a healthy speed and preventing it from overheating. The ultimate concern is that authorities could overreact and hit the brakes too hard, causing growth to stall.

While Beijing in theory possesses enormous control over the levers of its economy, it has serious difficulty manipulating those levers to its desired effect. The government has control of all of China's major banks, for example, yet it largely failed to get them to rein in lending last year after ordering them in 2009 to open the credit spigots to fight the global recession.

Thursday's data, from China's National Bureau of Statistics, show "the tightening done so far hasn't had a major impact on growth," said Citigroup China economist  Ken Peng.

The fears of a possible hard landing in China caused global stock markets to fall on Thursday's news. China's benchmark Shanghai Composite stock index dropped 2.9%, while Hong Kong's main index fell 1.7%, and Japan's and Australia's both declined 1.1%. Major European markets also fell as worries about further policy tightening in China hit mining and auto stocks. In the U.S., similar concerns prompted a small drop, but improvements in U.S. jobs and housing helped to limit the decline.

Some Chinese officials blame the country's inflation problems partly on the loose monetary policies of the U.S. That is because low U.S. interest rates push investments overseas, adding to the flow of hot money washing over Asia.

U.S. officials counter that China could easily damp prices by allowing its currency to rise more against the dollar—which lowers the cost of imported goods. But China worries that too quick a rise would batter its export market and boost joblessness. 

The issue has been a subject of major contention during Mr. Hu's U.S. visit, although Mr. Hu played down inflation as a factor in exchange-rate policy before he came to Washington. The yuan slipped slightly against the dollar in Shanghai trading Thursday, after hitting records earlier in the week

Japan's minister of economic and fiscal policy, Kaoru Yosano, said it appeared likely that China has surpassed Japan and that "the Japanese people should welcome our neighbor China's growth."

For the full year, China's GDP grew 10.3%—up from 9.2% growth in 2009—to about $5.88 trillion. The International Monetary Fund forecast in October that U.S. GDP would top $14.62 trillion.

—Bob Davis and Victoria Ruan contributed to this article.

 Write to  Aaron Back at aaron.back@dowjones.com and Jason Dean at jason.dean@wsj.com 