Two years ago, several full-service brokerage firms took steps to limit customer access to leveraged and inverse exchange-traded funds amid a surge of concern about their suitability as long-term investments. Many discount brokers added disclaimers to their sites. 

Read the complete Investing in Funds report. 

But the moves hardly put a dent in the proliferation of complex ETFs that use derivatives and other financial instruments to amplify the daily moves of a market index or its inverse. Other, newer products let investors bet on market volatility and on the comparative yields of bonds of different maturities.

Although they are mostly targeted to institutions and sophisticated investors, these ETFs trade on exchanges, meaning anyone with an online brokerage account can buy them—as easily as they would a stock.

While brokers are required by regulators and stock exchanges to make a reasonable effort to ensure funds are suitable for an individual before recommending them, the rule for the do-it-yourself investor is buyer beware. That concerns some analysts and industry observers, who say more could be done to warn individuals away from complex ETFs, which over time can produce results that diverge significantly from what the investor may have expected.

"Just because Wall Street can create these ETFs doesn't mean they should be offered to anyone who wants to buy them," says  Andrew Stoltmann, a securities lawyer in Chicago who often represents investors in disputes with brokerage firms. 

Consider this: Individuals must make certain representations about their finances and investment knowledge to buy on margin, trade futures and options contracts, and swap currencies through both discount and full-service brokers. Opening a margin account in which you can borrow against your investment holdings requires paperwork that "is essentially a credit application," says  Noah Hamman, CEO of AdvisorShares, which offers a collection of actively managed ETFs. 

These representations serve to limit the broker's losses and liability should the investor wade into trouble. Yet many exchange-traded products—funds, notes, trusts and more—offer investors exposure to leveraged and complex trades without any more paperwork than it would take to buy a mutual fund or shares of General Electric Co. 

As one example of the complex trades available, take new ETFs from FactorShares that offer so-called spread strategies: The New York-based asset manager launched five ETFs in February that allow investors to gain from leverage, combining double long and double short positions in the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index, U.S. Treasury bonds, oil, gold and the U.S. dollar.

With  FactorShares 2X: S&P500 Bull/TBond Bear, for example, an investor can make a leveraged bet that stocks will rise and a leveraged bet that bonds will fall. These investments, which reset daily, imply four-times leverage but don't necessarily represent volatile moves. FactorShares uses futures to implement the strategy, which would be costly and complex for even a professional to manage. The fund firm declined to comment.

In the past, such strategies were typically available only through a managed futures account run by a commodity-trading adviser or through hedge funds that required individuals to have a certain level of assets or income in order to invest. 

Of course, having the $1 million in assets or $200,000 in income needed to reach "accredited investor" status under Securities and Exchange Commission rules was never a guarantee that investors would understand the investments they were qualified to buy. This designation has long been "an easy rule to hide behind," says  Andy Rachleff, chief executive of Wealthfront Inc., a platform for investment managers to distribute their strategies. He says the most complex ETFs are best left to the financial professionals. 

  Dave Nadig, head of research at IndexUniverse, says that while he is confident that most ETFs are being used responsibly by financial advisers, he has less comfort when it comes to do-it-yourself investors. "The structure has outrun the ability of regulators to catch it," he says. 

With ETF assets topping $1 trillion, Mr. Nadig says he would like to see the SEC come up with a set of formal rules specifically for ETFs, including disclosure, suitability and trading guidelines. Right now, most ETFs are regulated by the same 1940 law that regulates traditional open-end mutual funds.

The SEC declined to comment, but when it comes to investor protections, regulators point to the "suitability" standard that generally applies to brokers and exchanges. At NYSE Arca, for example, Rule 9.2(a) says that trading firms must "make reasonable efforts to obtain information concerning the customer's financial status, tax status, investment objectives, and such other information…in making recommendations to the customer."

The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, or Finra, the brokerage industry's self-regulator, has its own version, with an enhancement set for October. But these standards offer little if any protection to individual investors working outside of a personal broker or adviser. Mr. Stoltmann says arbitrations related to suitability against discount brokers are generally seen as unwinnable in his industry.

Brokers such as  Charles Schwab Corp.
SCHW


-0.59
%




,  TD Ameritrade Holding 
AMTD


-0.11
%




Corp. and Fidelity Investments have been marketing commission-free trading of some ETFs, mostly basic index offerings, for more than a year. Scottrade stepped into the commission-free fray in late March. None of these brokers block customers from trading complex ETFs. 

"Do-it-yourself investors owe it to themselves to know what they own," says  Michael McGrath, director of ETFs at TD Ameritrade, of Omaha, Neb.

Still, TD Ameritrade was among many brokers that increased disclaimers and education about inverse and leveraged ETFs in 2009, around the time Finra and the SEC issued regulatory alerts about the products. TD Ameritrade says the number of accounts trading leveraged ETFs has declined roughly 40% since spring 2009.

Schwab, meanwhile, says its trading platform is designed to support the self-directed investor. So while it aims to help investors make informed choices, it doesn't block them from trading any type of ETF.

Darek Wojnar, head of U.S. product development for BlackRock Inc.'s iShares unit, which creates ETFs, says he believes opportunities may exist at the "point of sale" to better help investors determine suitability.

  Scott Burns, head of ETF research at Morningstar Inc., agrees, saying more disclosure at the point of sale would benefit brokers, too: "All brokers should be mindful to protect themselves from a bad experience by their customers." 

Still, many observers say no one is forcing do-it-yourself investors to buy high-risk investments, so the burden is on them.

"In the discount world, it's your own obligation," says  James Fanto, a professor at Brooklyn Law School who specializes in financial regulation. 

Mr. Weinberg is an editor for  The Wall Street Journal Digital Network. He can be reached by email at ari.weinberg@wsj.com.