PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. -- As soon as  Oliver Perez walked into the New York Mets clubhouse Monday, he was ushered back to a corridor leading to the team's executive offices.

Five minutes later, he walked out and began saying his goodbyes to teammates.

Everyone, it seemed, had sensed what was coming. The Mets released Perez with $12 million remaining on his contract, an ignominious exit for one of the most unpopular players in franchise history.

The move was expected. The Mets re-signed Perez to a three-year, $36 million contract before the 2009 season, a deal that will go down as one of the team's worst. Perez won just three games since and had a combined earned run average of 6.81 over the last two seasons. His ouster came just three days after the Mets released second baseman  Luis Castillo, who, like Perez, was emblematic of the excesses and disappointments of the last few years.

Perez was close to tears as he spoke to reporters after his release. "When you get fired anywhere, you feel sad," Perez said. "It's not a good moment. But you have to be stronger. My life is not done."

Another team can sign Perez for the major-league minimum salary of $414,000, but the Mets would still be on the hook for the remainder of his 2011 salary. 

That is the cost of moving forward under new general manager  Sandy Alderson, who is trying not only to improve the roster but also to alter the negative public perception of the organization.

More than any other player, Perez was a magnet for fans' anger. Alderson and manager  Terry Collins gave Perez, 29, a chance to make the Opening Day roster, first as a starter and then as a left-handed relief specialist. But the odds of that happening went from slim to none Saturday. Perez was booed off the mound after giving up two home runs, a single and a walk in two-thirds of an inning in an exhibition game against the Washington Nationals. By then, it seemed, his release was a mere formality.

"They were fair with me," Perez said. "When I came here, they gave me an opportunity to be a starter, and I didn't do anything great. They tried to move me to the bullpen to be a lefty specialist, and the last game I did a horrible job."

Perez can only hope his release works out as well as it did for Castillo, who signed a minor-league deal Monday with the Philadelphia Phillies.