 Political unrest has sent stock markets tumbling across the Middle East and is threatening economic growth and the employment prospects of populations already hungry for change.  

Ratings agencies have cut their assessments of many Arab economies and the cost of insuring risk across the region has surged amid the popular revolts that have spread from North Africa to the oil-rich Persian Gulf. 

 Forces loyal to Libyan leader Col. Moammar Gadhafi pushed an offensive into the east, but were resisted by antiregime forces, as Gadhafi warned the U.S. and Europe against a military intervention, saying, "we will fight until the last man and woman."  

U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates, testifying before Congress, criticized "loose talk" about any military intervention in Libya. He also said the U.S. military would have to launch pre-emptive strikes to destroy Libya's air defenses, should President Barack Obama order the imposition of a no-fly zone over the country. 

Rebel leaders in Benghazi called on outside powers to launch tactical airstrikes on Ghadafi's positions, according to a spokesman for a newly formed, self-appointed provisional government based in eastern Libya. 

Pro-Gadhafi forces moved into the oil refinery city of Brega and took over much of the western half of the city, according to residents. Fighter jets launched airstrikes against rebel forces in Brega and in the area of the rebel-held city of Ajdabiya, home to a massive rebel-controlled arms depot. 

 European nations and Egypt launched emergency airlifts along Libya's borders, as tens of thousands of hungry, anxious foreign workers poured into Tunisia to escape Libya's ongoing conflict. 

The prosecutor of the International Criminal Court says he is opening a formal investigation into possible crimes against humanity in Libya.

In Tunisia, daily protests and counter-protests in the Mediterranean port city of Sfax highlight the dangerous popular divisions in the North African country six weeks after the ouster of its despotic leader.

In Bahrain, thousands of antigovernment protesters marched on the Interior Ministry in the capital of Manama, demanding the release of all political prisoners.

The European Union increased its aid to handle the refugee crisis in Libya, and will mobilize extra funds to help member countries like Italy maintain border control, the president of the European Commission, José Manuel Barroso, said. 

Factory-gate prices in the euro zone posted their sharpest monthly gain in 29 years in January, the latest sign that inflationary pressures are building faster than expected, ahead of the European Central Bank's policy meeting Thursday. 

The role of the new European Securities and Markets Authority, which was created last year to strengthen financial-market oversight at the European Union level, isn't to find consensus between member states, but to act as a powerful independent agency, said its recently appointed chairman.

 Six Irish banks had €16.4 billion ($22.6 billion) outstanding of senior bonds that aren't guaranteed by the government or secured on mortgages, the Central Bank of Ireland said, as it revealed the extent of the banks' liabilities for the first time.  

 European Union antitrust officials have carried out raids of e-book publishing companies in several countries, the European Commission said.  

Spanish jobless claims continued to rise in February, data from the labor ministry showed, providing new evidence that Spain's weak economic recovery still isn't creating many new jobs. 

U.K. construction-sector activity grew at its fastest rate in eight months in February, adding to the mildly positive signals to emerge from the economy of late. 

Police in London arrested a man suspected of participating in an attack on a car carrying Prince Charles and his wife Camilla in December. Metropolitan Police said they arrested a 34-year-old man on suspicion of violent disorder and criminal damage in connection during a student protest on Dec. 9.

 German Chancellor Angela Merkel reshuffled her cabinet to replace Defense Minister Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg, who resigned Tuesday after revelations that his doctoral thesis was largely plagiarized.  

 A gunman killed two American servicemen and wounded at least two others in what investigators believe was a terror attack targeted at Americans. Airport police arrested a suspect, a 21-year-old Kosovar, shortly after the shooting, according to a spokeswoman for the interior ministry of the German state of Hesse.  

The Swedish Bar Association is investigating one of Julian Assange's lawyers after a British judge said he gave misleading information in the WikiLeaks founder's extradition proceedings. 

Budapest's mayor says Elvis Presley will be declared a posthumous honorary citizen of Hungary's capital and a city landmark will be named after him. Mayor Istvan Tarlos said Elvis will be commemorated because of his support for Hungary in the wake of the short-lived, anti-Soviet revolution of October 1956.

Several Turkish banks lent too much credit in the first two months of the year and the sector, or individual banks, could face additional measures to crimp lending if the situation continues, Turkey's Economy Minister Ali Babacan said. 

 Mikhail Gorbachev was awarded Russia's highest medal—the Order of St. Andrew—on his 80th birthday Wednesday, a belated tribute from the homeland where many blame him for the 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union. 

The United Nations peacekeeping chief said the U.N. mistakenly accused Belarus of delivering three attack helicopters to military forces supporting Ivory Coast's ruler who refuses to cede power.

 Less than a quarter of Americans support trimming Social Security or Medicare to tackle the country's budget deficit, according to a new Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll that illustrates the challenge facing lawmakers seeking voter support for altering entitlement programs. 

Private-sector payrolls expanded at a solid pace in February, but layoff announcements increased for the second month in a row, according to two separate reports.

The U.S. economy grew modestly in early 2011 and the weak jobs market improved, while businesses reported rising costs, the Federal Reserve said. A survey of regional economies showed all 12 of the bank's districts' economies were expanding. 

 The U.S. Supreme Court cited free-speech protections in ruling that a fringe religious group had the right to protest at the funeral of a U.S. Marine killed in Iraq. 

A consulting firm is predicting close to $100 billion of municipal-bond defaults over the next five years as state and local government-debt problems "dampen" the U.S. economic recovery.

Taiwan's government will open an additional 42 sectors to Chinese investors, including the strategically important panel and chip industries, as cross-strait economic ties continue to deepen, the island's Ministry of Economic Affairs said. 

 The U.S. sees no need to redeploy nuclear weapons to South Korea, a senior U.S. official said Wednesday, despite increasing pressure from some ruling-party politicians in the Asian nation.  

 Suspected Islamic militants shot dead Pakistan's minister for minority affairs who had campaigned for reforming the country's controversial blasphemy law. Shahbaz Bhatti, one of the few Christians in a senior government position, was traveling in Islamabad, the capital, to attend a cabinet meeting when three gunmen open fire on his car. 

 U.S. Gen. David Petraeus, the NATO-led coalition's commander in Afghanistan, responded to an angry protest from President Hamid Karzai and issued a rare apology for a helicopter strike that killed nine children. 