At a time when most lenders are overwhelmed by crushing caseloads of delinquent home loans and foreclosures, Habitat for Humanity International is telling a different story.

Habitat for Humanity is the Americus, Ga.-based nonprofit company that builds thousands of homes for lower-income Americans each year. Habitat also originates mortgages on the homes and, in most cases, holds the loans on its books. In 2010, it ranked as the one of the nation's largest builders, constructing nearly 4,600 new homes nationwide. The group also fixed up and resold more than 1,400 homes.

Most of Habitat's borrowers have household incomes below their area's median income – a population often at risk for foreclosure. Yet Habitat says foreclosures are minimal. 

A recent study led by the Cox School of Business at Southern Methodist University, which was commissioned by the Dallas branch of Habitat, found that foreclosures in Habitat's Dallas market were less than 2% last year. Although the report only looked at the Dallas office of Habitat, the findings mirror those found in other Habitat offices across the country, the organization says.

As politicians and economists disagree on whether and to what degree lower-income Americans should be encouraged to own homes—some even blame lenders outreach to lower-income borrowers for the housing collapse—the case of Habitat indicates these borrowers can receive mortgages without high default levels.

"They deserve to have the opportunity to build wealth through real-estate appreciation just like anyone else," said Jack McCabe, a housing analyst with McCabe Research & Consulting in Deerfield Beach, Fla. "That's been the American dream." 

But that doesn't mean catering to families on tight budgets is easy. Cash-strapped borrowers need plenty of hand holding and support. They need an easy way to get back on track when they slip behind due to emergencies or special occasions, said Lynette Pearl, director of home owner and neighborhood support for the Dallas Habitat chapter.

In Dallas, worried home owners are urged to call anytime to discuss financial issues, and it's not unusual for the organization to receive dozens of calls a day as troubled home owners leave multiple messages. 

"We don't have a problem with our families getting behind as long as they're talking with us," said Bill Hall, the Dallas Habitat's chief executive.

Becoming a Habitat home owner is not easy. Applicants must show a solid work and credit history. Once selected, recipients undergo home-ownership education that covers the added costs of owning over renting, how to pay bills and home maintenance. 

Habitat is known for requiring home owners to help build their home. While the demands differ for each market – the national average is 300 hours – Habitat says home owners are less likely to walk away from homes they helped construct. 

"Before they actually move into the house, they're invested," Ms. Pearl said.

In Dallas, homes cost between $80,000 and $100,000. Recipients receive interest-free mortgages for 30 years and mortgage payments range between $500 and $800 per month, which includes taxes and insurance, depending on income.

The organization doesn't build McMansions – it's known for no-frills homes erected on free or low-cost land lots. Local governments often donate land in ailing neighborhoods, hoping the new owners will help revitalize the community. The Dallas report estimates that for every $1 the organization spends, $3.18 of economic impact is generated. Much of this impact is felt directly in troubled neighborhoods, stabilizing vales and preventing foreclosures.

Unlike traditional lenders, Habitat checks back several times with new owners. The Dallas chapter noticed that its late payments spike in September – when families spend money on school clothes and supplies – and in the winter, when they shop for holiday gifts. It partnered with a local nonprofit to distribute free supplies. The group also helps its families get free tax preparation: Delinquent home owners often use their tax refund to catch up on missed payments.

That's different from traditional lenders, who slap on late fee upon late fee, making it hard for the borrower to get back on track. Of course, Habitat's late payers don't get off entirely. The Dallas Habitat, which sells its loans to a local bank, covers any missed payments and tacks on a late fee equal to 4% of the principal: The average payment is $8 for each late month.

"It's only meant to remind them that they're late. It' not meant to punish them," Mr. Hall said. We aren't here to knock you down and foreclose. We're here to help you through it."

To be sure, large lenders and servicers including Bank of America and JP Morgan don't have the time or manpower to field calls every time an owner missing a monthly payment. But they could learn from Habitat's business model: screen buyers, educate in advance, make home owners work for their down payment and get them to pay what they can, when they can.

"These are practices that I think any bank should implement, particularly after looking at the foreclosures in the last five years," said Paul Hendershot, lead author of the Dallas Habitat report and an adjunct University of North Texas professor.