TUCSON, Ariz.—Gov. Jan Brewer, far from comfortable in the media spotlight, again finds herself trying to unite and defend her state in the midst of a national storm.

Last year, the Republican spoke out forcefully in defense of a controversial state law cracking down on illegal immigration. 

Once again all eyes are on Arizona after Saturday's shooting that left six dead and U.S. Rep. Gabrielle Giffords, along with 13 others, injured. 

On Tuesday, Ms. Brewer visited Tucson for the first time since Saturday's shooting. She was greeted with a standing ovation from hundreds of Tucson business leaders at the city's convention center.

Instead of delivering her planned state of the state address, Ms. Brewer heaped praise on the city and its people for their actions in the aftermath of the shooting. 

"I know your hearts and minds are far away from this room. Mine, too," she said.

Ms. Brewer, 66 years old, visited some of the shooting victims at the hospital, and, surrounded by a heavy police guard, stopped at the makeshift vigil on the hospital lawn. She hugged a few bystanders.

Ms. Brewer can seem uncomfortable at news conferences and made a few gaffes on television during the recent race for governor—including walking away from reporters after being pressed on her claims there were headless bodies in the Arizona desert. 

But aides say she is at her best interacting with voters.

She won praise from locals for her visit. "She's speaking from the heart and I think people see that," said Margaret Kenski, a longtime Tucson resident and political pollster.

Ms. Brewer was already a popular governor in most of the state, said Ms. Kenski, with an approval rating of over 50%. She said most voters feel more supportive and less critical of their political leaders in times of national tragedy, as people look to heal and unify.

Tucson is tougher territory. Pima County, which includes Tucson, voted in favor of Ms. Brewer's Democratic opponent in the last election. But how much lasting goodwill her outreach here will win is unclear. Soon, Ms. Brewer will have to sell a painful budget plan to constituents as the state faces a $2.1 billion budget deficit. The University of Arizona, which has a big campus in Tucson, could face severe cuts. 

"I'm glad she came here to show her respect but its not going to change her policies or my opinion of them," said Kristen Farney, a 27-year-old Tucson resident who stood before a sprawling memorial of candles on the lawn of the medical center where shooting victims are recovering.

Those close to her say Ms. Brewer is struggling to maintain contact with her constituents, but is worried about her own safety. 

During her campaign and the immigration fight, Ms. Brewer received hate mail, said Chuck Coughlin a former campaign manager for Ms. Brewer and head of her transition team.

In addition to the illegal-immigration legislation, she signed a law making Arizona one of a handful of states that allow people to carry concealed weapons without a permit.

Mr. Coughlin said Ms. Brewer—who was secretary of state before stepping in to succeed Janet Napolitano in 2009 and being elected last November—has marveled at her unexpected and, at times, uncomfortable position. She is now a repeat guest on the international stage and again finds herself having to take up for Arizona. 

"Since Saturday, all of us have read and heard a lot about the state of Arizona," Ms. Brewer said in her Tucson speech. "I want to speak to you about the Arizona I know...it is a place of service, a place of heroes, a place with a bruised, battered heart that I know will get past this hideous moment."

—Angel Gonzalez and Stephanie Simon contributed to this report.

 Write to  Tamara Audi at tammy.audi@wsj.com 