Deep in their cloisters in Brussels and Frankfurt, what must the Eurofaith's high priests say of the national governments with which they've been forced to deal?

When the doors are shut and the room's been swept for bugs it's not hard to imagine some frankly un-priestly invective unleashed against the heretics and schismatics of Greece, Ireland, Portugal and the rest. 

Their travails have stalled the whole project, come alarmingly close to derailing it completely and may yet leave us all wondering what might have been. A little frustration would be only human.

The trouble is, time seems to move so much faster outside the euro zone than within. Global tectonic plates are shifting, China and the other emerging markets surge on at a pace unthinkable to the bloc's previous political generation.

Europe may get its act together and become what it promises to be. But, when China is planning a new conurbation 26 times the size of London, it's hard to avoid the conclusion that it needs to do it soon. While anyone still cares. Certainly before the center of economic gravity is simply too far away. 

How trying it must be to have only suggestion, rather than force, with which to chasten the euro zone's bunglers and their tiresome democratic mandates. 

It always falls laughably short. Look at the European Central Bank's efforts.

To give the bank its due, officials could hardly come within a mile of a microphone for years without pleading the case for the Stability and Growth Pact.

Under current chief  Jean-Claude Trichet and his predecessor, the late  Wim Duisenberg, the mantra was the same. Stick with it. Please. Come on, guys. 

But plead was all they could do. Compulsion was beyond their power.

If you recall, this benighted agreement was the euro zone's sole defense against charges of being a suboptimal currency area. 

It is just that, of course—but, you see, this wouldn't ever matter because member states would Be Good. 

Living by the pact, they would refrain from maxing out national credit cards from which the limit had essentially been abolished, thanks to access to Germany's good name. So relax. The problems of being a suboptimal currency area would never arise. Nothing to see here. Move along.

Yeah right, as my kids so often say.

Member states didn't listen to the ECB's pleas, of course. They generally preferred to keep the pork moving around their various client voters and to hell with whatever silly agreements they'd signed.

In the end, the poor old pact ended up more honored in the breach than the observance. Last year's persistent and ongoing debt catastrophe was the end result.

Now, according to a couple of reports this week, the International Monetary Fund remains very worried about Europe, despite signs of continuing recovery elsewhere.

Well, you may be thinking, so what? We're all still worried about Europe, aren't we? The bond markets certainly are. Indeed cynical old hands and the generally mischievous might even conclude that, if the IMF is worried, it's probably time to buy.

But in fact the fund's latest squeaks of concern come at a bad time for the Eurofaith's true believers. 

Last week saw Presidents Obama and Hu greeting each other as equals in Washington, a telling measure of how quickly China is growing in America's rear-view mirror. It's still distant, for sure. But there's clearly nothing much in the way. Certainly not Europe.

Consider that for a second. The European Union has a larger nominal GDP than the U.S. and, for the moment, greater military reach than China. More aircraft carriers, higher-tech equipment, all that stuff.

To the faithful, these numbers mean Europe demands a seat at a global top table now exclusively the property of these two titans. But they know it hasn't got one.

Messrs. Obama, Hu and their entourages came out of the Washington trip as shapers of New World Order. Bad news for a union whose very reason to exist is to keep one pole of a multipolar world firmly planted in the old continent.

Neither president gave the impression they'd be clearing anything afterward with Brussels, from the Oval Office, perhaps, or the jet home to Beijing.

And yet, what is Europe doing? What it is usually doing. Looking inward, trying to resolve those internal contradictions Milton Friedman was always so worried about. 

You can't be part of a New World Order if you are always condemned to remain at home, engaged in the diplomatic equivalent of washing your hair, as it seems Europe will be for a very long time to come.

We are already far from the lofty ambitions of the Eurofaith's founding fathers. They dreamed of making the virtue of global economic leadership out of what they deemed was the necessity of monetary union.

Remember their reveries of oil priced in euros? And then on, on, with commodities falling one by one to the inevitable until the dollar was unseated and replaced at the summit.

Now mere survival is the endgame as Europe gropes for a means of compulsion it should have had in the first place.

And oil? Straight from dollars to yuan in due course. Do not pass Brussels, do not collect two hundred euros. If they even still exist.

 Write to  David Cottle at david.cottle@dowjones.com 