Newark authorities Monday said that three groups of juveniles were largely responsible for the area's spike in carjackings late last year.

Five juveniles, ranging in age from 15 to 17, and three adults have been arrested thus far in connection with the Newark carjackings. Acting Essex County Prosecutor  Robert Laurino said he will move to charge the juveniles as adults because of the nature of the crimes.

"They recklessly and without regard for human life brandished weapons and created a clear danger to the community," he said, adding that the maximum punishment for such crimes was 30 years in prison. Authorities said the investigation was continuing and that they expected to make more arrests.

Officials said yesterday that they believe the youths were involved in more than a dozen carjackings during the holiday season alone. But the recent spate, which involved cars ranging from Volkswagens and Mazdas to BMWs and Range Rovers, is part of a larger pattern in Newark over the past year.

Nearly a quarter of the city's 288 carjackings last year came in the month of December. The 2010 total marked a 70% increase over 2009, when there were 169. 

While a number of the incidents involved firearms, just once was a shot fired, prosecutors said. No one was injured in that case.

The increase in carjackings appeared to coincide with the recent police layoffs in budget-strapped Newark, New Jersey's largest city.

Newark Police Director  Garry McCarthy said the crimes marked "an unbelievable spike" last month. But he said the layoffs and high number of carjackings were unrelated.

The carjackings prompted coordination between the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Newark police and the Essex County prosecutor's office in early December. Later in the month, officials got a break in the case when detectives placed two youths under arrest for a carjacking on Manchester Place in Newark.

The incident produced intelligence that led to the arrests of members from another group of alleged carjackers.

Among those arrested were a 15-year-old Newark resident, who was charged in five carjackings; a 16-year-old of Irvington, who was charged in three carjackings and one attempted carjacking; and a 17-year-old of East Orange, who was charged with two carjackings and one attempted carjacking.

"Let this response be heard loud and clear by anyone who would consider committing a crime in Newark," said Newark Mayor  Cory Booker. "Our brave and dedicated police officers…simply won't tolerate dangerous and illegal behavior. We will innovate, pursue you and you will be caught."

Authorities say they believe that the adults arrested in the case— Newarkers Wayne Lewis, 22,  Jequele McKenzie, 19, and  Reginald Anderson, 19—had ties to a group allegedly engaged in carjackings in and near the city's North Ward.

Attorney information for the defendants couldn't immediately be determined.

 Write to  Chris Herring at chris.herring@wsj.com 