According to Father Lucas, an allegedly legendary exorcist played by Anthony Hopkins, reliable proof of demonic possession involves knowledge of the unknowable—an ability, in the example offered by one of his subjects, to divine the presence of a dollar bill hidden from view. "The Rite," set mostly in Rome and the Vatican, proves that yet another cabal of producers, divining the presence of dollars in unknowable numbers of wallets, has been possessed by the belief that the world is ready for another movie about exorcism.

This one, an overwrought thriller with a surfeit of solemnity and the devil's own sound design, first distances itself from the conventions of the genre. Father Lucas comes on as an honest tradesman who sees exorcism as a sort of spiritual colonic, a procedure that must periodically be repeated. "What did you expect?" he asks a skeptical young seminarian from America who becomes his apprentice: "Spinning heads? Pea soup?" If only. Linda Blair's rotations and regurgitations were a lot more fun than this movie's pseudo-theological lucubrations on the subject of skepticism, faith and the never-ending battle against evil. (The director, Mikael Håfström, actually made a Swedish-language movie called "Evil," which earned an Oscar nomination seven years ago. This time he's working from a screenplay, by Michael Petroni, that's ponderous enough to banish Oscar anxiety for all concerned when next year's nominations are announced.)

The seminary student, Michael Kovak, is played by Colin O'Donoghue; it's a flat attempt at a soulful portrayal, and all the more damaging because the movie is focused more on Michael's dogged quest for the truth about demons than on Father Lucas's struggles with them. (The son of a mortician, Michael keeps flashing back to childhood memories of an especially significant corpse lying supine on an autopsy table. "Don't be afraid," the boy's father tells him brightly. "It's just your mother.") The conventions of the genre are resurgent, of course. A victim of possession, played with grand-guignol gusto by Marta Gastini, responds to Father Lucas's ministrations with elaborate writhings and squirmings; a male victim wouldn't have given the genre its requisite sexual charge. Ben Davis's burnished cinematography gives the production an elegance it hasn't earned. Dave Whitehead's sound design fills the production with ominous whooshings that sometimes overwhelm the dialogue, not that the dialogue doesn't deserve it.

Mr. Hopkins gives the production what he was hired for. Whenever you wonder how much longer he can trade on Hannibal Lecter's special zest, the same answer comes up—a lot. This time his emphasis is on verbal and emotional dynamics. Each battle with old Beelzebub begins calmly, matter-of-factly, then generates a lather of accusatory wrath before subsiding into the equivalent of an all-in-a-day's-work shrug. Father Lucas does bring impressive equipment to the final battle. By that time, though, you're ready to give the devil whatever due it takes to get "The Rite" over and done with.

Jason Statham is Arthur Bishop, a vengeful hit man in an excruciatingly amped-up remake of the 1972 original that starred Charles Bronson. (Richard Wenk wrote the new screenplay with the original writer, Lewis John Carlino. The credits also list 15 producers.) Arthur isn't one for showing his feelings—thus the 'mechanic' moniker—so it makes sense that the granite-faced Mr. Bronson has given way to another star schooled in the art of impassivity. But Mr. Statham, the specialist in English tough guys who was so affecting in "The Bank Job," has more to offer than "The Mechanic" has the grace to receive.

The director, Simon West, pummels us with action sequences (seldom have so many chases been chased to so little effect) and punishes us with exceedingly violent killings. (This 92-minute movie has a piercing-and-puncture fetish.) Donald Sutherland lends his leonine presence to the proceedings, while the excellent American actor Ben Foster does what he can—quite a bit, really—with the role of Arthur's protégé and then partner, Steve, a younger man with a complex connection to his mentor. Still, "The Mechanic" is as shallow as the Louisiana bayous that Arthur travels in an air boat. Toward the beginning of the film, someone tells him that a treacherous new target must be removed because "he has crossed his Rubicon." Long before the end, I'd crossed my Lethe.



Nominees for the 83rd annual Academy Awards were announced January 25. Who should take top honors this year? Cast your vote.

Variety may be a shadow of its former self in the Internet age of infinite buzz about showbiz, but the venerable trade paper can still come up with a terrific, if politically incorrect, headline. "IT'S STAMMER TIME," Variety proclaimed earlier this week after the Oscar nominations were dominated by "The King's Speech." Does that dominance predict more of the same when the Oscars are handed out next month? Apart from stating the happily obvious, that Colin Firth has a next-to-unbreakable lock on an Oscar for best actor, I don't want to get into the prediction game—at least not right now, though I'll have to make my annual public guesses before the ceremonies. But I do want to note a few things about the nominations—or should I say the noms, since Variety coined that term decades before legions of media kibitzers turned it into an affectation.

The decision to allow 10 best-picture nominations has worked out well once again. Last year's opening-up of the category—a reopening in the context of Academy history—made it possible for "The Hurt Locker" to win. This year such worthy contenders as "The Fighter," "The Kids Are All Right" and "Winter's Bone" have made the list. None is likely to win, but it's wonderful that they've been recognized.

Of the five nominees for best actor, all gave admirable performances, but where was Ryan Gosling? What he did in "Blue Valentine" was as best as acting gets. His co-star, Michelle Williams, got a best-actress nomination, and a richly deserved one. So did Jennifer Lawrence, a thrilling long shot in a category that properly recognized Annette Bening, Nicole Kidman and Natalie Portman. This year the voting members of the Academy's actors branch have not only chosen well, but surprisingly so in the case of Javier Bardem, a formidable star in a difficult movie. It's also good to see nominations in the supporting categories for Amy Adams, John Hawkes, Jacki Weaver, Christian Bale and Geoffrey Rush, though the latter two men lent support to their films by giving star-stature performances.

I agree with those who have expressed dismay at Christopher Nolan's exclusion as best director. "Inception" opened while I was on vacation and my feelings were mixed when I caught up with it, but the film is clearly a director's showcase. I'm sorry that "Unstoppable" got stopped, and glad that "Toy Story 3" straddled both the best-picture and animated-feature categories like a gentle Colossus.

The one flagrant miscarriage of justice was perpetrated by the foreign-film selection committee, which has managed to sustain its long-standing reputation for getting things wrong. How could Xavier Beauvois's sublime "Of Gods and Men" have been ignored? Several other foreign-language triumphs opened last year, among them "Mother" and "A Prophet." But the Beauvois film was on the Academy's long list, then got dropped for the final cut. That's not just négligence, it's a désastre. 

 Write to  Joe Morgenstern at joe.morgenstern@wsj.com 