LONDON—European stock markets edged higher Monday, getting a lift from deal news and as investors reacted positively to news of Osama bin Laden's death.

The Europe Stoxx 600 index closed up 0.1% at 283.93, supported by the automotive, mining and chemicals sectors.

U.S. President Barack Obama announced late Sunday that, nearly a decade after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, bin Laden had been killed in a U.S. operation in Pakistan.

Asian stocks rallied overnight and Europe spent the entire session in positive territory.

In Germany, the DAX 30 climbed 0.2% to 7527.64, led by gains for Commerzbank, up 3.2% after reporting a rise in earnings.

"What's moving the DAX is probably the news that bin Laden is dead, because that also pulls down crude-oil prices," said  Andre Saenger, an analyst at IG Index. "Since the rebellions started in Egypt and Tunisia and the war in Libya, crude oil has gone up. Now we see it going down and it should be very supportive for the DAX."

Oil prices declined earlier in the day, but at the time of the European close Nymex crude futures for June delivery were up 62 cents at nearly $115 a barrel.

Stocks rose slightly in Paris, with the CAC-40 up less than 0.1% to 4108.77.

U.K. markets were closed for a bank holiday.

Danisco, the world's largest food-ingredients company, gained 4.3% after U.S. chemical company DuPont late Friday raised its offer for the firm to 700 Danish kroner ($139) a share, from an earlier bid of 665 kroner a share. The stock closed Monday at 696.50 kroner. The new offer values the company at around $6.64 billion and was unanimously recommended by Danisco's board.

Grifols surged 5.3% in Madrid after the Spanish maker of blood-plasma products said its purchase of Talecris Biotherapeutics Holdings has won tentative U.S. antitrust approval.

Shares of Demag Cranes rallied 24% in Frankfurt on news that U.S. heavy-equipment manufacturer Terex made an €884 million ($1.31 billion) bid for the company.

In earnings news, Commerzbank gained after unveiling preliminary financial results. The bank, in which the German government holds a 25% stake, reported a 41% increase in first-quarter net profit to €1 billion, helped by lower provisions for bad loans and positive contributions from all core segments. 

In Milan, shares of Fiat gained 3.9% following news that Chrysler Group reported a small net profit in the first quarter for the first time since it exited from U.S. bankruptcy nearly two years ago. Fiat has a 30% stake in Chrysler, which it plans to increase to 46% via the exercise of an option. 

TNT fell 1.4% in Amsterdam after the mail-and-express company reported a 14% drop in first-quarter net profit as its express unit continued to struggle because of oil prices as well as integration issues in Brazil. 

Swiss pharmaceuticals company Actelion sagged 8.7% in Zurich. The firm said Sunday that a U.S. jury has awarded Japan-based drug maker Asahi Kasei Pharma up to $547 million in a legal battle opposing the two firms. In response to criticism from one of its major shareholders of its handling of reporting requirements related to ongoing litigation in the U.S., Actelion said it believes the criticisms have "no factual basis."









 Write to  Aude Lagorce at aude.lagorce@dowjones.com 