WASHINGTON—The 112th Congress opened a new era of divided government Wednesday, and newly empowered Republicans immediately moved to advance their agenda of attacking government spending.

Rep. John Boehner (R., Ohio), within hours of becoming the nation's 61st House speaker and swearing in the new Republican-controlled House, pushed through new rules designed to make it more difficult to raise taxes, increase spending and lift the federal debt ceiling.

The Senate convened with Democrats still in the majority, but with the GOP holding six additional seats.



Mr. Boehner, in his maiden speech as speaker, acknowledged his party has been thrust into the majority in an era of great political volatility, capping two decades in which control of the House has changed parties three times.

"The American people have humbled us," Mr. Boehner said. "They have refreshed our memories as to just how temporary the privilege to serve is. They have reminded us that everything is on loan from them. That includes this gavel."

Mr. Boehner accepted the speaker's gavel from Rep. Nancy Pelosi (D., Calif.), the first woman to hold the office that is second in the line of succession to the presidency. 

In the Senate, meanwhile, Majority Leader Harry Reid (D., Nev.) fended off an effort by members of his own party to alter rules that control operations of the Senate, including proposals to curb filibusters and other tactical hurdles used to block legislation.

The spotlight was most intensely focused on the bigger changes in House, where Republicans hold a 49-seat majority, just four years after losing control of the House in 2007. Members quickly took up a GOP resolution that turned arcane procedural matters into vehicles for advancing GOP policy goals.

The measure, which set House rules for the next two-year session, established a new requirement that bills be posted on the Internet 72 hours before they're debated on the floor. That addressed tea-party complaints that the health-care legislation and other major bills were drafted in too much secrecy.

But more far reaching were GOP proposals that upended the ground rules for deficit reduction. Under Democratic control, a so-called "pay as you go'' budget rule required most bills that increased spending or cut taxes to be offset with spending cuts or tax hikes in other areas. The new rule instituted Wednesday says only spending cuts can be used to offset spending increases—a "cut as you go'' rule that takes tax increases off the table. It also allow taxes to be cut even if their cost isn't covered by spending reductions.

In practice, the impact of those rules will be limited, because they don't apply to the Senate, and spending and tax legislation has to pass both chambers. But the rules underscore a dramatic shift from decades in which budget hawks from both parties tended to view both spending cuts and tax increases as necessary to tackle mounting deficits and debt.

"They are switching from rules that emphasize deficit reduction to those that emphasize controlling spending,'' said Maya MacGuineas, president of the nonpartisan Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget. "The budget is a two-sided entity. Allowing tax cuts without offsets can create tremendous holes in the budget.''

More on the new speaker of the House

See the average age of the House of Representatives and the Senate, from 1949 to 2011.

Take a look at Republican lawmakers who taking the reins of key House committees.

Republicans said the rules changes were in keeping with their campaign promises and the message they heard from voters in the midterm elections. "We don't have a revenue problem; we have a spending problem,'' said Rep. David Dreier (R., Calif.), who will lead the House Rules Committee.

Interest groups potentially affected by the budget rules changes wasted no time in responding. The construction industry and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce have already criticized the GOP for making it easier to cut spending on highway and transit programs. Education-spending advocates complained about impending cuts to social programs. 

Democrats accused Republicans of hypocrisy for campaigning on a platform of fiscal responsibility then altering the "pay as you go'' rules.

"They told the American people they were serious about deficit reduction, but apparently that was for campaign purposes only,'' said Rep. Jim McGovern (D., Mass.).

The new GOP rules also specify that when the House votes on a Republican proposal to repeal the 2010 health-care law—a vote that Mr. Boehner has slated for next week—the impact on the deficit will not be taken into account. The Congressional Budget Office has projected that the health law would reduce the deficit by more than $1 trillion over 20 years, due to tax increases, Medicare cuts and other provisions. Republicans have challenged that number. 

Erecting another hurdle to spending increases, the new GOP rules will require an on-the-record vote every time Congress increases the ceiling on the national debt. That abolishes a procedure that allowed the debt ceiling to be increased as part of the annual budget process, rather than with a separate vote.

The transfer of power to Mr. Boehner entailed far less fanfare and ceremony than when Ms. Pelosi took the reins in 2007. Ms. Pelosi invited a crowd of children to the dais in a symbol of her commitment to helping America's families.

Mr. Boehner spent the morning with his family, including 10 of his 11 brothers and sisters who came to witness his swearing in. The group attended mass at St. Peter's, a Catholic church a few blocks from the Capitol.