As the dollar fell to a record low against the yen Thursday, the question being asked is: Why does everyone want to buy the yen? 

The rapid ascent of the Japanese currency since Friday's earthquake and tsunami hit the country's northeast coast seems a striking anomaly amid one of Japan's worst-ever disasters. But the yen's rise—which may be short-lived—is the product of market assumptions based on Japan's unusual profile as a creditor nation and the experience following the 1995 Kobe earthquake, which also pushed the yen up temporarily. 

The dollar fell from about 82.80 yen when the earthquake hit, to a record low of 76.25 yen early Thursday, before recovering a bit to 78.72 yen late morning in New York, down from 79.85 yen late Wednesday. The drop has been fueled by investors seeking to cash in on expected repatriation of Japanese investment abroad, economists say. 

Japanese investors held around $2 trillion in foreign assets, net of reserves, at the end of 2010. Speculators are betting a chunk of that will flow home as Japan begins to rebuild and repair the damage and insurance companies begin to pay out claims on life and property-and-casualty policies. 

The Nikkei stock index has also been hammered, raising expectations that Japanese banks and other large firms would need to bring foreign money home to cover losses in the equity markets. 

"There's been an almost Pavlovian response," said  Robert Rennie, a foreign-exchange strategist at Westpac Institutional Bank in Sydney. "We know Japan has an enormous foreign-asset position. Given the scale of the disaster we've seen in recent days, there is a sense that Japan will need to dip into that." 

"Those that are trying to front-run repatriation have taken out their playbooks from the Kobe earthquake, and they see the yen appreciation that happened back then," said  Endre Pedersen, a Hong Kong-based managing director at Manulife Asset Management. "It's all about speculative flows in thinner trading, and I think that's what we are seeing pushing up the yen." 

The most dramatic move occurred in the early morning hours of Asian trade Thursday. It seems to have been driven more by a generalized market panic and stop-loss sales, than any deliberate trading strategy involving the yen. 

Remarks by European Union Energy Commissioner  Guenther Oettinger touched off a stampede to haven currencies, including the Swiss franc and the yen. Mr. Oettinger told a European Parliament committee that the situation at a nuclear-reactor site in Japan was "out of control" and that "catastrophic events" could ensue within hours. A spokeswoman for Mr. Oettinger later said the remarks reflected his personal views and weren't based on privileged information. 

The dollar slid to 79.75 yen—the previous record low, set a few months after the Kobe disaster—which in turn triggered stop-loss orders, sending the greenback tumbling to 76.25 yen. The break took place after New York traders had wrapped up for the day and most Asian traders weren't yet in their dealing rooms, leaving a very illiquid market, which contributed to the steep decline in the dollar.

The dollar was weaker against most major currencies on Thursday. Early afternoon in New York, the euro was trading at $1.3999, up from $1.3890 late Wednesday, and at 110.40 yen, from 110.92 yen. The British pound jumped to $1.6124 from $1.6022, while the dollar slipped to 0.9017 Swiss frank, from 0.9086 franc.

The yen pulled back sharply during the Asian session as Japan appeared to get a measure of success in grappling with the nuclear crisis.

Perhaps just as important, markets braced for potential intervention by Japan's Finance Ministry to force the yen lower. Finance Minister  Yoshihiko Noda said he was closely watching the yen, given "nervous movements" and "speculations" in the market.

 The government, which unleashed enormous currency interventions early in this decade, has stepped into the market only once since 2004, but in a big way. On Sept. 15, the ministry sold two trillion yen to knock the Japanese yen back from an attempt at the 1995 record high. 

Officials appeared to justify their position by blaming speculators for the yen's run-up, insisting there was no evidence that actual repatriation flows were behind the move. 

While there is scarce data on the extent to which capital is flowing back to Japan, there are reasons to think those who are trying to cash in quickly on repatriation flows will be disappointed. The rate of repatriation will depend in part on the extent to which households and insurance companies can liquidate domestic investments or tap cash reserves to cover losses. 

Recent data on Japanese retail currency positions suggest that smaller Japanese investors haven't begun to liquidate their currency trades, said Westpac's Mr. Rennie. "You get a sense of a steely nerve and a real stubbornness on the part of the Japanese housewife," he said. 

This may be a worry to the authorities. In what may have been concern that long-dollar Japanese retail investors had been wiped out by the yen's surge, a senior Finance Ministry official Thursday morning asked a reporter, "How is Mrs. Watanabe's position doing?" 

In addition, many Japanese investments overseas now have currency hedges, "implying that position unwinding will not have as much impact as in 1995 when hedge ratios were lower," said  Robert Ryan, a senior global currency strategist at BNP Paribas. 

There are other factors playing into the yen's strength besides just the bets on repatriation. Rather than an increase in demand for yen, a decrease in supply—as Japanese investors slow their fresh investments abroad—is pushing the currency up. 

"We no longer have active Japanese long-term investors who have been aggressively buying assets overseas," said  Satoshi Tate, a senior dealer at Mizuho Corporate Bank. "Improving these investors' risk-taking appetite is a must for the dollar to recover further." 

The long-term outlook for the yen, however, is weak. The aftermath of the earthquake is bound to take a toll on exports, narrowing Japan's current-account surplus and hurting the yen, said Manulife's Mr. Pedersen. 

—Jerry Tan, Takashi Mochizuki and Tatsuo Ito contributed  to this article.