 Vietnam saw another double-digit pickup in inflation ahead of Lunar New Year, putting pressure on authorities to raise interest rates. The consumer-price index rose 12.17% in the first 24 days of January from a year earlier.  

 Consumer prices in Singapore rose faster than expected in December, prompting some analysts to say the nation may tighten monetary policy again in April.  

 Huawei sued to delay the sale of some Motorola assets to Nokia Siemens, claiming it would improperly transfer the Chinese firm's intellectual property.  

 Japanese private-equity fund Advantage Partners is in talks with creditors about giving up board seats at Tokyo Star Bank and control over the eventual sale of the lender.  

 Kirin agreed to form a soft-drink joint venture with one of China's biggest drinks companies, China Resources Enterprise.  

 Honda Motor said improper transactions discovered at a trading-business subsidiary will cause a loss of about $181 million.  

 Canadian National Railway is in talks with some Chinese firms about the possible export of crude oil produced in Saskatchewan.  

 Singapore Exchange secured long-term funding worth about $3.7 billion for its proposed deal to acquire Australia's ASX, reaffirming its intention to complete the transaction this year.  

 Standard Chartered plans to buy GE Money, a wholly owned unit of GE Capital that provides auto and personal loans in Singapore, for up to $701 million.  

 India's largest private lender by assets, ICICI Bank, beat market expectations, posting a near 31% rise in its financial third-quarter net profit from a year earlier.  

 Air France is implementing 35 safety recommendations including in-flight observation of cockpit crews, prompted by an outside review of its operations.  

 Japan's Resona set a price of $5.33 a share for its planned public offering later this month as it strives to repay a bailout.  

 Australia's economic outlook cooled with the release of weaker-than-expected producer-price figures, early signs of the impact of flooding in Queensland state.  

 Cocoa futures jumped after Ivory Coast's internationally recognized leader put a monthlong ban on cocoa exports.  

 France's Sarkozy said the new global monetary order should reflect the growing role of emerging nations without undermining the role of the U.S. dollar, which will remain "prominent."  

 Japanese Prime Minister Kan called for cooperation across the political spectrum in tackling the nation's debt crisis as he opened the new parliamentary session.  

 Japan's government will soon reach a settlement on a class-action lawsuit involving people who contracted hepatitis B through childhood vaccination.  

Karzai approved a deal to inaugurate parliament, ending a four-month standoff that left Afghanistan without a legislature. 

Two bombs hit Shiite pilgrims in the Iraqi holy city of Karbala, killing at least 18 people as they massed for religious rituals. 

Democratic nations are ignoring abuses by repressive regimes and opting for improved relations rather than condemning violations, Human Rights Watch said.

British fighter jets escorted a Etihad Airways plane to Stansted Airport after a passenger made a bomb threat. 