KABUL—Afghan President Hamid Karzai approved a deal to inaugurate Afghanistan's parliament on Wednesday, ending a four-month standoff with winning candidates that left the country without a legislature to check presidential powers.

The agreement represented a significant concession by Mr. Karzai, who had ordered a month-long delay of the inauguration last week, to give a special court he had established time to investigate allegations of fraud in the Sept. 18 election. Parliamentarians forced his hand by threatening to convene without his approval.

Monday's agreement, brokered after days of intense negotiations under international pressure, will leave in place Mr. Karzai's special court, which Afghan election authorities and lawmakers consider unconstitutional. Western observers and incoming lawmakers say Mr. Karzai may use the special court to weed out opposition legislators.

Spokesmen for the president deny that he will do so. "Cases regarding the parliamentary election of 2010 will be dealt with by judicial authorities and the established election court," allowing the inauguration to occur to Wednesday, a statement from the presidential palace said.

The confrontation between Mr. Karzai and incoming lawmakers over the inauguration is likely to produce a parliament that is more defiant than the previous legislature. The parliament has already emerged as the only real check on Mr. Karzai, voting down the president's cabinet choices last year and opposing legislation sponsored by him.

"I'm sure this parliament will be stronger than the last as we have stronger personalities," said Mirwais Yasini, an influential incumbent from Nangarhar province who is running for speaker. "The inauguration delays haven't helped relations."

Mr. Karzai authorized the inauguration after 200 of the 249 incoming lawmakers signed a letter accepting the continuation of criminal inquiries into fraud in the election.

Lawmakers initially insisted that the special court be dissolved, but removed the request after Mr. Karzai refused to stand down on the matter.

"It's a court made by the president for the president," said one incoming lawmaker.

The September polls were marred by widespread fraud, with nearly a quarter of all ballots cast, 1.3 million, thrown out and hundreds of polling stations disqualified for ballot stuffing and voter intimidation.

Western diplomats and the United Nations in recent weeks were steadfast in their support for parliament's speedy inauguration and insisted that Afghanistan's judiciary stay out of the elections.

On Friday, the U.N. expressed "deep concern" over parliament's delay and stressed that the country's "peaceful future lies in the building up of robust democratic institutions based on the rule of law and clear respect for the separation of powers."

—Habib Khan Totakhil and Arif Afzalzada contributed to this article.