 STATS: A 7,535-square-foot, five-bedroom, 5½-bath home on just over nine acres asking NZ$7 million (US$5.6 million), or NZ$929 a square foot. 

 58 Hunter Road  Queenstown, New Zealand 

 DETAILS: The owners built this Alpine compound as a retreat from their busy lives in Los Angeles. But shortly after moving in they decided to make it into a second career and try their hands at innkeeping. They turned the two-bedroom, two-bath stone guest cottage into a bed-and-breakfast (during the summer months only). For NZ$695 a night, guests get a full breakfast cooked by one of the owners, often using produce from the greenhouse and fruit from the orchard. In the afternoon there's tea and in the evening the owners serve hors d'oeuvres with New Zealand wines. Attached to the barn-like garage is a 1,000-square-foot screening room complete with its own lobby and popcorn machine. Amid the terraced gardens is a croquet lawn large enough for a game of badminton or petanque. Of the three ponds, the largest includes a gazebo and a jetty. 

 SELLERS: Bill Bailey and Mike Harris. Mr. Bailey was once a Hollywood set designer, while Mr. Harris worked in retail merchandising.

 THE NEIGHBORHOOD: "We used to have box seats at the Hollywood Bowl and there were more people there than in the whole area where we live now," says Mr. Harris. The property is halfway between the city of Queenstown and historic Arrowtown (those on the gourmet tour won't want to miss dinner at Saffron). If you don't run into a flock of sheep, it's about 12 minutes to the airport. 

 WHAT WE PAID: The owners paid about NZ$350,000 for the original five acres in 1995 and estimate that they have put more than NZ$6.9 million into the land, the house and the garden over the last 15 years.

 WHY WE'RE SELLING: "The world's a big place and we'd like to see some of it," says Mr. Harris. They hope to explore Asia and the South Pacific before settling in Queenstown.

 WHAT WE'LL MISS: "I will miss the home cinema because I grew up in a family that ran motion-picture theaters in the '30s and '40s," says Mr. Harris. Mr. Bailey will miss the garden where he grows potatoes to make hash browns. They will also miss the many guests who have become friends. Ten of their guests have liked the area so much that they have bought homes nearby, according to the owners.

 WHAT WE WON'T: The owners won't miss having to use the intercom system to find each other when it's time for cocktails. They say that their next house will be smaller.

 WE REMEMBER WHEN: At their last Christmas party there were about 110 people. "It's nice when you're an immigrant and you can pull together people from all walks of life, from the mayor to the plumber," says Mr. Harris. At Thanksgiving they had a croquet tournament and a picnic.

 OTHERS SAY: Mike Cook, a real estate agent at RE/MAX in Queenstown, has shown the property to prospective buyers from Shanghai. "I have no issue with the price because we have a limited supply of luxury property in Queenstown," says Mr. Cook. "The grounds and the views are stunning." 

—Guess what the house will sell for—and when— at WSJ.com/Guess.