Making a name for oneself as a winemaker with a grape that almost no one has ever heard of is a bit like writing pop songs for the cello. "Eleanor Rigby" aside, you're probably starting with a handicap. But Morgan Clendenen had her reasons for choosing Viognier as the focus of her winemaking aspirations when she started Cold Heaven 15 years ago. For one thing, her then-husband, Jim Clendenen, cast a big shadow as the godfather of Pinot Noir and Chardonnay in the Santa Barbara region. Starting his winery Au Bon Climat in 1982, Mr. Clendenen had been instrumental in showing the region's potential for these Burgundian varietals, and this influenced his wife's decision to try something different. That and the fact that she loved Viognier, a passion I happen to share. 

Although it seems to be a descendant of the Northern Italian Nebbiolo, the Viognier grape found a home on the steep slopes of the Rhône River just south of Côte-Rôtie, in a small appellation called Condrieu. It appeared to be headed for extinction just a few decades ago; in the French agricultural census of 1968 only 35 acres remained in Condrieu and the tiny adjacent appellation of Château-Grillet. Fortunately, Condrieu was rediscovered, in part thanks to the enthusiasm of wine critic Robert Parker and to the efforts of Étienne Guigal, the renowned Côte-Rôtie winery, which has become the largest producer of Condreiu. In fact, there was a moment when Condrieu was downright fashionable, at least among wine wonks. 

What makes Condrieu irresistible to some of us is its heady aroma and flavors, both of which suggest peaches and apricots and honeysuckle, as well as its rich, viscous texture. The best examples smell as if they will be sweet, and even start out tasting that way, but finish dry. They are full-bodied, voluptuous whites that stop just short of being floozies. Viognier is low in acid, and if it gets too ripe it will turn into something that tastes like the syrup at the bottom of canned fruit salad. In Condrieu, the climate and the soils, not to mention generations of experience, usually seem to keep Condrieu from putting on the red light. But there will always be a hint of decadence, something fin de siècle and Oscar Wildeish, about Condrieu. 

In the past two decades Condrieu fans have planted Viognier around the world, from the Languedoc to Australia, with decidedly mixed results. In California's Central Coast, pioneers like John Alban and Calera's Josh Jensen made some promising examples; more recently Greg Brewer has produced racy Viogniers at Melville.

Ms. Clendenen, who looks in person like a cross between Jodie Foster and Kate Hudson, grew up in rural North Carolina, where her father had a bottled-spring-water company. "My dad would set up water tastings. I became attuned to slight variations in flavors and tastes," she says. When she got a job with a North Carolina wine importer she noticed that the Calera Viognier from California's Central Coast always sold out in advance, and while she never got to taste it, she was intrigued. Moving west to pursue her interest in wine, she spent 18 months at Sinskey Vineyards in the Napa Valley, where she met Au Bon Climat's Jim Clendenen. For an aspiring winemaker, marrying a wine-world legend was a mixed blessing. She needed to find her own niche. When the owner of the Sanford & Benedict Vineyard, which supplies grapes to Au Bon Climat, asked her husband if he had any interest in a batch of Viognier grapes, "Jim said no but I kicked him under the table," she recalls. "I was interested." Thus was her Cold Heaven winery born.

"I loved Condrieu but was less than impressed with most of the California Viogniers which started appearing in the '90s," she says. "In Condrieu it makes this elegant, noble wine, but here in California it was sweet and cloying." Indeed, most of California's microclimates are probably too hot for Viognier, but Ms. Clendenen believed that parts of California's Central Coast, with its transverse valleys which funnel cool Pacific air into the interior, could provide congenial real estate. Cool heaven, so to speak. (The winery is actually named after a Yeats poem.) After stumbling on the grapes from Sanford & Benedict in 1996—no one could quite tell her when they were planted or by whom—she decided to plant more at Le Bon Climat Vineyard in the Santa Ynez Valley in 1998. With her husband, she traveled to Condrieu to taste Viognier at the source. She wanted to meet Yves Cuilleron, the rising star of the appellation, but he was away when she first visited and she subsequently ran into him in her own backyard at the Hospice du Rhône in Paso Robles, an annual event devoted to the celebration of Rhône Valley wine varietals.

Mr. Cuilleron's grandfather had founded the family's Rhône estate, although Yves had little interest in wine when he was growing up. "I thought I would be a mechanic," he told me when I first visited him, as we walked the steep Les Chaillets vineyard looking down on the silvery Rhône River below. "And then during my military service I was sent to Alsace, where I became interested in food and wine." In 1987 he took over the family domain and helped spark the renaissance of the appellation, taking his place alongside the standard bearers like Georges Vernay and André Perret.

It's not hard to imagine Mr. Cuilleron being charmed when he met the attractive young American Viognier maker at the Hospice du Rhône. More importantly, he liked her wine. She visited him in Condrieu and together they hatched an improbable plan—to make a Franco-American Viognier, blending grapes from Condrieu and grapes from California. In 2002 Mr. Cuilleron shipped several barrels of Condrieu to Santa Ynez, where Ms. Clendenen blended them with juice from the Sanford & Benedict vineyard. The wine, called Deux C, quickly became a cult item, fought over by sommeliers on both coasts of the U.S. The sommeliers who first introduced me to the stuff leaned in close and whispered the news, as if he were offering me something illegal: "Jim Clendenen's wife… Cuilleron… sick juice…." And indeed it tasted almost criminally decadent. 

The duo launched a second wine, Domaine Des Deux Mondes, using Sanford & Benedict grapes vinified in Mr. Cuilleron's style, to his recipe. Surprisingly, the master of Condrieu favors a richer, more decadent—some would say New World—style, employing new oak barrels, which Ms. Clendenen normally eschews, and riper grapes. Ms. Clendenen's natural style is frankly more Old World; she picks early to maintain acidity and ferments in old barrels. The Clendenen-made, Cuilleron-styled Viognier is called Saints & Sinners—"because in France Yves would be considered a sinner for performing this kind of experiment," Ms. Clendenen explains, "but he's a saint to us Americans." The result tastes more sinful than saintly to me, with its sultry, come-hither personality. Mr. Cuilleron recommends trying his wines with Thai and other spicy Asian cuisines; Ms. Clendenen concurs, and also suggests Mexican. I'd add lobster to the list.

The Clendenden marriage ended a few years ago and Ms. Clendenden no longer operates her winery out of Au Bon Climat's headquarters. But her partnership with Mr. Cuilleron continues; although the Deux C project is on hold at the moment, partly in response to the global economic downtown, the 2009 Saints & Sinners will be bottled in a few weeks. In the meantime, Ms. Clendenen's own Cold Heaven Viogniers are available from the winery and Mr. Cuilleron's excellent 2009s have reached our shores. You can drink them now; not particularly benefiting from age, Viognier is a wine of instant gratification.

A selection of outstanding Condrieus from the Rhône and Viogniers from California. 

Tart, fresh and lively, this suggests a just-ripe peach. Fleshy without being flabby. Order from the winery at 805-686-1343.

This seems to expand in the mouth; nice viscous texture and classic peach fruit with enough acid to gift it with definition.



Classic Condrieu in a restrained style, a collaboration of winemakers Yves Cuilleron, Pierre Gaillard and François Villard.



 Peach, apricot and honeysuckle leap out of the glass and then coat your palate. A big but not overblown Condrieu.



Almost over the top, this mouth-coating, decadent honeyed elixir verges on dessert and would be great with foie gras.