Fiat said it has raised its stake in Chrysler Group to 25% from 20%, as a result of an engine-production agreement.

 Renault and Volkswagen reported their global sales of cars and light-goods vehicles surged 14% last year compared with 2009, and both said their 2010 sales were at record levels. 

 Ford introduced its first plug-in compact minivan. The new C-Max, which is more compact than a traditional minivan, will also come in gas-powered and gas-electric hybrid versions.  

 Toyota unveiled the first of a family of new models that will carry the Prius hybrid-car name, part of a move to establish the Prius as a brand in its own right. 

China's auto sales rose 32% to 18.06 million units last year but will likely slow to 10% to 15% this year because of such factors as the government's withdrawal of certain auto-purchase incentives, a trade group said. 

Renault plans to use its partner Nissan Motor's Micra car platform to develop its first small car in India for 2012 as it prepares to enter the country's most popular vehicle segment.

Porsche is aiming to set a car sales record in 2011 and expects to sell more than 100,000 vehicles, Chief Executive Matthias Mueller said at the North American International Auto Show. The German sports-car maker will present a new product strategy at the end of the first quarter, he said. 

Virgin Atlantic risks having some aircraft seized after the airline said it wouldn't pay any airport fees at Heathrow until the end of March because airport operator BAA had handled recent heavy snowfall so badly. 

 The U.K.'s two partially state-owned banks, Royal Bank of Scotland Group and Lloyds Banking Group, have been quietly moving to stir investor interest in U.K. government holdings of their stocks, people close to the matter say.  

 Barclays Chief Executive Officer Bob Diamond is to be asked by U.K. lawmakers Tuesday to forego a potential multimillion-pound bonus payout for 2010, as politicians continue to stoke public anger over hefty bank bonuses two years after the financial crisis.  

 Credit Suisse said it will alter how it pays banker bonuses for 2010, taking into account shareholder criticism and increasing government involvement in year-end rewards. The Zurich-based bank's cash bonuses will be paid out over four years—one-quarter annually—and be linked to Credit Suisse's return-on-equity from next year to 2014.  

EFG Eurobank Ergasias, Greece's second-largest lender by assets, expects profit from its so-called New Europe operations to double this year, its chief executive said. Eurobank now has operations in 10 countries, including Bulgaria, Romania, Serbia, Turkey, Ukraine, Cyprus and Poland. 

 The Trans-Alaska Pipeline system will likely restart before Friday, a person familiar with the operation said. On Saturday, Alyeska Pipeline Service, which operates the 800-mile pipeline network, turned off the pipeline after workers discovered a leak, a closure that forced BP, Exxon Mobil and others to shut down nearly all of their oil production on the North Slope.  

Ineos Group Holdings announced a preliminary agreement with PetroChina to establish a trading partnership, share refinery technology and inject fresh capital into medium-size refineries in Scotland and France. 

India's oil ministry will decide by early February whether to allow Cairn Energy to sell a majority stake in its Indian unit to Vedanta Resources, federal Oil Secretary S. Sundareshan said. Edinburgh-based Cairn Energy is awaiting regulatory approval to sell up to 51% of Cairn India for as much as $8.5 billion to London-based mining conglomerate Vedanta. 

 Playboy Enterprises agreed to be taken private by an entity controlled by founder Hugh Hefner in a deal valued at about $207.3 million, ending a month's wrangling over the future of the media and entertainment company.  

U.S. financial-services firm State Street said it received a contract to provide custodial services for an A$18 billion (US$17.9 billion) Australian pension fund, taking the business from rival banking giant J.P. Morgan Chase. Boston-based State Street said it will add staff to handle all custody, fund accounting and complex tax services for REST Industry Super, the largest pension fund by membership in Australia, with 1.9 million policy holders. 

 Denmark's Danisco urged its shareholders to accept a 665 Danish kroner ($115.24) per share takeover offer from U.S. chemicals major DuPont that values the food ingredients and enzymes maker at 36.1 billion kroner ($6.3 billion).  

Private-equity firm Apollo Global Management and investor C. Dean Metropoulos have formed a group of investors to explore a purchase of Sara Lee, people familiar with the matter said. Sara Lee recently rejected a takeover offer from Brazilian beef processor JBS and is waiting to see if JBS will return with a higher proposal, people familiar with the matter said.

The U.K. takeover regulator told France's Oberthur that it must announce a firm intention to make an offer for banknote-paper maker De La Rue by Feb. 7 or walk away, setting a timetable for a takeover attempt that had threatened to drag on for months.

Bangladesh suspended trading at its main stock exchange Monday and security officials used batons to disperse thousands of angry investors upset over a market plunge. The benchmark Dhaka Stock Exchange general index rose 80 percent in 2010 but has fallen several times over the last few weeks. It tumbled 7.8 percent Sunday and 9 percent in early trading Monday, prompting an indefinite suspension on trading.

Trading was also suspended on the stock exchange in Chittagong, Bangladesh's second-largest city. A government website said trading in Dhaka and Chittagong would remain suspended until further notice.

 Laos launches its first stock exchange Tuesday with two listed stocks: a bank, Banque Pour Le Commerce Exterieur Lao and power company EDL-Generation, which many investors see as a way of getting some exposure to Laos's burgeoning hydropower industry. 

 Alcoa swung to a fourth-quarter profit of $258 million, compared with a year-earlier loss of $277 million, as the economic recovery boosted aluminum prices, and the company—which unofficially opens the U.S. earnings season—said it expected demand would stay strong.  

Norwegian conglomerate Orkla said it is in talks with China National BlueStar over the sale of its subsidiary Elkem's silicon-related businesses, which could bring it between 10 billion and 15 billion Norwegian kroner ($1.67 billion to $2.51 billion). 

Mapletree Commercial Trust is looking to launch a Singapore initial public offering in March in a transaction that could raise up to 1 billion Singapore dollars (US$772 million), people familiar with the situation said. 

Inditex's founder, controlling shareholder and current chairman Amancio Ortega proposed that Chief Executive and Deputy Chairman Pablo Isla become the new chairman of the world's largest fashion retailer by sales. 

Retailer Matahari Putra Prima will retain and expand its Hypermart Food Retail business as a wholly owned business division after offering international buyers a majority stake, a senior executive said.

In addition, an executive at Indonesia's Lippo Group said Matahari is planning to issue new shares worth up to 20% of its total equity "soon" and has already attracted interest from global investors. 

A consortium that includes Nasdaq-listed iGate and private equity firm Apax Partners agreed to buy a 63% stake in Indian outsourcing firm Patni Computer Systems from General Atlantic and three Patni founders in a deal that could be worth as much as $1.22 billion. 

 Research In Motion said it will implement Internet filtering in Indonesia "as soon as possible," after a minister threatened Friday to shut down Internet browsing via BlackBerry smartphones if the Canadian company fails to block websites containing pornography. It will be the first time that the company will apply Internet filtering in any country, an official at RIM's Indonesia office said.  

Walt Disney is discussing making video from some of its television networks available on sets embedded with Yahoo's Internet-TV software, people familiar with the matter said. 

Duke Energy and Progress Energy agreed to an all-stock merger, valued at about $13.7 billion. The suitor will also assume about $12.2 billion in debt. The combined company will serve 7.1 million electric customers with a mix of coal, natural gas, oil and renewable resources and have what the companies called the U.S.'s largest regulated nuclear fleet.