SEOUL—South Korea's February consumer prices topped forecasts to rise at their fastest clip in more than two years, prompting the government to convene another price-stability meeting and raising pressure on the Bank of Korea to increase its policy interest rate next week. 

With the government's pledges to maintain price stability failing to curb inflation expectations and the growing belief that global oil and raw material prices will continue to remain high, some economists are raising their inflation forecasts for this year and calling on the central bank to raise its policy rate. 

The BOK's monetary policy board, which held rates steady in February following a 0.25 percentage point rate increase in January, next meets March 10. 

"Now I see more chances for the consumer price index to rise by more than 5% in the early part of the second quarter if global oil prices stay above $100 a barrel for a prolonged time," HI Investment & Securities economist Park Sang-hyun said. 

The central bank's inflation target range for this year is 2%-4%. 

In February, the consumer price index was up 4.5% from the year-earlier month, accelerating from a 4.1% rise in January and marking the fastest pace since the same rate was recorded in November 2008. Inflation was driven by rising global raw material prices externally and more expensive service charges internally. 

Month-to-month, the CPI rose 0.8% following a 0.9% increase in January. 

Economists polled by Dow Jones Newswires had forecast the CPI to rise 4.3% year-to-year and 0.5% month-to-month. 

The core CPI, which excludes volatile energy and food prices, rose 3.1% year-to-year, the biggest rise since the same reading in August 2009 and larger than a 2.6% increase in January. It was up 0.7% month-to-month in February following a rise of 0.6% in the previous month. 

The data are the latest sign of escalating prices pressures in Asia, where a combination of fast economic growth and rising prices of food and energy have stoked inflation and prompted most central banks in the region to raise interest rates. 

Even the region's holdout, the Philippines, may be moving closer to lifting interest rates from a record-low level. Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas Gov. Amando Tetangco said Wednesday the scope for keeping interest rates at current levels "has narrowed," responding to comments by the International Monetary Fund, which said the spike in food and fuel prices "probably reinforces the case for normalizing the monetary policy stance sooner rather than later." 

Recent data show the South Korean economy—Asia's fourth largest—remains resilient despite growing external uncertainties, adding urgency to the authorities' need to take action to curb surging prices. 

The HSBC Purchasing Managers' Index for Korea, a key gauge of manufacturing activity, stood at a seasonally adjusted 53.40 in February, little changed from January's 53.49 and above the boom-bust threshold of 50. 

HSBC said growth of new orders received from overseas markets accelerated to a nine-month high, while input cost inflation rose at its fastest clip since February 2009, driven by further rises in raw material prices. 

"Korea's economy is not missing a beat. Output is expanding at a robust pace and a pick-up in new export orders in February points to another month of solid gains," said HSBC economist Song Yi Kim. "The only headache is inflation...Amid healthy demand growth, firms will increasingly pass these on, necessitating continued tightening by the central bank." 

Government data Tuesday showed Korea's exports rose 17.9% from a year earlier to $38.96 billion in February, while imports were up 16.3% on year at $36.11 billion, resulting in a handsome surplus of $2.85 billion. 

The data showed export momentum remains solid, which means the BOK will be able to tighten policy next week with little fear of damping economic growth, said Mr. Park at HI Investment. 

Minister of Strategy and Finance Yoon Jeung-hyun convened a meeting with nine other minister-level officials to discuss what the government can do to stabilize prices. 

The government will "basically" freeze utility service charges in the first half of the year, but will gradually pass increases in raw material prices on to customers from the second half, said Vice Minister of Strategy and Finance Yim Jong-yong. 

Mr. Yim also said that the government isn't considering making changes to its forecasts for 5% economic growth and around 3% inflation this year despite criticism that they aren't realistic. 

"It's true that we're in a difficult situation [in terms of price stability]...but we're not thinking of revising our forecasts yet," Mr. Yim said. 

A government statement after the meeting said it is "extremely difficult" to maintain price stability now due to supply shocks domestically and overseas. It said this may continue for the time being. 

But the government said it is optimistic that inflation will start to ease from the second quarter as winter-related demand for energy weakens and the supply of agricultural and marine products may rebound. 

 --Cris Larano in Manila contributed to this article.  

 Write to  Kanga Kong at kanga.kong@dowjones.com 