The Drug Enforcement Administration has seized a key execution drug from the Georgia prison system because of concerns about how the state imported the drug from overseas.

Like other states, Georgia last year was forced to import thiopental sodium from England due to a U.S. shortage of the drug, which is used to carry out lethal injections. 

"Questions came to light with how the substance was imported" by Georgia, said DEA agent Chuvalo Truesdell, declining to elaborate. He said the DEA will retain control of the drug while it conducts an investigation, which could last up to six months. There are no scheduled executions in the state.

Peggy Chapman, a spokeswoman for the Georgia Department of Corrections, said the department notified the DEA after a February letter was sent to Attorney General Eric Holder alleging that Georgia had violated a federal law in acquiring thiopental by failing to register as an importer of the controlled substance.

 "We have been working with [the DEA] to ensure we are in compliance in the way we handle controlled substances," Ms. Chapman said.

The February letter was sent by John Bentivoglio, a partner at the Washington D.C. office of the law firm Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP, who represents Georgia death row inmate Andrew Grant DeYoung.

 The attorney contended in the letter that "illegally imported thiopental may be adulterated, counterfeit or otherwise ineffective in providing adequate sedation" to condemned inmates. Mr. Bentivoglio was not immediately available for comment.

Georgia has used imported thiopental to carry out two lethal injections, the September execution of Brandon Rhode and the January execution of Emmanuel Hammond, according to court documents. 

Witnesses to the Rhode and Hammond executions have questioned whether the state's imported thiopental properly sedated the men, potentially subjecting them to painful deaths. 

"There are no reasons I'm aware of to be concerned that those executions were not carried out properly," Ms. Chapman said. 

 Write to  Nathan Koppel at nathan.koppel@wsj.com 