SHANGHAI—Shanghai Pudong Development Bank Co. recorded a 44% surge in 2010 net profit, raising the curtain on a likely robust earnings season in China for an industry that remains beleaguered in western economies. 

However, despite China's buoyant financial performance last year, analysts urged caution over the long-term prospects for China's banking sector, citing hidden dangers from exposure to its booming property market and risk-prone local government financing vehicles that have come under regulatory scrutiny. 

Pudong Development, in which  Citigroup Inc.
C


0.67
%




 owns a 2.7% stake, said Wednesday in an earnings briefing that under Chinese accounting standards, its unaudited net profit for the 12 months ended Dec. 31 was 19.1 billion ($2.9 billion), up from 13.2 billion yuan. The bank said it issued 217.6 billion yuan in new loans last year, increasing its outstanding loans by 23% compared with the end of 2009. 

The midsize Shanghai-based bank didn't give an explanation for the rise in profit, but analysts said they believe its bottom line was lifted by a wider net interest margin and rapid growth in loans and fee-based intermediary businesses. 

  Shanghai Pudong Development Bank
600000


1.91
%




 is scheduled to issue its audited earnings results on April 28. China's banks usually issue full-year results in March and April. 

"The banking sector has been surrounded by a lot of uncertainties, such as stricter capital and provisioning rules," said  Jin Lin, an analyst at Shanghai-based Orient Securities. 

"The potential changes in these rules may not have an immediate and significant impact on the earnings of Chinese banks, but they will hurt people's confidence in the sector," he said. 

China's banks have emerged unscathed from the latest financial crisis because they derive a large portion of their revenue from the domestic market, but worries about the long-term health of local banks have been growing since they extended 9.6 trillion yuan of new loans in 2009, more than the combined new lending in the previous two years. 

Memories of a massive government bailout of the state-owned banks at the start of this century have prompted Beijing to take some pre-emptive steps to curb rising credit risk in investment-intensive sectors, especially real estate and local government infrastructure development. 

These measures include higher mortgage rates and downpayment requirement, more frequent stress tests on the impact of a decline in property prices and a crackdown on gray-market financing from trust companies. 

Additionally, local media have reported in recent weeks that China may increase the risk weighting for loans extended to local governments' financing vehicles, a move that analysts say will significantly increase banks' costs and prompt another round of capital raising. 

Most analysts expect China's listed banks to post an average 20% earnings growth this year, down from an expected 30% rise in 2010. 

Citigroup said in a recent note that Chinese banks' net interest margins will likely continue to expand this year, supported by the country's interest rate increases and slower credit growth following the successive increases in banks' reserve requirement ratios. 

China raised its benchmark interest rates twice in the last quarter of 2010. The increases have led economists to say the world's second-largest economy has entered a rate-increase cycle to contain surging inflationary pressure. 

Chinese banks have traditionally enjoyed a competitive edge over its Western peers due to a rigid interest rate regime that maintains a large premium on lending rates over deposit rates. 

Analysts said Pudong Development Bank's earnings growth will likely dwarf an average 30% earnings growth to be posted by its big rivals such as  Industrial & Commercial Bank of China Ltd. and  Bank of China Ltd.
BACHY


-0.21
%




 Medium-sizes banks such as Pudong Development mainly serve small- and medium-sized companies, they said, adding that lenders can charge these firms higher interest rates on loans than big banks can charge their customers, which mainly comprise government-owned firms. 

—Rose Yu 