BANGALORE–Indian pharmaceutical company Dr. Reddy's Laboratories Ltd. said Monday a U.S. court has allowed it to sell a generic version of  Sanofi-Aventis SA's anti-allergy drug, Allegra D-24. 

The launch of this product is significant for Dr. Reddy's as the company will be the only one selling the drug's generic version, enabling it to enjoy better margins and likely boosting its profit and sales in the financial year through March and the next. 

Shares of the company jumped almost 4% on the news. The shares were trading 2.2% higher at 1,600.25 rupees on the Bombay Stock Exchange in midday trade, outperforming the 1.1% fall in the benchmark Sensex. 

Allegra D-24 tablets are a once-daily treatment for allergy symptoms such as nasal congestion in adults and children aged 12 years or older. 

Dr Reddy's had received the U.S. Food and Drug Administration's approval to make and sell fexofenadine hydrochloride 180 milligram and pseudoephedrine hydrochloride 240 mg tablets, the generic version of Allegra D-24, in March 2010. It was the first to file a generics application for the drug with the FDA. 

However, it couldn't launch the product as the U.S. District Court of New Jersey in June 2010 granted Sanofi-Aventis and  Albany Molecular Research Inc.
AMRI


1.90
%




 a preliminary injunction on the drug's sale. 

Dr. Reddy's, which appealed the order, said Monday that the court lifted the injunction on Jan. 28 and asked Sanofi-Aventis and Albany Molecular to deposit $40 million as security with the court toward the possibility that the injunction had been wrongfully granted. 

The company said it intends to pursue an award of this security for having been stopped from launching the product since last June. 

Suryadeep Das, a pharmaceuticals analyst with Centrum Broking, said the brokerage is estimating about $10 million to $12 million in sales from the product this financial year and about $60 million in the next. 

Morgan Stanley said in a research note last week the potential for Dr. Reddy's from generic Allegra D-24 launch in the U.S. would be constrained as Sanofi-Aventis had got regulatory approval to sell the Allegra family of products without prescription from March. 

However, local analysts said that Dr. Reddy's could gain from the generic version in the time that it takes the French pharmaceutical company to build up its over-the-counter franchise for its Allegra products, which include a twice-daily version of the drug. 

 Write to  Rumman Ahmed at rumman.ahmed@dowjones.com 