The federal prosecution of alleged gunman Jared Lee Loughner will likely focus first on whether he should be tried in Arizona, then shift to the question of his mental competency.

Mr. Loughner's attorneys are expected to argue that he couldn't get a fair trial in Arizona, according to seasoned criminal lawyers, because his shooting spree has been the focus of intense media coverage and many potential jurors may have some tie, however remote, to the victims and witnesses. 

John Roll, one of those killed on Saturday, was the chief federal trial judge in Arizona and thus had a connection to every federal jurist in the state. Tucson federal judge Raner Collins on Tuesday issued an order in the case disqualifying all Tucson federal judges from presiding over the case because their "impartiality could be reasonably questioned."

Finding jurors who don't have preconceived notions about the defendant could be challenging wherever the case is held, given the widespread national coverage of the shootings. "I'm not sure that the problem of juror bias is going to be solved by moving this anywhere in the country," said Gabriel J. Chin, a law professor at the University of Arizona.



The case is at the very early stages. Mr. Loughner thus far has been charged in federal court with two counts of murder for the federal employees slain—Judge Roll and Gabriel Zimmerman—two counts of attempted murder of federal employees and the attempted assassination of a member of Congress. In total, six people were killed in the rampage, and 14 were injured, including Rep. Gabrielle Giffords.

Mr. Loughner will have to answer in Arizona state court for the four people killed who were not federal employees and more than a dozen victims injured by the crime, said Pima County Attorney Barbara LaWall. She hasn't yet determined whether she has to wait until the federal case is over before she files state charges.

"I would have liked to have gone first," she said, noting that she has the authority to prosecute Mr. Loughner for the entire crime and is troubled by the fact that there are so many victims who might be left in a "static position," awaiting the completion of the federal prosecution. "That might take a couple of years," she said.

When a decision is made about the venue of the federal case, likely by an out-of-state judge, the focus probably will turn to how prosecutors and defense attorneys handle questions about Mr. Loughner's mental state and competency to stand trial.

The case pits Tucson federal prosecutor Wallace Kleindienst—son of onetime U.S. Attorney General Richard Kleindienst, appointed by President Richard Nixon—against defense lawyer Judy Clarke, former counsel to "Unabomber" Theodore Kaczynski.

Mr. Kleindienst and Ms. Clarke are career criminal lawyers known for handling cases with subtle legal maneuvering, not bombastic courtroom presentations, attorneys said. Mr. Kleindienst declined to comment; Ms. Clarke didn't return a request for comment. 

Law-enforcement officials said Mr. Loughner had psychological problems but plotted his attack in a deliberate and orderly manner, buying a Glock 9mm semiautomatic pistol in November and bullets the morning of the shooting.

Mr. Loughner's lawyers may request a mental examination of their client, who authorities say left behind a trail of erratic conduct, including writings and videos critical of the U.S. dollar and the proper use of grammar.

Once the prosecution is under way, lawyers said, Mr. Loughner's legal team could try to claim he is not guilty by reason of insanity, a tough legal standard that would require a showing that he didn't understand the wrongfulness of his crime.

If a defendant proved that he thought he was "playing a videogame, for instance, or squeezing lemons instead of strangling someone, that might" prove insanity, said Mr. Chin. "But merely a profound mental illness typically isn't enough" to win an acquittal, he said.

Given the voluminous evidence linking Mr. Loughner to the crime, the ultimate issue in the case likely will be whether Mr. Loughner should be executed, attorneys said. 

If Mr. Loughner doesn't qualify for an insanity defense, his mental condition could still prove relevant at sentencing. "Even if he knew right from wrong, jurors may decide [Mr. Loughner] is so mentally deranged, he should not qualify for the death penalty," said Tucson criminal defense lawyer Michael Piccarreta. 

 Write to  Nathan Koppel at nathan.koppel@wsj.com and Ashby Jones at ashby.jones@wsj.com 