In the first move of what could be a long legal battle,  Charlie Sheen has sued Warner Bros. and "Two and a Half Men" co-creator Chuck Lorre for $100 million plus punitive damages over his termination on the hit television show.

Mr. Sheen, who was fired from TV's most popular sitcom on Monday after a series of public outbursts and a history of drug abuse and arrests, filed a lawsuit in Los Angeles Superior Court demanding that he, the cast and the crew be paid for the show's canceled episodes, among other damages.

The suit alleges that Mr. Lorre fired him because he wanted to work on other shows and because he disliked Mr. Sheen. "Since Lorre has a better deal and stands to make even more money on his other current shows," Mr. Sheen's lawyer,  Marty Singer, wrote in the suit. "Lorre has been motivated in part by his own self interest and conflict of interest to make his other shows flourish at the expense of the Series and because of his animus toward Mr. Sheen."

The suit also argues that Warner Bros., a unit of  Time Warner Inc.
TWX


0.56
%




 that produces "Two and a Half Men," and Mr. Lorre "conspired" against Mr. Sheen, weaving an intricate "public relations fiction" in order to turn him into a public "scapegoat."

A spokesman for Warner Bros. declined to comment on the suit. 

"The allegations in the complaint against Mr. Lorre are as recklessly false and unwarranted as Mr. Sheen's rantings in the media," said Mr. Lorre's attorney,  Howard Weitzman. "These accusations are simply imaginary. This lawsuit is about a fantasy "lottery" pay-day for Charlie Sheen. Chuck Lorre's concern has been and continues to be about Mr. Sheen's health."



Warner Bros. on Monday cited Mr. Sheen's behavior in terminating his contract. The studio said the actor had committed felony offenses involving "moral turpitude." "Your client has been engaged in dangerously self-destructive conduct and appears to be very ill," Warner Bros. said in a letter to Mr. Sheen's lawyer. 

The studio also gave what it said were multiple reasons why it is entitled to terminate Mr. Sheen's contract. It said it could do so, with written notice, as a result of "uncured incapacity." It also said that Mr. Sheen's flurry of media appearances, in which he has launched personal attacks against Mr. Lorre and criticized Warner Bros., violated part of his contract related to publicity.

Mr. Sheen's suit said that Warner Bros. was "quite happy" to employ him and even negotiate new deals with him for future seasons of "Men" while he was in rehab and facing a potential felony conviction, but terminated his contract only when Mr. Sheen had "been provoked into criticizing Lorre."

"Warner Bros. even stated that it would not object to Mr. Sheen entering a guilty plea and having a convicted felon as its Monday night star, so long as it would not unnecessarily interfere with the production schedule," the suit says. "None of this resulted in Warner Bros. suspending Mr. Sheen. What did?"

The suit alleges that the studio's firing of the actor, even for those circumstances, would be in violation of provisions of federal and California labor law. 



The suit also states that Mr. Sheen is pursuing claims "for the benefit of the entire cast and crew to get paid for the balance of the season's 24 episodes." 

The show aired on  CBS Corp.'s namesake network.

A Warner Bros. spokesman said that no one from the show's crew has filed a lawsuit or is a party to Mr. Sheen's suit.

Mr. Sheen is paid about $2 million an episode for "Men," including his share of "back-end" profit like syndication, according to people familiar with the matter. The suit also states that Mr. Sheen's most recent contract entitles him to payments for episodes, whether or not the series films, through late 2011.

The lawsuit opens by criticizing Mr. Lorre in terms echoing some of the public statements Mr. Sheen has made in his TV and radio appearances in recent weeks. "Defendant Chuck Lorre, one of the richest men in television who is worth millions of dollars, believes himself to be so wealthy and powerful that he can unilaterally decide to take money away from the dedicated cast and crew ... in order to serve his own ego and self-interest, and make the star of the Series the scapegoat for Lorre's own conduct."

Warner Bros. and  CBS Corp.
CBS.A


0.12
%




, which airs the show, haven't yet said whether they will bring "Men" back into production without Mr. Sheen. 

 Write to  Lauren A. E. Schuker at lauren.schuker@wsj.com 