SAN FRANCISCO—Officials in California, Oregon and Washington state said Wednesday that radiation from Japanese nuclear reactors isn't expected to reach their shores. 

While state and federal officials continue to monitor radiation levels in the Pacific and along California's coast, officials have concluded that California isn't in danger of being exposed to radiation from nuclear reactors in Japan, officials at the state's Department of Public Health and Emergency Management Agency said. 

"We don't anticipate any dangerous radiation reaching California," said Public Health Department spokesman Mike Sicilia. "We believe that distance and weather are in our favor." 

Tokyo and San Francisco are roughly 5,000 miles, or 8,000 kilometers apart. 

California officials have been speaking regularly with officials at the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the Environmental Protection Agency and the Department of Health and Human Services, where scientists are monitoring the events in Japan, Mr. Sicilia said. 

"We are actively monitoring the situation in Japan and are ready to take all steps necessary to protect Californians should risks develop," the state Public Health and Emergency Management agencies said in a statement. 

Authorities in Oregon and Washington state also said they aren't at risk of being exposed to radiation from Japan. All three states' public-health agencies offered information about radiation exposure on their web sites. 

U.S. Energy Secretary Steven Chu said Wednesday he believes a "partial meltdown" occurred at Japan's Fukushima Daiichi power plant, where explosions and malfunctions following a 9.0-magnitude earthquake have raised concerns about radiation leaks. He added that the plant has containment systems to prevent leaks and that a partial meltdown doesn't mean the "containment systems will fail." 

The state agencies urged residents not to take potassium iodide as a precaution against radiation exposure. They said the substance is only useful in the event of a nearby radiation event, and taking it could sicken people with shellfish or iodine allergies or thyroid problems. 

More radiation monitors are being deployed in the western U.S. and Pacific territories as officials seek to mollify public concern, the Associated Press reported. 

The EPA already monitors radiation throughout the area as part of its RadNet system, which measures levels in air, drinking water, milk and rain, the AP said. 

California already has 12 monitoring stations scattered throughout the state that test the air for radiation levels.

The EPA told the AP that it is adding two more stations in Hawaii and two in Guam. In Alaska, officials are setting up three new monitors in Dutch Harbor, Nome and Juneau. The new stations are expected to be operational by the end of the week, EPA said.

—Tennille Tracy contributed to this article.

 Write to  Cassandra Sweet at cassandra.sweet@dowjones.com 