 Goshen, Ky. 

Two of Louisville's best-known urban renewal proponents, Laura Lee Brown and Steve Wilson have bet heavily that they can draw visitors and residents back to the city's urban core. 

 In 2006, the couple converted several abandoned downtown warehouses into the 21c Museum Hotel, a boutique hotel that merges 90 rooms with an upscale eatery and 9,000 square feet of contemporary art gallery space. This weekend, they will be hosting their annual Kentucky Derby party there. The couple are also the largest backers of a four-acre, $465 million development downtown that will include a 62-story building, a public park and a contemporary arts center. 

Yet Mr. Wilson, a 63-year-old who handled public relations for four Kentucky governors, and Ms. Brown, the 69-year-old great-granddaughter of the founder of liquor empire Brown-Forman, choose to make their life in the country. 

Both grew up on farms along the Ohio river, just like this one. "They are rural people at heart who believe in a strong urban core," said Craig Greenberg, a development partner.

Their 1,000-acre farm, about 40 minutes outside the city, has rolling hills dotted with bison, free-grazing pigs and a barn with a foundation that predates the Civil War. 

Woodland Farm dates back to the 1790s. Situated on the Ohio River about 40 minutes from downtown, it was a bustling, 10,000-acre plantation before the Civil War. The roughly 5,000-square-foot, four-bedroom, four-bath brick house has the original chestnut floors; the portion of the house that dates back to the 1790s still has the low ceilings and prominent wood beams of the era. 

Ms. Brown has incorporated some of her family's 19th-century English furniture collection into the home, including her great-grandmother's four-poster bed. An 1870s chapel, imported from several miles away, is set up as a guest cottage. 

Standing out in contrast to the traditional details is the couple's collection of contemporary art. A number of pieces address issues like race, sexuality or conflict: a straitjacket made of tangled barbed wire hangs above a 19th-century fireplace. Crystal champagne glasses shaped like male genitalia are arranged on a Plexiglass display pedestal in the living room. 

A wool tapestry in their living room, by artist Kara Walker, depicts a silhouette of a woman in a 19th-century dress hanging from a noose. Across the room, a motorized steel wall sculpture made an alarming snapping noise every few minutes. "I think [the art] gives the house a new energy," said Mr. Wilson, who has a white beard and wore jeans with a plaid shirt and yellow-rimmed glasses. 

Ms. Brown, who is also a painter, admitted that her husband's love of sometimes visually challenging artwork was something she's learned to embrace over time. "She was a debutante," Mr. Wilson said. "I was not." 

 Reflecting the couple's locavore interests, their gardens and farm supply the bison meat, fruit and a growing number of vegetables for ingredients in the seasonal dishes at the hotel's restaurant, Proof on Main, like Bison Carpaccio with parsnips and country ham fritters. 

The farm was originally slated to become a subdivision with a golf course until Mr. Wilson and Ms. Brown bought it in 1996 for about $4 million, partly, they said, to preserve rural land. (They've since put three-quarters of the property into a conservation easement.) A 750-acre riverfront farm property with a pre-Civil War house that hasn't been restored is on the market in Bedford, Ky., for $5.9 million. 

Ms. Brown said that the previous owners lived in a small two-room area that's now the kitchen. There was no central heat and a front porch was missing. Mr. Wilson and Ms. Brown spent nearly seven years getting the house and other buildings on the farm up to date. They said they spent roughly $1.5 million on the restoration of the main house as well as some of the landscaping nearby. 

The couple frequently maneuver between their roles of developers, farmers and art collectors. As the chef prepared a few proposed dishes (including an unusual parsley-based salad) for a casual pizza restaurant they plan to open downtown, Ms. Brown and Mr. Wilson met with a marketing manager to discuss names for the place. 

After lunch in a metal-roofed barn, Mr. Wilson chatted with a livestock veterinarian about a shipment of horse semen. Later, the couple advised two white-gloved art handlers where to hang a large, bright red painting that included human hair embedded in wax by artist Grant Hayunga. "Lordy be!" Ms. Brown exclaimed when she first caught a glimpse of it.

As evening approached, Mr. Wilson took his grandson and a visitor out to check on several dozen heritage pigs. Mr. Wilson, who grew up on a pig farm in western Kentucky, originally insisted that he'd never again live near the stinky swine, but he decided to add them to supply some pork to their restaurant. "We go back on our word a lot," he joked. 

 Write to  Candace Jackson at candace.jackson@wsj.com 