(See Correction & Amplification below .)

TOKYO—Radioactive water in and around the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear complex has emerged as the central challenge for repair crews, slowing efforts to bring the troubled facility under control and raising concerns about new dangers to workers and the environment coming from the plant.

Concern reached a new pitch Sunday morning, when the plant's operator,  Tokyo Electric Power Co., or Tepco, evacuated staff from one reactor after reporting that the level of radioactivity in a pool that had accumulated inside one of the buildings reached 10 million times the normal level found in the reactor core. The company later said the measurement was inaccurate and revised it down to 100,000 times the normal level.

Radioactive material detected in nearby seawater also continued to rise, the government said Sunday, following a sharp jump first announced the day before. Officials said the level there rose to 1,850 times the legal limit, up from 1,250 times a day earlier. 

Officials said Sunday they still weren't sure of the causes of the water contamination inside or outside the plant. But they said the radioactive pools inside were likely the result of leaky valves and pipes, not damage to any of the basic reactor structures. They said the seawater was likely polluted by rain or steam that trapped the radiation in the sky near the plant, then fell into the water. Tepco and a top regulator ruled out direct leakage from the plant.

The Japanese government monitors radiation levels around the country. Track these measurements over time.

While acknowledging the seriousness of the water situation inside the plant, which first emerged Thursday, officials tried to put the troubles in context, saying this has delayed progress toward the ultimate goal of a cold shutdown, but hasn't undermined the advances made to date. A "cold shutdown" refers to cooling reactors to safe levels.

Indeed, radiation levels from air sampled outside the Daiichi main gate fell again Sunday after declining for several days in a row, according to data provided by Tepco. They are now at their lowest level in roughly two weeks. 

That suggests radiation leakage into the atmosphere has slowed and the threat of a dramatic meltdown—indicated by high temperatures and rising pressures in the early days after the tsunami—seems to have receded. Radiation measured in both Tokyo's air and its water continued to fall Sunday.

Officials also insist that the emergence in recent days of radioactive water, even at the highly toxic levels recorded, poses little direct threat to anybody other than the workers directly exposed. Three workers were hospitalized after stepping in the water last week, but officials said they will be discharged Monday. 

The radioactivity in the seawater will disperse quickly, officials say. They say the poison puddles inside the plant are being pumped safely to a container inside the facility.

The contaminated water would cause more worry if it leaked from the plant into the outside grounds. But a Tepco spokesman said the company didn't think the water had penetrated the plant buildings' floors into the ground. 

"We are now taking care of it so that it will not released to the outside world," said Hidehiko Nishiyama, a senior regulator. "The water itself won't have any effect on the people in the outside world." 

Still, Chief Cabinet Secretary Yukio Edano said that "testing of soil in and around the plants has begun.... We are pushing for a speedy analysis."

The cause of the radioactive water leakage remains undetermined, and the severity of the problem depends in part on just what is behind it. Officials and some independent experts said they suspected it was caused by leaks in pipes and pumps running in and out of the reactors. Fixing a valve or pipe would be easier than a repair to the containment vessel, which serves as a final barrier in the chambers holding the fuel rods. 

"At the current point, we believe that there are no cracks or any broken parts of the containment vessel," Mr. Nishiyama said.

The water problems of the past four days underscore the complexities and uncertainties that continue to surround the repair effort, as workers, engineers and regulators are forced to confront new problems just as they seem to have solved old ones. Perhaps more unnerving than the specifics of the radioactive water is that it shows how unpredictable the repairs have become, and thus how hard it is for anybody to say with certainty how quickly or easily they can be completed.

Experts say the Japanese are moving in a prudent manner given the enormity of the task. As long as workers are able to keep the cores cool, the experts say, the nuclear material will continue to produce less heat naturally.

"Time is their friend," said  Alexander Sich, an associate professor at Franciscan University of Steubenville in Ohio. "The longer they wait, the cooler the cores get, the less stress on the system."

The next urgent task at the complex is removing the radioactive pools, which have gathered in the basements of three turbine buildings. Work started Saturday to pump out the water at one of the buildings. 

In addition, the repair crews are seeking to get the control rooms of each reactor up and running. On Saturday, they completed the task of turning on partial power at all four troubled units. But that is just the first step. Operators still need all the monitors and equipment up and running in those rooms to make them functional. It isn't clear how long that will take. 

Another key goal: hooking up the original cooling systems, which were knocked out by the March 11 tsunami, leading to the overheating of the reactors. Regulators had hoped to have that task under way by last Friday. But work was delayed, in part by the radioactive water building up inside the reactors, and it still isn't certain when that will resume.

Until the regular cooling systems are hooked up, workers are trying to keep the reactor temperatures down by dumping large amounts of water on them by various means, from helicopters to high-powered hoses. 

That process is now changing in two key ways.

First, they are accelerating the change of the water used to douse the reactors to fresh water from seawater. Seawater, while quickly available in large quantities, comes with its own set of problems: as seawater boils off, salt is left behind, potentially coating the fuel rods and preventing them from being cooled as efficiently.

Reactor No. 2 began receiving fresh water Saturday, following a similar switch at Nos. 1 and 3 the day before.

Second, workers are starting to hook up electrical pumps at three of the reactors, replacing the worker-run pumps currently in use. On Sunday, an electric pump replaced fire engines at Unit No. 2. A similar change is expected on Monday for Nos. 1 and 3. 

 Write to  Andrew Morse at andrew.morse@wsj.com 

 Correction & Amplification 

Tokyo Electric Power Co. on March 27 said that the level of radioactivity in a pool that had accumulated inside one of the buildings at the Fukushima Daiichi power plant had reached 10 million times the normal level found at the measurement site, and later revised the figure to 100,000 times normal. This article inaccurately stated the readings exceeded the normal levels found in the reactor core.