They play the same position. They were traded for each other. So it's only natural to measure Austin Jackson of the Tigers against Curtis Granderson of the Yankees.

And last season, Granderson was the clear loser in that competition.

Brian Cashman swapped Jackson, a former top prospect in the Yankees' farm system, for Granderson before the 2010 season, and initially it seemed like a great deal for the Yankees. Granderson was a dynamic player, seemingly well-suited for New York, and entering the prime of his career at age 29. 

A year later, the luster had faded. Jackson was flying high in Detroit, finishing second in the Rookie of the Year balloting while playing an excellent centerfield.

 Meanwhile, Granderson was decent but unspectacular in his first season in New York, hitting .247 with 24 homers. 

At only 24 this winter, it seemed likely that Jackson would keep improving, while costing the team far less: Jackson makes the major league minimum of $414,000, while Granderson costs $5.5 million last year and $8.25 million this year.

 But times have changed. 

Since a swing tweak last August, Granderson has been on fire, showing 40-homer potential and a new resilience against his longtime bugaboo, left-handed pitching.

 Meanwhile, the league seems to have caught up to Jackson, who is batting only .188 and looks lost through the first month of the season. 

With Granderson making his first visit back to Detroit since the trade, the talk has been whether the Tigers, not the Yankees, got the short end of that deal.

Jackson understands the comparisons, and knows they won't go away—that he will be measured for much of his career against Granderson. 

"It's just human nature," Jackson said. "I'm replacing the guy that was playing centerfield. But at the same time, I took it as this is my time to put to use all that work I did in the offseason, and in the minor leagues, a chance to achieve my goals."

Granderson would only say that he's happy to be on a winning team—that yes, he's enjoying the good start to this season, but that his own struggles last year and his hot streak this year both came on good teams, so he's fine with either. 

"When the team's playing well. it makes it that much more relaxing," Granderson said. "Even though individually I wasn't where I wanted to be last year, we were still playing good baseball like we are now. No matter what, as long as the team is playing well, I'll always be fine." 

Since his swing change, Granderson has been one of baseball's best hitters, showing the ability to hit both right-handed and left-handed pitchers, and to hit with significant power. 

Already this season, he's hit three home runs against lefties after hitting only four against them all of last season.

Granderson is signed through 2012, with a club option for 2013 —and his current success offers the hope that he could be New York's long-term solution in centerfield. 

Granderson's struggles last season paved the way for his current success. As he tried to find his way in the new environment in New York, he reached out to Yankee hitting coach Kevin Long, who offered a new approach that eliminated what Long believed was unnecessary movement.

Still, Granderson wasn't sure he was ready to rework the approach that had gotten him to the majors and allowed him to hit 30 home runs with Detroit in 2009. 

He had doubts. But Long was persistent, and Granderson wanted so badly to succeed that he stuck with the new style. 

"I remember the first time I tried it out," Granderson said. "I had to pinch hit in Texas and I flew out to center. I started to think, 'Hey man, I missed an opportunity here.'" 

Granderson went back to the dugout dejected. But Long was on him right away. 

"As soon as I got to the dugout, Kevin said, 'That's it, that's what we want.'...As soon as he said something like that, I was ready to go back to work with him the next day."

It has paid off. Granderson's 22 homers since August 14 are third-most in the major leagues over that stretch, and his eight homers this season ranked second in the American League entering Tuesday's game. 

Replacing Granderson has been doubly tough duty for Jackson because the gregarious Granderson was beloved in Detroit. 

He was involved in extensive charity efforts, and even took an active role in helping the Detroit public school system. "I loved the fans here, the city of Detroit,'' he said.

Jackson is pleasant and well-liked, but his public efforts are not on Granderson's level. 

Granderson and Jackson have only spoken in-depth once since the trade, in spring training before the 2010 season.

 Granderson gave his Detroit replacement advice, telling him to "play hard, and you'll be fine," Jackson said. 

Jackson probably will, and more likely than not, it'll take years before we know which team won this centerfielder swap.

Curtis Granderson of the Yankees, at eft, and Austin Jackson of the Tigers, at far left, since they were traded for each other after the 2009 season. After a stellar 2010, Jackson is struggling so far this season. The reverse is true of Granderson, who is excelling this season. Statistics through Monday's games.

Baseball-Reference.com

Reuters; Getty Images



