Amid commemorations for the 100th anniversary of the Triangle Shirtwaist Co. fire on March 25, descendants of the 146 victims and of those who survived the inferno are remembering tales of family members who worked in the factory building, which still stands in lower Manhattan.

A common theme among many family members is how little of what they know of the fire came from their loved ones. Historians say the loss of life and the circumstances of the Triangle fire stunned New York and the nation, transforming fire- and workplace-safety rules and galvanizing the labor movement in America. 

It was a time when young immigrant women, who were the majority of the victims of the fire, became leaders and helped to battle Tammany Hall bosses over greater enforcement of regulations. The fire's aftermath also empowered women on other issues, including their right to vote, which became law in 1920.

  Arlene March, who lives in California, and her brother,  Herb Freedman of Rye Brook, N.Y., said they first learned about the fire when they were watching television one night more than 30 years ago with their mother,  Rose Freedman. "I survived that fire," Mrs. Freedman told her surprised children.

Ms. March believes her mother had never mentioned the fire previously because she felt ashamed at having worked at a menial job, after emigrating to New York from Austria. "She spoke seven languages and was always going to school," Ms. March said.

Mrs. Freedman also became a dedicated basketball fan after moving to the West Coast, where another son, Bob, was friends with  Jerry West, a Los Angeles Lakers star and later the team's general manager. On Mrs. Freedman's 100th birthday in 1993, the team presented her with a Lakers jersey with her name and the number 100 on it. She died in 2001 at the age of 107.

Mrs. Freedman was the last known survivor of the fire that engulfed the top three floors of the building at the corner of Washington Place and Greene Street near Washington Square. The building was modern—far from the worst of the sweatshop facilities of the time—and despite the brutal hours and other working conditions, Triangle's workers were eager for work making shirtwaists—as the fashionable women's blouses were called.

When the fire broke out on the eighth floor late in the afternoon on Saturday, March 25, 1911, Triangle's workers were near the end of their shift. The cause of the fire is unknown, but within 30 minutes, one of the deadliest industrial accidents in U.S. history was over. 

Of the some 500 workers in the Triangle factory on the eighth, ninth and 10th floors, the majority made it to safety, including some who used elevators before they stopped and others who reached the roof and climbed to nearby buildings. But 146 victims—all but three of them Jewish or Italian—burned inside the building or leaped out of windows to avoid the flames.

What followed was a calamity both inside and outside the building. Firemen's hose and ladders didn't reach the eighth floor, nets failed to catch jumpers and stairways and a rusty fire escape were quickly overwhelmed. Workers on the ninth floor weren't warned about the fire until it had spread from the eighth floor. Wood tables and fabric—including perhaps a ton of remnants awaiting pickup by a scrap dealer—fueled the fire.

Seventeen men working for Triangle also died in the fire. Among them was  Elliott Steinberg's grandfather, Kalman Donick, a Triangle shop foreman. But until 1963, Mr. Steinberg, a real-estate broker who lives in Ridgewood, N.J., had thought that  Harry Donick, Kalman's brother, was his grandfather. 

On the day that Harry Donick died in 1963, his mother told Mr. Steinberg that his actual grandfather was Kalman. Harry had married Kalman's widow after the fire. 

Now, at every Passover Seder, the Steinbergs remember Kalman Donick, who is buried along with 22 other Triangle victims in the Hebrew Free Burial Association cemetery in Staten Island. 

The heroism of another victim,  Fannie Lansner, is cherished by her grandniece,  Erica Lansner, a photographer in New York. Fannie Lansner was credited with saving many co-workers by leading them to elevators before she became a victim of the blaze.

"I never knew anything about her unselfish act until I got a phone call one day from  Mike Hirsch asking me if I was related to Fannie," Ms. Lansner recalled. She guesses there were no family discussions about her great-aunt because the memory was probably "just too painful" for anyone to talk about.

Mr. Hirsch, a writer and genealogist, has spent time investigating the Triangle fire after discovering that one of the victims had lived on his block on the Lower East Side. 

Recently, after years of poring over death certificates, cemetery records and census files, he pieced together names and other details on the six remaining fire victims listed as "unidentified." 

Mr. Hirsh, who co-produced an HBO documentary on the fire that has its debut March 21, believes many Triangle survivors and descendants of the victims didn't talk about the fire—often for decades after that day in 1911—because they wanted to put the memories behind them. 

"For the immigrant generation who weathered the fire and the children they raised, Triangle represented just one more of those terrible events which these new Americans were struggling to distance themselves from and forget," he said. "I think it was this strong desire to look forward and not look back which is probably most responsible for the loss of this history among many Triangle families."

Ms. Lansner said she is "in awe" of what her great-aunt did and never misses an opportunity to talk about her relative. She even went to the walk-up apartment on Forsthye Street in Manhattan where Fannie lived, asked to be allowed in and photographed the interior. The Lansner family, now scattered across the globe, is planning a reunion on March 26.

Another victim of the fire was  Daisy Lopez Fitze a native of Jamaica who received only minor injuries in a 1907 Jamaican earthquake that killed more than 1,000 people. 

She emigrated to the U.S. and went to work for Triangle. After the fire, as she was dying in New York Hospital, Ms. Lopez told the Rev.  H. Roscoe Bates of the Spring Street Presbyterian Church about how she had helped save 50 women, leading them to a stairway before she and a friend jumped to escape the flames. She died two days later. 

Mr. Bates's account was later published in a periodical.

  Diane Fortuna, a retired State University of New York professor who lives in Stony Brook, is the great niece of Ms. Lopez. Ms. Fortuna said she first learned about her relative's role in the fire in 1954 while attending New York University, which now owns the building that was the site of the Triangle fire.

She "sacrificed her life to save others," Ms. Fortuna said.