LISBON—Portugal agreed to a €78 billion ($116 billion) financial bailout program with the European Union and the International Monetary Fund over three years to help its ailing economy, in a deal caretaker Prime Minister José Sócrates described as friendlier than what other rescued euro-zone economies received. 

Mr. Sócrates, whose government quit in March but is running the country ahead of a June 5 election, said in a televised statement the accord reached Tuesday won't require the privatization of social security. 

Other key details, such as how much the country will have to pay in interest rates for the loans, haven't been disclosed yet, but Mr. Sócrates said the agreement includes a more relaxed deadline for the government to meet budget deficit goals. 

Mr. Sócrates said the deal won't include cuts in the minimum wage or in public-sector jobs, measures Ireland and Greece were forced to take. Employees will still receive the extra 13th and 14th months of salary, Mr. Sócrates said.

Portugal is the third member of the euro zone after Greece and Ireland that requested financial help to deal with mounting debts, setting off a crisis of confidence among investors that demanded punishing rates to finance the countries' deficits.

Negotiations have been taking place in Lisbon for almost three weeks, much longer than the talks held in Greece and Ireland for their respective bailout programs. 

"The international institutions recognize that the Portuguese situation isn't like the situation of other countries," Mr. Sócrates said during the address. "The government has managed a good agreement. It is an agreement that defends Portugal," he said.

 According to a person familiar with the package, some of the €78 billion is earmarked for the banking system in case banks need help to boost their capital ratios over the next three years.

Officials from the larger Portuguese banks, including Banco Espírito Santo SA, Banco BPI SA and Banco Comercial Português SA have said they won't need to tap the rescue package.

Mr. Sócrates said state-owned Caixa Geral de Depósitos won't need to be privatized under the rescue program. 

The package will now need to be approved by the opposition parties by Wednesday. Further details will be provided by the IMF and the EU in a news conference in Lisbon on Thursday, according to a person familiar with the negotiations. 

EU members are expected to approve Portugal's package in a meeting this month. 

Under the bailout package, the country will have to reach a budget deficit of 5.9% of its gross domestic product this year, 4.5% in 2012, and 3% in 2013. 

That represents a relaxation of current targets where the country had committed to bring its spiraling deficit down to 4.6% of GDP this year, 3% next, and 2% in 2013.

Changes in the budget deficit targets were expected after the Portuguese government said recently its deficit for 2010 was 9.1% of GDP, compared with the 7.3% it had targeted for the year. 

People familiar with the situation say the main factor slowing down decisions for Portugal was the fact that the government that will implement the plan hasn't been formed. 

Mr. Sócrates resigned in March after the Parliament voted down a new set of austerity measures to tackle the country's spiraling budget deficit. 

Front-runners for the job of prime minister are Mr. Sócrates himself from the Socialist Party, and Pedro Passos Coelho, leader of the main opposition, the Social Democrat Party. 

Mr. Passos Coelho has said he has little choice but to support the package, since the country urgently needs €8 billion to repay debt due mid-June. 

In a statement late Tuesday, his campaign coordinator, Eduardo Catroga, said the opposition helped create a bailout package "that was better for the Portuguese," adding the country now "has an opportunity to implement what is needed."

 Write to  Patricia Kowsmann at patricia.kowsmann@dowjones.com 