BANGALORE—Hindustan Unilever Ltd. said its third-quarter net profit fell 1.7% amid high raw material costs, which will force the company to raise prices for its products. 

India's largest consumer goods maker by sales has been forced to sacrifice profitability to grow sales volume over the past several quarters after it found that consumers were opting for cheaper brands from its rivals. 

The strategy seems to have worked as the company reported double-digit percentage sales volume expansion for the fourth consecutive quarter, signaling it has been able to sustain demand for its products such as soap bars and detergent packs. 

The Indian unit of  Unilever PLC in the latest quarter reported a 13% expansion in sales volume at its local consumer goods business. 

Hindustan Unilever's bottom line, however, didn't benefit from the strong demand as high raw materials costs ate into its operating margin. 

The consumer-goods company said net profit for the October-December quarter fell to 6.38 billion rupees ($140.3 million) from 6.49 billion rupees a year earlier. Sales jumped 12% to 50.27 billion rupees from 45.04 billion rupees. 

Operating margin shrank 3.2 percentage points from a year earlier.

The average of estimates in a Dow Jones Newswires poll of 10 analysts was for net profit at 6.50 billion rupees on sales of 50.77 billion rupees.

The results pressured the company's shares, which closed down 5.5% to 281.65 rupees in a Mumbai market that finished 1% lower. 

Analyst say consumer-goods companies like Hindustan Unilever don't have much space to raise product prices given the highly competitive market in which they operate. Though the company raised prices of some soap and detergent brands earlier in the fiscal year, which wasn't enough to offset the increase in raw material costs as well as higher expenses on advertising, promotion and packaging. 

Hindustan Unilever, for its part, said it doesn't see an immediate let-up in either the competitive intensity or input cost inflation. But said it would act to protect its operating margin. 

"There will need to be more price increases going forward given the outlook that we have on commodity cost inflation. We'll do so in a judicious manner," Chief Financial Officer  R. Sridhar told reporters on a conference call. He didn't elaborate on when or how much or in which categories the company will raise prices. 

Total costs rose 16% to 44.59 billion rupees from 38.31 billion rupees, with raw material costs up 19% to 19.42 billion rupees. 

Advertising and promotion spending grew 17% to 7.43 billion rupees. 

 Write to  Rumman Ahmed at rumman.ahmed@dowjones.com 