 The British model talks to The Wall Street Journal Europe about how she starts her weekend.  

Erin O'Connor, who has modeled for fashion's biggest names, including Christian Dior, Prada, Giorgio Armani, Jean-Paul Gaultier and Dolce & Gabbana, is currently on assignment as the face of the Investec Derby Festival, one of the biggest horse-racing events in the U.K. that takes place next month.

When she isn't traveling for work, the 33-year-old enjoys the simple pleasures the English capital offers, from dining at her local Greek restaurant in south London to dancing with her neighbors on a Saturday night. "I feel so at home here, especially in south London," says Ms. O'Connor. "Just traveling home—as simple and mundane as it could be—is a bit of an exotic journey in that I don't spend as much time [here] as I would ideally like to. So when I am here, I really live and breathe it." 

  How do you unwind?  

Friday is my favorite day of the week because if I am lucky, it is the end of the working week. The weather is really nice in London right now and there is something quite symbolic about getting the bus home and crossing the Thames.... I can work anywhere in the world but I am always aiming for south London at the end.

  How does your Friday start?  

Generally, I meet my best friend, Tori, and her goddaughter, Nancy, at a Greek restaurant called the Greek Taverna and we get mezze. We like a nice glass of Rosé at the moment. It's so lovely. I have a banter back and forth with the owner, who is a bit of a local legend, about how to sauté chicken. He likes to try new recipes with his customers, which is very pleasant for all of us. We never ever give him a name. It's just the Greek Guy. Friday is generally a girl's night.

  How do you spend Saturday morning?  

The first thing I do on a Saturday morning is put the radio on BBC Radio 2. Then I go and get a fresh baked loaf from the local Cypriot bakery on the High Street. Then I like to sit in the garden if we are lucky with the weather and eat breakfast outside. I have a little garden, which is quite exotic. I base it on a Victorian garden, so there are lots of palms and a beautiful magnolia tree that I sit under during really sunny periods, because though I love the sun, the sun does not love me. My skin burns.

  What's next on the agenda?  

My boyfriend, Dan, and I go to Borough Market, which is my favorite place in all of London. I love the idea of feeling that I have been transported back in time. There's a real Dickensian feeling about it. We go look for a nice plumed bird and some really good farmer's organic vegetables. I ride my old-fashioned Pashley bike.

  You seem to be into vintage.  

I love going back in time and reusing furniture that has been lost before. I am a real collector of furniture and art. When I am on assignment abroad, I like to take something home with me. It's a lovely way of documenting the history of my career, too. I have a tin bathtub; it looks like a big pint of Guinness. I found that in a Parisian antique market while I was there for work. I collect Voodoo masks. I have quite a few of those. 

  And Saturday night?   

When I am home, in the evening, there is a little bar called Funky Munky and it's not even a dancing venue, but there is always impromptu dancing that happens— the same crowd instigates it—and they do great cocktails. We are regulars; I've been in this neighborhood for six years. I like mojitos. Although they are delicious, they take ages to make, so when a bar is packed, you can always rely on a rum and Coke.

 How do you spend your Sundays? 

Sundays are really chilled. I see it is as a homework day. It reminds me of being a child. It's like having a proper scrub in the bathtub. I also plan my week ahead. 

  How else do you unwind?  

I love gardening. I bought a beautiful sunflower the other day and I am trying to get an army of sunflowers in the back garden.... If I am going to love my home, a garden is very much part of who you are too. I dedicate about two hours to it during the weekends. Part of the fun for me is in arranging it, tidying it up and watering the plants so that you can actually sit in it and enjoy it.

 Write to  Javier Espinoza at javier.espinoza@wsj.com 