Pittsburgh avoided a state takeover of its severely underfunded pension plan when the city council adopted a last-minute bailout at the end of December, but the Steel City's yawning obligations to its workers remain a hurdle to its fiscal health. 

By state law, Pittsburgh's pension system, which currently has about 28% of the assets it needs to cover its obligations, had to be brought up to 50% funding as of Dec. 31 or be turned over to state administration. 

The council, which in October rejected Mayor Luke Ravenstahl's plan to inject cash into the pension fund by leasing parking garages and meters, scrambled during the last week of December to stave off takeover, which would have meant sharply higher contributions from the distressed city of 300,000 residents. 

The plan council approved on Friday—hours before the deadline—dedicates parking-tax revenue to pensions for 31 years. But observers say the approach doesn't solve the pressures on the city's pension system, which is the most underfunded in Pennsylvania and likely among the most underfunded in the country, according to municipal analysts. 

"This is no long-term solution. This was a mechanism to avoid state takeover," said city controller Michael Lamb, who supported the council action. "A long-term solution has to involve pension reform." 

Others said that the plan, even if it passes muster with the state, only buys Pittsburgh a little time. 

"If longer-term this doesn't work, they're probably going to file for bankruptcy, if the state lets them, to renegotiate their legacy costs," said Jake Haulk, president of the Allegheny Institute for Public Policy. 

Pittsburgh's pension liabilities are about $990 million, but its current assets are about $272 million, according to a recent actuarial report. Meanwhile, the system pays out $82 million a year; retirees outnumber active workers by one-third. 

The system needed about $220 million to bring it up to 50% funding. Under state control, the city's yearly contributions to its pension would be $127 million by 2016. That's more than double the contribution the city made in 2010 and 2009, and its overall budget this year is $450 million. City officials warned of massive budget cuts and higher taxes to make the payments required under state administration. 

The council on Friday voted on a measure that dedicates about $736 million in parking-tax revenue to the pension fund over 31 years. Council members believe the "present value" of that revenue is around $250 million, and would be considered an asset that boosts the funding to 50%. In addition, the council provided the pension funds an infusion of $46 million in cash that originally had been allocated for debt service. 

The goal of averting takeover won't be officially confirmed until the fall. The state's Public Employee Retirement Commission, which monitors local pension plans, will review data that must be submitted by the city's actuary by Sept. 1, and it may take about a month to make an announcement, said executive director James McAneny. 

Mr. McAneny added he didn't "have a legal problem with the concept" of the council's plan, but said it wouldn't make the pension woes go away. 

It also creates a hole for this year's budget, as a quarter of the parking-tax revenue will go toward the pension fund. The city must now make $13 million in cuts as a result, said Joanna Doven, spokeswoman for Mr. Ravenstahl, whose veto of the plan Friday was overridden by the council. 

Not only does the plan commit the city to turning over a percentage of its parking-tax revenue every year, it doesn't provide enough upfront cash to grow assets, she said. The funding ratio will shrink as liabilities continue to mount, she said, and the state may demand takeover or other action. 

"The risk it would put the city at is very great," Ms. Doven said. 

Also, should the plan be approved by the state, it would still be only half funded. A pension that is near 70% funded is closer to being safe, said  Tom Kozlik, municipal credit analyst at Janney Montgomery Scott. 

"Although there have been some positive strides, increased pension payments will continue to challenge the city's recovery," Mr. Kozlik said. 

The state designated Pittsburgh as financially distressed in 2003. In November, Moody's Investors Service in November puts its A1 rating on Pittsburgh on negative outlook, citing the potential of much higher pension contributions in the near and medium term. 

 Write to  Romy Varghese at romy.varghese@dowjones.com 