The crash of an Indonesian turboprop Saturday on a domestic flight -- with early indications of more than two dozen fatalities -- follows a string of accidents in recent years that have undermined international confidence in the safety of many of the country's carriers.

Preliminary reports said the Chinese-built, propeller-powered Merpati Nusantara plane slammed into the water amid fog and rain, less than half a mile from its intended runway in Kaimana, an eastern province. Agence France-Presse quoted a rescue official saying all 27 people aboard were killed. Reuters reported that 15 bodies recovered, and more victims appeared trapped inside the wreckage.

It's too early to tell what caused the accident, and some recent Indonesian plane crashes have remained unsolved partly because onboard recorders malfunctioned or couldn't be deciphered after data was downloaded.

But aviation safety experts said Saturday's crash threatens to undercut efforts by the Indonesian government, along with its flag-carrier PT Garuda Indonesia, to persuade U.S. and European regulators about the country's aviation-safety improvements.

It also comes as Garuda prepares to join the SkyTeam group of international airline partners next year, as part of the airline's strategy to ramp up service to European destinations.

In the summer of 2009, Garuda was removed from the European community's airline blacklist, allowing it to resume flights to the region. A few other, smaller Indonesian carriers, including some all-cargo operators, also have been taken off the same blacklist. 

Garuda, however, remains unable to significantly increase its service to and from the U.S. because of Indonesia's poor safety ranking by the Federal Aviation Administration.

Other countries downgraded in the past few years by the FAA include Croatia, Ukraine and the Philippines. 

But India and Thailand, countries that also have suffered a number of high-profile commercial crashes in recent years, weren't downgraded by the FAA despite persistent warnings of oversight deficiencies by independent air-safety experts. Both countries, however, mounted extensive drives to hire and train dozens of additional inspectors, supervisory pilots and other aviation professionals.

Indonesian regulators pledged to make similar improvements, which apparently helped persuade European regulators to take Garuda off the blacklist. The country's airline industry has enjoyed robust growth, with overall international traffic expanding by some 20% last year. Previously, Indonesia experienced the emergence of a score of low-cost airlines to serve primarily regional and domestic markets.

Yet during just the past two years, there have been at least five other serious accidents in Indonesia on domestic flights.

In July 2010, a different Merpati turboprop veered off a runway, blowing its main tires and collapsing its nose gear, while halting a takeoff roll from Bintuni. Investigators determined the pilots failed to receive proper training for such rejected takeoff situations.

Three months earlier, a Merpati Boeing 737 jetliner ran off the end of a wet runway while landing in rainy conditions at Manokwari, ending up in a river. Two passengers received critical injuries.

In the summer of 2009 a Merpati turboprop flew into terrain due to pilot error, according to Indonesian investigators, because the crew was trying to visually identify a gap through mountains obscured by clouds.

A Garuda Boeing 737 landed on a taxiway in October 2008 at Palembang and blew some tires, a sequence of events investigators determined was caused by pilots failing to pay adequate attention to visually lining up with the runway.

Six months earlier, another Boeing 737 flown by a low-cost carrier landed too fast and too far down a strip at Pangkalpinang, ending up some 150 feet off the end of the runway. Investigators determined the captain realized the aircraft wasn't on the required stabilized approach, but he failed to take control from the first officer or order the necessary corrections.

 Write to  Andy Pasztor at andy.pasztor@wsj.com 