LONDON—Britain's coalition government, born with smiles and optimism in a sunny rose garden here a year ago, is entering stormy territory as its junior Liberal Democrats try to balance good relations with their Conservative partners and the voting public.

While the coalition isn't in imminent danger, it faces more turbulence and scrutiny as the Lib Dems—on the heels of an election drubbing—try to play tougher with the Tories in areas such as banking, constitutional overhauls and health care. 

For example, the party may take a more activist stance in forcing banks to increase their lending to small businesses, said a person familiar with the matter. In another key area, Lib Dems have promised to fight Conservative plans to give doctors greater control of National Health Service funds.

But while rocky moments are ahead, politicians and analysts generally expect few substantive differences to the way Britain is governed and its attempts to pare back a large fiscal deficit.

"In the next phase of the coalition, both partners will be able to be clearer in their identities," Lib Dem leader Nick Clegg will say in a speech Wednesday, according to excerpts. 

Wednesday marks a year since the two parties signed a deal to create Britain's first peacetime coalition since the 1930s. The following day, Prime Minister David Cameron and Mr. Clegg, the deputy prime minister, unveiled a series of agreements at 10 Downing Street's rose garden with the reduction of Britain's then-record deficit at its heart. 

Even as other parts of that agenda, such as in education and health care, have become bogged down, the government has stuck to its guns on one of the world's most aggressive programs of fiscal tightening. 

There is little sign that will change. On Tuesday, Danny Alexander, a Lib Dem Treasury Minister, said "now is the moment to hold firm." 

Markets are willing to believe him. The pound and government bonds were unmoved by last Thursday's election result, when the Lib Dems lost a referendum to change Britain's electoral system and shed around 40% of their previously held English council seats, while Conservatives fared relatively well. 

Lib Dem voters and others said they believe the center-left party broke pre-election pledges by backing Tory policies, such a tripling the cap on university tuition fees. Voters also punished the party over tax increases and public-spending cuts. 

In Cannock Chase, outside Birmingham, England, the Lib Dems lost five of seven council seats, and councilor Diane Bennett believes Mr. Clegg should resign. 

"The Liberal Democrats should come out of this alliance and claw back some respectability from the electorate," she said. 

Analysts say Britain's previous coalitions haven't crumbled from the top down, but rather from the bottom up as grass-roots support withers. 

But Lib Dem lawmakers said they believe Thursday's local landslide would be repeated nationally if they were to leave the coalition and a general election was triggered. Instead, theypromise to trumpet their achievements better and to carve a clearer identity outside the coalition. They boast of taking 800,000 of Britain's poorest people out of the income-tax system and providing extra funding for educating students from deprived households. 

They say they intend to be more vocal in pushing the Lib Dem agenda. That includes demanding greater action against Britain's banks if they aren't lending enough money to midsize and small businesses as agreed under a deal with the government called Project Merlin, said the person familiar with the matter. Recent data suggest small businesses still struggle to get bank financing.Mr. Clegg will also be asked to distance himself slightly from the close relationship with Mr. Cameron. 

"He's a great deputy prime minister but we want him to speak out more as our leader," said Lorely Burt, a Lib Dem lawmaker. 

David Davis, a senior Conservative lawmaker and sometime coalition critic, says as Lib Dem politicians raise more disagreements, it will encourage Conservatives to do so as well. But he said that as a former minister for Europe, he had seen that this is natural in coalition governments. 

"We just have to get used to it," he said.

 Write to  Alistair MacDonald at alistair.macdonald@wsj.com 