LONDON—U.K. Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne will use Wednesday's budget to announce a series o anti-tax-dodging measures aimed at raising about £1 billion ($1.6 billion) in extra revenue each year. 

The crackdown on tax avoidance will address cases of disguised remuneration—where pay is routed through trusts or other vehicles to avoid paying tax, a person familiar with the matter said. The anti-avoidance package will be the biggest introduced since 2004, the person said.

Mr. Osborne, who is keen to show he isn't going easy on the wealthy, will also announce a consultation to examine extending air-passenger duty to private jets —which could raise tens of billions of pounds for the government, the person said. The chancellor will update the so-called non-dom tax, which applies to U.K. residents who claim their true home is elsewhere for tax purposes. 

Mr. Osborne is scheduled to appear before the House of Commons on Wednesday to present proposals for the government's next annual spending plan. 

The tax-avoidance package will combine new initiatives and moves outlined in December, when the Treasury closed tax loopholes used by multinational companies.

The measures taken in December included legislation to counter "repeated" tax-avoidance schemes that use intra-group loans or derivatives to reduce a firm's tax bill, and the adjustment of existing legislation to better target companies whose balance sheets fail fully to recognize "amounts that are taxable under the rules on loan relationships and derivative contracts." 

At the time, the Treasury asked commercial tax lawyer Graham Aaronson to lead a study on introducing a general rule to discourage tax dodging, as is the case in countries including Australia, Canada and Germany. The group is to report back by Oct. 31.

The Liberal Democrats, the junior partner in the coalition government, campaigned on pledges to crack down on tax dodging as part of efforts to trim the budget deficit. The party made such action one of their conditions for teaming up with Prime Minister David Cameron and his Conservative party.

In presenting the budget, Mr. Osborne will seek to make the point that while the U.K. is sticking to the course of eliminating the budget deficit, there won't be additional pain for squeezed households. 

The first part of this message—reasserting his commitment to the ambitious austerity measures that will see the government instigate £111 billion of fiscal tightening by 2015—leaves Mr. Osborne constrained, resulting in a budget that is likely to consist of tweaks to existing policy rather than major changes or new initiatives. 

"The government has been keen to emphasize that there is no Plan B, and will not want to compromise the message by even minor tinkering with its existing program," said Chris Crowe, an economist at Barclays Capital. 

Still, unexpectedly strong public finances have given the chancellor some room to maneuver. 

Economists predict that borrowing for 2010-2011 is likely to undershoot the £148.5 billion target by between £8 billion and £10 billion because of increased tax revenues. But with a long way to go until the government finances regain balance, Mr. Osborne looks unlikely to indulge in any substantial giveaways. 

Instead, he will probably use that extra money "to build a buffer against slow growth and potentially higher borrowing needs in the future," said Hetal Mehta, economist at Daiwa Capital Markets. 

But economists expect Mr. Osborne He is, however, expected to announce some relief for households—who are being squeezed by inflation of 4% and stagnant wage growth—by taking measures to counter the surge in oil prices. The most likely scenario is a delay on April's penny rise in fuel duty., a move that will cost between £500 million and £1 billion. 

Other, more costly, alternatives include a fuel-duty stabilizer—which would lower fuel duties as oil prices rise—or reversing January's value-added tax increase on motor fuels. 

The government is aware of how strongly the issue of fuel duty is resonating with the public, a point illustrated by a ComRes poll Monday that showed 81% of 2,000 respondents agreeing that the government should scrap the duty increase to show it is on the side of "ordinary families." 

 Write to  Ainsley Thomson at ainsley.thomson@dowjones.com 