Italy might have produced the most celebrated art of the last 2,000 years, but it sometimes seems rather slow to shout about it. Perhaps there's so much cultural heritage here that Italians have grown blasé; in many parts of the country you find yourself virtually tripping over fine arts and antiquities. 

Still, a major collection dedicated to the peninsula's artistic achievements would be nice, especially for visiting art lovers. This thought hasn't escaped Alberto Vanelli, the man in charge of the Venaria Reale, a World Heritage site near Turin and Italy's answer to Versailles. "We don't have a national art collection. In Britain, there's the National Gallery; in France, there's the Louvre. But here, there isn't an equivalent. So to mark Italy's 150th birthday celebrations, we thought we'd have one—at least for six months," says Mr. Vanelli with a smile.

To create the temporary "national gallery of art," entitled "La Bella Italia," his curators have, over a period of several years, assembled 360 masterpieces produced in Italy, covering a period from ancient Rome to the modern state's foundation in 1861. The organizers might be going for broke in claiming that the resulting collection could provoke Stendhal syndrome. But with so many great works from museums in Italy and around the world, in a who's-who list from Giotto, Leonardo and Titian to Canaletto, Hayez and Canova, who's to say it might not?

"La Bella Italia" certainly looks like the blockbuster exhibition of the year. But there's more to the show than just a crowd-pleasing roll call of big names. Its curators have sought to highlight the different contributions made by pre-unification Italy's distinct cultural centers, and to shed light on the historical contexts that shaped them.

The country we know as Italy came into existence quite recently, on March 17, 1861. Before then, north and south were divided, and loyalties and cultures remained tied to city-states (as they are to some extent even today). This means that cities as geographically and culturally distinct as Rome, Florence, Turin, Venice and Naples all emerged to make unique artistic contributions.

In keeping with this theme, the exhibition is organized geographically, rather than chronically. As such, visitors hoping to trace the historical development of Italian art might be disappointed. Instead, the show leads visitors through 10 key cities or regions along a winding path of AstroTurf—a no-taste gimmick that jars somewhat in this splendid setting. The elaborate claims about the sections' distinct lighting arrangements aren't entirely convincing either. But within moments, you're too busy eyeing the (well-displayed) artworks to bother with these quibbles.

Ancient Rome serves up the first course in this 10-part feast. Paintings and sculptures—from a statue in rare brown marble taken from Emperor Hadrian's villa to Rubens's 1617 rendition of "Romulus and Remus Suckled by the She-wolf"—show the transition from pagan to Christian art. 

Florence as the birthplace of the Renaissance is next. In the 13th century, Giotto predicted the future of Western painting by creating new emotional depth and perspective. He was forgotten for over 100 years, while decorative Gothic styles resumed. But his efforts were revived and given pivotal momentum by Masaccio, arguably the father of modern painting, who rode the artistic and technical wave of 15th-century Florence to introduce new, monumental figures. His genius was matched by his sculptor contemporary Donatello. All three are represented in the exhibition. Another highlight in the Florence section is a glowering bust of Bruto (1539) by Michelangelo. The intellectual force of the Renaissance is shown by Domenico Di Michelino's painting of Dante (1465) and Botticelli's beautiful, complex "La Calunnia" (1495). 

People with an interest in history will enjoy Jan Baptiste Tetar van Elven's depiction of the meeting of the first Italian Parliament in Turin in 1861, in the section dedicated to Italy's first capital city. The painting includes dozens of portraits of key figures including Prime Minister Camillo di Cavour. Also on the Risorgimento (Italian unification movement) theme, there's a patriotic version of Francesco Hayez's iconic "The Kiss"; in this one, painted in 1861, Francesco Hayez has the couple sporting the red, green and white colors of the fledgling state's Tricolore flag.

Some of the older works seem surprisingly relevant today. A gold-trimmed international Gothic view of Naples, on loan from the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, was painted in 1399, but the sense of chaos pervading the picture might seem familiar to today's visitors to the southern port.

The sections representing Genoa, Milan, Palermo, Bologna and Parma-Modena are also fascinating. But the organizers saved the best for last with the Venice collection. Naturally, there are Titian portraits, Canova sculptures and wonderful color by Tintoretto and Veronese. But there are surprises, too: next to Canaletto's idealized views of the city hangs Francesco Guardi's image of the lagoon port apparently recovering from—or perhaps anticipating—a ruinous storm. In the next room, Tiepolo eschews Rococo cherubs to present us instead with the remarkable portrait of a wizened but defiant Daniele Dolfin IV (1756).

The show closes with Napoleone Nani's 1876 picture of crowds in St. Mark's Square celebrating the release of Italian patriots following the end of Austrian occupation. With its sharp contrast and bombastic message, the painting anticipates one of Italy's great artistic achievements of the century that followed, neorealist cinema. 

It all makes for a triumphant exhibition. People who haven't been to the Venaria Reale, a few kilometers outside the elegant city of Turin, will be in for a double treat. This baroque palace with vast gardens is a glorious creation in its own right. When you gaze out from its exquisite Great Gallery, over ornate gardens with real grass, framed by the Alps that loom brown, mauve and white in the distance, the phrase "room with a view" takes on a whole new meaning.

Those in the know will arrange a visit for May, when the gardens are in full bloom. Stendhal famously described "entering the most beautiful country in the world one spring morning" on a visit to Italy. A trip to "La Bella Italia" might leave you with the same impression. 

 Until Sept. 11; www.lavenaria.it  