MANAMA, Bahrain—Hundreds of hard-line Bahraini opposition protesters gathered in Manama's financial center on Monday, defying a police order to disperse, in a new escalation of tensions between antigovernment demonstrators and the ruling Al-Khalifa family.

A small number of protesters pitched tents Sunday night at the base of two skyscrapers in the heart of the financial center, but were warned by police to move on, demonstrators said. Amid fears of a crackdown, the number of protesters began to swell, with hundreds calling for the fall of the ruling family and choking traffic at one of the capital's busiest intersections. 

By nightfall, that crackdown hadn't come, but a group of protesters said they were determined camp out for another evening, according to eyewitnesses. 

Protesters said the demonstration was a new escalation of their strategy of demonstrating at sensitive locations around the capital; they said they were aware that the police might respond with force. 

"If they come, then they come. ... We have to pay for our freedom," said Hussain al-Araby, a 37-year old businessman from Manama. 



Bahraini security forces haven't clashed with opposition protesters since Crown Prince Salman bin Hamad al-Khalifa ordered the military off the streets two weeks ago, although tensions have escalated in recent days as daily marches have had an increasingly harmful effect on Bahrain's economy. 

In an interview with Bahrain state television late Sunday, the crown prince sought to calm the situation, stressing the government was making progress on brokering talks with the opposition, but warning that neither side should set conditions before the talks begin.

"Bahraini citizens should not feel there is a void. There is progress and there are results. ...There is no solution to solve this crisis besides dialogue," he said, adding, "One side cannot set a ceiling, or the aim, of dialogue before it begins."

Earlier on Monday, more than 100 Bahraini Shiite opposition protesters demonstrated outside the U.S. embassy in Manama, calling for Washington to abandon its support for Bahrain's Al-Khalifa family. The small group of protesters chanted that the U.S. has shown less support for pro-democracy protests in Bahrain than it did for similar movements in Tunisia and Egypt. Some U.S. diplomats came out of the embassy to meet the protesters and explain Washington's perspective, while others handed out sweets, including donuts. 

"America is always talking about democracy and we want democracy to come to Bahrain... We want them to practise what they preach, that's all," said Mohammed Ansari, a 32-year old unemployed man from the outskirts of Manama.

Bahrain sits in a key strategic position in the Persian Gulf. It hosts the headquarters of the U.S. Fifth Fleet—a home to 3,000 military personnel who oversee 30 naval ships and some 30,000 sailors.

Protesters' targeting of the embassy comes as Washington appears to have moved away from pushing for immediate regime change—as it did to varying degrees in Egypt and now Libya—and urging protesters from Bahrain to Morocco to work with existing rulers toward what some officials and diplomats are now calling "regime alteration."

The approach has emerged amid furious lobbying of the administration by Arab governments, who were alarmed that President Barack Obama had abandoned Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak and worried that, if the U.S. did the same to the beleaguered king of Bahrain, a chain of revolts could sweep them from power, too, and further upend the region's stability.