(See Corrections and Amplifications below.)

For many women, packing for a long business trip leads to shoe overload. If you're attending a variety of meetings and events, it's hard to resist the idea that you need many pairs.

But even for trips as long as 10 days,  Paola Venturi, creative director for the Via Spiga shoe label, sticks to a limit: three pairs of shoes.

Ms. Venturi, who is based in Milan, always brings a classic pair of high heels that will go with most of her outfits. She prefers round-toed shoes, which she calls "more ergonomic for your foot" than pointy ones, and she likes her heels to be just over three inches—high enough to give her confidence but not enough to make it hard to get around.

Even though this shoe should be classic, it should also have details that keep it from being boring: "Maybe it has a woven leather or a beautiful hand-stitching, or there's a sexy cutout on the side," she says. Also, instead of going with black or brown, she often picks a shoe in a very pale metallic gold. "It really goes with everything," she says—with the proviso that the gold shouldn't be "too bright" for daytime ensembles.

The second pair of shoes Ms. Venturi brings are for "running around to catch a flight," she says. "This is the shoe that I'll wear on the plane." She usually picks a ballerina flat in an animal-skin pattern or an embossed leather, which can perk up not only her travel outfit but also the simple pants and white dress shirt she might wear to a casual business meeting.

The shoe should also have a flexible rubber sole to make running and walking more comfortable. She likes it to be made of soft Napa leather, which she says will mold to the foot and allow for a bit of swelling during a flight. "With this, you're going to feel really comfortable," she adds.

Ms. Venturi likes her third pair of shoes to follow "the latest trends," so that she looks fashion-forward in meetings. This spring, she says, that shoe is a wedge, which goes well with tailored pants or a dress, as long as it's "made with sophisticated detailing" and is in a fairly neutral color, such as camel, chocolate, or off-white. This shoe can be open-toed—though she makes sure to have a pedicure before wearing that style.

If a very formal event is on her travel schedule, Ms. Venturi sometimes adds a fourth pair of shoes—a high-heeled stiletto in black, champagne or red satin, sometimes "with a lot of embellishment"—to wear with a classic black dress.

She is especially careful when packing shoes with jewels or other decorations. She'll often pack each shoe individually in a silk bag or swath them in tissue and pack them in the box they came in. Other shoes are typically packed individually in soft cloth bags and placed on top of the other items in the suitcase. "I really feel strongly the shape of the shoes has to be protected," she says.

Thanks to her care in packing, Ms. Venturi doesn't have to agonize over her shoe choices when she's on the road. She says, "Just bring a few simple shoe silhouettes with great details, in neutral colors, that make you feel comfortable, and you can't make a mistake."

 Corrections & Amplifications 

Paola Venturi is creative director of the shoe label Via Spiga. A photo caption on an earlier version of this story incorrectly stated that she was the owner of the label. 

 Write to  Cheryl Lu-Lien Tan at cheryl.tan@wsj.com 