LONDON—The Bank of England couldn't have prevented a decline in living standards in the wake of the financial crisis, and raising its key interest rate last year would only have intensified the pain being experienced by many Britons, BOE Governor Mervyn King said Tuesday. 

The annual rate of inflation in the U.K. rose to 3.7% in December, well above the BOE's 2.0% target. Despite the steady rise in the inflation rate over recent months, the BOE has kept its interest rate at a record low of 0.5% since March 2009. 

Speaking in Newcastle in northeast England, Mr. King said the inflation rate will rise further, to between 4% and 5% in coming months and real wages will fall again this year to their 2005 levels. 

"One has to go back to the 1920s to find a time when real wages fell over a period of six years," Mr. King said. 

But while he acknowledged that Britons are increasingly unhappy about the high rate of inflation, he said a decline in living standards was "the inevitable price to pay for the financial crisis and subsequent rebalancing of the world and U.K. economies." 

In particular, Mr. King said that had the BOE already raised its key interest rate to combat the rise in inflation, the impact on living standards would have been even greater. 

"If the MPC had raised Bank Rate significantly, inflation might well have started to fall back this year, but only because the recovery would have been slower, unemployment higher and average earnings rising even more slowly than now," he said. 

"So, unpleasant though it is, the Monetary Policy Committee neither can, nor should try to, prevent the squeeze in living standards, half of which is coming in the form of higher prices and half in earnings rising at a rate lower than normal." 

Mr. King said the rise in the inflation rate has been almost entirely due to the decline in the pound's exchange rate, higher commodity prices and increases in the rate of sales tax. 

"The contribution of domestically generated inflation ... was close to zero, and obviously well below the target," he said. 

Mr. King's comments suggest that he doesn't favor an increase in the central bank's key interest rate in the immediate future, a course of action that was advocated by fellow MPC member Andrew Sentance Monday. 

In a speech, Mr. Sentance said the MPC risked losing its credibility if it didn't raise the key rate in response to the rise in the inflation rate. 

"Credibility was not earned in a year, and it will not be lost in a year," Mr. King said. 

He did acknowledge that the key interest rate would have to "return to a more normal level," and that when it did so, it would be a welcome development for savers who had behaved prudently in the run up to the crisis and now "find themselves among the biggest losers" as a result of the low returns on their investments. 

But he said the MPC will have to move cautiously. 

"A return to economic stability from our fragile condition will require careful and well-judged steps looking beyond the next few months," he said. 

Mr. King said there are risks that inflation will rise even further than he expects, particularly if world commodity prices continue to increase. And he said that should workers attempt to protect their real wages by asking for significantly higher pay rises, the MPC would have to raise the key interest rate. 

But if that didn't happen, Mr. King indicated it was unlikely that he would argue for a rate increase, partly because in his view monetary policy is tighter than the bank's key interest rate would suggest, because most borrowers are having to pay much higher interest rates. 

"Since the onset of the crisis the interest rates faced by many households and companies have changed rather little, and in some cases have increased," he said. 

Earlier Tuesday, the Office for National Statistics reported that the U.K. economy contracted by 0.5% in the final three months of last year, a surprise development that partly reflected heavy snowfall in December. 

Mr. King said that reinforced his long-held view that the recovery will be "choppy." 

"Even abstracting from the effects of snow, growth at home slowed in the second half of last year," he said. "Looking ahead, domestic spending still faces strong headwinds." 

 Write to  Paul Hannon at paul.hannon@dowjones.com 