Every night as dusk descends on the thin, fish-hook shaped collection of atolls that make up Bermuda's western elbow, the oldest cast-iron lighthouse in the world flickers into life. 

From where it stands, towering 75 meters high above the Southampton Parish of the island, its beam stretches forward in a brilliant column of white, illuminating the shoreline and dancing across the Atlantic, where it can be seen for more than 60 kilometers.

Since 1846, the rhythmic white flash of Gibbs Hill Lighthouse has provided comfort to sailors navigating the treacherous reefs that line its western Atlantic coast. 

In 1953, shortly after her coronation, Queen Elizabeth II paid a visit to the lighthouse, built next to a signal station once operated by the British army. Pausing to take in the view—a spectacular vista overlooking a large body of water known as the Great Sound that stretches east toward Hamilton—she would have seen a landscape first colonized by Elizabethan adventurers.

Today, Bermuda is once again a destination for adventurers looking to make their fortune. The juniper-made sloops may no longer navigate the oceans between Europe, the West Indies and America, but if the mercantile trade has withered, the age of re-insurance and international finance has grown, helping swell the economy of this 54-square-kilometer enclave to an estimated €4.3 billion. 

Look behind the pastel-colored shops, whitewashed stepped roofs and manicured gardens of the capital city, Hamilton, and there are dozens of offshore companies domiciled on the island that have provided Bermuda with a sophistication quite unlikely in such a romantic hideaway. Amid the pink-hued beaches, the hidden coves, coral reefs and the heavy, perfumed scent of freesias and oleander, one also finds the sort of bustling restaurants, wine bars, corporate hotels and golf courses one would expect from an island that boasts the headquarters of companies such as Bacardi Ltd. and insurance brokers Hiscox Ltd.

And while one can spend hours whiling away the time on one of its flag-ship beaches such as Horseshoe Bay, Somerset Long Bay or Tobacco Beach, there is a quiet formality to the island. 

Bermudians like to dress up. Jacket and tie is de rigueur for many restaurants, and on a working week day, it isn't uncommon to see islanders wearing the national dress: blazer, city shirt and tie, Bermuda shorts, long, dark socks and brogues. 

On the week we visited, in mid-December, the temperature averaged a pleasant 16 degrees Celsius. Warmed by the Gulf Stream, the island sits in the mid-Atlantic more than 1,600 kilometers north of the Caribbean, just a couple of hours flight from New York and roughly six hours by plane from Europe. It is the combination of the gentle, sleepy, subtropical atmosphere, (there are no rental cars here, only mopeds, buses and taxis) and the character of a well-run, distinctly middle-class country club that pervades many of its hotels, which attract so many to its shores.

This began with the regular visits of American writer Mark Twain in the late 19th century and continued after World War II, when the lure of tennis parties and cocktails on the lawn attracted English playwright Nöel Coward, who set up home on the island. A stream of well-known stars followed, including David Bowie and Hollywood's husband-and-wife team, Catherine Zeta-Jones and Michael Douglas, the latter whose mother is Bermudian.

Sport takes up a large swathe of culture on the island. For the active traveler there is golf, hiking, fishing, diving, windsurfing; for the less adventurous, one can enjoy some snorkeling amid the intimate coves and miles of shallow, calm, turquoise sea.

Below Gibbs Hill Lighthouse sits an 18-hole par-3 golf course adjoined to the Fairmont Southampton, a large pastel-colored hotel perched on the highest point of the island. With more than 500 rooms, many with spectacular views over the Atlantic, the hotel, under the guidance of general manager Norman Mastalir, is a good place to unwind for a few days.

The golf course was designed by Theodore Robinson and meanders across a procession of steep inclines, with a series of bunkers and lakes. Speeding from hole to hole in one of the carts, it is hard not to get distracted by the ocean views. If this isn't enough, there are seven other 18-hole courses on the island.

Afterward, one can relax in the sumptuous Willow Stream Spa, And from the hotel's large outdoor Jacuzzi, watch the sun set and night sky emerge. Or one can sit at the bar with a Rum Swizzle, a cocktail some describe as Bermuda's national drink, or a Dark & Stormy. The Fairmont Southampton also has its own private beach overlooked by the obligatory tennis courts.

A little more exclusive is Cambridge Beaches Resort & Spa, which sits on a 12-hectare peninsula on the western tip of the island in the rural parish of Somerset. Secluded in landscaped rolling gardens, guests receive their own cottage with private gardens and sea views. It goes without saying that it has its own private beach.

Close by is the Royal Naval Dockyard, which, along with the historic town of St. George, on the other end of the island, is a reminder of the island's rich naval history. The Royal Naval Dockyard was a major western Atlantic outpost for the British Royal Navy until 1951, when the navy left and most of the land was acquired by the local government.

Today, it is one of the island's most popular tourist attractions, with an art center, craft market and the usual eateries and souvenir shops. Walking around the 30-hectare dockyard, one cannot fail to be impressed by the sheer size and scale of the development, when it was built in the early 19th century. The dockyard also houses Bermuda's main cruise berth and can be a hive of activity in the summer. 

For a smaller sailing experience, catch one of the fast ferries across to Hamilton, where one can dine in style overlooking the port at the Harbourfront Restaurant. In town, and less formal, the Pickled Onion is a fun first-floor restaurant with a balcony overlooking the harbor.

The more adventurous can try cycling across the island on Bermuda's onlyrailway line. The 34-kilometer track was laid between 1926 and 1931, and was considered to be one of the world's most expensive railway lines to build. The railway only operated for 17 years before the arrival of the motor car rendered it obsolete. Today, it has been transformed into a rather attractive walking and cycling path, which can be followed to Scaur Hill Fort & Park, built in the late 19th century to defend the Royal Naval Dockyard. The fort, an enormous engineering project involving the excavation of a dry moat above a large, inclined dip, was protected by two 64-pound guns. Only one cannon remains today and it has never been used. 

As we left, a yellow-breasted kiskadee set off from the cannon, ascending in a great arc over the water, soaring high above the hook-shaped archipelago of the Great Sound toward the distant outline of Gibbs Hill Lighthouse, the beat of her wings thankfully undisturbed by the sound of gunfire. A reminder of the gentle side of this island.

 Write to  William Lyons at william.lyons@wsj.com 