A federal commission investigating the Deepwater Horizon oil spill said "identifiable mistakes" by  BP
HAL


1.65
%




 PLC, Halliburton Co. and  Transocean Ltd.
RIG


1.41
%




 led to last year's disaster, in findings that also conveyed broad concerns about oil-drilling safety.

In a widely anticipated report released Tuesday, the seven-member panel said government oversight of the industry would require "fundamental reform," including additional funding for drilling regulators, and that oil companies will need to "dramatically" step up safety practices. 

The recommendations drew mixed reactions from lawmakers, whose approval will be needed to turn some of the proposals into law. That suggests a drawn-out fight is likely over what the industry should do in the wake of the rig explosion that unleashed millions of gallons of oil into the Gulf of Mexico, the worst U.S. offshore spill ever.

On Tuesday, Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D., Nev.) said Congress "must take action this year to prevent another catastrophic spill through smart regulation, and by giving regulators the tools and resources they need to do their jobs effectively." 

Rep. Edward J. Markey (D., Mass.) plans to introduce a bill to implement the panel's recommendations.

The commission's findings drew a more skeptical response from Republicans. The new chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, Michigan's Fred Upton, said it was "disappointing" that the panel hadn't identified the "root cause" of the accident, adding that "neither this nor any investigation should be used as political justification for a pre-determined agenda to limit affordable energy options for America."

Some big producers said the industry was already far along in embracing changes and boasted of already-safe operations. "The Deepwater Horizon incident was a call to action for the industry, and the industry has responded," a  Chevron Corp.
CVX


1.00
%




 spokesman said.

The report "casts doubt on an entire industry based on its study of a single incident," said the American Petroleum Institute, a trade group, and "does a great disservice to the thousands of men and women who work in the industry and have the highest personal and professional commitment to safety."

As it previously indicated, the panel faulted BP, Halliburton and Transocean for failing to train their workers to identify risks and respond to problems that emerged before and after the Macondo well blew out in April.

BP has pinned most blame on its contractors, and said in a statement Tuesday that it would work with government and the industry to "implement operational and regulatory changes that will enhance safety practices."

Halliburton, which handled a cement seal on the well, said it disagreed with some commission findings. Transocean, owner of the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig leased by BP, said procedures in its final hours were directed by the British oil company and approved by regulators.

The panel urged congressional action so the U.S. Interior Department could create an independent "safety agency" to oversee offshore drilling. It also recommended "significantly increased funding" for agencies that oversee spill response and planning. And it recommended the industry create a "safety institute" to audit safety practices of companies that drill offshore.

The commission reserved its strongest language regarding drilling in Arctic waters off Alaska, an area the industry is keen to explore, saying it has "serious concerns" about the federal government's "very limited" response capabilities there

Established by President Barack Obama in May, the National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Offshore Drilling was given the task of conducting the most high-profile investigation of the disaster. 

The White House pointed to steps it has already taken to tighten standards and oversight. "The Commission's recommendations will help inform the work that remains to be done," it said in a written statement.

The panel's co-chairmen, William K. Reilly and former U.S. Sen. Bob Graham (D., Fla.), are scheduled to testify before Congress this month. Asked about potential opposition to some recommendations, Mr. Graham sought to distinguish between regulating drilling leases in public waters and regulating other businesses. "This is not government regulating a private enterprise. This is government regulating land that the people of the United States own," he said.

Mr. Reilly said oil companies "are seriously deliberating on the possibility" of creating the safety institute that the panel recommended, which would be modeled somewhat on the body created following the 1979 Three Mile Island nuclear accident.

—Russell Gold and Stephen Power contributed to this article.

 Write to  Tennille Tracy at tennille.tracy@dowjones.com 