Japan's earthquake-triggered crisis continued unabated on multiple fronts Monday morning, three days after the powerful tremor first hit, with a new explosion breaking out at the troubled Fukushima nuclear complex, and rescue workers still unable to reach some of the hardest-hit parts of northern Japan. The full extent of the catastrophe, in human lives, physical destruction and economic impact was still untold.

Amid the ongoing drumbeat of dire news, the capital Tokyo struggled in fits and starts to return to some semblance of normalcy on the first work day since the calamity. The city was largely undamaged by the earthquake and tsunami, but pinched by disruptions like a sudden, unexpected train stoppage designed to save electricity, which interrupted the planned return to offices for many employees.

Compare satellite images before and after the earthquake and tsunami to see damage across Japan.



The Tokyo Stock Exchange managed to open for trading on schedule at 9 a.m. And while the Nikkei Stock Average plunged about 5% at the outset, shares quickly stabilized—even as the office towers in Tokyo once again shuddered when a 5.8 magnitude aftershock hit the area—and by the end of the morning session were trading a bit above their lows. Sectors performed wildly differently, as traders bet on how the calamity would affect each business. Insurers were off 12%, and Tokyo Electric Power Co., the utility owning the troubled nuclear plant, didn't open during the morning session. On the other side, construction companies—expected to see a surge in business from the pending mammoth rebuilding—surged 9%.

Financial stability, at least in the short-run, was aided by the Bank of Japan's announcement early Monday offering to inject 18 trillion yen of funds, or about $220 billion, to the money market, the largest ever for a single operation by the central bank. Policy makers were slated to hold a meeting later in the day to discuss further emergency stabilization measures.

 Sign up for a daily look at the most popular video from the Wall Street Journal Digital Network via email.  

At least one TV station for the first time since Friday interrupted its nonstop quake coverage with commercial advertising, featuring a chirpy jingle sponsored by cosmetics company. 

But underscoring the threats still surrounding the nation, the news suddenly turned dire after the market's 11 a.m. morning close, with televisions simultaneously showing smoke billowing once again from the Tokyo Electric Power Co. nuclear plant in Fukushima, and then warning of multiple new tsunamis heading toward northern Japan. Stock futures plunged again on the news. The tsunami alert was canceled, and the explosion didn't do damage to the core reactor.

The newest crises briefly pushed off the TV screens Monday the steady stream of gripping footage of the climbing official human toll from Friday's jolt. As of 8 a.m. Monday, the National Police Agency said confirmed deaths had reached 1,598 and missing hit 1,720. The official toll was expected to soar; in the port town of Minami Sanriku alone, about 10,000 people—more than half its population—were unaccounted for, Japanese news agencies reported.

More than 200,000 people had been moved to relief shelters, including tens of thousands evacuated from areas around troubled nuclear facilities. Millions of homes remained without power or water. 

In many parts of the country, supplies of basic necessities from gasoline to instant noodles dwindled, as survivors faced difficulties meeting essential needs.

Outside a supermarket in the town of Shiroishi, in the southern part of Miyagi Prefecture, customers tore through makeshift shelves stocked with pineapples, dried fruit and snacks. At gasoline stations, drivers waited in line for hours, with many of them running out.

Prime Minister Naoto Kan, his voice rising with emotion, told the nation Sunday that the disaster represent the biggest crisis to face the country since it emerged from World War II.

Mr. Kan said there was a risk of large-scale electrical outages because of nuclear reactors as well as dozens of conventional fossil-fired or hydroelectric plants shut down as a result of the earthquake. Tokyo Electric Power Co. said it was expecting a 25% shortfall in supply for normal demand.

Were you there when the earthquake hit Japan, or were you among those evacuated along Pacific coasts? Email us your photos of the damage, at yourphotos@wsj.com.



Scheduled rolling blackouts were due to begin Monday morning across large areas of northern Japan, in an effort to avoid a massive power outage amid the heightened energy needs of weekday economic activity. A planned 6:30 a.m. start was postponed, however, after Tokyo Power said demand was running at lower levels than expected. The utility said the power cuts were expected to continue until the end of April, Kyodo News reported.

Though by Sunday many of the nation's airports and routes among its sprawling rail system had reopened, the country's chief government spokesman urged everyone in Japan to stay at home.

"I would like people to save energy as much as possible and refrain from going out if it's not necessary," said Chief Cabinet Secretary Yukio Edano. 

Mr. Edano said food delivery to quake-hit areas was insufficient, as transportation infrastructure in the affected area had been devastated. 

East Japan Railways announced early Monday morning that it was canceling numerous rush-hour trains in the Tokyo area. A JR spokesman said that the majority of lines were shut and that on average only 20% were running during the morning rush hours. Tokyo Metro, one of two subway lines, was operating trains with longer gaps than usual.

"The number of people is amazing," said Daiki Yamashita, 21, as he stood in a taxi line at Shinagawa Station in central Tokyo following a 40-minute trip that took 2-1/2 hours.

Hiroshio Yokomichi, a 41-year-old IT company employee living 20 miles away from central Tokyo, left home at 5:50 a.m. to catch a train at his nearby station to get to his office in Aoyama but decided to go back home. He said he got a call from his boss and was told to stay at home. "Even if I can get to the office today, I'm worried that I may not be able to come back home today if trains won't be back to normal operations," he said. 

Those inconveniences paled in comparison to the tragedy in the Tohoku region about 200 miles to the northeast. In Iwate Prefecture, about 5,000 houses in Rikuzentakata were submerged by the quake-triggered tsunami, and most of around 7,200 houses in Yamada were also submerged. The local government said the town office of Otsuchi was swept away by the raging sea.

Prime Minister Kan issued an instruction early Sunday to boost the number of military personnel sent to quake-hit areas to 100,000 from 50,000. 

But the Self-Defense Forces had yet to reach the worst-hit areas. More U.S. warships, from the USS Ronald Reagan Carrier Strike Group, arrived off Japan's coast on Sunday. The U.S. flew several helicopter missions conducting surveys of the debris field at sea, delivering humanitarian supplies ashore and evacuating hundreds of people.

Search-and-rescue teams were also arriving from abroad Sunday. A total of 88 governments and six international institutions offered assistance, the Foreign Ministry said. 

The aftermath also brought some good news. On Sunday, a Japanese warship rescued a 60-year-old man who was discovered floating on a piece of roof more than nine miles off the coast of Fukushima Prefecture.

In the city of Sendai, on a four-lane road about one mile from the airport, there were some happy reunions. "You're alive. I was so worried," said one man, hugging another elderly man, before breaking down in tears. 

Aftershocks continued. In Shiroishi, north of Fukushima in Miyagi Prefecture, Setsuko Kimura, a 67-year-old homemaker, and her daughter Yukie Takeda, said she spent the night huddled around a table with her husband, a family friend, her daughter and son-in-law. They didn't want to be separated in case of another major quake. "We fear nights the most because we don't know when the aftershocks will end," she said.

A slew of manufacturers said they would suspend operations as they assess damages and face power shortages at their factories. Major auto makers including Toyota Motor Corp. and Nissan Motor Co. said they would halt production at their domestic plants from Monday.

While the actual cost of the catastrophe won't be known for some time, Boston-based AIR Worldwide estimated the earthquake alone caused insured property losses of $15 billion to $35 billion—positioning the economic cost to possibly surpass all other natural catastrophes. 

In Fukushima, north of Tokyo, 70,000 to 80,000 people living within a 12-mile radius of the nuclear plants were asked to leave the area. Evacuees were being tested for radiation.

For most evacuees, Sunday was only their second day away from home, but they were already having trouble feeding themselves. 

In Tamura, the nuclear refugees said they had received blankets and about one rice ball per day from the government and Tokyo Electric Power, which operates the plants. Those with cars said they were scouring the area for stores with any food left. 

At the few grocery and convenience stores that were still open they only found empty shelves. Despite freezing weather, people were buying bags full of ice cream sandwiches Saturday night as frozen desserts were basically the only food left at some stores. 

Even in Tokyo, some supermarkets and convenience stores reported food and water shortages, as residents prepared for any contingency. 

Mr. Kan took the lead in the government's reaction to the disaster, seeking to avoid the mistakes made by Tomiichi Murayama, prime minister during the Kobe earthquake of 1995, who wasn't visible during the initial relief effort. 

Mr. Kan named an emergency team of senior officials, appointing himself as head. By Saturday morning, he was on a helicopter flying over the devastation. 

Since the quake, he and other officials have appeared in the blue uniforms of the disaster-relief team. 

—William Sposato, Andrew Joyce, Brad Frischkorn and Yoshio Takahashi contributed to this article.



 Write to  William Sposato at william.sposato@dowjones.com, Eric Bellman at eric.bellman@wsj.com and Daisuke Wakabayashi at Daisuke.Wakabayashi@wsj.com 