NEW DELHI – India's International Coal Ventures Pvt. Ltd., a consortium of five state-run metals and energy companies, is close to buying a 24% stake in Singapore-headquartered MEC Coal for around INR9 billion ($200 million), three executives with direct knowledge of the deal said Friday. 

"Technical and financial due diligence is over. We expect to sign the deal within a month," said one of the executives, who didn't want to be identified.

If the deal goes through, it will be the Indian consortium's maiden overseas stake buy since its inception as a joint venture company in 2009. ICVL has been scouting for overseas mining assets in countries such as Australia, the U.S, Indonesia and South Africa, but hasn't struck a single deal so far. 

The ICVL consortium consists of Steel Authority of India Ltd., Coal India Ltd., NTPC Ltd., NMDC Ltd. and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. 

Energy-deficient India is trying to buy coal mines overseas as local supplies aren't enough to feed power, cement and steel plants the country is building. While power companies are on the lookout for steam coal assets, steel producers are scouting for coking coal properties. 

MEC Coal, through its Indonesian subsidiary PT Tekno Orbit Persada, is developing thermal coal mines in East Kalimantan province. The Indonesian unit's two coal blocks have estimated resources of two billion metric tons, the executives of the Indian consortium said. 

Production at one of the Indonesian coal blocks is expected to start from the third quarter of 2013. The two blocks jointly have the potential to produce 34 million tons of coal annually, according to information available on MEC Coal's website. 

The Indian consortium is trying to get six million tons of assured coal supplies each year from MEC's Indonesian mines for at least 20 years under the deal, one of the executives said. 

India anticipates a coal supply shortfall of about 83 million tonnes in the current fiscal year ending March 31, with local production expected around 542 million tons. The shortfall will rise to 142 million tons in the next financial year. 

MEC Coal will supply the dry fuel to ICVL at a 20% discount to Indonesian benchmark prices, another executive said, adding that the Indian consortium will have to bear $4 per ton on some shipping costs. 

ICVL will also have the first right to buying more coal from MEC's Indonesian blocks, he added. 

The Chairman of ICVL and Steel Authority of India, C.S. Verma, didn't want to comment, saying it was "premature." There was no response from MEC Holdings to an emailed query on the proposed deal. 

MEC Group, in partnership with the government of Ras Al Khaimah, U.A.E., is developing the infrastructure required to transport and export coal and raw materials from its mines in Indonesia. The group also has a license to develop a port in the country. 

Currently, India meets its coal shortfall through imports from countries such as Indonesia, Australia and South Africa. 

"Technical and financial due diligence is over. We expect to sign the deal within a month," one of the executives told Dow Jones Newswires. 

If the deal goes through, it will be the Indian consortium's maiden overseas stake buy since its inception as a joint venture company in 2009. 

MEC Coal, through its Indonesian subsidiary PT Tekno Orbit Persada, is developing thermal coal mines in the East Kalimantan province. The Indonesian unit's two coal blocks have estimated resources of 2 billion metric tons, the executives of the Indian consortium said. 

The ICVL consortium consists of Steel Authority of India Ltd., Coal India Ltd., NTPC Ltd., NMDC Ltd., and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. 

 Write to  Rajesh Roy at rajesh.roy@dowjones.com 