The Syrian army attacked a town in Homs on Saturday, killing at least three people in what activists said appeared to be a government reprisal for a protest there a day earlier led by former members of the country's ruling Ba'ath party.

The military entered the town of Tal Kalakh in Homs, near Syria's border with Lebanon, early Saturday morning and shelled areas close to the border. Three people were killed and at least 20 were injured, while dozens others fled into Lebanon, activists in Homs said.

Despite the rising death toll from weeks of unrest, people across Syria continue to protest the government of President Bashar al-Assad. See events by day.

Track events day by day in the region.

Popular demonstrations in Tunisia toppled a president and spread to countries across the region. See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

Doctors and engineers in the town, who had recently resigned from the Ba'ath party to denounce the government's violent crackdown on unarmed protesters, led a demonstration there Friday, according to the activists. Thousands marched across Syria after the Islamic prayer on Friday, in defiance of a week of the broadest and harshest military action yet against protest hot spots in Syria's eight-week uprising.

"The demonstration is thought to be the reason provoking the authorities to take military and security disciplinary measures against the people of the city," said Wissam Tarif, head of the Syria-focused human-rights group Insan.

Some 200 members of the Ba'ath Party, which has monopolized political life in Syria since 1963, resigned last month. Many of these people, members of the party from the vast southern region of Syria known as the Houran—where restive protesters have been met with ruthless force—have since been detained, according to rights groups.

Homs, Syria's third-largest city and a major industrial center, was particularly hard hit by the military this week, as President Bashar al-Assad's government broadened military action there and in two other locations: Banias on the Mediterranean coast and in the towns around Deraa in the south.

Three people were shot and killed in Homs during Friday's demonstrations, in spite of an apparent order by Mr. Assad's government to show restraint toward protesters. On Thursday, tank shelling on the Bab Amro residential district in Homs killed at least 19 people.

Movement around Homs was impossible Friday, with roadblocks at the end of every street and security checkpoints every other block, a resident of the city said by email. Some 200 tanks and armored vehicles deployed on both sides of a major highway leading to nearby Hama, the resident said.

He said security forces opened fire on thousands of mosque-goers as they poured out after Friday prayer. 'Shabeeha', or what activists describe as gunmen loyal to the government, sped by crowds of protesters in black Mercedes, shooting out at them, the resident described. 

On Friday, activists said the government's continued use of violence against protesters, punctuated by an offer of "national dialogue" announced by the country's information minister, shows increasing weakness in the face of a protest movement that won't abate. But they also said the pervasive military and security presence, even in cities like Aleppo where people haven't broadly joined protests, has stifled the protests' momentum.

"I also think the regime is realizing they cannot continue like this," said Insan's Mr. Tarif. "Security forces must be getting tired," Mr. Tarif said. "There must be questions being raised on the inside—people inside the oppression machinery are also starting to question the efficiency of what they are doing."

Besides Homs, activists and residents say military remains deployed in Banias, in Deraa, and in several cities around Deraa, where protests first started against Mr. Assad's regime two months ago.

Syria's government, which has characterized the uprising as a foreign plot against the country led by terrorists and armed gangs, said last week it was withdrawing the army from Deraa. Information Minister Adnan Mahmoud said on Friday army units had also begun a gradual withdrawal from Banias. Activists and residents say tanks and troops still have both cities under siege.