 Q: I live in an upscale neighborhood, where the homes are all more than 15 years old. Although many of my neighbors have remodeled extensively over the years, I haven't. Now I'd like to redo my kitchen, but don't want to overdo it, as I plan to sell within the next five years. I can spend about $75,000 without going into debt. What would you recommend?

 --Boston 

 A: If you haven't made any major upgrades in your kitchen in more than 15 years, and you don't have to go into debt to make them, then it's worthwhile to talk with some contractors. Since real estate agents inevitably point to a kitchen as the biggest selling point of a home, you'll probably have to do some updating to keep your house competitive when it comes time to sell. In the meantime, you'll have a few years to enjoy the space yourself.

But given your budget, you should steer clear of fancy range hoods, built-in wine coolers and top-of-the-line cabinets and appliances. And you shouldn't expect to get your money back on resale.

According to Remodeling magazine's latest cost versus value survey, in New England, a major upscale kitchen remodel done in 2010 cost $115,578 but recouped only 61% of its value on resale. In 2011, the survey projects that the cost will drop slightly, to $113,464, but the return will also fall, to 59.7%. 

If you go with middle-range products and materials, however, both the price and the payback improve. In 2010, a midrange kitchen redo in New England cost $60,038 but returned 71% on resale. In 2011, the cost is expected to be $58,367 and the return 68.7%.

I also suggest that you stay away from ultra-trendy style choices, like red stoves, or hard-to-remove personal touches, like multicolored mosaic backsplashes. Instead, keep a neutral palette and match the style of cabinetry to your home's architecture, rather than what's being pushed this month in shelter magazines. 

If you want a few flashy features to impress home shoppers, splurge on some items that are visible and touched often, like countertops and faucets, rather than those that are hidden and taken for granted, like trash compactors.

Meanwhile, think green—it will save you money. Look for lighting and appliances that are energy efficient and products that are made from sustainable materials, like bamboo floors, or recycled, like composite countertops made from crushed reclaimed bottles and other glass. 

Also, see what you can save or reuse from your existing kitchen. For instance, if your cabinet frames are sound and you are happy with your room's overall layout, you can save a great deal of money by re-facing rather than replacing them. 

Or you can buy lightly-used appliances, or even entire kitchens, from wealthy sellers who remodel often. Call local kitchen designers, contractors and interior decorators to see if they can help you snag these almost-new gems. Of course, nearly new kitchen castoffs also may be found in newspaper classified ads and on online auction sites. 

Another interesting source for recycled products is Greenwich, Conn.-based GreenDemolitions.com, which removes kitchens from estates or design showrooms, sells them for a fraction of their original price and ships them nationwide. Green Demolitions is part of Recovery Unlimited, a non-profit that supports All Addicts Anonymous outreach programs.

 Write to  June Fletcher at fletcher.june@gmail.com 