MUMBAI – Air India Ltd. plans to double its fleet size to 272 planes over five years in the country's fast-growing aviation market, even as the national carrier strives to cut costs and reduce losses. 

"Based on the studies our consultants have done, the Indian aviation market will grow to 150 million passengers by 2015 from the current 72 million, and a company has to expand in a growing market," said  Gustav Baldauf, Air India's first chief operating officer. 

The airline, with a current fleet size of 135, plans to lease 107 planes by the end of 2015, he told Dow Jones Newswires in a recent interview. 

In addition, Air India expects to take delivery of 30 planes from  Boeing Co.
BA


0.77
%




, which forms part of the 111-plane order from Boeing and Airbus in 2005, said Mr. Baldauf, who joined the carrier in April. 

Air India's plans mirror the ambitions of the expanding Indian aviation market, which just two years ago was crushed by high fuel prices and carriers running empty planes due to low demand. 

Just Wednesday, India's biggest low-fare carrier IndiGo announced an order for 180 Airbus planes, which the European plane maker called the single-biggest by number of planes in commercial aviation history. SpiceJet, another low-fare domestic airline, recently placed an order for 30 Boeing jets and 30 turboprop aircraft from  Bombardier Inc. 

Still, Air India is under pressure from the government to cut costs. 

The airline has been in heavy losses since 2007, bogged by an ill-planned merger with the erstwhile Indian Airlines and government rules that forces it to fly unprofitable routes. 

The $15 billion order plane order from Boeing and Airbus, coupled with the global downturn in 2008 that sapped air travel demand, added to the carrier's woes. It posted a net loss of INR55.51 billion in the year to March 31, 2010. It has also lost market share locally in the past few years and is now in fourth place behind Jet Airways (India) Ltd., Kingfisher Airlines Ltd. and IndiGo. 

Mr. Baldauf said "the company won't be able to reduce its losses by shrinking." 

Air India's revenue is likely to grow 25% this financial year through March 2011, as steps to raise productivity and cut costs have begun to yield results, he added. 

Meanwhile, the Indian government injected 8 billion rupees ($178 million) into Air India last fiscal year and approved an infusion of 12 billion rupees more this year to shore up finances. In return, it asked the carrier to cut costs, increase revenue and make a turnaround plan. 

The plan from the airline was submitted to its consultant Deloitte Tuesday. "We expect Deloitte to approve the plan this week, following which, we will submit it to the government," Mr. Baldauf said. 

As part of that plan, Air India isn't likely to make any fresh plane order, he said. 

Instead, it will lease planes as a more cost-effective and flexible management solution; about 15% of Air India's fleet is leased and the figure will likely climb to 40% by 2015, he added. 

The fleet expansion plan will trigger the need for an initial 1,500 additional cabin crew staff however, he said. 

Mr. Baldauf said Air India now has more than 30,000 employees and an employee-to-aircraft ratio of 290:1--the highest in the country. 

The airline plans to shift 17,000 of its employees to separate business units for ground handling, maintenance and for plane repair to help cut costs, Mr. Baldauf said. 

The carrier plans to hive off businesses into separate units as part of the turnaround plan. 

"Shifting people will decrease the main company's salary bill by that much since these units are independent entities and don't count in Air India's wage bill." 

Mr. Baldauf said Air India is still in negotiations with Boeing over a compensation for the delay in its 27-ordered 787 Dreamliner aircraft. 

The delivery of the planes have been delayed several times on a global level by the U.S. manufacturer over technical issues. 

The compensation to Air India will stretch over three years and will include both cash payments and payment concessions for planes, spare parts and maintenance services, he said, without providing any figures. 

But a person close to the development said Tuesday Air India has already lost 60 billion rupees in revenue because of delays and should have received 20 of the planes by now as per the original delivery schedule. 

Air India is also in the process of reworking its domestic and international network to make its flights more profitable. 

Mr. Baldauf said the carrier's plan includes setting up five domestic hubs in the country by December 2012, and increasing services between shorter routes with smaller turboprop aircraft. 

"We are also planning to introduce more non-stop international flights for more efficient connectivity," Mr. Baldauf said. 

 Write to  Anirban Chowdhury at anirban.chowdhury@dowjones.com 