SEOUL—South Korea's  Shinhan Financial Group Co. reported better-than-expected first-quarter net profit as its net interest margin strengthened and its loan-loss provisions declined, reflecting improving business conditions for the industry.

Shinhan, the country's third-largest financial holding company by assets, said Wednesday that net profit for the three months ended March 31 was 924.32 billion won ($860.5 million), up 0.7% from 917.51 billion won a year earlier. The first-quarter figure was the highest among the major domestic lenders.

Shinhan's year-earlier figures were restated as the lender switched to International Financial Reporting Standards in line with changes to the regulator's accounting-rule requirements that took effect Jan. 1. 

"The results were generally solid," said Daewoo Securities analyst  Ku Yong-uk. "This is a company with a diversified income base and loan-loss provisions are falling…Shinhan could easily surpass 3 trillion won in full-year net profit if it keeps going at the current pace." 

Net interest margin, a profitability metric for the industry, rose 0.08 percentage point from the previous quarter to 2.28% at the firm's banking unit. Loan-loss provisions for the first quarter fell 4.2% from a year earlier to 177.5 billion won. 

During a teleconference, Shinhan executives said they will focus on maintaining good asset quality and profitability as they sounded a positive note about business prospects going forward. Continued global economic recovery and likely future rate increases by the Bank of Korea to control inflation are expected to support the lenders' bottom line going forward. 

"As we have in the past, we will grow at a pace slightly above the economic growth rates and focus on high-grade customers," Deputy President  Choi Buhm-soo said. 

Shinhan's executives said loan-loss provisions stemming from its exposure to the weak real-estate market will remain limited. They added that they will seek to improve the profitability of the firm's credit-card unit, its key nonbanking operation, as opposed to chasing market share amid intensifying competition for the industry. 

Local financial regulators have repeatedly warned financial companies not to engage in excessive asset growth, concerned that an overly aggressive fight for market share could undermine their fiscal health and exacerbate ongoing concerns about growth of household debt.

But Daewoo Securities' Mr. Ku said the concerns seem overblown, adding that current loan-growth rates are nowhere near what the industry has seen in the past when reckless asset growth was a clear risk. 

"They've just resumed the push for asset growth coming off the downturn, but the lenders are all going after the same, limited pool of clients because they want strong asset quality," he said. "It looks like a very heated battle in the pits, but when you look at the actual numbers, it's not such a huge problem." 

Shinhan Financial Group's profit beat the average 707.14 billion won forecast of seven analysts polled by Dow Jones Newswires and was better than any individual forecast in the Dow Jones poll. 

The firm also said the adoption of IFRS accounting standards will boost its annual net profit by between 250 billion won and 300 billion won, mainly due to the change in the accounting for goodwill. 

 Write to  Se Young Lee at vincent.lee@dowjones.com 