 (Best of the Tube Tonight: We'll be on "Hannity" as part of the "Great American Panel." Fox News Channel, 9 p.m. ET, with a repeat showing at midnight ET.) 

The Puffington Host headline could have been written in 2004: "Administration Grows Frustrated as Conversation Shifts From bin Laden to Waterboarding."

Everyone's talking about how we shouldn't talk about "torture." "Do we have to have another big national debate about torture?" complains Slate's Dahlia Lithwick. "Really, do we have to?" She then offers this sledgehammer-sharp bit of analysis:

Of course, without waterboarding, Osama bin Laden might also be alive, and who knows how many Americans might be dead from unthwarted terrorist attacks, a point even Lithwick acknowledges toward the end of her piece: "I have heard that [waterboarding] may have played some very small part in a vast tangle of intelligence and surveillance and patient detective work." 

But the facts don't matter. Waterboarding is "Still Stupid, Still Wrong, Still Immoral," as the headline declares. Anyone who disagrees with Lithwick is also stupid, wrong and immoral. "Let's ignore them," she urges. Would that she had followed her own advice and not written this silly and obnoxious article.

The editorialists at the New York Times, similarly, acknowledge that "there is no final answer to whether any of the prisoners tortured [sic] in President George W. Bush's illegal [sic] camps gave up information that eventually proved useful in finding Bin Laden." But again, the facts are of no importance when weighed against the Times's insufferable moral vanity: "Even if it were true that some tidbit was blurted out by a prisoner while being tormented by C.I.A. interrogators, that does not remotely justify Mr. Bush's decision to violate the law and any acceptable moral standard."

Lithwick and the Times editorialists have a small fraction of a point. We'd be happy not to have this debate if the other side would let the subject drop. Not only is it not doing so, but the Obama administration has not given up the idea of criminally prosecuting the interrogators, FoxNews.com reports:

Our friend Debra Burlingame, whose brother was the pilot of American Airlines Flight 77, tried to raise the matter with the president at Ground Zero yesterday. She tells Fox what happened:

Classy guy. 

 Time.com has excerpts from an interview CIA Director Leon Panetta gave NBC's Brian Williams:

 Reuters reports that Attorney General Eric Holder, in testimony before the Senate Judiciary committee Wednesday, said that bin Laden's killing "was justified as an act of national self-defense." If Holder can raise such a defense before Congress, surely the interrogators could do so at a trial. It would be revealing to see them call Panetta to testify that their work might have been responsible for the killing of bin Laden and the saving of American lives.

But it shouldn't come to that. The interrogators do not deserve to be hounded for the "crime" of having served their country. If Holder doesn't drop the investigation, Obama should drop him. If the administration and its supporters really want to end the debate over "torture," they can easily do so by following the advice of the Washington Post's Marc Thiessen and acknowledging that the other side may be right.

 Politicians as Role Models  Here's a telling juxtaposition of headlines: "Defining Moment of Barack Obama's Presidency?" (Politico.com, Tuesday), and "OBL's Death: A Defining Moment for Young Americans?" (Associated Press, Wednesday).

The Politico story describes a triumphant mood in the administration:

But the AP's tone toward young Americans is condescending:

Could it be that young people are taking their cue from political leaders who, while older, do not seem terribly mature?

  Käse-Eating Surrender Monkeys   Der Spiegel interviews one Herfried Münkler, a snotty German political scientist who is put off by the scenes of Americans celebrating Osama bin Laden's death:

We guess what he's saying is that it isn't like the Nuremberg rallies or anything.

  You're Just Saying He's Green Because He's Black   By ordering the raid that killed Osama bin Laden, President Obama "has demolished the notion that he cannot make tough decisions or cares primarily about the nation's image abroad," the New York Times editorializes.

Diminished perhaps, but "demolished" seems laughably hyperbolic. And the Times is not confident enough in this view to refrain from playing the race card yet again:

As we noted Tuesday, this bizarre obsession with race cannot be fully understood without treating it as a psychological symptom. Increasingly a liberal is someone who looks at an inkblot and sees only that it is black.

 'They Talk About Me Like a Dog' 

 Osama Imitates Obama 

  I Shot the Sharif   "Split Seen Between bin Laden, Deputy"--headline, The Wall Street Journal, May 6

  The Cola War on Terror   "Bin Laden Aides Said to Have Bought Orders of Pepsi, Coke"--headline, Bloomberg, May 4

  The Odds Were 100%   "U.S. Commandos Knew bin Laden Likely Would Die"--headline, Reuters, May 2

  Out on a Limb   "The Post-bin Laden Outlook? Anybody's Guess"--headline, WashingtonJewishWeek.com, May 5

  We Blame Global Warming   "Bill Richardson: Osama bin Laden's Death Changes Climate on Energy"--headline, Politico.com, May 4

  Other Than That, the Story Was Accurate   "An article on Saturday about a dispute over whether Harper Lee, the author of 'To Kill a Mockingbird,' cooperated with the author of a coming book about her misstated the history of interviews given by Ms. Lee. She spoke with a New York Times writer for an article in 2006; it has not been 45 years since she has granted a public interview."--correction, New York Times, May 4

 With DNC in Mind, City Bans Carrying Urine, Feces 

 So Much for the War on Drugs 

  It Must've Been Really Minor if They Waited Until Spring to Tell Us   "Harry Reid Suffers Minor Injuries in Fall"--headline, Politico.com, May 4

  'I'm Not a Witch'   "Ahmadinejad Allies Charged With Sorcery"--headline, Guardian (London), May 5

 The Lonely Lives of Scientists 

 Christianity, the Religion of Cheese 

  But You Should've Seen the One That Got Away   "Game and Fish Agents Catch 3 Shocking AR Catfish"--headline, KAIT-TV website (Jonesboro, Ark.), May 5

  Wouldn't It Be Safer to Use a Scalpel?   "Surgeon Blasts New 'Corset Piercing' Fad Where Pierced Skin Is Pulled Together With Ribbons"--headline, Daily Mail (London), May 6

 Hey, Kids! What Time Is It? 

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  Questions Nobodies Are Asking   "Frum & Greenwald: Was bin Laden Hit Legal?"--headline, FrumForum.com, May 6

 Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  All Men Can Bite--Now That Would Be News   "Be Aware: All Dogs Can Bite"--headline, Mat-Su Valley Frontiersman (Wasilla, Alaska), May 2

  Bin Laden Misquoted After Dr. King Killed--Now That Would Be News   "Martin Luther King, Jr. Misquoted After Osama bin Laden Killed"--headline, Washington Post, May 3

 Look Out Below! 

 Too Much Information 

  News of the Tautological   "GOP senators use legislative rule to pass budget"--subheadline, Houston Chronicle, May 4

  Breaking News From Last Week   "Bin Laden Involved in Terror Planning"--headline, USA Today, May 5

  Breaking News From This Week   "We No Longer Need to Kill bin Laden, Claims Barack Obama"--headline, Daily Mail (London), Jan. 15, 2009

  News You Can Use   "Banks Don't Look at Names, Signatures on Cheques"--headline, CBC.ca, May 3

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  There Goes the Neighborhood   Maybe his presence brought down property values, maybe he got hit by the real estate bubble, or maybe he just overpaid. Whatever the case, London's Guardian reports Osama bin Laden's house isn't worth as much as had been advertised:

Assuming bin Laden made the customary 20% down payment and took out a mortgage for $800,000 in 2005, he's going to be underwater for a long time.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Ed Lasky, Joe Perez, David Gerstman, John Bobek, Hillel Markowitz, Paul Dyck, T. Young, Ed Grinberg, Mark Bussey, Glen Cuccinello, Chris Niedner, Rod Pennington, Daniel Mullen, John Williamson, Kyle Kyllan, Edward Himmelfarb, Michele Schieser, Dave Ceely, Mark Zoeller, George Struve, Lewis Sckolnick, Todd Crampton, Terry Holmes, John Sanders, Joel Griffith, Michael Capel, Jeff Dobbs, Peter Huntsman, Ethel Fenig, Arlene Ross, Scott Siegel, Rich Ferree, Patrick Lavin, Paul Strada, Cameron Graber, Brian Warner, Bruce Goldman, Miguel Rakiewicz, Zack Russ, Robert Elworth, John Hoh, Jim Orheim, Jim Miller, Craig Hildreth, Merv Benson, Don Stewart, Michael Garrett, Rex Pilger, Jonathan Seder and Brian Smith. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)