Portugal's agreement to a €78 billion ($115.7 billion) bailout package late Tuesday paved the way for a reasonably well-received Treasury bill auction Wednesday, although the country paid higher yields than two weeks ago to borrow three-month money as investors have remained cautious towards Portuguese debt. 

The bond market's attention will now shift to Spain, which will provide a bigger test of sentiment towards peripheral euro-zone debt, after Portugal successfully sold a more-than-planned €1.12 billion in bills Wednesday. 

Spain has largely avoided contagion effects since Portugal requested external help at the beginning of April, with its bond yields holding steady and its market access unaffected. But Thursday's sale of €3 billion to €4 billion of the country's 3.25% April 2016 bond will be a "much more meaningful litmus test" of investor appetite for peripheral euro-zone debt after the Portuguese bailout announcement, said Richard McGuire, senior fixed-income strategist at Rabobank in London. 

Citigroup strategists said they see little relative value in five-year Spanish bonds on either an intra- or inter-market basis, but expect the auction to benefit from continued short covering and the usual domestic sponsorship. 

Portugal paid an average yield of 4.652% on the three-month Treasury bills, compared with 4.046% at the previous auction April 20. The amount sold is above the debt agency's €750 million to €1 billion target range. The tender saw a bid-to-cover ratio of 1.9, compared with 2.0 previously. 

"Portugal will not be immune over the next months from market pressure, given it still has to convince markets that it has a credible growth strategy and given that the debate of a Greek debt restructuring will continue," said  Chiara Cremonesi, strategist at UniCredit Bank in London. 

The rise in yield compared with the previous sale on April 20 reflects the increase in yields in the secondary market prior to the bailout announcement. 

"It [the higher yield] is due to market movement over the last few weeks," said  Giuseppe Maraffino, a strategist at Barclays Capital in London. "In terms of pricing there was no price concession today," he said, adding that market interest for the auction was good. 

Bonds and Treasury bills on offer usually see some price concession ahead of the auctions as primary dealers, who directly trade with a country's debt agency or treasury, make room for the new supply in their books. 

Portugal's €78 billion bailout package will likely carry an interest rate around two percentage points over the yields of bonds issued by the European Financial Stability Facility, a person close to the situation said Wednesday. The person said this would likely give the three-year financing provided by the EU and the IMF an interest rate of around 4.3% to 4.7%. 

The bailout deal is expected to be approved at a meeting of euro-zone finance ministers in mid-May, by when Finland and Portugal's opposition will have to agree on the package. This would give time for the European Financial Stability Facility—the temporary euro-zone rescue fund—to raise money for Portugal by June 15, when a €4.9 billion redemption is to be met, analysts said. 

Portugal's debt agency plans to raise up to €7 billion in T-bills in the second quarter. The country doesn't have any redeeming T-bills in the April-to-June period, with the next T-bill payment due in July, when €3.01 billion expires. 

The debt agency modified its preliminary issuance plan which envisaged the sale of six- and 12-month T-bills at Wednesday's tender, and instead sold the shortest possible maturity. 

 Write to  Emese Bartha at emese.bartha@dowjones.com 