 Forces loyal to Libyan leader Col. Moammar Gadhafi launched airstrikes outside a rebel-held town to check the opposition's advance west toward the capital of Tripoli, as the U.S. and allies took steps to prepare for a possible military intervention.  

Rebel forces, following their defeat in the small coastal town of Bin Jawad on Sunday, appeared to be consolidating their positions and assuming a more defensive posture in the city of Ras Lanuf. 

U.S. President Barack Obama, saying Gadhafi and his allies would be held accountable for the actions, said the U.S. was discussing military options with allies in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. 

Some permanent members of the United Nations Security Council began drafting a U.N. resolution supporting a no-fly zone over Libya—a move that would require military intervention.

NATO military planners should have completed an assessment of a no-fly zone plan for Libya in time for the issue to be considered by alliance defense ministers at a meeting in Brussels on Thursday, according to the U.S. ambassador to NATO, Ivo Daalder.

Morgan Stanley has ceased trading oil with Libya in response to U.S. sanctions, as concerns grow about the North African country's future ability to export the oil it produces.

 In Bahrain, hundreds of hard-line opposition protesters gathered in Manama's financial center, defying a police order to disperse, in an escalation of tensions between demonstrators and the ruling Al-Khalifa family.  

 Oman made another bid to end daily antigovernment demonstrations by making a sweeping cabinet reshuffle that includes the removal of the country's powerful economy minister.  

 Egypt's military rulers swore in a new Cabinet that includes new faces in key ministries, responding to protesters' demands that the new government be free of stalwarts of ousted President Hosni Mubarak. 

Tunisia named a new government and disbanded a much-hated police unit as the interim leadership of the nation seeks to stabilize a country still finding its way after a popular revolt. 

 The world has become increasingly vulnerable to food crises in the wake of the global financial crisis and the commodity boom of 2007-08, the United Nations' food body said. 

The Food and Agriculture Organization's food-price index rose 2.2% on month in February, the eighth-consecutive monthly rise, to the highest level in real and nominal terms since the FAO started monitoring prices in 1990.

 Central banks across the world are ready to do whatever it takes to avert a sustained increase in inflation expectations, European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet said in responding to a question on whether some central banks, particularly the U.S. Federal Reserve, risk keeping interest rates too low, for too long.  

European Union regulators preparing a new round of bank stress tests are unlikely to examine what would happen to the region's banks if a euro-zone government defaults on its debt, a European official said. 

 A series of public-relations debacles—including links to a convicted sex offender and connections to controversial figures in the Middle East—have called into question Prince Andrew's position as the U.K.'s special trade envoy and threaten an embarrassment less than two months ahead of a royal wedding. 

 Ben Broadbent, senior economist at Goldman Sachs Group, was named as arch-hawk Andrew Sentance's replacement on the Bank of England's rate-setting Monetary Policy Committee.  

 The trial of former French President Jacques Chirac was suspended, just two hours after its start, when judges said they needed to first examine a constitutional claim lodged by a co-defendant in the case. The Paris court said it would make a decision by Tuesday on whether to accept or reject the claim.  

 France's military counter-espionage unit is following a lead in the investigation into cyber attacks on the finance ministry, Budget Minister Francois Baroin said. He said hackers had targeted the mailboxes of about 150 people working on the Group of 20 industrial and developing nations, which France is chairing this year. 

 Moody's slashed Greece's credit rating by three notches to B1 and signaled it could cut it even further, dragging the European sovereign deeper into junk-grade territory. The ratings agency downgraded Greece from Ba1, and kept its negative outlook.  

Serbia and Kosovo on Tuesday will hold their first direct talks since the former province declared independence from Serbia three years ago, the European Union said. The talks will cover freedom of movement, regional cooperation and the rule of law, a senior EU official said.

 The White House laid out its legal strategy Monday to indefinitely detain Guantanamo Bay prisoners who can't be tried but are too dangerous to be freed. President Barack Obama issued an executive order to conduct periodic reviews of the cases of nearly 50 detainees who will be held under "the law of war" at the base in Cuba. 

The news came in tandem with an announcement of plans to hold new military tribunals at Guantanamo. Defense Secretary Robert Gates rescinded a 2009 order that had frozen the filing of new charges against detainees imprisoned at the U.S. Naval base there. 

 Sen. John Ensign, a Nevada Republican, said he will not seek re-election in 2012, as the former presidential hopeful faces an ethics investigation for how he handled the aftermath of an extramarital affair. 

U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk formally launched the Obama administration's effort to win ratification of the South Korea trade agreement "without delay," according to a copy of a letter to leaders of Congressional committees. The letter didn't address pending trade-opening deals with Colombia and Panama. 

 Although China plans to shrink its trade surplus further this year, the nation's commerce minister expressed skepticism about the benefits of rapid yuan appreciation, indicating China is looking for other ways to ease tensions with global trading partners. 

 A general at the center of Taiwan's worst spy case in 50 years is suspected of leaking sensitive details to China about an electronic defense system being sold to the island by U.S. contractor Lockheed Martin, according to a member of Taiwan's parliamentary national defense committee.  

 North Korea raised the pressure on four North Koreans who defected to South Korea, saying it wants the four to face their relatives at a meeting of the two Koreas later this week. South Korean officials said they agreed to meet North Korea on Wednesday to discuss the issue.  

A Vietnamese human-rights lawyer has been freed from prison after serving a four-year sentence for advocating a multiparty system in Internet posts. Nguyen Van Dai, 42 years old, was released Sunday from Nam Ha prison in northern Ha Nam province, though he still has to serve four years of house arrest. 

 U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert Gates arrived on a surprise visit to Afghanistan to meet with U.S. troops and Afghan leaders, as the Obama administration looks for signs that its strategy there is starting to pay security dividends. 

In a news conference Monday evening in Kabul, Gates took the unusual step of making a personal apology to Afghan President Hamid Karzai over an incident in which nine teenage boys were mistakenly killed in a coalition attack.

Karzai, who a day earlier rejected a similar overture from U.S. Gen. David Petraeus, thanked Gates, and added, "I trust him fully when he says he's sorry."

 In Ivory Coast, heavy fighting broke out near the border with Liberia between forces backing the political rivals who both claim to be Ivory Coast's president, panicking tens of thousands of refugees who already had fled the violence.  

South Africa's ranking among major mining regions fell in a closely watched survey that assesses a region's attractiveness to mine investors and operators, leaving it just a few ranks above Zimbabwe. 

A stronger rand is helping to mute inflation pressures fanned by rising global food and oil prices, South Africa's Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan said, adding the country needed a "growth-friendly" policy on budget deficits and spending, as the economy was too sluggish to warrant the kind of fiscal austerity seen elsewhere in the world.