WASHINGTON—White House adviser Elizabeth Warren is expected Thursday to formally announce that Holly Petraeus, the wife of Gen. David Petraeus, will lead a new federal office aimed at helping troops avoid financial scams. 

Ms. Warren is poised to make the announcement at an event Thursday afternoon, according to a person familiar with the matter. 

The high-profile appointment comes as Ms. Warren, whom President Barack Obama put in charge of readying the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau for a July launch, has been busy hiring key staffers. She has tapped Ohio Attorney General Richard Cordray to lead the enforcement division, the Federal Reserve's Leonard Chanin for rule-writing duties and former AFL-CIO Deputy General Counsel David Silberman to head the card-markets unit. 

The consumer bureau, charged with watching out for U.S. consumers of financial products, is a cornerstone of the sweeping financial-regulatory overhaul Congress passed last summer. Ms. Petraeus's addition will be embraced by consumer groups who have long-argued that financial scams and abusive products are regularly targeted at veterans and active-duty military men and women. 

Also, the senators who authored the amendment creating the new office are welcoming early reports of Ms. Petraeus's appointment. 

Sen. Jack Reed (D., R.I.), who knew Holly Petraeus's father, Gen. William Allen Knowlton, when he was at West Point, touted Ms. Petraeus as "a strong advocate for military families." 

Also Massachusetts Republican Sen. Scott Brown said he is "pleased" with Ms. Warren's pick. 

"Our nation's soldiers and their loved ones make extreme sacrifices to protect us, and this new office will help protect them from predatory lending and financial fraud," he said. 

Meanwhile, Ms. Petraeus's appointment, which is expected to continue to meet bipartisan support, could be a public-relations boost for the bureau's image on Capitol Hill at a time when House Republican leaders are poised to scrutinize the bureau and investigate ways to strip the agency's powers. 

"Warren is showing that she's serious about reaching out broadly to a diverse array of experts to perform the many important functions of this agency," said Travis Plunkett, a legislative director for Consumer Federation of America. "It's easy to attack a bogeyman. It's easy to attack a caricature of a government agency. It's harder to attack a bricks-and-mortar government agency working to protect consumers." 

Ms. Petraeus, whose husband is commander of U.S. forces in Afghanistan, has spent her life around the military, and she isn't new on the consumer-protection scene. She is director of the Council of Better Business Bureaus' BBB Military Line, which warns military personnel about scams. She also played a prominent role during debate on the financial-regulatory overhaul, speaking out against an effort to exempt auto lenders from the consumer watchdog's oversight. 

"It's a fact that military personnel love their cars," she said during a May media conference with Sens. Reed and Dick Durbin (D., Ill.) "Sadly, many of them end up paying far more for those cars than they should." 

Ms. Petraeus added that predatory lending remains a problem despite a law that caps interest rates for consumer credit to active-duty military personnel at 36%. 

"There are still plenty of people out there willing to make short loans, small personal amounts and in a way that get around the definition that the law requires," she said. 

Predatory lending and insurance scams have long been problems for the military. A National Consumer Law Center report in 2003 found that military personnel "are ripe targets" because many are young and low-income yet they have a regular paycheck and other economically attractive qualities. The report also found that businesses offering "instant money" as well as tax-refund, pay-day and title-pawn loans cluster near military bases. 

The Department to Defense has also concluded that predatory-lending practices are prevalent at military bases. 

In October, the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority's investor-education foundation found that most military service members are deeper in debt than the general population; that many overdraw their checking accounts; and that more than one in five service members recently used high-cost borrowing such as pay-day or auto-title loans. 

Consumer advocates said they hope Ms. Petraeus can help military personnel avoid predatory lending and debt traps. 

"I think the choice of Holly Petraeus is fantastic," said National Consumer Law Center Managing Attorney Lauren Saunders. "Somebody with her visibility is very important. I think she will be able to communicate the real needs that consumers have and the importance of establishing a strong protection agency." 

 Write to  Maya Jackson Randall at Maya.Jackson-Randall@dowjones.com 