 Thailand raised its benchmark interest rate for a third straight time and signaled it will continue increasing rates to curb inflationary pressures. The country joins other Asian nations in trying to fight inflation amid strong economic growth, rising food prices and inflows of foreign capital.  

 Two clean-energy businesses plan to raise a total of roughly $1.1 billion from Hong Kong IPOs this year, highlighting the rapid growth of demand for renewable power in China.  

 Toyota shook up its management team to sharpen its focus on hybrid vehicles and emerging markets, while forgoing the kind of aggressive growth targets it pursued in recent years.  

 San Miguel is building a multibillion-dollar war chest in preparation for what it fears will be a rapid end to a boom in some of Asia's emerging markets.  

 U.S. stocks wobbled between gains and losses on the second anniversary of the bull market's start. Most Asian markets gained as oil prices edged lower.  

 European officials are poised to let regulators in individual countries use their own definitions of a key gauge of banks' health in coming "stress tests."  

 Ford plans to expand the range of vehicles it sells in Southeast Asia as part of an effort to boost market share in the region.  

 China extended its antitrust review of Motorola Solutions' sale of its network-equipment business to Nokia Siemens, delaying the deal for a second time.  

 Prudential PLC's profit more than doubled in 2010 despite its failure to buy insurer AIA.  

 Satyam is in talks with the U.S. SEC to shorten the time the Indian software exporter would need to restate its earnings under U.S. accounting standards.  

 The Swiss franc gained in volatile trading as Libya's troubles brought demand for haven investments. Asian trading was disrupted by problems on a Thomson Reuters dealing system.  

 Beijing appears to be stalling a deal with a South African petrochemicals company that would tap China's vast coal reserves to make synthetic fuels, while at the same time securing ways to acquire such technology domestically.  

 Extract Resources wants a Chinese state-owned company to extend a proposed takeover offer for its largest shareholder, Kalahari, to its own shareholders.  

 Managing relations with China will likely be a top priority for Japan's new Foreign Minister Takeaki Matsumoto, as a period of calm seems to be ending.  

 Forces loyal to Gadhafi showed no sign of relenting in attacks on areas of Libya under rebel control, raising the stakes for the U.S. and its allies who have called for the embattled leader to quit.  

At least 13 people died in clashes that broke out in Egypt when a Muslim mob attacked thousands of Christians protesting the burning of a Cairo church.

A suicide bomber struck a funeral attended by anti-Taliban militiamen in northwestern Pakistan, killing at least 36 mourners and wounding more than 100. 

Insurgents killed more Afghan civilians last year than ever before and their attacks were responsible for the majority of conflict-related deaths in 2010, the U.N. said.

National Public Radio's CEO resigned in connection with a scandal over a subordinate's taped remarks to a conservative activist, the U.S. broadcaster said. 