The city's plans to have Parisian-style café seating sprouting in the streets were dealt a serious blow this week when a downtown community board shot down half of about a dozen prospective pop-up cafés.

The community board representing SoHo and the West Village denied six applications to erect pop-up cafés outside of restaurants, approving only one. 

"I'm elated that the community has a voice in determining what's going to go in front of their homes," said  Sean Sweeney, director of the SoHo Alliance, a neighborhood organization that led the opposition. "Sidewalk cafés are pleasant enough on a wide boulevard but they're just incompatible within narrow streets in a residential neighborhood, and that's why there are none permitted there."

The Community Board 2 vote came after vehement community opposition to the cafés, part of a two-year pilot program of the city's Department of Transportation. The program, in its first year, will provide temporary seating platforms for restaurants not eligible for sidewalk cafés due to narrow sidewalks or zoning restrictions.

Residents raised liability issues and zoning concerns, and questioned why the DOT was getting into the entertainment industry.

City officials say the curbside platforms are meant to increase public open space. The cafés will be placed in the street and open to any passerby, not just restaurant patrons. Table service will not be provided, but eating is allowed though not required.

The city put out a call for applicants last year after the success of the first platform, in the Financial District. That pop-up was on Pearl Street and the expense was shared by the owners of two eateries, who deemed it a boon to business.

  Monty Dean, a spokesman for the DOT, said the community board has the deciding vote. He said two cafés have been approved and are moving forward, the Local Café in SoHo, and a Le Pain Quotidien at 708 Third Ave. They will be open roughly from May to October.

Mr. Dean said three other applications are pending board approval: Ecopolis Café in Cobble Hill, Brooklyn, a Le Pain Quotidien at 922 Seventh Ave. and Le Rivage at 340 W. 46th St.

"It is a pilot program, so we're trying to figure out if there are places that work," said Mr. Dean. "That's why part of the criteria was to have a letter of support from the community board. We wanted to see if they think it's a good use of the curb side space."

Restaurant owners expressed disappointment in the vote and surprise at the level of opposition.  Susie Lupert, vice-president of the Housing Works Bookstore café in SoHo, said the café would have been just four tiny tables seating eight to 10 people. "It would have replaced UPS trucks that sit all day in front of our store and in our view actually impede our business," she said. "We thought, 'Oh, we'll open up the space a little bit.' We just thought it was a cool idea that could have added something."

For some, the idea of the program was indicative of a department they find overbearing. 

"This is the same arrogance this agency has displayed when it comes to putting in bike lanes," said Mr. Sweeney. 