Federal regulators are likely to issue two different proposals in forthcoming mortgage-lending rules for loans classified as lower-risk: one calling for a minimum 20% down payment; and another recommending a 10% down payment, according to people familiar with the matter.

The proposal by six different federal agencies is part of an effort to rewrite rules for mortgage lending as part of the Dodd-Frank financial overhaul law enacted last year. The law requires banks to hold a portion of loans that are bundled and sold as securities, but it allowed regulators to exempt certain gold-standard residential mortgages from the costly new requirement.

The debate over what regulators should classify as a so-called "qualified residential mortgage" could have sweeping implications for the U.S. mortgage market.

Regulators have been at an impasse for months over where to draw the line on down payments for "qualified" mortgages. The pending proposal resolves that debate by instead asking industry stakeholders to weigh in on the two different proposals.

After a comment period, regulators will make a decision and issue a final rule.

Under the first proposal, pushed by banking regulators such as the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., new mortgages would need to have minimum 20% down payments. Homeowners would need a 75% loan-to-value ratio for refinances, and a 70% loan-to-value for cash-out refinances in which the borrower refinances into a larger loan.

That proposal drew support on Thursday from Sen. Bob Corker (R., Tenn.). "Borrowers making meaningful down payments are at a considerably reduced risk of defaulting on their loans," he said in a written statement. "I applaud any plan that helps us improve underwriting standards."

But consumer advocates and the real-estate industry have lobbied against tougher standards. The second proposal would recommend a 10% down payment.

Regulators are also finalizing details on the so-called "risk-retention" rule that requires banks to hold onto a portion of mortgages that are sold off as securities. In the pending proposal, regulators are likely going to require the banks who issue mortgage-backed securities to investors—not originators who make the loans—to hold the risk in most cases, according to people familiar with the matter.

How the risk retention requirements are defined could determine who issues mortgage-backed securities. In the pending proposal, regulators are likely to allow issuers to make a choice: They will be able to either hold the 5% piece of the deal that would get wiped out first in a default or they can choose to hold a less risky piece exposed to different levels of possible losses, according to these people.

The rules are likely to classify any loan that carries an effective government guarantee as a "qualified" mortgage that would be exempt from the risk-retention rules. That means loans from mortgage giants Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac would be exempted for as long as the firms are propped up by the government.

 Write to  Nick Timiraos at nick.timiraos@wsj.com 