OTTAWA—Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper, fresh from a high-profile turn on the world stage, faces this week a slew of domestic challenges—from a possible budget fight to a parliamentary reckoning over alleged ethical lapses by his government—that many here expect will bring down his minority government and trigger fresh elections. 

Over the weekend, Mr. Harper flew to Paris, where he committed Canadian fighter jets, a warship and military personnel to the coalition now conducting aerial strikes against Libya, giving a short-term boost to his international standing.

But back home, a parliamentary committee is set this week to decide whether to endorse a historic censure of the government by the speaker of the House of Commons, the elected lower house of parliament. Earlier this month, the speaker—currently a member of the opposition, whose role, however, is to play independent referee in the chamber—found evidence that Mr. Harper's government breached parliamentary privilege.

If confirmed, the rebuke would be a first for a Canadian government and an opportunity for opposition leaders to call a vote of no confidence in Mr. Harper's Conservative, minority government, triggering new elections.

Meanwhile, Mr. Harper's finance minister will present a budget Tuesday, another opportunity for opposition members to bring down the government. Mr. Harper needs the support of at least one of Canada's three, big opposition parties to pass his budget and stay in power.

Elections are far from a sure thing. Mr. Harper has publicly said he isn't seeking a vote now. Forcing an election is also a risky move for the opposition, with some polls showing Mr. Harper's Conservatives within striking distance of a majority, which has eluded them for five years and two national votes.

Last week, polling firm Ipsos Reid found that among decided voters, 40% would vote for the Tories, compared with 27% for the Liberals, the biggest opposition party. The Tory vote was down three points from earlier this month but remains what many political observers here see as a solid base upon which a majority can be won over the course of a campaign.

"They're knocking on the door," said Darrell Bricker, Ipsos Reid's chief executive for public-affairs, which includes polling.

Both sides appear to be gearing up for a fight. The government has been running ads touting its economic stewardship. The Liberals say their election platform is ready to go. Liberal leader Michael Ignatieff has all but said he would like to contest an election now.

The budget announcement could be pivotal. Canada's economic recovery now appears well entrenched, and Mr. Harper has said stimulus measures he spearheaded would stop as his government reins in spending. But Canada's better-than-expected fiscal position—thanks in part to higher commodities prices—could give him room to offer modest, voter-pleasing spending measures. That could keep at least one of the opposition parties on board. "They could easily do things if they wanted to avoid an election," says Scott Clark, a former deputy finance minister.

In the alleged ethical lapses, the government stands accused of two offenses: The opposition says it inappropriately withheld information about the cost of crime legislation. And a government minister is accused of misleading parliament by obscuring her denial of a grant to a church-based, human-rights group.

Mr. Harper's government has since provided more information to the committee about the crime legislation's costs. And Bev Oda, Canada's international-cooperation minister, has denied misleading parliament. A document surfaced that appeared to show an earlier funding approval of the group had been doctored after the fact. In testimony before the committee Friday, she apologies for the confusion and blamed sloppy paperwork.

The committee, in which opposition lawmakers make up a majority of voting members, is expected to make a recommendation on both instances this week. Opposition lawmakers have so far signaled they haven't been satisfied by the government response.

 Write to  Chip Cummins at chip.cummins@wsj.com and Nirmala Menon at Nirmala.Menon@dowjones.com 