Some two years after the initial set of advance copies went out to critics, Michael Feeney Callan's authorized biography of Robert Redford has finally arrived. The delay shouldn't be surprising, as Mr. Redford is legendarily dilatory about nearly everything. A friend of mine who worked on Mr. Redford's film of "The Milagro Beanfield War" (1988) recalls that they'd get in about two shots in the morning, and perhaps one after lunch. Throughout his career, Mr. Redford seems to have kept more people waiting for longer periods than even Marilyn Monroe, but then he always had a touch of the diva about him. 

This is an unusually well-written movie-star biography and one that deals dutifully with the subject's personal life. But it is most revealing when chronicling his professional one. When Mr. Redford first appeared, to swelling murmurs of female sighs, in the mid-1960s, he looked like a man created in a test tube for the job of movie star. Yet he was drawn to portrayals of cracked vessels—the closeted gay star in "Inside Daisy Clover" (1965), the narcissistic skier in "Downhill Racer" (1969), the gradually compromised politician in "The Candidate" (1972), the go-along-to-get-along WASP prince of "The Way We Were" (1973). Pure star vehicles were a rarity in Mr. Redford's acting career, the enormous hit "Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid" being a notable exception—an intersection of star mythology and cute, with cute getting right of way. 

 By Michael Feeney Callan  Knopf, 468 pages, $28.95

Old-time movie stars of an equivalent physical beauty could occasionally get away with such angular, uncomfortable characters, but not often: Tyrone Power was spectacular in "Nightmare Alley," but another 10 years passed before he felt secure enough to be ambitious again in "Witness for the Prosecution." Mr. Redford repeated the feat time and again, earning deserved street cred in the process. His career was on a straight ascent for more than a decade, from his Broadway success in "Barefoot in the Park" (1963) right through "All the President's Men" (1976).

But the bigger Mr. Redford got, the more obvious it became that he wasn't entirely comfortable with the job requirements. As early as "The Great Gatsby" (1974), his acting showed a tentative quality, which gradually spiraled into something approaching outright discomfort. An intelligent man, Mr. Redford knew he was miscast as Denys Finch Hatton in "Out of Africa" (1985). Lacking the theatrical bravura needed to bull his way through, he ended up communicating his unease to the audience.

Mr. Redford's gradual transition out of acting seems to have come because of his growing distaste for what is an intrinsically reactive job. He didn't really want to take direction from anybody—not even his close friend Sydney Pollack, who helped create the Redford template in seven films, beginning with "This Property Is Condemned" in 1966. Mr. Redford's intransigence on "Out of Africa" and "Havana" gradually created a breach that was only closed at the very end of Pollack's life.

The late Alan Pakula told Mr. Callan that he thought that "something corrosive happened with the specific success of 'The Way We Were' [1973]. 'The Way We Were' made him as a romantic hero." "I wonder if his success with Sydney had taken off the edge," Mr. Pakula said. "That may have been his personal Faustian trade-off." Or perhaps Mr. Redford simply couldn't help shying away from authority, even his own earned authority as a star.

Mr. Redford's habit of maintaining a physical and psychological distance from the film industry, as well as his string of enormous hits, gave him plenty of leverage to make the transition from acting to directing and producing, which is to say from passive to active. He didn't like Los Angeles—who can blame him?—so he set up an aerie for himself at Sundance in Utah, which, on the evidence of this biography, gradually became the focus of his life. He became disaffected with acting, so he directed "Ordinary People" (1980), a big, Oscar-winning hit that inexplicably beat out "Raging Bull" for Best Picture. 

The strangest thing about Mr. Redford is his self-defeating habit of making guest appearances in his own career. The roster of films in which he has acted in the past 20 years includes "Sneakers" (1992), "Up Close and Personal" (1996), "Spy Game" (2001), "The Clearing" (2004) and "An Unfinished Life" (2005). Seen them? No need. Some were commercially successful, most weren't, but none added anything to the star's reputation. When he directed himself in "The Horse Whisperer" (1998), Mr. Redford showed rapt self-regard, the star/director arguing with the studio to preserve that silly film's supposed "Chekhovian element." He also characterized the disastrous "Legend of Bagger Vance" (2000) as "Jungian." 

Mr. Callan points out that stars who survive as stars into their 60s do so by embracing their age—Eastwood, Connery, Nicholson. This Mr. Redford basically refused to do until he made "An Unfinished Life," and by then it was too late. The abdication from meaningful acting would be forgivable if his directorial career had been successful (see Eastwood), but Mr. Redford's output has been erratic—for every artistic success like "A River Runs Through It" there is a "Legend of Bagger Vance," "Lions for Lambs" (2007) or his new film, "The Conspirators"—overly explicit message movies, with Mr. Redford adopting the mantle of a moral scold. 

 Mr. Callan had complete access to Mr. Redford, his family, letters and diaries (though most of the interviews seem to have been done in the 1990s). What emerges is a comprehensive portrait of a man beset by colliding tides of ambition and hesitation. Mr. Callan is very alert to the wide range of shifting cultural and political winds that have always animated Mr. Redford. But he occasionally holds back, going coy, for instance, on the subject of women: We're offered barely comprehensible euphemisms such as "a closeness beyond friendship" with Natalie Wood. "Robert Redford" is thus as fascinating, and as maddening, as its subject. 

—Mr. Eyman's latest book is "Empire of Dreams: The Epic Life of Cecil B. DeMille."