BEIJING— Tencent Holdings Ltd.
TCEHY


-3.09
%




 of China posted a 61% rise in first-quarter net profit, as the operator of the QQ chat service benefited from a U.S. acquisition and improved revenue from online games and other Internet services. 

Tencent is looking to expand its revenue from areas outside its core businesses of online games, messaging services and social networking. But analysts expect online-games revenue to continue to fuel Tencent's growth this year as the company adds new games and industry consolidation favors dominant companies. In March, Tencent said it expects revenue and net-profit growth to slow this year. 

"We will continue to increase our strategic investments in areas that include microblog, e-commerce, search, online security, online video and international expansion," Tencent said in a written statement. 

The company said its net profit rose to 2.87 billion yuan ($442.1 million) in the quarter from 1.78 billion yuan a year earlier.

Revenue rose 50% to 6.34 billion yuan from 4.23 billion yuan. 

The company's revenue from online services rose 55% to 5.25 billion yuan from 3.39 billion yuan, due to growth in Tencent's online-games and online-community businesses. As of March 31, Tencent had 674.3 million active instant-messaging user accounts, up 4.1% from 647.6 million at the end of 2010. 

Revenue from mobile and telecommunications services rose 26% to 777.8 million yuan from 618.2 million yuan a year earlier, while revenue from online advertising rose 37% to 280.9 million yuan from 204.3 million yuan.

Tencent benefited from a gain of 459 million yuan related to its acquisition in February of U.S. online-game company Riot Games Inc., part of Tencent's efforts to expand outside China. 

It also teamed up with U.S. deals website Groupon Inc. and another investor to launch a group-buying services website in China, offering users group discounts on items like meals and movie tickets. 

Tencent held the largest share of China's online-games industry in the first quarter, with 28.8% of the sector's 8.5 billion yuan in revenue, according to Beijing research firm Analysys International.

Shenzhen-based Tencent operates online platforms in China including instant-messaging service QQ, Web portal QQ.com, games portal QQ Game and a mobile portal. 