Financial advisers are battling what they say is a dangerous phobia among younger investors. It's the fear of risk.

Many investors born between the early 1980s and the late 1990s—the so-called Generation Y—have watched their parents' portfolios take a beating in recent years. And the result, advisers say, is that they have become overly cautious, shying away from stocks and other investments they perceive as too risky.

Such wariness carries its own substantial risks, advisers say. They believe that at some point inflation will return, eroding the value of portfolios stuffed with too many conservative fixed-income investments. They argue that the only way their younger clients will achieve the higher returns they will need for their security in later years is by increasing their risk tolerance.

To that end, here are some ways financial advisers are trying to coax Generation Y into investing's choppier waters:

  Brian Ullmann, an adviser with Ford Financial Group in Fresno, Calif., sometimes counsels the children of his older clients about their 401(k) holdings. He says he finds that many aim for limited-risk portfolios more commonly associated with investors twice their age, and have perhaps only 30% to 40% of their assets in stocks.

Mr. Ullmann is cautious about encouraging these new investors to go beyond their comfort zone. However, depending on their willingness and interest, he often explains how they could take a small step forward along a continuum of risk into potentially more-rewarding assets.

For instance, an investor who holds only bond mutual funds might consider moving some dollars into large-stock mutual funds whose top 10 holdings include familiar names like Google, Cisco and Apple. An investor comfortable with large-stock funds, he says, might consider adding a small stake in emerging-market funds.

"Many Gen Y investors say, 'I want more bonds and less stock,' " he says. He might nudge them toward a 50-50 mix. "It's still better for them to have half their money in stocks and half in bonds than to hold 100% in cash. Being somewhat invested is better than not investing at all," Mr. Ullmann says. On the plus side, he adds, these investors are often more comfortable with international-stock funds than were prior generations.

  Bradford Winton, a 31-year-old adviser at Legacy Solutions in Kennett Square, Pa., says he has some clients in their 20s who can be unnerved when the large amounts of equities typically prescribed to people their age result in lots of portfolio volatility. They may also get heavy stock exposure in target-date or other funds in which their money may land by default within a 401(k) plan.

"I feel a lot of older advisers tell young clients to just shove 80% or more of their money into equities," Mr. Winton says. He'll usually recommend 65% to 75% for twentysomethings, and suggest they place 10% to 15% of their portfolio into alternative-investment funds which have a low correlation to the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index. In particular, he likes alternatives funds that focus on futures, arbitrage and other hedging strategies. (The 10% to 20% remaining can go into cash or fixed income.) He explains to his younger clients that alternatives funds have the potential to deliver higher returns than conservative investments and to perform countercyclically to stocks.

"I want to show them their returns can look less like shark teeth," Mr. Winton says. His firm's alternatives-fund picks include  Calamos Market Neutral Income, Rydex SGI Managed Futures Strategy, Arbitrage and  JPMorgan Research Market Neutral.

Increasingly, investment firms and retirement-plan operators are trying to engage Gen Y investors in one of the main ways these young adults communicate—electronically.

Some retirement-plan administrators are looking for 401(k) platforms that let tech-savvy Gen Y investors access information using smartphones or tablet devices, says  Colby Winslow, am analyst with Chepenik Financial, a Winter Park, Fla., firm that advises plan administrators. Companies enabling administrators to pitch a more modern 401(k) experience to Gen Y include Putnam Investments, Principal Funds and MassMutual Financial Group, Mr. Winslow says.

According to Mr. Winslow, one Florida employer he works with has had "big success" with MassMutual's "e4" platform, in which 401(k) enrollment is done via hand-held devices. MassMutual reps visited the company and handed out tablets with employee information partially filled in, then took the workers through the steps of sign-up and immediate enrollment.

Mr. Winslow says some administrators are using auto-enrollment in 401(k) plans and "auto-escalation" of plan contributions—a slight uptick in contributions every 12 months or so—to benefit Gen Y investors.

  Francisco Prat, former head of client research at UBS Wealth Management, a unit of UBS AG, has founded a company called Lifewellth Inc. targeted at twentysomethings. The company is developing an iPad app to help these investors save for various near-term goals, and retirement, by offering targeted, automated investment portfolios.

 Ms. Hodges is a writer in Seattle. She can be reached at reports@wsj.com. 