MUNICH – German industrial group Siemens AG Monday said it plans to raise its stake in its publicly-listed Indian company Siemens Ltd. to up to 75% from 55% at a cost of around €1 billion ($1.36 billion), as part of wider plans to increase its presence in India. 

Siemens said it would offer shareholders 930 rupees ($20.28) a share. 

A further increase above 75% isn't expected, according to a company spokeswoman. A stake above 75% would require the Indian company to be removed from the stock market because publicly listed companies must have at least 25% free float. Siemens is the sole shareholder in all of its other foreign subsidiaries. 

Siemens sees India as a major growth market. About a year ago, the company announced plans to double its market share in the country. India is an interesting market for Siemens, mainly because of its renewable energies and SMART products businesses, which create cheaper and technologically trimmed-down products. Siemens currently has more than 80 SMART-Projects in place, mainly in China and India, which are driving business for the company. 

"Siemens is really growing in India at present and it is constantly developing new products for the entry level," Siemens strategy chief Roland Busch said recently in an interview. Prices for entry-level products are generally 30% to 50% cheaper than high-end products. "By 2012 alone, more than 30 new entry-level products should be launched on the Indian market," Mr. Busch said at the time. 

India also plays an important role in the development of Siemens' wind turbines business. In addition to Russia and Brazil, the company has plans to build a manufacturing facility for wind turbines in India this year. 

The higher stake will give Siemens the upper hand in future investment decisions, reducing the influence of other shareholders to a minimum. Siemens Ltd. employs 7,500 people in India and posted annual sales of €1.5 billion with operating profit of about €200 million, in the fiscal year ended Sept. 30, 2010. 

Siemens' offer is 28% above the closing price on Jan. 28 of 728 rupees and 20% above the minimum offer price of 772 rupees required under Indian market regulations. 

Pending regulatory approval, the offer is expected to open on March 25 and close on April 13. 

The move follows that of its Swiss rival ABB Ltd., which last year raised its holding in its Indian subsidiary to 75% from about 52% at a cost of around $965 million. 

The offer is scheduled to open on March 25 and is likely to close on April 13, the company said in a newspaper advertisement Monday. 

Under Indian regulations, any move to buy more than a 15% stake in a company has to be followed by an open offer to minority shareholders for a minimum stake of 20%. 

Indian regulations stipulate that if the publicly held shares in a company fall below 10%, the company must delist from Indian stock exchanges. 

  Siemens AG holds a stake of about 55.18% in the India unit and its total holding will rise up to 75% upon the completion of the offer, if fully subscribed, the advertisement said. 