WASHINGTON—The Obama administration has been secretly building up its ranks of hunter-killer commandos, such as the Navy SEAL team that killed Osama bin Laden. 

Since 2009, the U.S. has boosted the number of strike teams in Afghanistan from four to 20, each with 10 to 100 men. These and other special-operations forces have carried out thousands of raids in the past year, officials said, killing about 3,200 insurgents and capturing approximately 8,000 more.

A senior U.S. official said stepped-up raids in Afghanistan honed the teams' skills, increased intelligence about militants in Pakistan and gave President Barack Obama confidence that a SEAL assault on bin Laden's compound in the Pakistani town of Abbottabad could succeed.

Operations conducted by special operations forces, April 24, 2010–April 15, 201

Insurgent leaders were killed or were captured in that time

Insurgents were captured

Insurgents were killed

The raid on the bin Laden compound has raised the curtain on this and a host of other secret military capabilities, including the possible existence of new stealth helicopter technology and commando teams' use of trained dogs. Although the military jealously guards such details, the chance to take out the al Qaeda leader appeared worth the trade-off of revealing some of the commando teams' tradecraft.

Few have publicly criticized the use of hunter-killer commandos in the wake of the SEAL team's successful strike. But in the past, some critics have expressed worry that use of the teams amounts to targeted killings and that inserting commandos in countries where the U.S. isn't at war can threaten to enmesh the U.S. in bigger, more costly conflicts.

Hunting al Qaeda fighters and gathering intelligence on bin Laden was a prime justification for the buildup of commando units in Afghanistan. But their mission isn't likely to end with bin Laden's death. Officials say the Pentagon intends to further bolster the teams and increase the number of missions they are assigned to carry out.

"They are building their target lists and stacking them up," another U.S. official said. "These guys have never been as busy as they are now."

Mr. Obama planned to travel Friday to Fort Campbell, Ky., to meet with members of the team involved in the strike on bin Laden's compound. The commandos belong to Joint Special Operations Command, the Fort Bragg, N.C.-based headquarters, usually called JSOC, which oversees the U.S. military counterterrorism missions around the world.

While President Obama decided not to release photographs of Osama bin Laden's body, other photos taken at the compound were released by Reuters. 

Diagram from the U.S. government

Photos inside and out

Since the beginning of last year, the Obama administration has embraced the hunter-killer mission with vigor.

The military distinguishes between counterinsurgency—which focuses on protecting the locals and winning their trust with government services and economic development—and what the Pentagon calls counterterrorism, which in Afghanistan is a campaign to hunt down top insurgent leaders and foreign fighters.

Some in the White House view the military's counterinsurgency mission with skepticism, worried about the huge expense of having large numbers of U.S. troops deployed overseas. By contrast, the JSOC counterterrorism teams are small, travel light and require little in the way of the heavy logistics needed to sustain conventional forces. 

In Afghanistan, JSOC units are credited with weakening the Taliban over the past year with constant attacks. Those insurgents reported killed or captured in the past year by JSOC and other special-operations forces, such as Army Green Berets and Marine commandos, include some 1,500 insurgent leaders, officials say. 

Although foot soldiers are easily replaced, military commanders say, eliminating midlevel commanders has helped to erode the Taliban's ability to control territory and fighters. 

Still, violence levels in Afghanistan remain high, with the number of weekly attacks hitting an all-time peak last September.

Such teams have generally not ventured into Pakistan. During the George W. Bush administration, military officials proposed sending a team there to capture al Qaeda's then-No. 3, Faraj al-Libbi. Senior administration officials vetoed the plan, saying he wasn't a valuable enough target to risk angering the Pakistanis. In 2005, he was captured by Pakistani special forces working with the Central Intelligence Agency.

But in 2008, the Bush administration did approve a raid into Pakistan. In an operation code-named "Cottonmouth," a SEAL team crossed into Pakistan and grabbed a militant who later provided detailed information about al Qaeda safe houses in Pakistan's North Waziristan region, a tribal area where many militants take refuge. Officials say the Central Intelligence Agency used the information to develop targets for drone strikes.

The incursion caused a furor in Pakistan, where the government publicized and condemned the strike. Within the Bush administration, State Department officials argued that further raids could permanently damage the relationship with Pakistan. The White House ruled out future strikes.

"It got to the point that bin Laden would be the only reason to go in," the senior official said. 

In the 2008 presidential campaign, then-Sen. Obama repeatedly stressed his willingness to enter Pakistan to pursue al Qaeda targets. Soon after he became president, the number of CIA missile strikes in the tribal areas of Pakistan increased.

Before this week's attack on bin Laden's compound, as far as is known publicly, Mr. Obama hadn't authorized any commando raids into Pakistan. But senior U.S. officials said the administration used the expanded number of hunter-killer teams in Afghanistan to try to pressure the Pakistanis themselves to move against militants.

In October 2010, amid new intelligence reports that militants in the tribal areas were planning an attack on America or Europe, senior U.S. officials told their Pakistani counterparts that if an attack on the U.S. or its allies were traced to Pakistan, the military would act unilaterally and send commandos to attack plotters or training camps there.

JSOC controls the Pentagon's three classified special-mission units: the Army's 1st Special Forces Operational Detachment-Delta, known as Delta Force; the Navy's Naval Special Warfare Development Group, commonly called SEAL Team Six; and the Air Force's 24th Special Tactics Squadron. Units from the Army's secretive Ranger battalions are routinely assigned to JSOC, as well.

"SEAL Team Six is unique," Marine Maj. Gen. Richard Mills, who just finished a tour as the commander in southwest Afghanistan, told reporters Thursday. "Those are big boys. ...That particular team is your top-shelf stuff."

In public, military officials will not discuss in any detail the activities of JSOC. Its budget remains classified. Still, its commanders have risen to the most senior posts. Gen. Stanley McChrystal, who led JSOC at the height of the Iraq war, became the top commander in Afghanistan. Vice Adm. William McRaven, the current commander, has been tapped to lead Special Operations Command, which oversees all such troops.

Prior to 2009, Army's Delta Force primarily worked in Iraq, while SEAL Team Six was assigned to Afghanistan. But as the Iraq war wound down, and the Obama administration shifted the military's focus, Delta Force units and additional Army Green Berets were reassigned to Afghanistan.

"The Obama administration made Pakistan and Afghanistan its primary mission, not Iraq," the senior official said. "By doing that, we resourced that part of the world to go after bin Laden. Obama said we are in this because of bin Laden, we are going to go after bin Laden. And we did."