WASHINGTON - Democrat  Erskine Bowles, who co-chaired the White House's deficit-reduction panel last year, predicted Wednesday evening that 35 to 40 additional U.S. senators would back a deficit reduction plan being drafted by a group of lawmakers known as the "Gang of Six."

"I think the Gang of Six is our best hope," he said during a conference call hosted by a group called "No Labels," which says it represents Democrats, Republicans and Independents who want lawmakers to work together to promote change in Washington.

Mr. Bowles and his co-chairman, Republican  Alan Simpson, designed a series of spending cuts and revenue increases that would cut $4 trillion from the deficit over 10 years. The proposal received the support of 11 of the panel's 18 members in December, which is more than many expected but not enough to trigger immediate action by Congress.

Now Mr. Bowles is working with six senators, led by Democrat  Mark Warner and Republican  Saxby Chambliss of Georgia, to push the plan into action. Many Democrats oppose some of the proposed changes to Social Security, and many Republicans oppose the proposed changes to tax policy, but Mr. Bowles said he's hopeful that a broad package can win support because of a growing concern about the size of the country's deficit.

The support of 35 to 40 more senators in addition to the six authors of the package would fall short of the number needed to push any plan into law. But lawmakers and aides involved in the process have said they are hopeful that if they can get a critical mass of supporters, other lawmakers will back whatever they propose. Previously, Mr. Chambliss has said there were 31 lawmakers who were considering backing the plan.

The U.S. debt is $14.1 trillion and growing. The deficit this year is expected to hit $1.65 trillion, and Mr. Bowles predicted the U.S. would pay $1 trillion in interest alone by 2020. The debt is expected to grow rapidly in the coming decades, driven in part by the country's aging populations and higher health care costs.

Mr. Bowles's tone on the call was grim. "The problem is real," he said. "The solutions are all painful. There is no easy way out." At one point, he said if the country doesn't do anything to tackle the debt, "we're going to have one hell of a crisis."

He has said the debt could trigger an economic crisis if country's that buy U.S. debt either decide to stop or start demanding much higher interest rates.

Mr. Bowles had harsh words for fellow Democrats. He dismissed the idea that raising taxes alone might help erase the deficit, saying "raising taxes doesn't do a dern thing" to address health care costs that are projected to be a big driver of future fiscal problems.

He also said the White House, and House and Senate leadership would have to step in and help drive the process forward. "We're going to have to have leadership...to get to the promised land," he said.

The bipartisan group of six senators, which includes Democrats  Richard Durbin of Illinois and  Kent Conrad of North Dakota and Republicans  Tom Coburn of Oklahoma and  Mike Crapo if Idaho, still hasn't signaled when it will propose its plan.

Talks are described as so fragile they could collapse at any time. Still, one idea they've looked at closely would include setting deficit-reduction targets that Congress must meet over time.

For example, they could instruct Congress to find $10 billion in savings on agriculture spending, which would require lawmakers to either cut spending or raise taxes or both to meet that threshold.

Treasury Secretary  Timothy Geithner backed the idea of "constraints" on congressional spending on Tuesday.

Mr. Bowles and others have said these steps are necessary to try and control the growing debt, but many lawmakers oppose some of the specific proposals being considered, ranging from cuts in military spending to a reduction in things like health care benefits.

 Write to  Damian Paletta at damian.paletta@wsj.com 