WASHINGTON—U.S. Energy Secretary  Steven Chu said Sunday that the Japanese are making progress at stabilizing the stricken Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant and said U.S. regulators are reviewing the safety of reactors with a similar design.

Speaking on "Fox News Sunday," Mr. Chu said the situation at the reactor is "more under control." Japanese authorities and power company officials are "making very good progress," he added. 

Speaking on CNN's "State of the Union," Mr. Chu said he believed the main containment vessels in two of the three reactors were "intact" but that officials remain concerned over Unit 2 because higher levels of radiation there suggest there may be a breach in the containment vessel. 

Mr. Chu also there was no evidence that the Japanese were holding back information on the reactors. "We have confidence," in information provided by the Japanese, he said. 

Japan's nuclear safety agency said Sunday that pressure levels inside the containment vessel of the No. 3 reactor at the Fukushima plant are stabilizing. Tokyo Electric Power Co., the plant's operator, said Sunday afternoon that it restored the power supply to the No. 2 reactor. 

Power restoration to reactors No. 1 and No. 2 had been expected by Sunday afternoon, after being pushed back from Saturday afternoon. The delay was due to workers having to shield many pieces of equipment from the water spraying operations. 

Mr. Chu also sought to reassure Americans about the safety of U.S. reactors, 23 of which have a similar design. "There will be a thorough review going forward" of all the reactors' safety. That review is being conducted by the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission. 

While no new reactor has been built in the U.S. in more than 30 years, those already in existence are "constantly upgraded." 

New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo, said Saturday his staffers will meet the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission to highlight concerns about the safety of the Indian Point nuclear plant located north of New York City. Asked about New York officials' concern, Chu said officials will examine whether that plant should be kept running but added that "we believe that reactor is safe."