My luggage recently took an extended vacation in New York without me. We had, as you might expect, planned to travel on the same flight, but British Airways had other ideas. We were reunited three days later, and one of us was in perfect order. No thanks to BA, but thanks to a tip I received about eight years ago from a seasoned Italian traveler who claimed she had never once damaged or permanently lost her suitcase. Why? Well, she explained, her luggage was a set of tangerine-colored Mandarina Duck suitcases on wheels. I remained unconvinced until my friend pointed out that her baggage neatly satisfied the twin tenets for superior luggage (and so much else in life): sturdiness and the ability to stand out in a crowd. Her cases were made of the tough, techno-nylon fabric for which Mandarina is famous. And though the color—a particularly muddy shade of orange—might not be to everyone's taste, it would most certainly attract the eye of the resolutely ambivalent baggage handlers, whose job it is to rescue the vast swathes of bereft luggage that twirl around the airport conveyors of the world daily. If you are traveling commercial or without the help of "special services" to locate your luggage for you, investing in good bags is vital. The science is straightforward—spend as much as you are able to and buy from companies that have a longstanding reputation as malletiers of excellence. In case you are wondering, my luggage isn't orange, but it is an usual shade of khaki (with army connotations) and it is also by, you've guessed it, Mandarina Duck.

It isn't difficult to buy good luggage, but with almost every major fashion brand attempting to "have a go" at small and large leather goods—recognizing quite rightly that that is often where the money is to be made—it is important not to be swayed by the vagaries of fashion. Choose from a few brands with a reputation of excellence and go from there.

You won't get upgraded if you have the "right" bag, but you will feel pretty smug when you notice that everyone else on the plane has the "wrong" bag—by that I mean one that won't close, is unbearably heavy and is too bulky to fit under the seat or in the overhead bin. I shy away from dictates, but in this case, people, here are the options:

Bottega Veneta's Scarabee convertible bag in light iridescent leather (£2,450): Amazingly light, stylish and capacious, you could pack a baby elephant in here— well, OK, maybe a couple of kittens and a hair dryer. In any case, the bag can be ingeniously shrunk with the help of a couple of sturdy fasteners, should you want to use it as a handbag on vacation. The zipper fastens for security (I have twice had items stolen in flight); the bag will pack flat should you want to pack it on your return (because you had to have that handbag from Prada's Via Montenapoleone store); and because it is soft and pliable, depending upon what you put in it, it will double as a pillow (I know, because I've used mine for this and many other purposes, including a footrest.) It seems like a crime to subject such a work of art to the rigors of air travel, but designer Tomas Maier creates his bags for serious use, and they look all the better for some serious wear. He travels with the Cabat (also his design), but he's a bloke and probably only carries an iPod and a Kindle, plus the lack of a zip makes me nervous…

It used to be that the flash of a Birkin at the airport would be enough to confirm your chic cred. Nowadays, though, everyone including the Duchess of York and Martine McCutcheon carries a Birkin. Far better to use what one friend calls the "intellectualized It Bag"—the Hermès Shadow 40 (price upon request). Roomy enough for a light laptop, a book and any number of other sundries, the Jean Paul Gaultier-designed Shadow is a showstopper. If you need to ask where the missing hardware is, then it's not for you. 

If you want to spend less (and it's reasonable that most of us might), try Anya Hindmarch's classic Carker bag, £850. The new navy, shiny-leather version with enamel studs gives the bag an edgy feel (I know it's only a bag and one shouldn't be pantheistic, but this is the Michelle Obama of handbags—modern, practical and serious, with some "street" thrown in for good measure). The front pocket can be locked and the zippered pocket inside is huge. 

There are some columnists who shall not be named for whom the rolling bag is as common as, well, Stansted Airport. If you, like me, are apt to travel minus check-in luggage, then a roller is vital. (Tip: Pack lingerie at the bottom; then when you come to remove your laptop for screening, your most personal of items won't be revealed to the world.) I love Prada's luggage and, having used it for years, I can vouch for its sturdiness and resilience. Their new lettering service—which will bespoke label a backpack, trolley or shopping bag in either saffiano leather or a camouflage print with your own multicolored initials and graphic motif—is getting a lot of attention. The concept is simple, but as with so many other things, Prada has done it first and done it so well that interlopers will have their work cut out to better it. 

For all their ubiquity, it is unlikely that there will be many Louis Vuitton suitcases on the carousel. Vuitton improves with age and they are still one of the supremos in the luggage world. Nothing gets the attention of airline staff more effectively than the sight of a stack of battered Vuittons. A couple of years ago in Milan, I was traveling with Marie Claire editor-in-chief Joanna Coles and her fashion director (and Project Runway judge), Nina Garcia. Whilst Coles and I struggled to haul our own cases onto the conveyor, Garcia stood to the side, stared pointedly at her Vuittons and, as if by magic, an airline official leapt over the check-in desk to load them for her. Invest in an Alzer 70 to begin with; it is a medium-sized, hard-sided case. At £3,850, it is a good start to a collection that you can leave to your children.

I've written about Goyard before and there isn't a better stealth luxury brand out there. Less obvious than LVMH (and thus not to everyone's liking), Goyard's soft luggage is peerless— and relatively rare, so it has standout potential, particularly when it is an Goyard Ambassade 24h (price upon request), into which, I am reliably informed (though I don't own one), you can fit "almost anything."

Mandarina Duck thinks of everything—fabulous color, shoe and laundry bags, dividers for shirts and lighter clothes, extendable handles for transportation, wheels that work and, most importantly, a light, durable frame covered in nylon and polyurethane (they do leather too). Try their work trolley case with zipper front pockets, which comes in a myriad of colors and sizes. A large suitcase will start at around £250-£300.

Sir Edmund Hillary used Globe-Trotter suitcases on his first Everest ascent, so a trip to Sydney on a 747 should be child's play. Luxurious, carefully crafted examples of fine British workmanship, these cases are iconic (they also improve with age). If Paddington Bear had a younger, chicer sister, this is what she would have been carrying. A 28-inch suitcase with wheels from their Original range is £520.

You'll notice that I have omitted here many of the ubiquitous luggage brands. This isn't because I don't approve of them; it is because I think (somewhat bizarrely perhaps) that one's luggage should have a personality. Generally speaking, travel should be fun, even in these days of heightened security, smaller seats and astronomical travel taxes. To have luggage you are proud of is to start a trip as you mean to go on. In many places, it is still a passport to better, more attentive service. Like a good man (or woman), a great suitcase might cost you a lot, but it should be with you forever. If you lose heart, you can always turn it into a coffee table. The suitcase, that is.

 Write to  Tina Gaudoin at Tina.Gaudoin @wsj.com 