TOKYO— Nomura Holdings Inc. unveiled a broad reshuffling of its senior management Monday, promoting a foreigner to the highest role in the company's 86-year history and naming its first female senior executive. 

Japan's largest brokerage by revenue appointed Hong Kong-based  Jasjit "Jesse" Bhattal as group deputy president and chief executive of the wholesale banking division.  Takumi Shibata, current wholesale chief executive, will keep his roles as chairman of the division and deputy president and chief operating officer of Nomura Holdings. 

It also appointed 45-year-old  Junko Nakagawa as chief financial officer, its first female senior executive and a rare move for a major Japanese financial institution. Current CFO  Masafumi Nakada will become president of Nomura's trust banking unit. 

Both appointments take effect April 1. 

The moves are part of the bank's continuing efforts to become a true global player in investment banking, aiming to compete with western giants like Goldman Sachs Group Inc. and Morgan Stanley. As part of this agenda, Nomura bought Lehman Brothers' Asian and European operations in September 2008. 

By giving Mr. Bhattal more responsibility for the wholesale division, Nomura seeks to improve its global operations, which lag those of the world's top investment banks in terms of profitability. The company's wholesale division includes its global markets, investment banking, trading and other businesses. 

Mr. Bhattal, 54, was born and raised in India. He became president and chief operational officer of Nomura's global wholesale banking division in April. He is Lehman's former chief executive in Asia.

Meanwhile, Ms. Nakagawa's promotion from co-deputy chief financial officer makes her the first woman to become an executive managing director and the first on Nomura's executive management board. The board currently consists of 11 men. 

Ms. Nakagawa graduated from Kobe University and became co-deputy CFO last June. She quit the company in 2004 due to her husband's overseas job posting, and returned as president of Nomura Healthcare Support & Advisory from 2008 to 2010. 

Ms. Nakagawa earlier held various senior positions in the finance divisions, leading a number of key projects, including Nomura's listing on the New York Stock Exchange in 2001. 

 Write to  Atsuko Fukase at atsuko.fukase@dowjones.com 