ANCHORAGE -- The operator of the Trans Alaska Pipeline system said Tuesday that it plans to temporarily restart the pipeline late Tuesday night to ensure the pipes and oil in the system don't freeze while crews work to replace a damaged pipe.

"We expect that oil will start flowing through the pipeline tonight," Alyeska Pipeline Service Co. spokeswoman  Michelle Egan said late Tuesday.

Most Alaska oil production has been shut in since Saturday as Alyeska scrambles to replace a section of damaged pipe that is crucial for permanently restarting the pipeline system. Each day the system is down amid below-freezing temperatures at Alaska's North Slope oil fields, the possibility looms that something else could go wrong.

"We are very concerned about the integrity of the pipeline and the production facilities, and we're obviously very concerned about the environment," Alaska Gov.  Sean Parnell said in an interview Tuesday.

To keep the Trans Alaska Pipeline components and oil inside the pipelines from freezing, Alyeska will temporarily restart the pipeline system using crude oil currently being stored in tanks. Alyeska has said that pumping oil through the pipes will increase temperatures and prevent ice from building up inside. Restarting would also allow Alyeska to remove two pipeline cleaning devices called "pigs' that were in the system when it was shut down. If the pigs aren't removed they could push ice and wax that have accumulated in the pipeline into pumping facilities, potentially damaging pipeline systems.

Alyeska hasn't said how long the temporary restart will last, but has said the pipeline system will have to be shut down again to allow a new section of pipe to be installed and tested.

After finding oil leaking from an intake pipe into the basement of a primary pumping station early Saturday, Alyeska stopped the flow of oil to the 800-mile Trans Alaska Pipeline system and told companies extracting oil from Alaska's North Slope to slash output by 95%, or almost 600,000 barrels a day.

A major concern is that the four-day shutdown, temporary restart, subsequent shutdown to install the new section of pipe and eventual restart could cause pipeline or equipment failures that could lead to an oil spill,  Larry Hartig, commissioner of the state Department of Environmental Conservation and the state's top environmental official, said.

"As more time goes on, the level of our concern keeps going up, both on impacts from the cold weather and potential freezing, and on operations at Prudhoe Bay itself," Mr. Hartig said in an interview.

Mr. Hartig said he expects the temporary restart to last "a couple of days," during which his agency will oversee recovery of oil that is expected to leak out of the still-leaking pipe. Federal and state agencies--which approved the temporary restart--are working with Alyeska to closely monitor key points along the pipeline for any sign of a new oil leak, he said.

Mr. Hartig said he is equally concerned about the Prudhoe Bay oil field. If the pipeline system is down so long that storage facilities fill up, oil companies could be forced to shut in production completely, which could cause oil wells to freeze, creating new problems, he said.

"It's a big deal to shut in that field in the wintertime," Mr. Hartig said. "We're talking about hundreds of wells and 100,000 miles of pipeline."

Temperatures in Deadhorse, Alaska, near the Prudhoe Bay oil fields, were below freezing Tuesday, and are forecast to drop as low as minus 20 degrees Fahrenheit by Thursday, according to the National Weather Service.

Oil prices on the New York Mercantile Exchange have risen 3.5% since the shutdown, ending Tuesday at $91.11 a barrel. The oil transported through the Trans Alaska Pipeline accounts for 11% of total U.S. output, and West Coast refiners would potentially need to cut back on fuel production during a long-term shutdown.

About 100 people are working in Fairbanks, Alaska, to fabricate 157 feet of steel pipeline, 24 inches in diameter, that will be shipped by aircraft to Prudhoe Bay in nine separate pieces, according to Alyeska. The new pipe will be reassembled and installed underground to replace a section of damaged pipe that is a critical feeder of oil into the system's Pump Station 1, the first of a series of stations with mechanical pumps that propel the oil through the pipeline.

The pipeline system and Alyeska are owned by  BP PLC, ConocoPhillips,  Exxon Mobil Corp.
XOM


0.84
%




 and other oil producers.

 Write to  Cassandra Sweet at cassandra.sweet@dowjones.com 