For more than five decades, Bill Gallo channeled the sports news of the day in broad strokes of ink and pencil. His cartoons appeared regularly on the pages of the New York Daily News, a link to a century-old tradition. With his death Tuesday night at age 88, American newspapers lost one of the very few remaining sports cartoonists. 

Gallo died of complications from pneumonia at White Plains Hospital. He had suffered from deteriorating health in recent weeks. Gallo's final cartoon appeared on April 19.

Cartoonists can rarely avoid criticism and mockery, but Gallo was often appreciated even by those he caricatured. "My father was a frequent subject of his work," Yankee owner Hal Steinbrenner said in a statement, "and he had tremendous respect for Bill's talents."

"He was out and around a lot," Daily News editor-in-chief Kevin Convey said. "That's part of the reason why in addition to a cartoonist, he became a successful columnist."

The illness that finally took Gallo's cartoons off the page further lowered the curtain on a chapter of newspaper history. In their heyday in the 1920s and '30s, sports cartoonists worked at scores of big-city papers.

"These were the guys watching what happened on a daily basis," said Drew Litton, the long-time sports cartoonist for the now-defunct Rocky Mountain News. "This was before the days when you had very solid photo machines that would allow you to get really strong imagery across the wires.''

In New York of the 1930s, 10 of the city's 12 major daily newspapers had sports cartoonists, some of whom enjoyed outsized influence. Willard Mullin of the New York World-Telegram created the iconic "Brooklyn Bum" character that came to define the Brooklyn Dodgers.

Litton and Gallo had become two of the last newspaper sports cartoonists working. At the Philadelphia Inquirer, political cartoonist Rob Tornoe contributes occasionally on sports.

At the Daily News, cartoonist Ed Murawinski remains on the sports beat. He drew the caricature of Gallo that appeared on page one Wednesday, accompanying his colleague's obituary.

"They died out even before I took the job," Litton said of his predecessors. "I used to joke that if you wanted to have a convention of sports cartoonists, you could have it in a closet."

Gallo's work featured "statistics and great line art, but he also combined it with commentary as well," Litton said. "He was such a gentleman and such a humble, helpful guy."

 Write to  Aaron Rutkoff at aaron.rutkoff@wsj.com 