SYDNEY—Low-lying residents of the flood-stricken Australian city of Brisbane prepared Friday for a high tide expected to peak at 1.7 meters, just a week after waters began to recede from one of the city's most severe floods on record.

Police warned that low-lying riverside areas of the Queensland state capital may experience a further inundation as a king tide hits the city, with a peak of 1.7 metres expected later.

Eastern Australia has been hit by major flooding over the past two months. Queensland's government estimates that 28,000 properties have been affected by flooding that inundated large stretches of central Brisbane last week, easily outstripping the 6,700 homes impacted by the city's 1974 floods.

  Australia & New Zealand Banking Group Ltd.
ANZBY


-0.21
%




 estimates rebuilding costs at up to 20 billion Australian dollars (US$19.7 billion) and analysts argue the floods will cause the Reserve Bank of Australia to pause an expected run of interest-rate rises.

The weather has spread to other states in eastern Australia. Victoria's State Emergency Service on Friday warned more than 2,000 residents of the towns of Beulah, Dimboola and Kow Swamp to evacuate their homes while flood warnings were in place for six river systems in the state's north and west as rainfall from last weekend worked its way to the coast.

At Kerang in northern Victoria, the Loddon River was still at major flood levels after peaking on Wednesday afternoon and was expected to remain high for several more days, Australia's Bureau of Meteorology said.

"Indications are that flood levels in the lower reaches of the Loddon Basin around and downstream of Kerang will reach or just exceed those of the 1909 flood, the highest flood on record," the Bureau said.

The flooding is expected to have a significant impact on Australia's export industries.

In Queensland, crops have been destroyed by the floodwaters and mines flooded or cut off through damage to freight railways.

However, mining companies have reported a tentative return to normal in recent days.  QR National Ltd., the country's largest hauler of mining products, estimated Thursday that 15 million-20 million metric tons of coal haulage had likely been lost to the weather, equivalent to around 10% of annual loadings.

Earlier Friday,  Aquila Resources Ltd., the first miner in Queensland's Bowen Basin coal region to declare force majeure on its production last month, said that operations were returning to normal although force majeure would remain in place on particular products.

  Rio Tinto
RIO


0.10
%




 Plc, the world's second-largest aluminum producer after  United Co. Rusal
0486


4.68
%




 Plc, said it was lifting a force majeure order placed Jan. 13 on production from its Boyne aluminum smelter in the port city of Gladstone.

Force majeure orders free companies from the obligation to fulfil contracts when they have been hit by unexpected events, such as bad weather.

 Write to  David Fickling at david.fickling@dowjones.com 