Advertising giant WPP PLC and media group  United Business Media Ltd.
UBM


0.10
%




 are considering moving their headquarters back to the U.K. from Ireland, a day after the U.K. government outlined plans to reduce and simplify the country's corporate taxes.

That's good news for the U.K.'s Conservative-led coalition government, which regularly says its goal is to make Britain more competitive through changes in its approach to taxes and regulation. Like many developed economies, the U.K., whose record national debt makes tax cuts difficult, faces regular threats from companies saying they will move to lower-tax jurisdictions. 

WPP Chief Executive  Martin Sorrell said Thursday that he would put a proposal to move back to the U.K. to WPP's board. Such a move could take place after the tax changes are legislated later this year or early in 2012.

In a statement, United Business Media said it is actively considering a return. It, too, would need board approval to relocate its home base. 

Both companies decided to move their headquarters to Ireland in 2008, citing uncertainties about the U.K. corporate-tax system, particularly rules on profits earned abroad by U.K. businesses. WPP accused the previous Labour government of dithering over changing the Controlled Foreign Companies regime. The issue is a crucial one for WPP, which gets about 90% of its revenue outside the U.K. 

"It was just the uncertainty that was created about the taxation of overseas profits...and it looks as though the government's view, the Revenue's view, has changed on that, and we have a more certain environment," Mr. Sorrell said on a British Broadcasting Corp. program.

A person familiar with the matter said that Treasury chief  George Osborne heard this news for the first time on the same radio show that he was himself about to appear on. The government regularly talks to companies about tax matters; Mr. Sorrell has a role on a government advisory body. 

The coalition government elected last year has moved more quickly to enact changes to the U.K.'s corporate-tax system after companies including pharmaceuticals maker  Shire PLC and asset-management firm  Henderson Group
HGG


0.68
%




 PLC joined WPP and UBM in moving headquarters to Ireland. Other companies moved to Switzerland, Luxembourg and the Netherlands. Most of them cited uncertainty over the rules on taxation of profits earned abroad, although the U.K.'s own high corporate tax rate played a part. 

The Treasury's Mr. Osborne told lawmakers Wednesday in his annual budget that the U.K. government would now push ahead with new rules on the taxation of foreign profits, with laws expected to be passed this year and in 2012, and would bolster plans to cut the U.K.'s corporate tax rate in an effort to make the country more competitive and lure back the tax exiles. 

Corporate tax rates will be cut to 23% in 2014 from the current 28%, a move Mr. Osborne said would give Britain the lowest rate among Group of Seven leading industrial countries. The reduction will involve a two-percentage-point cut from April 1, and a one-percentage-point cut at the same time each year until 2014. Previously, the government had planned to cut the rate to 24% by 2014, starting with a 1-percentage-point cut this April. Ireland's corporate tax rate is just 12.5%. 

In December, the government set out plans to exempt a U.K. company's foreign subsidiary from U.K. tax if it can be proved that the trading activities or intellectual-property holdings of the subsidiary have limited connection with the U.K. The plans would also raise the exemption rate above which foreign profits are taxed to £200,000, or roughly $325,000, a year from £50,000. It would still ensure that companies aren't diverting any profits earned in the U.K. to foreign subsidiaries. 

Under the current system, profits are taxed by the authorities where a subsidiary is located, but if the rate is less than 28%, the company has to pay a top-up to the U.K. government. There are some clauses that allow companies to escape the top-up, chiefly if they can prove that the subsidiary has a commercial rationale for being in the jurisdiction. 