MANAMA—Clashes between demonstrators and progovernment loyalists left hundreds injured in Bahrain on Friday, in the worst outbreak of violence here since the military was ordered off the streets nearly three weeks ago.

Conflicting reports centered on whether police had used rubber bullets to disperse protesters, something the government vehemently denied.

The violence came hours before U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates paid a surprise visit Friday to Bahrain in a show of support for the island kingdom's royal family. Bahrain, which holds a strategic position in the Persian Gulf, hosts the headquarters of the U.S. Fifth Fleet—a home to 3,000 military personnel who oversee 30 naval ships and some 30,000 sailors.

Despite its clear backing for the ruling family, the Obama administration has launched an investigation into the role of Bahraini security forces in previous violent crackdowns, part of a broader reassessment of U.S. security assistance and big-ticket arms sales to long-time Arab allies caught up in a wave of popular revolts.

In a March 10 letter to Sen. Patrick Leahy, a Vermont Democrat who chairs a Senate panel that oversees foreign aid, the State Department said Washington was "investigating the actions of the Bahraini police and Ministry of Interior forces and assessing their conduct in connection with the protests" last month.

The investigation could force the U.S. to cut off aid to specific military units found to be involved in crackdowns on civilian protesters. It could also delay multibillion-dollar arms deals to Gulf states, one of the fastest-growing markets for U.S. defense contractors.

On the outskirts of Bahrain's capital, Manama, eye witnesses said Friday that police fired tear gas and rubber bullets to disperse tens of thousands of mainly Shiite antigovernment protesters attempting to march on the royal complex of Riffa. They were met by progovernment loyalists who, armed with swords, sticks and clubs, had gathered to protect the mainly Sunni neighborhood.

A spokesperson for the Bahrain government denied that police had fired rubber bullets. "Rumors that live ammunition or rubber bullets were used, causing many injuries, or that people had inhaled gas to the point of suffocation are totally without foundation. This is supported by video footage of the operation," Bahrain's Ministry of Interior said in a statement late Friday. 

Police had cordoned off the area to keep the antiregime marchers from getting close to the offices of the Sunni ruling family. The attempt by police to disperse the crowds then sparked violent confrontations. Eye witnesses said police formed a line between the pro- and antigovernment parties but failed to prevent a melee when regime loyalists confronted the marchers. 

The nearby A'ali Health Center, where injured antigovernment marchers were brought in the backs of ambulances and cars, turned chaotic. Two doctors said the bulk of injuries were fractures inflicted by clubs and sticks and suffocation from tear gas. 

A third doctor estimated that about 300 people had been injured but that there had been no deaths. "We are seeing mainly fractures and chest injuries from the [tear] gas," said the doctor, Ali Alekri, an orthopedic surgeon who came to the center to help from Manama's main Salmaniya hospital. "I've seen injuries to the chest, abdomen, neck and head, all from rubber bullets."

The government cast doubt on the veracity of such reports, saying they came from opponents of the regime.

Houda Ezra Nonoo, the Bahrain ambassador to Washington, also said in a statement that no rubber bullets had been used.

Friday's clashes marked the first major violence since Crown Prince Salman bin Hamad al-Khalifa ordered the military off the streets nearly three weeks ago and called for talks with the mainly Shiite opposition. 

Seven died during clashes between demonstrators and security forces in the early stages of the unrest.

Since the crown prince's call for dialogue, the government has offered a series of concessions, releasing 308 political prisoners, reshuffling the cabinet and reducing citizens' monthly housing costs by 25% in a move to assuage protesters' demands.

Members of some moderate opposition groups had argued that Friday's march should be cancelled, saying it would inflame tensions and hurt the prospects for dialogue with the government on introducing political reforms.

But many protesters are voicing more radical demands, seeking the dissolution of the government and the removal of the monarchy.

The Sunnis, the more powerful minority that make up around 30% of Bahrain's 1.2 million population, fear that a strengthening Shiite faction could attract the support of regional Shiite powerhouse Iran, which could inflame sectarian tensions further. 

Mr. Gates's visit–intended as a show of support for Bahrain's king–was instantly complicated by Friday's violence. The defense secretary had been expected to take on an unusual diplomatic role, delivering a message of support to the ruling family, while encouraging leaders to engage in dialogue with the opposition.

"Bahrain is a frontline state in a regional competition with Iran," said a senior defense official. "It's a very, very important strategic partner." 

While U.S. officials are skeptical about claims that Iran is behind the demonstrations, they do see potential for Iran to reap strategic dividends from regional unrest. 

"We are concerned that the longer this crisis prolongs, the more an opportunity there might be for Iran to create mischief," the senior defense official said. "I don't think we see them as the hidden hand behind this." 

Assistant Secretary of State Jeffrey Feltman recently concluded a weeklong visit to the kingdom, but Mr. Gates is the first U.S. Cabinet secretary to visit Bahrain since the region-wide crisis began.

In anticipation of clashes between Shiite hardliners and proregime protesters, Bahrain's interior ministry warned earlier Friday that security forces "would undertake their duties to preserve security and public order." Tensions have escalated in recent days as daily marches have had an increasingly harmful effect on Bahrain's economy. Hotels across Manama are near-empty, and the retail and tourism industry has been badly hit. 

In an effort to keep up the pressure on the government, protesters have held marches in the financial district and demonstrated outside government buildings and the U.S. embassy.

—Adam Entous contributed to this article.