ISLAMABAD—Pakistan's prime minister defended the country's military in his first major speech since the raid that killed Osama bin Laden, in a sign the politically powerful Pakistani army could escape internal scrutiny over suspicions that it sheltered the al Qaeda leader. 

Prime Minister Yousuf Raza Gilani, in a speech to parliament Monday, rejected accusations that elements of the Pakistani military shielded bin Laden and, as he sought assuage public anger over the raid that killed the al Qaeda leader, suggested the terror network was created by the U.S. 

Declaring "blame games serve no purpose," Mr. Gilani said Pakistan's investigation into the raid would be led by the military.

His comments were seen in Pakistan to be a reflection of how the powerful military has managed to assert control over the Pakistani response to the raid despite the unprecedented degree of criticism it has endured at home because of the strike. 

Mr. Gilani emphasized that Pakistan maintains a long-term alliance with the U.S. But the main points of his speech were aimed at rebutting allegations of incompetence or complicity that have been widely aired in the past week, including by President Barack Obama, underscoring how the raid has soured relations between the two allies.

"It is disingenuous for anyone to blame Pakistan or any state institution of Pakistan…for being in cahoots with al Qaeda," Mr. Gilani said. He called claims that Pakistani soldiers or spies helped hide bin Laden "absurd."

"It was al Qaeda and its affiliates that carried out hundreds of suicide bombings in nearly every town and city of Pakistan," he said, pointing out that Pakistani forces have arrested a number of senior al Qaeda leaders, including Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, the self-confessed mastermind of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.

The bin Laden raid and its fallout are threatening to accelerate the deterioration of relations between the U.S. and Pakistan. 

The stakes for both countries are enormous. The U.S. is deeply reliant on Pakistani cooperation for global counterterrorism operations and to fight the war in Afghanistan. Pakistan's weak economy would likely be stretched beyond its limits if it were forced to battle its own Islamist militant problem without billions of dollars in American aid.

Much of the anger in Pakistan over the past week has focused on how the American strike team was able to breach Pakistan's airspace undetected. 

How bin Laden lived for years in Abbottabad, close to the country's elite military academy in a garrison town populated by active and retired military officers, has largely been relegated to a secondary concern for many Pakistanis.

An opposition leader, Chaudhry Nisar Ali Khan, reinforced that point in his response to the prime minister, saying: "This nation wants to know how four helicopters intruded Pakistan in the dark of the night!" The comment was loudly applauded by lawmakers.

The military here is both revered and feared—it has ruled for roughly half Pakistan's history and wields enormous power—and its generals are unaccustomed to relying on elected civilians to defend its reputation. 

In the immediate aftermath of the raid, it was Mr. Gilani and President Asif Ali Zardari who won out when shaping Pakistan's initial response: The foreign ministry issued a statement that was congratulatory and uncritical of the U.S. operation. 

Military chief Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani and intelligence chief Lt. Gen. Shuja Ahmad Pasha were deeply unhappy with the statement, say people familiar with the matter.

While President Obama has decided not to release photographs of Osama bin Laden taken after the al Qaeda leader was shot to death Sunday by U.S. forces, other photos taken at the compound have been released by Reuters. 

Photos inside and out

A day later, another foreign ministry statement was more critical. Foreign Secretary Salman Bashir then warned the U.S. of "disastrous consequences" should it attempt another such raid. Top military officers told Pakistani reporters they were pleased with that statement.

Mr. Gilani said Monday that he had full confidence in the military and Inter-Services Intelligence, the powerful military spy agency accused of nurturing Islamist militants. He praised their efforts in fighting Islamist militancy and said there was no divide in the government, declaring Pakistan has the right to defend itself with "full force."

Mr. Gilani slipped in a reference to China, saying its technological prowess serves as "inspiration" to Pakistanis. China, an ally, is commonly referred to here as Pakistan's "all-weather friend," a phrase often intended to draw a contrast with America, which is seen as mercurial and unreliable. 

Mr. Gilani also suggested the U.S. was to blame for al Qaeda's existence—another common Pakistani refrain—saying it was Washington that invited Arabs such as Osama bin Laden to the region to help fight the Soviets in Afghanistan in the 1980s.

"Who was responsible for the birth of al Qaeda? Who was responsible for making the myth of Osama bin Laden?" he said. "Pakistan alone cannot be held to account for flawed policies."

The ISI, financed by the U.S. and Saudi Arabia, armed and trained the Afghan insurgents in the 1980s, including the Arabs who would go on to found al Qaeda. The ISI limited contact between insurgents and the Central Intelligence Agency.

The ISI's contacts with al Qaeda and its Taliban sponsors in the 1990s, along with its reliance on other Islamist groups to combat Indian-rule in Kashmir and its ongoing ties to current Afghan insurgents, is the source of much of the American suspicion over whether active or retired Pakistani military and intelligence officers protected bin Laden in recent years. 

U.S. officials say they are combing through the trove of data spirited out of bin Laden's house in part to find out how he managed to remain free in Pakistan, and whether there was any Pakistani complicity.

—Rehmat Mehsud contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Matthew Rosenberg at matthew.rosenberg@wsj.com 