The young woman chatting about the $100 Seychelles platform sandals in the Zappos.com video wears little makeup, her hair in a ponytail as her fingers caress the shoe's soul and straps.

She's cute, but she's no supermodel.

What she is: A Zappos employee chosen for her pep and "real people" look to wear and talk about shoes for sale on the company's website. 

The online retail company owned by  Amazon.com
AMZN


-0.49
%




 churned out about 58,000 short videos of mostly staff—not professional models—showing off shoes, bags and clothing in 2010. Zappos found that when a product includes a video explanation, purchases rise and returns decrease.

Marketing researchers and psychologists say that using "regular" people to model products can be especially effective in certain cases. 

"If you just have a regular person who matches the target segment the consumer is likely to trust that communication more," says  Steve Posavac, a professor of marketing at Vanderbilt University Owen Graduate School of Management. 

When a product is very high end, however, a more aspirational marketing approach typically resonates with potential buyers, he adds.

Zappos first posted a handful of the videos on its website in early 2009. Now 11 employees speedily shoot and perform about 400 videos a day out of five padded shooting booths in the company's inventory warehouses in Shepherdsville, Ky.

"It's crazy to say the least," says  Jason Lee Menard, video production manager for Zappos Development Inc. 

And so far it's effective. 

In the fall of 2010, the company did a test. It showed its products two ways—with the video and without the video—to track shoppers' behavior. It found purchases increased about 10% when a product included a video description, says  Laurie Williams, video and photo products manager at Zappos. The company is still testing to figure out what components affect sales the most, she says. 

Cutting down on the number of items customers return is perhaps most the significant benefit, she says.

"If you get the item and it's not what you wanted you become disenchanted," and the customer can have negative psychological association with buying, says Williams.

A handful of other retailers have recently started using staff who don't look like professional models to showcase their products. 

J. Crew Group Inc. used staff as models for the first time last year to showcase its men's denim. After noticing that men around the office got their jeans to have a particularly desirable worn look by not washing them for months at a time, the company decided to use five staffers to explain this technique to customers, said  Jenna Lyons, president and executive creative director at J. Crew.

J. Crew added a similar campaign last month with nine female staffers in khaki capri pants anchoring outfits styled "their own way." "Our hope is that it gives people a point of connection to J.Crew as a brand and also the people in it," said Ms. Lyons, in an email.

While J.Crew's staff looks intentionally well-styled and trendy in the brand's clothing, some of the shoes in the Zappos' videos actually look unflattering on the staff. 

"We probably have the most negative reaction," when the shoe looks bad on the wearer, says Ms. Williams of Zappos. Sometimes the sample shoe isn't the right size for the person in the video, something the company is working on solving, she says.

Still, when one pair isn't presented in a flattering manner, "that is not going to stop you from moving on to the next shoe," says  Baba Shiv, professor of marketing at Stanford Graduate School of Business. "You are more likely to buy a shoe." 

Why? A video—even an unflattering one—produces what marketers call "the stimulation process," says Mr. Shiv. When a company shows people an item in action, "your brain is sort of naturally imagining, 'how is this product going to feel on me, how is it going to look on me,' " he says. 

Not all videos on Zappos' website feature staff. Clothing videos on the website feature professional models for practical reasons. The models are already wearing the clothes for photo shoots for the website and tend to be a standard size, Ms. Williams says. 

Videos with professional models also increased sales in Zappos' internal test, but the test wasn't conclusive and the company gets better customer feedback from videos that feature staff, says Ms. Williams. "If we could, we would shoot [the clothing] on regular people."

 Write to  Sarah Nassauer at sarah.nassauer@wsj.com 