PRAGUE—The Japanese nuclear crisis has placed atomic energy back at the top of the political agenda throughout Europe, but European countries have split into two sides, with some countries urging immediate shutdowns and others remaining firmly committed to nuclear power. 

France, Russia, Turkey, the Czech Republic, Italy and Poland have chosen not to follow the lead of Germany, which has halted nuclear activity, and they have instead criticized calls for immediate shutdowns as rash. 

In Moscow Wednesday, Russian President Dmitry Medvedev and Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan said the two countries won't change their plans for Russia to build Turkey's first nuclear power. The two signed a $20 billion agreement last May to build the nuclear plant. 

"Earthquakes are possible everywhere and our country is on a seismically dangerous territory," Mr. Erdogan said after the talks. "But we understand the ways to secure the objects that we are building. And this nuclear power station will be able to withstand a 8-9 [magnitude] earthquake."

Other European countries that want to build nuclear power plants, or already rely heavily upon nuclear power, supported calls for greater safety measures but objected to those ruling out nuclear power. 

French Prime Minister Francois Fillon said the country, which gets more than 75% of its power from nuclear energy, would inspect all its nuclear reactors for safety, but added that it would be absurd to condemn nuclear energy out of hand. 

Italian power company  Enel
ENEL


1.69
%




 SpA said this week that it will stick with its plans to participate in Italy's plan to expand nuclear power use, and Polish authorities said they remain committed to building two nuclear power plants, each with a 3,000 megawatt capacity. 

British energy secretary Chris Huhne, Tuesday said "continental politicians" had acted hastily in shutting down power plants. 

"I know it can be frustrating in terms of those who want to come to more rapid conclusions, but we should not rush to judgment. Let's wait until we have got the full facts," Mr. Huhne said.

Mr. Huhne was responding to the shutdown ordered by Germany. German Chancellor Angela Merkel Tuesday ordered shut seven nuclear reactors that were built before 1980 for a three-month safety review. On Monday, she froze plans to extend the life of Germany's 17 nuclear reactors. Switzerland also suspended plans to replace its ageing nuclear power plants.

Mrs. Merkel has had to contend with a vocal opposition to nuclear power; thousands of antinuclear protesters have taken to the streets in Germany this week, and with several regional elections expected in Germany this year, the issue is likely to remain a hot-button issue in election campaigns. 

European countries that are developing nuclear power plants haven't seen as much public furor over the dangers of nuclear energy. In the Czech Republic, which has embarked one of the most aggressive nuclear investment programs in the world, the Czech prime minister Peter Necas staunchly defended the country's $25 billion nuclear expansion.

Mr. Necas Tuesday called Germany's decision to shut reactors a "cheap trick to make the public nervous."

The country's state-owned power company,  CEZ AS
ENEL


1.69
%




, criticized the European Union's decision Monday to conduct "stress tests."

European nuclear operators already face strict regulations and have safety checks in place. But some operators are skeptical of the stress tests, which will be conducted during Europe's summer. The tests are voluntary and non-binding, as each country already has its own nuclear regulatory regime, and some have said they are more political window dressing than legitimate steps to lower risk. 

In the EU, the choice of how to produce electricity lies in the hands of member states, with Brussels holding limited direct power over the issue beyond coordinating safety standards. National policies differ widely, with nuclear power used heavily France but not at all in 13 of the EU's 27 member states.

"We continue to check the safety and integrity of our nuclear stations, but 'stress test' is a political phrase without substance," said  Ladislav Kriz, a spokesman for CEZ.

Mr. Kriz said CEZ will comply with any requests from Europe regarding safety tests. It conducted its most recent test of a crisis scenario in February. 

—Selina Williams, Greg White and Alessandro Torello contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Sean Carney at sean.carney@dowjones.com 