 Astoria, N.Y. 

For anyone inclined to think of moving images as something reeling out of a projector catching dust motes in a beam of light, a trip to this Queens neighborhood to see the newly expanded and transformed Museum of the Moving Image, which opens on Saturday, will be an eye-opener.

The white stucco facade to what had been Paramount Studio's East Coast operation in the 1920s still carries a whiff of back-lot Hollywood; in fact, it is registered on the National List of Historic Places. (The street facade cannot be altered, except for three windows at the entrance.)

Those tall windows have been replaced with a triangulating pattern of semitransparent mirror glass etched with the museum's name in 3½-foot-tall hot-pink letters—making it loud and clear that something different is going on inside. 

The three-story addition to the rear, visible only along the side streets, is box-shaped and entirely clad in pale aluminum panels in a 3-D digital-grid pattern. Here and within, the language is science-fiction, but the careful detailing throughout shows such restraint and subtlety that it never pushes over the top into futuristic parody.

The Museum of the Moving Image has been around for 30 years, welcoming about 80,000 visitors annually. The emphasis has always been on the industry of making movies. "From gaffer to costume designer," said museum director Rochelle Slovin on a recent visit, "we view ideas about production and the skills needed to do these creative tasks. It's not a romantic, retrograde, Deco-ized evocation of the past; we're showing the material culture of the moving image." 

That has translated, in part, into a pretty hokey collection of such choice items as innumerable glam portraits of Hollywood stars, Chewbacca's furry mask from "Star Wars," the original neon sign from the Paris Theater on 58th Street, and probably the most recent acquisition—the artificial doubles for Winona Ryder's gashed ballerina legs in "Black Swan." With the Museum of Modern Art and its world-famous film archive just across the river, the Museum of the Moving Image has never collected films, but the program continues to be chockablock with screenings of restored classics, avant-garde masterworks and special events.

Over 1,400 objects from the collection have been thoughtfully reinstalled for both academics and enthusiasts in the older parts of the building, while climate-controlled storage facilities on the new third floor have made it possible to keep about 99% of the collection on site (that's minus the original "David Letterman Show" set). Spaces for the many student groups that visit have been intelligently segregated to reduce the potential for a mob scene.

But the focus of the $67 million transformation and expansion (doubling its former size) is really elsewhere, on a bold architectural reinterpretation of the museum's current and future role, especially in the video and digital arts. The triangular shapes on the front entrance and rear addition, as the architect Thomas Leeser explained, are meant to invoke digital wire-frame grids. Recognizable to an older generation as a flattened Buckminster Fuller geodesic pattern, and to younger folks as the virtual 3-D blueprint manipulated by Robert Downey Jr. while fabricating parts of his Iron Man suit, it is imagery that both groups know belongs to Now. The motif is used throughout the building—from the aluminum panels cladding the exterior to the blue felt walls and ceiling of the main theater space.

Even more noticeable is the blinding whiteness of the public spaces on the ground floor, a continuous wash of skim milk (much of it actually has a blue cast) on floors, walls, ceilings, built-in banquettes, ticket counter, cafe and more. A 50-foot video projection—Japanese anime by Chiho Aoshima in full floral glory for the opening—lines one side of the lobby wall, hinting that maybe any surface anywhere might burst into image. In fact, the main stairs—also white—to the second floor are positioned so that visitors coming up appear to be emerging from a video screen that wraps the walls and faces an open amphitheater of elegant chiseled slab benches in white Corian. 

The seamless white is interrupted only twice on the ground floor: by a wedge of blue light ("blue is the color of the digital world," proclaimed Mr. Leeser) drawing visitors up a ramp to the 267-seat theater, and by a hot-pink passage leading into the intimate 68-seat Celeste and Armand Bartos Screening Room. Galleries on the third floor, however, are currently painted dark gray, as is appropriate for the kind of ambitious video-art presentations the museum is now exploring. Another patch of color is planned for a pleasant outdoor courtyard at the back, in powder-blue Astroturf.

In talking about the architecture, Mr. Leeser returned frequently to the notion of making the space seem otherworldly or disassociated from everyday realities. "Architecture is the enabler of a new way to look at things," he said. "This is definitely not an example of old-style glamour, but it does have new glamour and the edge of new material, like a sharp porcelain knife."

Nowhere has he been more successful at confounding expectations—in a good way—than in the main theater, where the digital-like wire grid motif takes on folds, crimps and chamfered edges, making the truly blue space feel comfortably snug (although being inside a quilted Chanel bag also comes to mind) and ready-made for at least a double feature. The new Museum of the Moving Image is the finest recent American example of radical design, all the more astonishing in that it was almost entirely publicly funded. Bold but accessible, this is the kind of engagement with contemporary culture that will draw new audiences in without making longtime cinéastes feel left behind.

 Ms. Iovine is executive editor of the Architect's Newspaper.  