 Q: I don't understand why Congress is the excuse [for the Internal Revenue Service's recent announcement that millions of taxpayers won't be able to file their tax returns until mid-February]. The discussion was all about extending Bush-era tax cuts that would expire at the end of 2010. I never heard of any retroactive changes to the tax law. The law Congress passed in December should only affect the taxes for 2011, which will be filed in 2012. Why is the IRS blaming Congress for this problem when its actions should not have affected the processing of 2010 returns? 

—T.B., Greenville, S.C.

 A: Congress richly deserves the blame, not the Internal Revenue Service.

I understand why you (and other readers) think it should be the IRS's fault. But it isn't.

Here's why: You are correct about the Bush-era income-tax rate cuts. However, several other popular tax breaks expired at the end of 2009, and Congress didn't resurrect them until mid-December of 2010.

As a result, the IRS says it needs time to "reprogram its processing systems." That, in turn, means millions of people will have to wait to file their tax returns until mid- to late February.

Among those who are affected by the delay are taxpayers who itemize their deductions on Schedule A. Itemized deductions include mortgage interest, charitable donations, medical bills and state and local taxes. For more details, see the IRS website (www.irs.gov).

It isn't surprising that taxpayers are upset. Most taxpayers get refunds each year, and they want their money as quickly as possible. This year, many people will have to wait because of congressional procrastination in restoring several tax provisions.

Among the tax breaks restored retroactively to the start of 2010: an educator-expense deduction and a higher-education tuition and fees deduction. Another item that has been revived allows millions of taxpayers who itemize their deductions a choice: They can choose to deduct state and local general sales taxes or state and local income taxes, but not both.

How many taxpayers will be affected? An IRS spokesman tells me the answer is about nine million returns. To put that into context, officials estimate they will receive a total of more than 140 million income-tax returns this year for 2010.

—Send your questions to us at askdowjones.sunday03@wsj.com and include your name, address and telephone number. Questions may be edited; we regret that we cannot answer every letter.