NEW YORK—The dollar fell to its lowest level in 15 months against a basket of currencies, driven mainly by a recovery in investors' risk appetite and a surge in demand for the euro.

Europe's common currency has the biggest weighting in the dollar index at 57%. Amid anticipation that the European Central Bank will raise interest rates as soon as next month, the euro surged to its highest level since Nov. 5. This helped push the dollar index to its lowest since December 2009. 

The ICE Dollar Index, which tracks the U.S. dollar against a trade-weighted basket of currencies, was at 75.43 recently from 75.718 late Friday. The index's move below its 2010 low of 75.631 may portend a deeper retrenchment, technical analysts say. 

As the euro has risen strongly on the back of expectations of higher interest rates in the 17-nation currency bloc, the Federal Reserve bias for maintaining ultra-loose monetary policy—combined with surging oil prices that threaten to stoke inflation—has diminished the dollar's allure as a safe haven. 

Last week's intervention by the Group of Seven stabilized markets and chastened traders willing to buy the yen. As a result, investors who have recently fretted about the global repercussions of Japan's nuclear crisis momentarily bought currencies that offer the potential for higher interest rates.

"As some of these geopolitical concerns subside, the focus on interest rate differentials is going to be a euro positive story," said  Omer Esiner, chief market analyst at Commonwealth Foreign Exchange in Washington, D.C. "Central banks are expected to raise interest rates before the Fed, and that's why the dollar is going to remain under pressure."

Late Monday, the euro was at $1.4221 from $1.4168 late Friday. The dollar traded at ¥81.05 from ¥80.76, while the euro was at ¥115.26 from ¥114.41. The U.K. pound was at $1.6313 from $1.6224. The dollar was at 0.9051 Swiss franc from 0.9030 franc. 

Oil has been a major factor behind the dollar's woes. Instability in Libya and other parts of North Africa and the Middle East has made investors nervous about the prospect of a global oil shock. While some analysts say that the multilateral coalition waging an air bomb campaign against Libya might lead to a longer-term solution to the political unrest, oil prices remain well above $100 per barrel.

Higher oil prices depress the dollar's value because of the inflationary impact as the U.S. imports much of its oil. 

A surge in oil prices also creates a windfall of dollars for oil exporters, which already have substantial dollar holdings, inducing them to diversify some of those holdings into other currencies.

During Japan's unfolding disaster, "the dollar's appeal as a refuge of safety was not as pre-eminent as it normally is," said  Andrew Wilkinson, senior market analyst at Interactive Brokers in Greenwich, Conn. 

Meanwhile, signs of nervousness over the euro's outlook may be emerging in the form of options positions. Even as the single currency has rallied, investors were snatching up bearish "put" options, or bets the currency will decline, according to a trader. That could signal escalating nerves ahead of this week's key European Union summit, or possibly a feeling the European currency's recent rally has gone too far. "People are thinking one day we'll drop heavily," the trader said.

—Steven Cox and Neil Shah contributed to this article.







