 ICBC, China's biggest bank, signed a pact to make it the first Beijing-controlled institution to own retail bank branches in the U.S. The bank agreed to buy an 80% stake in Bank of East Asia's U.S. subsidiary for $140 million. Bank of East Asia, based in Hong Kong, has a total of 13 branches in New York and California.  

 U.S. officials said there were subtle signs in language and tone during Chinese President Hu's visit that Beijing is preparing to let the yuan appreciate faster.  

 Bank of Montreal has begun settling yuan-denominated transactions for North American clients. It is the first Canadian lender to receive Chinese permission to do so.  

 Old-fashioned fundamental factors are reasserting their power in the markets, ending a long stretch in which macroeconomic hopes and fears dictated the rise and fall of stocks, bonds and commodities.  

 China Hongqiao plans to raise as much as $2.2 billion from an IPO. The aluminum producer aims to list in Hong Kong on Feb. 11.  

 Google and Larry Page will need to compete with agile Web upstarts when he succeeds Eric Schmidt as CEO in April.  

 Facebook raised $1 billion from investors in a deal arranged by Goldman Sachs that values the fast-growing social-networking company at $50 billion.  

 Shiseido aims to blitz China's cosmetics market with low-priced items this year as the Japanese company grapples with a continued sales decline at home.  

 Japan's new trade and industry minister said the government will seek more cuts in the corporate tax rate, as part of its effort to buttress private companies against competition from rivals. 

 Shanghai's mayor said the city will impose a controversial tax on property to cool housing prices.  

 Vodafone said it continues to believe that material information hasn't been provided by Essar regarding the merger of its listed company with a privately held Essar holding unit.  

 A U.S. private-equity group bought a 20% stake in the operator of a Vietnamese tungsten mining project for $100 million.  

 State Bank of India posted a 14% rise in quarterly profit and said it is working with the government and other banks to set up a payment mechanism for oil-related transactions with Iran.  

 Pay packages for top Wall Street executives are starting to take off again.  

 India's Wipro reported weak quarterly earnings and unveiled a management shuffle at its information-technology business.  

 Lenovo is in talks with NEC over what could be a large-scale tie-up as it hopes to put another notch in its belt after its 2004 purchase of IBM's PC business.  

 Afghan lawmakers moved closer to resolving a constitutional crisis with Karzai over his order to delay the legislature's opening. The lawmakers aborted plans to inaugurate the parliament unilaterally on Sunday, and the president said he might inaugurate the parliament Wednesday. 

 Talks among global powers and Iran aimed at containing Tehran's nuclear program broke down Saturday, with Iran setting preconditions for talks to continue. 

 Ireland's Green Party pulled out of the government, a move that will hasten elections and bring down the curtain on one of the most crisis-racked administrations in Ireland's history.  

 Obama will call for new spending on infrastructure, education and research in his State of the Union address Tuesday.  

 General Electric CEO Immelt's elevation as an economic adviser to Obama cements a complex alliance between the president and the head of the firm that propelled Reagan's political career.  

A bus struck an oil tanker in southern Pakistan, setting off a blaze that killed 32 people.