School officials have closed 10 classrooms in two Staten Island elementary schools as they await test results to see if children and staff have been exposed to PCB-contaminated air, officials said Monday.

The Environmental Protection Agency and some local politicians have been pressuring the city to more aggressively confront the issue of aging fluorescent light fixtures suspected of PCB contamination.

PCBs are chemicals that were frequently used in building materials beginning in the 1950s. They were banned in 1978 after they were determined to likely cause cancer, as well as other health problems with reproductive and immune systems.

Eight classrooms at P.S. 53 in Staten Island have been closed while authorities await the results of tests conducted there last weekend by the EPA. At P.S. 36 R, two classrooms have been closed after testing.

The EPA's arrival at P.S. 53 this past weekend was the first spot inspection since the agency, frustrated by what it says is the city's slow approach to the problem, warned it would take action on its own to determine the extent of the problem.

City officials, led by Deputy Mayor Dennis Walcott, have argued the PCBs don't pose an immediate health risk to students, and removing them from roughly 800 schools would be prohibitively expensive. The city puts the cost at $1 billion.

City education officials insist that the known dangers of PCBs come from ingesting the material, not inhaling it as would be the most likely form of contamination in a classroom with a leaky old light fixture. 

EPA spokeswoman Bonnie Bellows acknowledged an inspection was conducted at P.S. 53, and said lab tests would determine "if there were leaks that involved PCB-containing fluids in the past, or currently. Once we have valid sample results we will release them to the public and take appropriate action."

The inspections at the other school, P.S. 36 R, were prompted by a worried teacher who remembered material leaking from a light fixture, the officials said. After samples were taken, education officials chose to close two of the classrooms there.

City officials notified the teachers union those two classrooms would remain closed until they are certain there is no health concern.

"We do not believe there is a health concern that warrants the closure of P.S. 36 R,'' Mr. Walcott wrote in a Friday letter to the teachers union. "We have already removed the affected material from the classrooms.''

A growing number of elected officials are criticizing the Bloomberg administration's handling of the issue. City Councilman Vincent Ignizio, a Staten Island Republican, said the issue is much larger than a handful of schools that have been tested so far. "Would I send my own child into [P.S. 36 R] right now? My answer would be no, not until I see documentation to show that it's safe,'' he said. "I want to see the test results back.''

 Write to  Devlin Barrett at devlin.barrett@wsj.com 