TOKYO—The Japanese government moved to prevent tainted agricultural products from reaching consumers, after the number of cases of food and water being contaminated by radioactive materials in northern Japan expanded across a wider area.

On Monday, the government ordered Fukushima prefecture—site of Tokyo Electric Power Co.'s troubled Daiichi nuclear power plant—as well as neighboring prefectures Ibaraki, Tochigi and Gunma to suspend shipments of spinach and rapeseed after radiation exceeding regulated safety limits was detected in some produce. The government also banned sales of raw milk produced in Fukushima. 

"Experts agree that there is no health impact by consuming these food items on a few occasions, so we ask that people respond calmly without reacting excessively," Chief Cabinet Secretary Yukio Edano said at a news conference Monday. "You can safely consume products that have already been distributed and there will no adverse health impact." 

Contaminated food products already have reached Tokyo. Higher-than-standard levels of iodine-131 were detected in the leafy vegetable shungiku, or garland chrysanthemum, sold in the nation's capital. 

Early Tuesday, Tepco said radioactive substances exceeding the normal levels set by Japan were detected in seawater near the Daiichi plant. The higher level of radioactive substances in seawater won't immediately cause adverse health effects as people aren't likely to directly ingest the water, a Tepco spokesman said. The utility planned additional sampling to see how widely the radioactive substances have spread, he said. 

See all the graphics on the situation in Japan -- from before and after photos to the status of the reactors to survivors' stories.

Fukushima prefecture also issued a strong warning Monday about high radiation levels in tap water. Residents in the village of Iitatemura, Fukushima prefecture, were told not to drink water there as a precaution, after more than three times the recommended maximum intake of iodine was found in the drinking water. 

The government found contaminated water in nine other prefectures on Monday, up from a total of seven prefectures on Friday. Iodine was detected in samples collected in Tokyo, Kanagawa, Ibaraki, Tochigi, Gunma, Saitama, Chiba, Niigata and Yamanashi prefectures, according to the latest data from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology.

"The key point is that this amount does not present an immediate health risk," a health ministry official said Monday, adding that the water could be potentially harmful to health over an extended period. 

The level detected was 965 becquerels, compared with a benchmark safety limit of 300 becquerels. 

Japanese agricultural exports world-wide are negligible. China, the nation's biggest trading partner, imported just $593 million of agricultural products from Japan last year. 

Tepco will be primarily responsible for compensation to some affected by the food contamination, because it is the result of problems with the nuclear reactor, Mr. Edano said. He added that the government also will step in if the company's compensation isn't sufficient.

What constitutes a safe level of each radioactive element varies by country, and there aren't any agreed upon international standards about the maximal level of radioactivity that can be ingested. The concern with consuming radioactive elements is that as they decay in the body, they emit radiation—high-energy particles—that can damage cell DNA, increasing the risk of cancer. 

Generally, the concern lies with the cumulative effect of ingested radioactive particles, but in some cases even small doses of highly contaminated food products can contribute to health issues, if they concentrate in particular organs in the body. Iodine-131, for instance, is known to accumulate in the thyroid, so ingesting relatively smaller doses can elevate risk of thyroid cancer. 

  Peter Caracappa, a clinical professor of nuclear engineering at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy, N.Y., says every dose of ingested radiation is associated with some degree of cancer risk. Estimated cancer risk from radiation is assumed to be 4% per sievert, he said. With iodine-131, if one were to reach the oral ingestion limit set by the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission of 50 millisieverts, there would be an estimated total increase in cancer risk of 0.2%.

—Shirley S. Wang in New York contributed to this article.

 Write to  Megumi Fujikawa at megumi.fujikawa@dowjones.net 

 Corrections & Amplifications  Japanese regulators limit radioactivity in milk to 300 becquerels per kilogram of raw milk and 2,000 becquerels per kilogram for spinach. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said in one instance that Japanese regulators set the limit for milk at 2,000 becquerels per kilogram.