Google: the other tech giant.

It was once nearly impossible to escape headlines about Google Inc. Now, that distinction goes to the likes of Apple Inc. and Facebook. "The Social Network," based on the Facebook story, just won four Golden Globe awards. The health of Apple chief  Steve Jobs is the subject of obsessive speculation.

But Google could muscle its way back into the spotlight Thursday. Fourth-quarter earnings should serve as a reminder that the company's glory days are hardly over. If anything, investors may be underestimating its growth potential. Analysts expect Google will report earnings of $8.07 a share, according to Thomson Reuters, up nearly 20% from the prior year, with revenue at about $6 billion, up 22% year on year.

For that, Google can partly thank the fourth-quarter surge in e-commerce, the indisputable bright spot of the 2010 holiday season. Generally speaking, the more things people do online, the better it is for Google, since the vast majority of its revenue comes from search advertising. And Google's market share continues to grow, to 82.6% at year-end 2010, according to SearchIgnite. Its main competition, the joint venture between Yahoo! and Microsoft's Bing, saw its share slip to 17.4%.

The more formidable challenge for Google is navigating the broader transition away from desktop, search-based computing toward smartphones and tablet devices. Here, the Android operating system has been a game-changer, helping shake Google's image as a one-trick pony. Android had less than 4% of the smartphone market in 2009, according to research firm Gartner; by the third quarter, it had about 25%—more than Apple's iOS operating system. And Android is likely to power a plethora of tablet devices looking to challenge Apple's iPad.

"It seems to me that Google could be seen as a growth company again," says Stifel Nicolaus analyst Jordan Rohan. Yet the company's shares, at about 18.7 times estimated 2011 earnings, aren't exorbitantly valued as far as high-flying tech companies go.

And there is more than investor sentiment at stake. Google also needs to attract and retain employees who might otherwise flock to brighter prospects elsewhere. In that case, a bit more buzz might go a long way for Google.

 Write to  Kelly Evans at kelly.evans@wsj.com 