Could the sports world have a weirder, more conflicted relationship with crying?

At times, the sports tears flow freely. Athletes cry when they win, cry when they lose, cry when they retire. Some even cry when they retire again. Or again.

Fans cry, too. They cry when their favorite teams win. They cry when their favorite teams fall. They cry when DeSean Jackson inexplicably returns a punt for a game-winning touchdown. They cry when they don't sign Cliff Lee.

Mets fans have been crying for so long, they don't know why they started.

There's a endless genre of sobby sports movies: "Brian's Song," "Rocky," "Rudy," "Remember the Titans," "Breaking Away," "Jerry McGuire," "Miracle." "Miracle" is basically a tear-collection device starring Kurt Russell.

Tom Hanks may have snapped, "There's no crying in baseball!" in "A League of Their Own," but there were rivers in "The Natural" and "Field of Dreams."

New York knows the emotion of sports as much as any other town—the high highs and the unfathomably sad. Consider this passage from the late sportswriter Shirley Povich:

"I saw strong men weep this afternoon, expressionless umpires swallow hard, and emotion pump the hearts and glaze the eyes of 61,000 baseball fans in Yankee Stadium. Yes, and hard-boiled news photographers clicked their shutters with fingers that trembled a bit.

"It was Lou Gehrig Day at the stadium, and the first 100 years of baseball saw nothing quite like it."

That was 1939. But even in a detached era of Game 7 scores delivered via text message, we continue to respond to the physically gifted acknowledging their frailties, to the less gifted overcoming the odds.

Few are immune. Some of you will even get a little dewy watching the hopelessly corny "One Shining Moment" montage at the end of the NCAA Tournament. Don't be embarrassed. Embrace it!

So why are people acting so fake-tough and junior high school about the Miami Heat crying?

Over the past couple days, there's been nonstop chatter about reports that Heat players grew misty in the locker room after the Chicago Bulls sent Miami to its fourth straight loss. The tears were mentioned post-game by embattled Heat coach Erik Spoelstra, who the next day admonished the media for blowing it out of proportion.

"This is a classic example of sensationalism, looking for a headline." Spoelstra said.

It didn't calm the intrigue. Who were the unnamed weepers? The Knicks reportedly mocked the Heat for the crying. Obviously, the Knicks hadn't watched their own game tape against Cleveland.

Are the Heat tears newsy because it's still the regular season? It wasn't a season-ending loss. Nobody is going home. It's not a retirement. Are they an easy cry?

Or is it just that it's the Heat—and anything bad that happens to Team Schadenfreude is funny? As Miami's Dwyane Wade claimed, "the world is better now because the Heat are losing."

That drew a zinger from deposed Heat coach Stan Van Gundy, now in Orlando: "My suggestion would be if you don't want the scrutiny, you don't hold a championship celebration before you've even practiced together."

He was referring to the bombastic Transformers-style introduction ceremony the Heat held in the off-seasons with Wade, LeBron James and Chris Bosh.

The Heat are clearly a magnet for mockery, and brought a lot of it on themelves. But lost in the gossip is the idea that for all the hype and attention, Miami might actually care.

Then how are you supposed to feel?