The City Council has persuaded Mayor Michael Bloomberg to rescind his plan to shutter 20 fire companies at night, part of $35 million in budget restorations that the council is set to unveil Thursday, people familiar with the matter said.

Led by Speaker Christine Quinn, the council convinced the mayor to roll back some of the most severe budget cuts that he proposed late last year, including those to programs for seniors and children. In November, Mr. Bloomberg ordered $585 million in cuts for the fiscal year that began July 1 to combat a multibillion deficit the following year.

The council and the mayor agreed to alternative cuts and identified other savings, so the net reduction to the budget will remain at $585 million.

Asked to comment on the restorations, Marc LaVorgna, a spokesman for the mayor, said, "We have always worked collaboratively with the council and by working together we have delivered responsible budgets that have kept the City's finances in order every year."

The restorations come just weeks before Mr. Bloomberg unveils a preliminary budget plan for the upcoming fiscal year.

As part of the council's negotiations with the administration, in addition to the Fire Department, the Administration for Children's Services, the Department for the Aging and the Department of Youth and Community Development will not face the full level of cuts that the mayor initially ordered, the people aware of the deal said.

The council restored about $2.6 million of the $4 million in cuts that the mayor ordered to the city's child welfare agency. The restoration will save more than 100 jobs slated for layoffs, the people said.

The council won a full restoration to block the mayor's plan to slash case-management services for the city's senior citizens, a cut advocates for the elderly warned would endanger already vulnerable people. 

There is also a full restoration to a program directed at runaway homeless youth. Also partially restored were some cuts to after-school programming.

The council restored roughly $4 million of an $11 million cut to the City University of New York. The restoration will help ensure there are sufficient course offerings in enough sections.

There were some other restorations to developmental-disability clinics, child-health clinics and for rapid HIV testing.

The restorations, though significant, represent roughly 6% of what the mayor initially proposed, meaning the council agreed with a big majority of the mayor's budget plan. 

The mayor had the power to make the cuts unilaterally, but ultimately ended up bending on some of the most controversial proposals in response to council opposition.

According to the people familiar with the deal, the speaker agreed with Mr. Bloomberg that a cut of $585 million was necessary because of the budget crisis. 

Even with the budget reductions, the city faces a $2.4 billion deficit next fiscal year, a figure that could grow if Albany withholds aid.

To make up for the restorations, the council and the mayor agreed to other cuts and savings, including a cut of $4 million to IT consultant contracts at the Department of Education. Also in the department, another $500,000 will be reduced to a professional-development contract, and there was a reestimate of roughly $1 million in special-education costs.

The council and the mayor identified about $8 million in savings for psychiatric hearings on competency to stand trial, and another $2.6 million in underspending of workers'-compensation payments.

While the council's push to restore $15 million to avoid closing the fire companies at night will be met with strong praise from the public, the fight over these fire companies is sure to continue.

The budget for the next fiscal year has no funding for 20 full-time companies, FDNY Commissioner Sal Cassano said at a council hearing last month. One council member called the plan to close 20 companies at night "irresponsible, dangerous and potentially deadly." 

One person described the deal as a victory for Ms. Quinn and Council Member Domenic Recchia, the council's finance chairman, because they protected the council's "core priorities" while moving forward with a "fiscally responsible budget."

"We recognize the difficult times we face and the need to make cuts to help address next year's budget gap," Ms. Quinn said in November when the mayor announced the cuts. "However, we must ensure these cuts do not fall disproportionately on the most vulnerable New Yorkers."

 Write to  Michael Howard Saul at michael.saul@wsj.com 