ANDAR, Afghanistan—The security situation in this insurgent-filled district illustrates the challenge the U.S. faces as the military prepares to begin drawing down troops in Afghanistan this summer, kicking off the three-year process of handing over authority to the government in Kabul.

The only government official able to function in Andar, district education director Taza Gul, does so because he has the Taliban's endorsement. Others, from the governor down, can't even visit without an escort of American troops.

When a platoon of U.S. troops showed up here recently to celebrate the reopening of a local primary school refurbished with American money, Mr. Gul was less concerned about pleasing his foreign benefactors than he was worried about angering the Taliban insurgents on whom he relies to do his job. 

"When the Taliban see these soldiers at schools, it makes problems for us and prevents children from attending," he says, sitting in an empty classroom. Only two boys showed up—on the first day of the Afghan school year.

The U.S. Army deployed a battalion to Andar, in southeastern Afghanistan, in February, seeking to arrest the momentum of the insurgency and provide enough security to allow the Afghan government to provide the kinds of services, such as education, that could win local favor. 

That goal could be difficult in places like this, on the eastern edge of violence-ravaged Ghazni province, where the Taliban's shadow government is largely in charge. 

"You see this turban and clothes?" Mr. Gul says, grabbing his long beard. "I have to be like this. We live among Taliban."

Mr. Gul says that by coordinating with the insurgents he has been able to keep some of Andar's schools open—though the Taliban demanded a shutdown of all government schools in the district in 2007.

In districts such as Andar with pervasive Taliban influence, local Afghan officials nurtured by the U.S.-led coalition would be unable to govern once the foreign soldiers protecting them leave, unless Afghan security forces gain the capacity to control a Taliban stronghold.

"In many places, the government is very reliant on international troops," says  Fabrizio Foschini, a Kabul-based researcher with the Afghanistan Analyst Network. "It's unsustainable."

In areas where Afghans are responsible for security, the Taliban are often dominant. On Tuesday, hundreds of insurgents attacked Afghan police checkpoints in the remote eastern Nuristan province, long abandoned by U.S. forces. The insurgents failed to overrun the government positions, officials said.

The Americans' preferred interlocutor is District Gov. Sher Khan, who complains that Mr. Gul is "close to the Taliban." Mr. Khan says he's keeping the education director in place only because "no one else will dare do his job." 

The district governor prefers to reside in the relative security of Ghazni City, 15 miles away, and visits Andar when accompanied by a convoy of U.S. and Afghan armored vehicles. Appointed in July, he only began regularly coming to Andar after U.S. forces deployed in February made it safe for him to do so.

Because of continuing Taliban intimidation and threats, many of the local council members haven't lived here in five years.

"In Andar, not everyone is willing to come down here and work," explains U.S. Army Maj. Michael Tucker, the civil affairs team leader for the 2nd Battalion, 2nd Infantry Regiment task force that oversees the district.

Mr. Gul, meanwhile, rides around Andar on a motorcycle and declines foreign protection. 

When asked why U.S. forces haven't sought to replace him, despite his ties to insurgents, Maj. Tucker says: "He knows the area, knows the teachers and he's their leader. He was able to keep some schools open, despite the Taliban."

Whether that is a good thing is open to dispute. The few schools in Andar allowed by the Taliban to remain open only teach Islamic religion, district governor Mr. Khan says. He says Mr. Gul's work effectively allowed the Taliban to radicalize students.

The schools refurbished with U.S. military funds and run with foreign aid money are intended to restore the national curriculum, which teaches English, science and history as well as Islamic studies. 

Mr. Gul says he has visited every Andar school to ensure that the government curriculum was taught. Cooperation with the Taliban was a must, he adds. 

"Sher Khan doesn't understand this," Mr. Gul says. "The U.S. won't be here forever."