TEL AVIV—A show that lampooned Col. Moammar Gadhafi was pulled from the Palestinian Authority's official television channel last week out of fear of insulting the embattled Libyan leader.

The popular Palestinian satire show "Wattan ala Wattar," Arabic for "country on a string" had devoted all of its 20-minute episode to Libya, poking fun at Col. Gadhafi's public addresses as well as his attire. Instead, Ramallah-based Palestine TV aired a rerun during the show's weekly Thursday time slot. 

Officials from the US-backed Palestinian Authority were not available to comment on the show, but a senior official of the Palestine Liberation Organization said that the PA has been reluctant to come out against Col. Gadhafi because it might endanger some 20,000 Palestinian nationals who reside in Libya.

"They may be in fear of what Gadhafi might do to the refugees, because they cannot flee," said Nabil Shaath, a Palestinian spokesperson who was in Cairo to lobby the Egyptian government to accept Palestinian refugees.

Last week, Israel agreed to allow entry into the West Bank for 300 Palestinian refugees from Libya, but they have yet to arrive. 

Palestinian concern about running afoul of Arab governments amid the regional upheaval stems from the memory of the expulsion of hundreds of thousands of Palestinians from Kuwait as punishment for Yasser Arafat's public support for Iraq's 1990 invasion of the country. 

Wattan ala Wattar has ridiculed both Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas and Hamas during about 18 months of shows on the state-run network. But the show's portrayal of Arab leaders around the region has spurred angry reactions from Palestinian officials, said the show's creator and lead actor. 

"I am afraid that in the future I won't be able to talk about the Yemeni president or any president. This is what makes me angry," said Wattan ala Wattar creator Imad Farajin. "If you talk about Arab countries, there is no space at all" for free expression.

Mr. Farajin said he would not continue work on the show until the episode is aired.