India's market growth slowed in 2010 after seeing stock prices soar more than 100% from 2008 to 2009, but the country still saw stocks rise a healthy 19%. The increasing consumer power of Indian's swelling middle class propelled the market and helped push up share prices, and Indian analysts took note: The country had 19 winners in this year's Asia's Best Analysts ranking, second only to South Korea's 20. 

India's overall country winner, Ishank Kumar of Religare Capital Markets Ltd., made a top pick with his buy call on Manappuram General Finance & Leasing Ltd., which he maintained throughout 2010 for a 130% return. Mr. Kumar, who declined to be interviewed for this article, also spotted a winner with his full-year buy call on Shriram Transport Finance Co. Ltd., which returned 62% on the year. 

Gauri Anand, chemicals analyst for MF Global Sify Securities, found top picks in fertilizer producers. She maintained buy ratings throughout the year on fertilizer and chemical maker Coromandel International Ltd. and fertilizer and agricultural-input maker Zuari Industries Ltd. Those returned 171% and 49% respectively, and propelled Ms. Anand to No. 2 in India, and to the top spot in the chemicals sector in Asia. 



Rohan Gupta, No. 3 in India, also found success in companies with ties to agriculture. His yearlong buy call on agricultural-product manufacturer and marketer Rallis India Ltd. returned 130%, and he made the buy call on Coromandel International as well.

Ms. Anand said this year she is watching stocks in the urea chemicals sector, which she believes the government is soon going to deregulate. Urea is a plant fertilizer that contains nitrogen. She likes urea-producing companies and recommends Chambal Fertilizers and Chemicals.

"Reform in urea, if delayed, may further threaten the existing nutrient imbalance in soil and risk productivity—something the government may want to avoid [when it] is battling the already-high food inflation," she said. 

—Brittany Hite and Krishna Pokharel