In some ways,  Joseph Zamudio's experience speaks to why many gun-rights supporters think carrying a legal weapon can save lives.

After all, when he realized there was an incident occurring at the Tucson  Safeway supermarket Saturday where Congresswoman  Gabrielle Giffords was holding a constituent event, Mr. Zamudio thought he could help, since he was legally carrying a 9 mm semiautomatic.

"If I'd gone down there sooner, maybe I could have shot him myself," Mr. Zamudio, age 24, said in a phone interview Sunday night.

Mr. Zamudio, who works at a Tucson art gallery, was at a nearby Walgreen's buying cigarettes when he heard the shots and immediately turned and ran toward the commotion. "In that moment, I didn't think about it. I just reacted."

He saw the blank face of the suspected shooter—"almost a smirk."

By the time Mr. Zamudio was in close range, others had wrestled the suspect to the ground. Mr. Zamudio helped hold him down.

The shooting suspect,  Jared Lee Loughner, 22 years old, is alleged to have killed six people and injured 14, including Ms. Giffords, before he was subdued by attendees of the event.

Mr. Zamudio also believes, however, that gun laws need to be tightened—though he's not very optimistic that will happen.

"Gun laws are a joke. I know where you can get a gun for $100 out of a trunk. It's never going to change. The only people gun laws are going to affect are you and me."

Mr. Zamudio's views reflect a renewed debate about the right way to suppress violence in light of a number of recent rampage killings in the U.S., including a shooting at Virginia Tech in 2007 which left 32 dead. Also in 2009, a military officer at Fort Hood in Killeen, Texas, killed 13 people and wounded 30. 

Some gun-control advocates say that access to guns, and ammunition, should be suppressed, with longer wait times that would allow for more extensive background tests. But some gun-rights supporters counter that law-abiding citizens with legal access to weapons that could be used in emergencies could make communities safer. After a shooting at the Texas Capitol in January, 2010, lawmakers installed metal detectors—but those who can show they have a license to carry a concealed handgun can be waived through.

Officials say Mr. Loughner bought his gun legally Nov. 30 at a Tucson outdoor-sports store, 

Now the emotional impact of what happened is hitting Mr. Zamudio, especially the death of  Christina Taylor Green, a 9-year-old elementary school student. 

"It kills me what happened," says Mr. Zamudio. "That poor little girl? That's just wrong. No disrespect to any of the other victims, but the worst thing about this is that little girl."

 Write to  Darren Everson at darren.everson@wsj.com 