I'm not normally tempted by New Year's resolutions. Losing weight, flossing daily, improving the plight of my fellow man—all too earnest and gloomy. But golf resolutions are another matter. Now that the PGA Tour has started broadcasting from Hawaii this week I'm a sitting duck: The pros make everything look so easy. This year, I've decided, will be my big breakthrough year in putting. And with the sage advice of some experts, I've already sketched out a winter game plan. 

I decided against trying to make off-season improvements in my full swing. In theory, winter is a great time to introduce swing changes, because you aren't distracted or discouraged by actual play. Nick Faldo famously revamped his swing in his garage in the winter of 1991-92, using nothing more than mirrors and lines on the floor to monitor positions. When spring came he hit the ground running. That year he snagged three top-four finishes in the majors and a British Open win at Muirfield. 

But Sir Nick knew what he was doing. Most amateurs don't, and risk hurting their game. Even working with a instructor can be dangerous. "If you've got a regular teacher who knows your swing well, and maybe you've waited until winter to make some specific change, that can be beneficial," says Stan Utley, a highly ranked teacher from Scottsdale, Ariz. "But I would say avoid going to a new teacher to make changes over the winter, even with all the great studio simulation technology available now." All a new teacher will know are the differences between your swing and some ideal swing, Mr. Utley says, not how or whether your particular swing actually works on the course.

Putting, on the other hand, is less likely to get worse, and more practical besides. All you need is floor space (not even a high ceiling) and a decent putting surface. Firm, non-luxury hotel-room carpet may run at 9 feet or faster on the Stimpmeter (the green-speed measuring device), but you don't want much slower than that. If your home carpet is too plush, you can usually find a suitable strip to buy (not too nappy, no grooves) at a carpet store. 

The props can be simple. Use chair legs or other balls as targets. Try putting between two telephone books or shoe boxes, either close by or positioned farther down the line. I found and bought a wonderful volume online called "The Little Book of Indoor Golf Games" by Adrian Winter. Many of the 18 games he has devised—Golf Slalom, Minefield, Space Invader, Last Ball Standing—use inverted golf tees that you try either to knock over or avoid. Some of the games use string, to demarcate a penalty zone for putting too far, or bank notes that you try to stop the ball on. Distance control is part of the challenge. All can be played against an opponent. And of course there are dozens of gizmos that beep and spin and return balls automatically when you make a putt. 

Is such practice more than just an amusing way to waste time? Yes, much more, according to my team of experts, as long as you aren't stroking your putts willy-nilly, but rather in the service of habituating sound fundamentals.

"The closer you get to the hole in golf, the more exacting each shot becomes. By the time you get to putting, the slightest little inconsistencies in grip, set up, posture and ball position can make a huge difference, and winter is absolutely a great time to work on those fundamentals," says putting specialist Michael Breed. 

The grip is key, every instructor emphasizes. Grips differ, but most have in common palms that face each other and a shaft that runs more through the palms and less in the fingers than full-swing grips do. This reduces wrist mobility and promotes a one-piece, shoulder-led rocking motion on the stroke. Consult magazines, books or a teacher for specifics, but whatever grip you use, the emphasis in off-season practice should be to make it the same each time. 

The same holds for the other fundamentals. Use mirrors to monitor the ball's position relative to your spine and your feet. Check the position of your eyes frequently; they should be directly over the ball or slightly inside it, but never outside. Putt with your head against a wall to hone the feel of keeping it absolutely still. 

"It doesn't take a lot of time to check these things each time you pick up a putter, but that's what this time of year is made for," says Mr. Breed. The result, once spring comes, will be far fewer days when your putting is "inexplicably" off. "Almost always the reason people putt poorly is related to flaws in their setup," he says.

At Mr. Utley's suggestion, I ordered one of those golf-specific metronomes, a type that can clip onto the bill of a cap. They help develop a natural putting rhythm. Ideally, the stroke for a 4-foot putt and a 40-foot putt should take precisely the same time, from takeaway to ball impact. "People that struggle with putting, especially outside 12 feet, often take the same backswing every time but then surge forward faster for longer putts," he says. 

Mr. Utley also thinks balance work can be useful in the off-season, even for putting. For example, making a few tiny swings or putting strokes while standing on inflatable balance pillows helps train the little muscles used in the swing and promotes a keener awareness of posture.

Most of all, he likes "filling the brain" with images of putting success, particularly of the golf ball tumbling time after time into the hole. Those short putts on a carpet in the den may not seem like much, but by spring they can seed a lot of confidence.

 Write to  John Paul Newport at JohnPaul.Newport@wsj.com 