It's rare to hear analysts describe policy making in Singapore as draconian and punitive, at least when it comes to the city-state's markets. But that's precisely what the latest measures to cool off the property market have triggered. 

The government will make buyers of second or third properties put up more cash for new purchases. It also sharply raised taxes on resales conducted soon after purchase. The moves drew a strong response: Morgan Stanley described them as "draconian", and Daiwa Securities said they're "arguably the most punitive policy measures ever." 

Critics have a point. The moves come only five months after the last round of measures to cool the market and despite the fact that those steps seemed to be working. Singapore's private-property price index has continued to rise but at a slower pace: In the fourth quarter of 2010, prices rose 2.74% from the third quarter. In the first six months of the year, they were rising at a quarterly rate of more than 5%.

Also making the latest steps seem like overkill is that they come despite the government's plan to release near-record amounts of land to property developers in the first half of this year, a measure designed to ease property prices at the developer stage.

Given growing worry about asset bubbles around Asia, keeping a wary eye on real-estate prices isn't unreasonable. But the timing and severity of the moves point to another factor at play: elections. Under Singaporean law, the next general election must be held before February 2012, and a vote later this year is highly likely. 

Housing affordability has become a point of criticism against the government, as has immigration, and the governing People's Action Party can now claim action on both fronts with these measures. 

In addition,  Mah Bow Tan, Singapore's minister for national development, this week  flagged the possibility of further increases to foreign worker levies, on top of those introduced last year. That echoes Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong's New Year's Eve comments that Singapore needs to manage the inflow of foreign workers, keep home ownership affordable and help poorer Singaporeans cope with home and other price pressures. 

Throughout Singapore's era of modern prosperity, tough and sensible economic management has traditionally won the day against populist policies. The recent moves, though, have a taste of the latter. 

 Write to  Sam Holmes at samuel.holmes@dowjones.com 