 The government, with newly appointed military generals in top positions, struggled to impose order and present a show of unified strength, but showed no signs of bending to demands that President Hosni Mubarak resign.  

Meanwhile, the country's scattered and loose-knit opposition movements announced they were putting significant ideological, religious and political differences aside, at least for the time being, by throwing their weight behind Mohamed ElBaradei, the former head of the International Atomic Energy Agency, to represent them in any future negotiations with the government. 

ElBaradei said in televised remarks that he was looking forward to working with the military to help establish order and to forge Egypt's new political future.

Scenes of chaos ensued in Cairo and other cities, with the death toll sharply rising to 102, according to the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights, with 80 of those deaths coming since Friday.

 The unrest is threatening economic repercussions across the region and around the world. Egypt's economy is relatively small—the fourth-largest in the Middle East—but the country plays an outsize economic role as home to one of the most important trade and energy thoroughfares, the Suez Canal. It's also the world's largest buyer of wheat and a significant cotton exporter.  

 U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton called for an "orderly, peaceful transition" to a "real democracy" in Egypt, and said the U.S. wants to see free and fair elections in Egypt result from the antigovernment unrest. 

 In Tunisia, thousands of jubilant supporters of the country's leading Islamic party Ennahdha packed the capital's airport to welcome their leader, Rachid Ghannouchi, back to the country after two decades in exile. 

 In Sudan, student protesters in Khartoum clashed with police on Sunday and called for the ouster of President Omar al-Bashir. 

The date of the protest coincided with the announcement of preliminary results for the south's referendum on whether to secede from the north. Over 99% of voters chose secession, according to those results, in line with overwhelming support for independence in southern Sudan.

 Syrian President Bashar al-Assad said grassroots revolts in Egypt, Tunisia and Yemen are ushering in a "new era" in the Middle East, and he acknowledged that Arab rulers would need to do more to accommodate their people's rising political and economic aspirations. 

European leaders could announce broad outlines of a new deal to boost the euro zone's bailout funds at a summit on Friday, paving the way for a final agreement when they next meet in March, European officials say. 

It's not yet clear whether enough agreement will emerge to make an announcement over the rescue funds, but European officials said they expected discussions over the issue Friday as part of a two-step process.

 Discussions are under way on an initiative that would allow the Greek government to buy back debt with help from the European bailout fund, Greece's finance minister said, amid signs that Europe is preparing a far-reaching solution to the country's debt problems.  

Since late last year, European governments have been discussing plans to beef up Europe's new, emergency-financing mechanism, the European Financial Stability Facility, to lend money to euro-zone countries in need of cheap loans. 

 Euro-zone bank lending expanded further in December, but the flow of loans to businesses turned negative again, raising doubt about companies' ability and willingness to raise capital expenditure.  

 German authorities were investigating the cause of a head-on collision late Saturday between a freight and passenger train in northern Germany that killed 10 people and seriously injured more than 20 others.  

Spain and Germany have unveiled details of a recruitment drive designed to help reduce unemployment in Spain and supply Germany's buoyant economy. The governments agreed to recognize each others' academic and training qualification levels. 

Spain's unemployment rate soared back above 20% in the last three months of 2010 as more than 138,000 jobs were lost, casting doubts about the strength of the ongoing recovery in the euro zone's fourth-largest economy, data released by the country's statistics institute shows. 

 Irish Prime Minister Brian Cowen will dissolve parliament when it reconvenes Tuesday and announce a date for a new election, closing the curtain on one of the most unpopular administrations of recent times. 

Europol and Interpol, working with European Union member police departments, were able to prevent hackers from pocketing €28 million ($38.1 million) from the sale of stolen emission-trading rights, according to senior people directly involved in the matter. The hackers were based in Romania, the senior person said, and targeted servers in the countries where they wanted to steal carbon-dioxide credit, using them as robots to penetrate trading systems security. 

European Union foreign ministers are expected to impose travel restrictions on senior officials in Belarus and freeze their bank accounts, diplomats say, in an effort to pressure President Alexander Lukashenko to release political prisoners. 

French media conglomerate Lagardère said two judges opened a formal investigation into the company over alleged insider trading of European Aeronautics Defence and Space stock. The investigation comes over a year after France's stock-market regulator said its Sanctions Committee had cleared all 17 executives and two companies, including Lagardère, of insider-trading charges in the four-year-old case. 

 Turkey's trade deficit widened 78% in December to $8.7 billion as imports grew twice as fast as exports, reaffirming concerns that the rapidly growing economy is overheating and adding pressure on policy makers to slow growth.  

The Securities and Exchange Commission charged a Connecticut man with misappropriating at least $53 million of investor funds, saying he invested the money for himself. The SEC alleges that Francisco Illarramendi defrauded investors in the hedge funds he managed by improperly transferring their money into bank accounts he personally controlled and then investing that money in private-equity investments

The boyfriend of a former Walt Disney administrative assistant was sentenced to 27 months in prison after admitting to trying to sell early access to the entertainment company's earnings. Federal prosecutors alleged that Yonni Sebbag and Bonnie Hoxie, the former assistant to Disney's head of communications, contacted dozens of hedge funds and investment companies anonymously last March in an amateurish insider-trading plot, offering to provide an early look at Disney's results. 

 A senior Japanese government official raised questions over last week's surprise cut in the country's debt rating by Standard & Poor's, while also seeking to use the cut to push a recalcitrant opposition to work with the government to get Japan's fiscal house in order.  

 A Chinese court handed a relatively light sentence to a police official's son whose hit-and-run killing of a college student sparked nationwide anger over the excesses of government officials and their families. 

 The People's Bank of China must be vigilant on inflation and may need to tighten reserve requirements further to address rapid capital inflows, the central bank's governor warned in an interview. Zhou Xiaochuan pointed out that Chinese price growth slowed slightly in December, but he signalled it had more room to climb. 

 Myanmar is expected to convene its first parliament in more than two decades on Monday, setting the stage for the selection of a new president. The latest steps are being watched closely by foreign diplomats and investors for any sign the country is becoming more open to reform, which could lead to a softening of Western economic sanctions. 

 The U.S. called for the immediate release of an American diplomat who was arrested by Pakistani police for killing two armed men allegedly trying to rob him, saying his detention was unlawful under international law. U.S. officials have been angered by the treatment of the official, whom Pakistani authorities have identified as Raymond Davis, a security officer at the U.S. Consulate in Lahore, the nation's second-largest city. 

In Afghanistan, a suicide bomber riding a motorcycle packed with explosives rammed into a car carrying the deputy governor of the southern Kandahar province, killing him and wounding three of his bodyguards, the Interior Ministry said. The attacker struck as the official, Abdul Latif Ashna, was being driven to work in the provincial capital, said a ministry spokesman.