Firing rifles in the air and vowing revenge, Libyan mourners Saturday buried nine men they said were Muslim religious leaders and other civilians killed in an aerial attack by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in a city on the front line of the insurgency against Col. Moammar Gadhafi.

The government said Friday's predawn bombing killed clerics who were part of a private peace initiative by 150 religious and tribal leaders and said they were spending the night in a guest house in Brega en route to the rebel-held city of Ajdabiya in eastern Libya.

Track the latest events in Libya.

Track events day by day in the region.

See the level of unrest, plus the economic and politic status of some countries across North Africa and the Middle East.

Popular demonstrations in Tunisia toppled a president and spread to countries across the region. See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

But a cleric who said he was part of the group described a different mission. Sheikh Atiya Ali Amer, a 25-year-old imam in Col. Gadhafi's home city of Sirt, said the men had been sent by the government to remain in Brega, an oil hub on the coast, with the aim of showing that the Libyan leader's forces are in control there.

Three missiles struck a building where some of the men were sleeping, Sheikh Amer told reporters at a Tripoli cemetery during a collective funeral for the nine men. He said he had fled a part of the building undamaged by the first missile before it was hit again.

The three missiles, fired about 1 a.m., left a crater 16 feet deep, he said. "It leveled the area. We identified our friends from their clothing."

The cleric and a government spokesman said 11 people died in the attack. The cleric said two were buried outside Tripoli. Eight of the dead were clerics, he said, and the others were a driver and two other civilians he didn't identify.

That would make it the largest civilian death toll in a single attack since NATO began bombing to try to halt attacks by Col. Gadhafi's forces on civilians involved in the uprising against his 41-year rule.

The government said 45 people were wounded in Friday's bombing.

NATO said in a statement that it had struck a command and control bunker in Brega "as the structure was being used by the Gadhafi regime to coordinate strikes against the Libyan civilian population."

A NATO official said the alliance had repeatedly warned civilians to stay away from such areas. "If the Gadhafi regime did indeed decide to send religious leaders into harm's way on the site in Brega," the official said, "that is further proof of their contempt for human life and international law."

During the funeral, Sheikh Amer addressed a few hundred mourners at the seaside Al-Hanshir cemetery, referring to NATO as a "terrorist organization" and declaring "the gate of hell is open" to its members. Jets apparently enforcing a no-fly zone over Libya produced vapor trails high over the Mediterranean, prompting taunts from mourners, who shouted "God is great!" and aimed cameras at the intruders.

Nine bodies wrapped in green cloth were removed from wooden coffins for burial in the sandy soil. 

Turnout at the cemetery was sparse, despite an apparent government effort to turn it into a show of support for Col. Gadhafi. The time and place of the funeral had been publicized on state television in cell phone text messages.

Sheikh Amer was the only person who came forward as a witness to confirm the government account of the bombing. He and government spokesman Moussa Ibrahim said the Brega guest house was located in a residential neighborhood and insisted it had no military use. 

On Friday, Libyan state TV aired images of bodies laid out in two rows and a concrete building with its façade blown off, but Tripoli-based journalists were barred from traveling there.

NATO has intensified its attacks in recent weeks, striking two of the Libyan leader's compounds since April 30, and is increasingly coordinating them with rebels fighting to expand from their strongholds in eastern Libya.

Moments after his regime announced Friday's attack, Col. Gadhafi taunted NATO, saying in a recorded address that he had survived the airstrikes on his compounds and is "in a place where you can't get me."

NATO shrugged off the colonel's statement. "We are not targeting him, our targets are solely military," alliance spokeswoman Carmen Romero said in Brussels.

As Libya's insurgency entered its 13th week, battles raged on at least two fronts. Col. Gadhafi's militias resumed rocket attacks on Misrata on Friday, reportedly killing 10 civilians, two days after losing control of the western city's airport.

In the east, rebel forces were fighting to expand westward toward Brega.

Col. Ahmed Bani, a rebel military spokesman, said Friday's airstrikes had hit homes in Brega used by the government to store rocket launchers, machine guns and other weapons.

The rebel spokesman said there were practically no civilians left in the war-torn city.

The government announced the bombing on the grounds of Tripoli's soaring Mawlana Mohammed Mosque, at a press conference joined by religious and tribal leaders. Mr. Ibrahim, the government spokesman, said NATO should have known about the clerics' presence in Brega because the group had been shown on state TV on Thursday night, praying by the waterfront.

"Their prayer was for God almighty to stop the bloodshed in Libya," said Sheikh Ali Abu Suwa, an imam at the Tripoli mosque.

Sheikh Nureddin al-Mijrah, another imam at the mosque, said at the press conference that NATO was "humiliating our religion and our nation."

He called on Muslims of the world "to take revenge for our brothers who died today. For every man, we should take down 1,000 men" from NATO countries and from Qatar and the United Arab Emirates, which support the alliance's operations in Libya.

"Even Nazi Germany respected mosques and churches," he declared. "NATO is going beyond what naziism did."

It was believed to be the first declaration from Libya for an Islamic holy war against Col. Gadhafi's adversaries. Other imams at the news conference didn't echo his call but warned that the NATO strikes were sowing hatred against the West among a Libyan Muslim population they said had been previously moderate.

Mr. Ibrahim, the government spokesman, said the imams weren't speaking for the regime.

In his brief recorded message, played on TV without video, Col. Gadhafi said he wanted to assure Libyans concerned about a NATO strike Thursday on the Bab al-Azizya military compound that includes his residence. "I tell the coward crusaders, I live in a place where you can't get to me," he said. "I live in the hearts of millions."

Mr. Ibrahim said the Libyan leader was "in good health" and working in Tripoli.

The sound of another apparent NATO airstrike was heard in Tripoli on Saturday night. Libyan state TV said it targeted a site at the Bab al-Aziziya compound.

Col. Gadhafi's forces, meanwhile, harassed rebel positions southeast and west of Misrata Friday, after being pushed back from the city's outskirts, residents said.

Dr. Ayman Abu Shahma, a Misrata surgeon, said two siblings, 2 and 5 years old, were among those killed in Friday's rocket attack, which came from west of the city, and the children's mother and 4-year-old sister were wounded. The surgeon provided photographs of the wounded girl during an operation to amputate her leg.

His account of casualties couldn't be verified independently because of difficulties getting access to the embattled city.

—Stephen Fidler contributed to this article