House Republican leaders are brimming with confidence that they won round one of the budget fight when President Obama was forced to concede to spending cuts—even if they only amounted to $4 billion.

This was a departure from the so-called "freeze" budget that the White House had originally proposed. The administration even agreed to another $4 billion in cuts for a funding extension through the end of March, but that last-second offer to Republicans arrived after they had passed the temporary budget.

Now the White House negotiators, led by chief economic advisor Gene Sperling, have come back with another $6 billion in cuts for the last six months of the year. But my GOP sources say Speaker John Boehner isn't ready to budge from the $61 billion level of savings that the House passed three weeks ago. Every budget that the House passes, Mr. Boehner keeps insisting, "will have cuts." One reason the GOP is holding tough is that they feel the public is with them on the need for cuts now. "Our members aren't hearing a lot of complaints from their constituents about hometown programs that have been cut," says one House Republican leadership advisor.

Another positive and unexpected development for the deficit hawks is that Senate Republicans aren't splintering. Back in 1996, Senate Republicans, led by Bob Dole, lost their nerve in the budget showdown with President Clinton and pulled the rug out from under then-Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich. But so far this year, Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell and House Speaker Boehner are walking in lock step. We hear that one reason the White House and Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid have begrudgingly agreed to GOP budget demands is that Mr. Reid hasn't been able to rally 51 votes—let alone 60—for a budget without real cuts. This is Harry Reid's curse: A handful of the 23 Senate Democrats up for re-election in November 2012 are demanding deficit-reduction progress. They're not as willing to punt on the budget as Mr. Reid and the White House are.

What all this means is that the White House and House Republicans are still far apart on the 2011 budget, but right now the GOP holds the upper hand. The price to extend funding past a week from Friday is $2 billion in savings per week—and frustrated liberal Democrats know it. The White House's latest offer would buy just three additional weeks of budget peace.

For better or worse, Republicans don't seem as petrified by the government shutdown option as they did a month ago. The House freshmen in particular see a shutdown as focusing public attention on the fiscal fight in Washington and a way to highlight what the two parties stand for. Which side blinks first will depend a lot on how voters react toward the GOP budget knife as it continues to carve deeper. "We won the majority by promising to cut spending, and that is something we just can't back off of," says Jeff Flake of Arizona, who is one the leading budget hardliners. A lot of the freshmen Republicans agree with him.

At some point Republicans will probably have to negotiate down from $61 billion in cuts this year. But don't be surprised if the eventual bipartisan budget settlement winds up with a savings number a lot closer to $61 billion than the zero the president originally put on the board.

To read more stories like this one, please subscribe to Political Diary. 