  (See Corrections & Amplifications item below.)  

LOUISVILLE, Ky.—They say regional speech is dying in America. But as I leaned out my car window in downtown Louisville and asked another driver where I could park, I heard a drawl truly resistant to homogeneity. And the voice said, "Ma'am, it's a clusterf—."

Parking may be a nightmare, but the actual parties are quite nicely organized here. And that is part of their distinctly local flare, especially on the weekend of the Kentucky Derby. Or at least, on the Friday night of Derby weekend, which as the radio anchor on 98.9 hyped: "Louisville's biggest party niiighhht!!!"

In some circles, though, the revelry is also philanthropy. "This is our biggest fund-raising weekend of the year," said Barry Wooley, a Louisville-based interior designer and, according to his card, "purveyor of all things beautiful," who supports the Julep Ball, a Derby-eve fund-raiser for cancer research at the University of Louisville.

One of the town's best-known fetes is the annual Barnstable Brown Party, a fund-raiser for diabetes research and programs at the University of Kentucky. It is held in the home of Patricia Barnstable Brown and co-hosted by her sister Priscilla.

A throng of onlookers collected in the grassy Highlands neighborhood to see guests arrive (by car) at a tented red carpet at the end of the host's long, curved driveway. The event draws a broad mix, from sports (Tom Brady, Bode Miller and Aaron Rodgers), music (Mary Wilson from The Supremes), Kix Brooks, LeeAnn Womack) and modeling (the simply dazzling Niki Taylor).

The gawkers were encouraged by an arrivals emcee to make as much noise as possible to welcome the guests. For a while, only local society folks were showing up, which didn't rate hooting and hollering. So the emcee instigated a roar: "Let's practice on the next car, no matter who it is!" Further attempts to keep the crowd warm: "Let's hear it from the right side of the crowd!" "OK. Left side, let's hear you!"

It didn't seem to phase Christopher Barnstable Brown, 28 years old and the son of Patricia, who grew up in the party location and is now a corporate lawyer in Manhattan.

"The big difference between this and New York parties is that the celebs get up on stage," he said, sharing that DMC [of Run DMC] and Salt-N-Pepa had come by during the day for a loose rehearsal.

The difference is also in things like the hot-air balloon, inflated, but stationary, on a side lawn. It's also in the "lounge" tent also on the front lawn, populated by about six young women hired to dance and spark a friendly energy as guests arrived. They weren't professional dancers, but college students who landed an easy gig: smile, wave, move in high heels.

There were also hired dancing girls at Maxim magazine's "Fillies & Stallions" Party, but they were overtly sexy, wearing micromini skirts, tight preppy shirts and riding crops.

Maxim's entry in the Derby-eve party circuit was its first— and it was a riff on its SuperBowl-eve party. Inside the Mellwood Arts Center, the crowd was typical Maxim: busloads of tall, girls with their blonde hair fashioned in one of two ways: low-side ponytails or slanty bangs like Taylor Swift.

Naturally, the guys showed up. There were locals like Kyle Walling, a good-looking, well-dressed friend of the DJ. Mr. Walling is a professional bass fisherman who also owns a scratch-and-dent business called Bumper Man. His card read: "You Bend 'em—I'll Mend 'em."

Businessmen of higher orders were also there. Chef Bobby Flay stopped by with Barry Weisbord, the New Jersey-based publisher of Thoroughbred Daily News. Mr. Flay said he doesn't come to the Derby every year, but this year he had a horse racing on Friday.

As for the Derby itself, it is one giant party, of course. Designer Betsey Johnson attended the race weekend for the first time. "I FedEx'd myself eight outfits," she said. "I just have to say, I'm having a real moment!"

Wearing a flowy dress and a floppy hat, she blended well with the bright colors worn by Southern ladies. Ms. Johnson had headlined a brunch and fashion event to benefit breast cancer research, organized by Chambord.

If anyone knows how to work the Derby, it's the liquor brands. Woodford Reserve hawked $1,000 mint juleps – severed in Tiffany cups with ice made from water flown in from Australia—to benefit the Heart of a Horse Foundation. Actor and politician Fred Thompson and his wife, Jeri, were the stars of that show.

Grey Goose sponsored several events, including Barnstable Brown, at which their spokeswoman this year, the actress Paula Patton ("Jumping the Broom") appeared. On Derby Day, Ms. Patton's hat was Grey Goose-provided, and given just how tall she is, it was a decent marketing investment.

After the race on Saturday evening, much of the horsey contingent heads back to Lexington or nurses wounds (some self-inflicted) quietly. But downtown Louisville was not without celebrations.

Babyface took to the stage at the Glitz & Glam party at the Louisville Palace, where guests dined at tables on a platform built over the theater seats. And after a long weekend of drinking, horse racing and running around town the sound of Babyface's crooning was something of a comfort.

 Corrections & Amplifications:  Actress Paula Patton was expected to attend a May 6 Kentucky Derby party at the home of Patricia Barnstable Brown, but didn't because of a late flight. This article incorrectly says that she attended the event.