Undaunted by a damp and chilly English winter's day,  Marion Brown is perched on a stool next to her stall chatting to potential buyers. She is trying to stay warm. It is early afternoon after a moderately busy Saturday for Mrs. Brown, who has been selling Victorian and Edwardian jewelry outside Vernon's Antiques Market on the Portobello Road in London for the past five years.

Read the complete  Watches and Jewelry report.  

A specialist in gems from the Victorian age, she believes that jewelry from this period is not only well-made and beautiful, but also extremely good value compared to its modern day counterparts. But collectors be warned, high gold prices mean it might not be around forever.

In a large glass case on the stall, a delicate Victorian diamond studded star-shaped gold ring jostles for space with a large array of other antique jewelry: A gold snake ring with emerald eyes, a pair of identical gold charm bracelets, sapphire and ruby earrings and a pink rose enameled pendant. Silver lockets, enamel butterflies, garnet necklaces and other pieces set with semi-precious stones are displayed on every available nook. Arranging all these delicate items of jewelry can take Mrs. Brown up to two painstaking hours, and that is after a dawn start. "Of course we're shattered by the time we've set up the stall, but it's fantastic to be here selling my jewelry," she says. "I've wanted to have a stall on Portobello since the first time I came here with my parents when I was 13. It was just so alive." 

Antiques are in Mrs. Brown's blood, having grown up in her parents' antiques shop in Windsor, but her real passion has always been jewelry. "At one time I sold everything from cannon balls to pine dressers, but I've always done jewelry and that's what I'm most interested in," she says. 

Her favorite is jewelry from the Victorian period (1837-1901), which is held by many to be the golden age for jewelry because of the quality of its workmanship and design.

"Most Victorian jewelry is a one-off. Labor was cheap then and a boy of 14 or even younger would be apprenticed to a jeweler to learn the trade, so they became expert at what they did. You just don't get that now," she says. 

Unlike antique jewelry, most modern pieces are mass produced and consequently it's hard to get something unique. Antique jewelry is also much better value. For example, an antique nine carat gold ring that would cost around £120 from Mrs. Brown's stall would cost three to five times more if it was contemporary. 

In addition to being famous for its quality, Victorian jewelry is also renowned for the variety of gemstones and themes. Better access and increased trade with the far-flung corners of the British Empire brought in gemstones and precious metals that had previously had been rare and prohibitively expensive, such as diamonds from South Africa, opals and gold from Australia and silver from new mines in the U.S. The rise of a new middle class also meant that men could afford to purchase the jewelry that a fashionable woman of the time liked to wear. "Husbands liked their women to look good. It was a sign of their own business success, so they dressed their wives in fine clothes and jewelry," Mrs. Brown explains. 

But unfortunately, there is less and less of such jewelry around these days and some of it will vanish forever. The record high gold price over the past few years has resulted in many selling their antique gold jewelry for its scrap value, which invariably means it will be melted down for its gold content. Dealers tell horror stories of beautiful handmade Georgian candlesticks, Victorian bangles and other precious items disappearing simply to be melted down. "The best things are getting harder to find," Mrs. Brown says. "The business has definitely changed in the last few years. There are a lot of men who have come into the scrap trade and they don't appreciate or care about the work that goes into the jewelry as they're just buying it by weight," she says.

 Ms. Williams is a reporter for Dow Jones in London. She can be reached at selina.williams@dowjones.com. 