The president had finally let the mask drop and revealed himself, once and for all, as a radical ideologue far outside the American mainstream. For years, his critics had identified him as a would-be socialist dictator with a pathological hatred of the free market. In launching his campaign for re-election, he seemed to embrace that role and to announce a war to the death against the business establishment he described as "the resolute enemy within our gates."

"These economic royalists complain that we seek to overthrow the institutions of America," the president proclaimed. "What they really complain of is that we seek to take away their power. Our allegiance to American institutions requires the overthrow of this kind of power. In vain they seek to hide behind the flag and the Constitution."

The president was Franklin Delano Roosevelt, and the speech (delivered on June 27, 1936) was his famed "Rendezvous with Destiny" acceptance address marking the rousing conclusion of the Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia. In the election, Roosevelt swept 46 of the 48 states. 

Seventy-five years later, conservatives should pay close attention to FDR's example as a crucial step in placing Barack Obama in a more realistic context. 

Republicans—especially in the tea party faction of the GOP—frequently charge that the current incumbent counts as an unprecedented, frightening fanatic with an alien, un-American agenda. But this view of Obama can't possibly survive an honest examination of the record of his Democratic predecessors. Newt Gingrich, as a former professor of history, ought to know better than to characterize Obama (fatuously) as "the most radical president in American history."

In what sense does Obama count as more radical than FDR, the patron saint of the modern Democratic Party? 

Where does he advocate government intervention and expansion more sweeping, costly or constitutionally questionable than the programs of the New Deal—or, for that matter, of Lyndon Johnson's Great Society? 

President Obama not only conforms to the big government, tax-and-spend traditions that have characterized his party for nearly a century; he stands squarely in the center of the Democrats' current coalition. Serious prospects of a challenge to the president's renomination have recently evaporated. Yet it's significant to recall that speculation about such an intraparty fight always centered on rivals to the president's left (Howard Dean, Alan Grayson, Russell Feingold) and never to his right. 

Not only has Hillary Clinton ruled herself out as a potential candidate in 2012, but it's tough to see any administration initiatives, in either foreign or domestic policy, with which she seems uncomfortable.

Those who insist on characterizing the president as a fringe figure ought to confront an important challenge: Name one significant policy or appointment during his first term that would have been inconceivable for Mrs. Clinton—or for Messrs. Biden, Edwards, Dodd, Richardson or the other leading Democratic presidential alternatives. 

The commonly recycled notion that President Obama has "surrounded himself with socialists"—giving key appointments to leftist activists and academics from outside the D.C. establishment—remains utterly unsupported by the evidence. Among the 15 cabinet officers, the majority (eight) had previously won election as Democrats (or Republicans) to the Senate, House or, in four cases, governorships (three of them from red states). The rest include three senior holdovers from the Clinton or Bush administrations, two department heads from New York and Chicago city government, a four-star general of the Army and a Nobel Prize winner in physics who previously headed the Energy Department's top research lab. 

One can scan the list of leading appointments (including Mr. Obama's two chiefs of staff, one a former congressman and the other a former Clinton cabinet officer) without finding a single example—not one—of the sort of wild-eyed, revolutionary intellectual frequently cited by right-wing critics. Yes, a record of business leadership in the private sector is sorely lacking within the Obama team, but so is any history of militant socialist scheming.

Republicans need not despair that President Obama fails to conform to the hackneyed (if groundless) charges of radicalism. They will find the president easier to beat when they re-adjust their attacks to portray him as typical rather than radical. 

The problem with Mr. Obama isn't that he functions far outside the Democratic mainstream. The real problem is that mainstream itself, a toxic stew of dysfunctional and discredited notions that have flopped reliably whenever they've been employed.

 Mr. Medved hosts a daily, nationally syndicated radio show and is the author of "The 5 Big Lies About American Business" (recently out in paperback by Three Rivers Press).  