KAMPALA, Uganda—Security forces firing on rioting protesters in the Ugandan capital killed five people Friday, in the second straight day of turmoil spurred by the arrest of the country's main opposition leader, clouding the prospect for talks scheduled for next week between the opposition and President Yoweri Museveni. 

Protesters were angered by the manner in which security officials arrested Kizza Besigye, Mr. Museveni's main challenger during disputed polls in February. Security officials smashed the windows of the car in which Mr. Besigye was riding and sprayed him with tear gas before arresting him. He was later released.

On Friday, officials initially blocked Mr. Besigye from getting on a flight at Entebbe Airport bound for Kenya for medical treatment for injuries sustained in the arrest, but later relented and allowed him to leave the country. 

The riots grew out of protests over rising food and fuel prices, which have been a challenge for Mr. Museveni since he was declared winner of the Feb. 18 polls. But the government has refused to bow to pressure to slash taxes on fuel imports to ease prices, as neighboring Kenya did last week to avert unrest.

Uganda's annual inflation rate increased to 14.1% in April, from 11.1% in March, the state statistics body said Friday. Food crop prices rose 39.3% in April compared with 2.1% in March due to food shortages, which the government blames on a drought late last year.

Government officials say food prices will drop in the next few months following the onset of the rainy season, after six months of drought.

Mr. Museveni, who has been in power since 1986, was scheduled to meet with opposition leaders on Tuesday for talks aimed at resolving the unrest, but opposition leaders have said they won't meet with the president unless he delivers a personal apology for Mr. Besigye's harsh treatment.

Four opposition parties, led by the Forum for Democratic Change, have also demanded the immediate withdrawal of all the military from the streets, "We find it difficult to sit on the table pretending to dialogue with our tormentors," the group said in a statement. 

The opposition has also called for the resignations of the internal affairs minister and police chief over the arrest. Internal Affairs Minister Kirunda Kivejinja said police used reasonable means to arrest the opposition leader.

Mr. Besigye is popular in the Ugandan capital and many urban centers across the country. The riots Friday started from Kampala's popular downtown Keseka market, before spreading throughout other markets in the city center, witnesses said.

Security forces continued to fire live ammunition and tear gas to disperse pockets of protesters in the various city suburbs Friday evening. Security forces also deployed around Mr. Besigye's residence. 

Mr. Kivejinja, the internal affairs minister, said five people were killed and 121 wounded. He assured the country that "the situation is under control" and told people to proceed with their normal lives but report anyone who disrupts the peace.

The Kampala city center was deserted by midday, with all the shops and stores closed.

Richard Nataka, the secretary-general of the Uganda Red Cross Society, said protesters were engaging police in running battles in towns outside the capital. Two protesters were shot in the eastern town of Mbale, the Red Cross said.

The Uganda government continued to impose a strict ban on live coverage of the protests by local broadcasters. Ugandan local television stations on Friday opted to broadcast the royal wedding in the U.K., as riots raged on.