LONDON—-The European Commission's bond issue for the bailout fund for Ireland was three times oversubscribed, the European Union's executive body said Wednesday. 

"This morning, the commission started a €5 billion ($6.65 billion) issuance in light of the economic situation in Ireland," EU spokeswoman Amelia Torres said. "There were three times as many requests to take it up as we could satisfy." 

The bond is a key test of investor support for the region's new sovereign-bailout mechanism, with proceeds earmarked for the EU's emergency funding program, the European Financial Stabilisation Mechanism, specifically in connection with the bailout for Ireland. Ireland is getting €22.5 billion from the €60 billion program, which was set up last year after the Greek debt crisis. 

Early indications suggest that the yield premium on offer had generated strong demand for the bond—denominated in euros, and maturing in five years—with pricing expected at the tight end of initial guidance. 

The bond will pay investors 0.12 percentage points over the midswap rate, which is a benchmark for bond pricing derived from the cost of swapping fixed- and floating-rate interest payments. Initial guidance was set at 0.12 to 0.15 percentage points earlier Wednesday. 

Two bankers not involved in the transaction said that informal price 'whispers' Tuesday had suggested that the bond could price at around 0.15 percentage points over midswaps. 

One of the bankers said that the bond was already trading at 0.1 percentage points over midswaps in the "grey market"—where securities that have yet to be issued can be bought and sold—suggesting that the initial premium 'whispered' on the deal had been generous. 

"It is generally positive that they were able to put the order book together very quickly," this banker said, adding that 0.12 percentage points over midswaps equates to around 0.6 percentage points over German bunds. 

Five-year bunds yielded 1.772% Wednesday, according to Tradeweb. 

However, Gary Jenkins, head of fixed-income strategy at Evolution Securities in London, said strong demand for the EU bond served to highlight the stresses in the euro-zone sovereign-debt market. "You would really prefer it if Irish or Portuguese debt was more in vogue than high quality, low-yielding debt at the moment," he said. 

The euro-zone's bailout fund, the European Financial Stability Facility, will follow the EU into the bond market later this month. Unlike the EU, which has issued bonds in the past to raise money for Hungary and Latvia, the EFSF bond will be a debut deal. 

Like the EFSF, the EU is rated Aaa by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and AAA by both Standard & Poor's Corp. and Fitch Ratings. Barclays Capital, BNP Paribas,  Deutsche Bank AG and  HSBC Holdings PLC are lead managers on the deal. 

