TOKYO—Japan's current account surplus contracted 34.3% in March from a year earlier, the government said on Thursday, posting the first drop in two months as the March 11 earthquake and tsunami disrupted the country's factory output and exports. 

The surplus in the current account, the widest measure of international trade and investment, stood at ¥1.679 trillion ($20.72 billion) in March, according to data released by the Finance Ministry. That was narrower than the ¥1.731 trillion surplus expected by economists surveyed by Dow Jones Newswires and the Nikkei. 

The data underline the broad economic impact of Japan's worst natural disaster in decades, which caused industrial output, household spending and consumer sentiment to fall at record rates in March. But analysts expect the economy will recover late this year on the back of exports and likely aggressive spending by the government to reconstruct quake-hit areas. 

The ministry also said on Thursday that Japan posted a merchandise trade deficit of ¥786.82 billion in the first 20 days of April, compared with a ¥154.60 billion surplus in the year-earlier period.

The numbers are based on customs data and do not include seasonal adjustments. 

"Trade data for the first 20 days of April show that import growth is very strong, whereas exports are weak. So we're likely to see a trade deficit for all of April," said  Yuichiro Nagai, an economist at Barclays Capital in Tokyo. 

Japanese exports were down 12.7% in the first 20 days of April compared to the same period a year ago, while imports climbed 14.2%, the data showed. 

The current account data had little impact on the USD/JPY trade as it came in line with forecasts, economists said. 

"Rather than the current account data, the market is now focusing on the U.S. economy, where a recovery has been slower than anticipated earlier this year," said  Hideki Hayashi, global economist at Mizuho Securities. 

Separate figures from the Bank of Japan on Thursday showed that bank lending fell a modest 0.1% in April, declining at its slowest pace since November 2009. BOJ officials said that post-quake demand for operational funding was behind the better number, with increases in loans by city and regional banks. Lending by city banks fell 3.1% on year in April, much smaller than a 4.6% decline in the previous month.

Total lending by regional banks (1st and 2nd tier) also rose by 1.2% in April from a year earlier, following a 1.1% increase in the previous month. 

Previous figures from the Ministry of Finance in late April showed that exports declined for the first time in 16 months in March, with shipments of autos marking the biggest fall since the global financial crisis. 

The government also said in mid-April that the economy is no longer on a recovery path due to the impact of the quake, but held out optimism that it will pick up by the end of the year. A Cabinet Office official said at the time that while Japan hadn't fallen into a recession, the country's economic recovery has clearly stalled. 

The recovery "is now a thing of the past," he said. 

The current account measures trade in goods, services, tourism and investment. It is calculated by determining the difference between Japan's income from foreign sources against payments on foreign obligations and excludes net capital investment. 

 Write to  Takashi Nakamichi at takashi.nakamichi@dowjones.com 