When  John London and  Scott Kennedy lost their young children to pediatric cancer a few years ago, they vowed to ensure other families don't suffer the same fate they did. 

Setting a deadline of ensuring survivorship for every child with pediatric cancer by the year 2015, Mr. London, a hedge-fund manager, and Mr. Kennedy, a former health-care marketing associate formed Solving Kids' Cancer. 

The charity identifies and funds clinical trials with the goal of developing effective and less toxic treatments for children with the deadliest forms of cancer. In three years, Messrs. London and Kennedy, who met at a hospital while their children were sick, have raised more than $7 million. They are now managing nine therapeutic development projects in North America. 

This month, the New Yorkers will announce a new $1.1 million grant to fund research at the Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center and Texas Children's Cancer Center on a treatment that harnesses viruses to attack cancer cells, while leaving healthy cells unharmed. 

"Penelope would sometimes see me crying by her bedside and say 'Why are you crying Daddy?' to which I would reply 'I wish I could feel yucky instead of you,'" says Mr. London. "She would respond by saying 'No Daddy, I want no one to feel yucky' and it's really those words and her legacy that I am trying to fulfill."

For Mr. Kennedy, the motivation is similar: "My son Hazen was a dreamer; he said he wanted to be a scientist to create things that would help people." 

Messrs. London and Kennedy say the hardest part of losing their children was the lack of options provided to them and the obstacles that prohibited new treatments for their children. 

"We were trying desperately to save our kids and the system failed us," says Mr. London, who invested hundreds of thousands of dollars to jump-start treatments and lobbied pharmaceutical companies to test their drugs on certain children when his daughter was sick. "We want to expand the menu of experimental options to children by focusing on clinical trials that we can get going as soon as possible." 

The duo says they are also helping to create a network of doctors, researchers and families who can collaborate on treatments for pediatric cancers and adapting medicines created for adults for use in children. 

Each clinical trial can cost $15,000 to $25,000 per patient but Mr. Kennedy says the charity is learning it can do less-expensive studies, faster. 

"We're working with scientists who can design trials that are more efficient and do more studies for less money," he says. "These kids deserve the choice of participating in experimental treatments that can cure them or extend their lives." 