DUBLIN—The head of Ireland's debt-management agency said the country will resume borrowing in bond markets "as soon as market conditions permit." 

However, John Corrigan, the chief executive officer of the National Treasury Management Agency, said Friday that a solution to the country's banking crisis was "vital" before the government could consider tapping the debt markets again.

Ireland last sold a bond in September, before the country's banking crisis deepened and eventually forced the government to accept aid.

The terms of the government's €67.5 billion ($87.85 billion) aid package with the European Union and the International Monetary Fund, reached late last year, "does not preclude the NTMA from seeking to fund in the markets itself," Mr. Corrigan said. The overall aid package includes a €17.5 billion contribution from the government and totals €85 billion.

The terms of the aid package included loans of up to 12 years with an average maturity of 7.5 years "to avoid a situation whereby Ireland would be faced with a funding wall upon the conclusion of the program," he said.

But an imminent return to the bond market is unlikely. Ireland is still trying to solve its banking crisis, which under a worse-case estimate could cost the government €50 billion, and its deficit for 2010 equalled a staggering 32% of gross domestic product. The government projects the deficit will shrink to 9% of GDP this year, still well above the euro-zone ceiling.

In its review of 2010, the NTMA said it raised €20 billion in long-term funding in 2010, which was used to fund the budget deficit of €18.7 billion and to refinance €1.2 billion of maturing debt. 

The agency said it deliberately sold a significant portion of its long-term borrowing program early in the year to take advantage of the terms and appetite then for Irish government debt. The weighted average cost of long-term funding raised in the bond market in 2010 was 4.7%, compared with 4.6% in 2009, with 97% of the national debt now carrying fixed rates of interest, it said. 

At the end of 2010, Ireland's national debt stood at €93.4 billion, it added. General government debt was €148.6 billion at year-end, equivalent to 94.2% of gross domestic product. 

The National Pensions Reserve Fund, which is contributing up to €10 billion of the government's portion of the aid package, had assets of €24.4 billion at year-end, of which €14.9 billion was in a portfolio that excludes investments in nationalized lenders Bank of Ireland PLC and Allied Irish Banks PLC. The fund recorded a return of 4.5% in 2010, the NTMA said.

 Write to  Quentin Fottrell at quentin.fottrell@dowjones.com 