New claims for jobless benefits rose last week and orders for durable goods fell in December, according to reports Thursday indicating the struggle of an economy trying to gather steam.

More data showed a modest revival in housing demand as the battered building sector that was a factor in sending the economy into recession attempts to recover.

The Labor Department reported the number of idled U.S. workers filing new claims for benefits rose by 51,000 to 454,000 in the week ended Jan. 22. Analysts said the data were likely distorted by winter weather and think new claims will resume a downward course.

The four-week moving average for claims, designed to smooth out volatility, increased 15,750 to 428,750.

"This jump in the number of new filers is likely to prove temporary and should reverse next week," RBS Economics Research said in a note to clients. "Since early October, the four-week average in initial claims has been trending firmly to the downside, and we see no reason to suspect that that trajectory has changed."

Still, while the U.S. labor market is gradually improving as the 18-month-old economic recovery gains momentum, it will take a long time to make up for all the jobs lost during the 2007-09 recession. 

"Despite some improvement, the labor markets remain relatively soft," Insight Economics analyst Steven Wood wrote in a research note.

Continuing claims for unemployment benefits, those drawn by Americans jobless for more than one week, rose 94,000 to 4 million for the week ending Jan. 15, according to the Labor Department.

The Commerce Department said orders for manufactured durable goods, which are designed to last at least three years, fell 2.5% last month from November to a seasonally adjusted $191 billion. The drop was driven by a sharp decline in aircraft orders, however. After stripping out transportation, new orders rose 0.5% last month. Some economists raised their estimates for fourth-quarter gross domestic product on the basis of the report.

The report suggested that business investment continued to improve last month as well. A closely followed proxy for capital spending—orders for capital goods, excluding aircraft and defense orders—rose 1.4% in December. That followed a 3.1% increase in November.

Shipments of manufactured goods, meanwhile, ticked up 1.4% to $200.4 billion. There were signs that business investment continued to improve last month as well. 

A measure of demand for capital goods that excludes aircraft and defense orders and gauges business spending rose 1.4% in December. That follows a 3.1% increase in November.

Demand for homes firmed in December, the National Association of Realtors said in a separate report Thursday, as its index of pending home sales increased for the fifth time in six months. The pending home sales index, which is based on signed housing contracts and is an indicator of future sales, rose 2% to 93.7 in December. 

 Write to  Jeff Bater at jeff.bater@dowjones.com and Sara Murray at sara.murray@wsj.com 