Fitch Ratings became the third major credit-ratings agency to cut Greece's ratings into junk territory, the latest sign the heavily indebted European nation continues to struggle from a severe recession.

Already, Moody's Investors Service and Standard & Poor's Ratings Service rate Greece in junk territory—with both last month warning further downgrades were possible. Fitch also warned of a downgrade last month, and became the first ratings agency to act on Greece's ratings this year.

The downgrade to BB+, the highest junk-level rating, acknowledges that while Greece's economic and fiscal performance under the European Union-International Monetary Fund program has in many respects exceeded expectations, its heavy public debt burden renders fiscal solvency "highly vulnerable to adverse shocks."

In May, the cash-strapped Mediterranean country agreed to impose tough austerity and restructuring measures in exchange for a €110 billion ($146.9 billion) bailout package with the IMF and others to rescue itself from the brink of bankruptcy.

On Friday, Fitch said despite the significant progress Greece made in reducing the budget deficit last year—by six percentage points of gross domestic product despite a severe recession—the fiscal consolidation effort will still have to be maintained over several years to firmly anchor confidence in Greek sovereign creditworthiness.

Revenue performance, weaker than originally budgeted, in part reflects the continuing weakness of tax administration and the prevalence of tax evasion.

Fitch did note that despite civil unrest in Greece, it judges the political commitment to the ambitious fiscal consolidation and structural reform program remains "very strong" and that the path to sustainable economic recovery and solvency is achievable. It added the IMF and EU remain fully committed to the success of the program agreed with the Greek authorities.

Still, the ratings outlook is negative, meaning future downgrades are possible, and reflecting that public debt sustainability is still very fragile and renewed access to market financing is uncertain, Fitch said. The economy is forecast to contract 3% this year, following an estimated contraction of 4% in 2010. Fitch said it is vital the economy begins to show some evidence of rebalancing and recovery by the second half of this year to stabilize public debt dynamics.

 Write to  John Kell at john.kell@dowjones.com 