Choose from the fabric's multiple personalities for spring. 

From virginal veils to "Like a Virgin" gloves, lace can play almost any part, be it innocent or ingénue. Labels such as Erdem and Balenciaga made lace a key element in their spring collections, presenting the delicate fabric in provocative new ways. 

Called "punto in aria" (or "stitch in the air") by the Italians, the intricate weave became popular in Europe in the 16th and 17th centuries. Charles V of Belgium, where arguably the finest lace was made, ordered the art of lace-making to be taught in every school and convent in the land. This season, adoration for the foundation-less woven is stronger than ever.

Between Valentino's lacquer-coated lace dresses and Christopher Kane's Queen Elizabeth II-inspired neon leather skirt suits, perforated to look like the fabric, it's clear the ancient weave has been reinvented. Nicolas Ghesquière laminated lace to denim pants and stitched shirts made from sequined, hand-painted panels of the fabric. And at Louis Vuitton, designer Marc Jacobs showed revealing sultan pants and long skirts in black guipure lace coyly woven with the house's initials.

Although laser-cutting and lamination may be far cries from traditional techniques—Grace Kelly's full needle-lace wedding dress for her marriage to Prince Rainier of Monaco was stitched by an army of MGM seamstresses in four complex parts—there are plenty of classic offerings this season, too. Like the wearer herself, lace can be wholesome, alluring or even avant-garde. The choice is yours. 

 Corrections and Amplifications 

Captions identifying spring-collections styles using lace were incorrect in the graphic accompanying this article in some editions. The caption on the upper-left side of the page under "Traditional" should have read: From top: Dolce & Gabbana, Ralph Lauren, Oscar de la Renta, L'Wren Scott. The caption on the lower-right side under "Subversive" should have read: From left: Balenciaga, Jean Paul Gaultier.