LONDON—Heavy snowfall and higher prices hit U.K. retail sales in December, with food stores recording the sharpest drop on record, the Office for National Statistics said Friday. 

Retail-sales volumes fell 0.8% on the month and were flat compared with December 2009—the weakest ever annual recording for the month since records began in 1998. 

Friday's figures were worse than expected, with economists surveyed by Dow Jones Newswires last week forecasting retail sales volume in December to fall 0.4% in monthly terms and rise 0.8% year-to-year. 

Food-store sales in December were 0.9% lower compared with November and dropped a record 3.4% in annual terms. 

"One factor to blame was that December 2010 was the coldest December in 100 years," said ONS statistician  Kate Davies. "Another factor was a 5% rise [year-to-year] in prices of goods sold at food stores." 

Inflation jumped to 3.7% in December, fueling fears that the Bank of England will raise interest rates earlier than expected. However, Friday's figures are likely to dampen those concerns.

Separate data Friday from the Council of Mortgage Lenders showed U.K. gross mortgage lending grew at a slower pace in December, and by the smallest amount for the final month of the year since 2000. 

The CML said gross mortgage lending grew by £11 billion ($17.49 billion) during December, having increased by £11.7 billion in November, a figure that was revised up from £11.1 billion. 

The December figure was down 18% from the £13.3 billion rise in mortgage lending during December 2009. 

With the annual rate of inflation set to rise even further above the Bank of England's 2% target in the early months of the year, investors and other participants in credit markets expect the central bank to raise its key interest rate earlier than was previously thought likely. 

In response, the interest rates at which banks and other lenders can borrow have also increased, and the CML said some of its members have recently raised the cost of mortgage lending to reflect that development. 

"Against this backdrop, consumer demand may be weaker than we would otherwise have expected," said  Peter Charles, the CML's chief economist. "Higher interest rates will also hit the budgets of existing borrowers, although the expected modest rises in the base rate will result in a relatively small proportionate rise in monthly payments for most mortgage holders." 

However, the CML said it doesn't expect the BOE to raise its key interest rate by more than half a percentage point this year, which would raise it to 1%. The group therefore isn't anticipating a sharp pickup in mortgage arrears. 

Meanwhile, figures from the Bank of England showed bank lending to U.K. businesses rose in November for the first time since February 2010, but may have fallen again in December. 

In its quarterly report on Trends In Lending, the BOE said bank loans to businesses increased by £1.3 billion in November, following declines of £2.8 billion in October and £3.8 billion in September. 

If sustained, the rise in bank lending during November could lead to an easing of tensions between the government and the banks. The current government and its predecessor have repeatedly urged the banks to increase their lending to businesses in order to support the economic recovery, while the banks have argued that demand for credit remains subdued. 

However, the BOE indicated that the pickup may not have carried into the final month of the year. "Data from major U.K. lenders indicated that net lending to businesses was weak in December," the central bank said. 

The BOE said that even in November, lending to small and medium-sized businesses fell. "The bank's network of agents reported that many small firms continued to be focused on repaying bank debt," the BOE said. 



 Corrections & Amplifications: Records of retail sales began in 1998. A previous version of this article misstated the date as 1988.









