An Egyptian cobra was still on the loose at the Bronx Zoo Sunday after slithering out of its enclosure Friday afternoon.

Zoo keepers shut down the Reptile House "until further notice" to look for the venomous 20-inch snake. Officials said the cobra's reclusive nature meant it posed little danger to the public.

"Snakes are incredible escape artists no matter what you do," said  Frank Indiviglio, who worked at the zoo for two decades and now writes a blog about reptiles at thatpetplace.com. Still, he said, the cobra would likely have a hard time getting out of the Reptile House. "It's not going to be the kind of thing where there's a snake out running down Southern Boulevard."

Egyptian cobras, like many ground-dwelling snakes, crave confined spaces, said  Susan Barnard, a longtime reptile curator at Atlanta's zoo and the author of the "Reptile Keeper's Handbook." 

Even if the snake wanted to venture outside, brisk early spring temperatures would likely stop the cold-blooded cobra in its tracks. 

It would be hard for a human to get bit by the snake without deliberately provoking it or trying to pick it up, experts said. But bites can be fatal. Egyptian cobras carry venom that attacks the nervous system.

"We are confident that the snake is secure within the Reptile House," said Bronx Zoo Director  Jim Breheny in a written statement. "To understand the situation, you have to understand snakes. Upon leaving its enclosure, the snake went to a place where it is hidden and feels safe. When the snake gets hungry or thirsty it will start to move around the building. Once that happens, it will be our best opportunity to recover it."

That didn't stop  Hayden Collins, an 8-year-old from Greenwich, Conn., and his two younger brothers from hunting for the missing serpent Sunday afternoon. The trio poked sticks into piles of dry leaves and looked hard at the base of trees. 

"I thought it would be great if we found it," Hayden said. 

Curators and young zoo visitors might be looking for a long time. Ms. Barnard recalled a cobra that got loose from its enclosure at the Atlanta zoo in the 1970s. It eluded searchers for about a month before someone found it curled up near other animals. 

"We looked in all the dark areas of the building. We looked high. We looked low. We looked everywhere," she said, "It's somewhere. They'll find it." 

—Eileen Markey contributed to this article.

 Write to  Andrew Grossman at andrew.grossman@wsj.com 