New York University has reached an agreement with Chinese officials to build a new liberal-arts and science college in Shanghai, school officials announced Sunday.

NYU's new Shanghai school will be the university's second major international campus. In 2010, it opened a school in Abu Dhabi.

Like its school in Abu Dhabi, the construction and educational costs of NYU Shanghai will be funded by the local government. It will also be the first American school in China to have legal independent status.

"We will be providing the same education here as in New York and Abu Dhabi," said  John Sexton, president of NYU. The school needs to branch out on other continents in order to attract talented students and faculty who have become increasingly globalized, Mr. Sexton said.

The new university's first undergraduate class will start school in the fall of 2013. NYU Shanghai will eventually have 3,000 undergraduate, graduate and professional students. Students in Shanghai will also have the option of studying at the university's New York and Abu Dhabi campus and other away-sites for up to three semesters.

Since 2006, NYU has had a study-away academic site in Shanghai at East China Normal University. The two school's will continue to work together as NYU expands its presence in Shanghai, according to school officials.

NYU has sought to bolster its presence both internationally and at home in recent years. In New York, the school wants to grow its campus by 6 million square feet over the next two decades. It also recently submitted two separate proposals with other universities and medical institution partners to build a new applied-science school in New York.

During the past decade, NYU has added several smaller academic outposts in different parts of the world in places like Accra, Ghana, Berlin, Buenos Aires and Prague. The school is also currently constructing two additional study-away sites in Sydney and Washington, D.C.

 Write to  Joseph De Avila at joseph.deavila@wsj.com 