BUDAPEST—The European Union is investigating the legality of special "crisis" taxes imposed by Hungary on a handful of industries amid an escalating feud between the country's new government and its increasingly outspoken critics elsewhere in Europe.

Tensions have mounted as Hungary takes over the rotating presidency of the EU and could complicate the regional bloc's efforts to make progress on a series of important measures aimed at bolstering the Continent's economic recovery.

The probe of the taxes, which have fallen most heavily on large, foreign companies, comes on top of criticism of a new Hungarian media law by officials of other EU states and members of the European Parliament, who say it goes against the EU's commitment to press freedom.

Hungary's government has dismissed the complaints, saying the new temporary taxes, which are to last through the end of 2012, and the media law are in line with the spirit and the letter of EU treaties and regulations.

"This is a politically motivated and coordinated attack" by companies unhappy about the taxes and their home-country governments, said Zoltan Kovacs, a state secretary in Hungary's Ministry of Public Administration and Justice. "It's payback, with interest."

Senior European officials, including the head of the EU's executive branch, José Manuel Barroso, and other members of the European Commission are to meet with Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orban this week in Budapest to mark the start of Hungary's six-month presidency.

The agenda for the talks hasn't been set, but "it is very likely that someone will raise these questions," Olivier Bailly, an EU spokesman, said Monday.

In some ways the dispute between Budapest and Brussels goes to the heart of a debate over the proper distribution of power between national governments and the central authorities of the European Union.

"The EU basically has no right to interfere" in these sorts of policy decisions, says Hungary's Mr. Kovacs. The media law, for example, he says, "is a domestic matter."

Friction between the EU and Budapest started last summer, when the EU and the International Monetary Fund, which rescued a heavily indebted Hungary from the brink of insolvency in 2008, criticized Hungary for relying on short-term fixes rather than long-term spending cuts to shrink its budget deficit.

Among those short-term measures was a levy on banks aimed at raising roughly $1 billion annually in revenue for three years. As Hungary's budget position deteriorated further, the government imposed similar temporary taxes on energy, retail and telecommunications companies.

Many companies hit by the levies have protested. Last month, 13 large companies from France, Germany, Austria, the Netherlands and the Czech Republic, sent a letter of complaint to the EU, saying Hungary is targeting "select sectors and foreign companies in particular, to balance the state budget."

Other policies have drawn fire from the European Central Bank, which says that Hungary's moves to cap the pay of its central bank governor as well as proposed legislation aimed at changing the selection process for the bank's rate-setting committee threaten the central bank's independence.

Then there is the media law, passed by parliament late last year, which allows regulators to impose fines for "unbalanced" or "offensive" reports and sets limits for the amount of time that can be devoted to certain types of news. The law also requires bloggers to register with the government.

"The dissatisfaction is not just with one piece of legislation, but against the whole attitude of the Hungarian government," said Tibor Szanyi, a member of the Hungarian parliament from the opposition Socialist party. "Europe means compromise. Europe means common values."

Eniko Gyori, minister of state for European affairs at Hungary's foreign ministry, said that after a range of austerity measures imposed under Hungary's previous government, the country couldn't put additional burdens on ordinary people, so it turned to the special taxes on large companies.

"I don't expect them to be happy about it. But it's reality," she said. Ms. Gyori said the Hungarian government's goal is to get the country's economy growing again. To that end, it has cut personal income taxes and lowered the taxes that must be paid by smaller companies.

"The question is: how much economic liberty you have in the EU?" said Ms. Gyori. "We think every state does have economic freedom—within a certain framework, we have different methods and models."

She also called on critics to read the media law, which doesn't yet have an official English translation, and wait to see how it functions in practice before condemning it. "We are ready to listen to everyone," she said. Still, opposition to the law has been growing, at home and abroad. 

"This new law is unacceptable. Hungary must explain and the Commission must act," said Guy Verhofstadt, president of the European Parliament's Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe. No EU state should be allowed to put "restrictions to freedoms that lie at the heart of our union of values," he said.

Hungary's left-leaning media have railed against the new law, which they say deals a serious blow to freedom of the press. 

"We have clearly stated our outrage," says Karoly T. Voros, editor in chief of the country's largest daily, Nepszabadsag, who says the legislation is "a violation of fundamental human liberties."

Media more friendly to the government and the ruling Fidesz party, however, have come out in favor of the law. 

In an editorial Monday, Magyar Nemzet, a national daily newspaper with headquarters in Budapest, said the law was required to end 20 years of "lies, misleading reporting, malevolence and one-sidedness" by left-leaning media outlets.

—Margit Feher and Veronika Gulyas contributed to this article.  

 Write to  Gordon Fairclough at gordon.fairclough@wsj.com 