SINGAPORE—Economic data from around Asia confirmed Monday that the region's breakneck growth is slowing, but analysts said there won't be a hard landing and that growth should pick up again in the second half of the year as Japan's post-quake reconstruction spending boosts the whole region. 

Purchasing managers' indexes from South Korea on Monday and China over the weekend showed growth slowing in April, while a similar gauge from Australia showed an outright contraction for a second-straight month. 

Meanwhile, price pressures continued to ease in South Korea and Indonesia, perhaps blunting the urgency to tighten monetary policy. 

"The consistent theme is that we're clearly seeing economic data weakening quite a bit, with the disruptions from Japan as well as the drag from higher oil prices making themselves felt, and globally we've seen a deceleration of industrial activity in part because inventories are high relative to final sales," said  Frederic Neumann, co-head of Asian economic research at HSBC Bank in Hong Kong. 

"All of that is setting us up for a slower second quarter," he said. "The good news is that this will help to tame price pressures that have been building in Asian economies." 

The data come amid two conflicting worries: One is that rapid growth in China and other parts of developing Asia is getting out of control and pushing those economies dangerously close to overheating; the second is that in their haste to tighten monetary policy, authorities will overreact and bring their economies thudding to a hard landing, with dire consequences for a developed world relying on Asia for much of its growth impetus. 

Neither worry is well-founded, Mr. Neumann said. 

"Asia was clearly overheating in the first quarter. By cooling down somewhat, that should help bring down global commodity prices, easing price pressures elsewhere," he said. "It's almost a Goldilocks scenario: Asia slowing down a bit will help stabilize the global economy." 

Two different indexes from China showed the slowing growth momentum. The official index, issued Sunday, fell to 52.9 from 53.4 in March, the China Federation of Logistics and Purchasing said. Any reading above 50 indicates growth, but it was the fourth month of five that growth slowed. 

A similar index from HSBC and Markit, issued Friday, was at 51.8, unchanged from March but below the long-run average of 52.3. 

In Korea, the HSBC PMI fell to a five-month low in April at 51.69, from 52.8 in March. In Australia, the manufacturing sector contracted in April for the second-straight month, weighed down by the surging local dollar and remaining below the boom/bust level at 48.4, from 47.9 in March. 

"The continued weakness of the Australian PMI reflects consumer caution and the substantial erosion in the competitiveness of the industry related to the volatile and rising dollar," said  Heather Ridout, chief executive of the Australian Industry Group, which releases the data with PricewaterhouseCoopers. "The uncertainty of how this will evolve is the essence of the pressures on the industry." 

Only India showed stronger manufacturing growth, buffered from global economic developments by its huge and vibrant domestic market. HSBC's PMI for India rose to 58.0 in April, its highest level in five months, from 57.9 the month before. 

Other data Monday also suggested that the intensity of Asia's growth was easing. 

Consumer inflation in South Korea decelerated for the first time in five months as fresh food prices stabilized and a stronger currency curbed imported inflation. The CPI rose 4.2% on-year in April, a sharp fall from March's 4.7% increase and below analyst expectations. Core inflation fell in both in on-year and on-month terms. 

Stable food prices also helped control inflation in Indonesia, where the CPI rose 6.2% on-year in April, smaller than March's 6.7% increase, and down 0.31% on month. 

Only Thailand bucked the price trend Monday, with data showing the CPI rose 4% on-year in April, up from a 3.1% rise in March. The core CPI, however, remained well within the central bank's target range, rising 2.1% on-year. 

HSBC's Mr. Neumann said the confluence of factors that has taken the edge off growth—soaring oil prices, overstocked inventories and the Japan quake—should abate by the end of the second quarter, setting the stage for a resurgence of growth by the second half of the year. 

"These are only temporary drags, but they'll mean that the data will be less stellar over the second quarter. Hopefully that will help to ease to inflation pressures that have been building," Mr. Neumann said. 

"Nothing in the data is saying we're looking at a hard landing in Asia, just that the pace of expansion has slowed down a little bit." 

 --Kanga Kong and  In-Soo Nam in Seoul, Aaron Back and  Eliot Gao in Beijing, Geoffrey Rogow in Sydney and Abhrajit Gangopadhyay in New Delhi contributed to this article. 