The salvo of cruise missiles unleashed Saturday was aimed at blinding Libya's substantial Soviet-era air defenses, according to a senior U.S. military official.

Vice Adm. William Gortney told reporters in a Pentagon briefing Saturday afternoon that the more than 110 Tomahawk cruise missiles launched from U.S. and British warships were supposed to take down the "critical nodes" of Libya's air-defense system, by targeting early warning radars, surface-to-air missile launchers and communications posts.

"Our mission right now is to shape the battle space in such a way that our partners may take the lead" in enforcing a U.N.-mandated no-fly zone, Adm. Gortney said.

The current operation over Libya stands in contrast to the U.S.-led campaigns in Iraq and Afghanistan, where coalition forces enjoy full control of the skies. That means it might take a while before U.S. forces can assess the impact of the strikes. Adm. Gortney said a surface-to-air missile threat would have to be eliminate before pilotless aircraft such as the Global Hawk drone could fly missions to see how successful the strikes have been.

"Bomb damage assessment is going to take a little bit," he said. "After being in combat in Iraq and Afghanistan -- where we have Predators, Reapers, you've got full-motion video -- we don't have that in the contested airspace, and that's why we had to drop the air defense system] in order to do that."

According to a U.S. Navy statement, the cruise missiles were fired by the guided-missile destroyers USS Stout and USS Barry. The submarines USS Providence, USS Scranton and USS Florida also took part in the strike. The U.K. defense ministry said in a statement that a Trafalgar-class submarine had also launched Tomahawk missiles.

By striking first with cruise missiles, the coalition took a first step toward gaining control of Libya's airspace. If successful, the strikes will allow U.S. and its allies to send military aircraft to enforce a broader no-fly zone over Libya's northern tier, although Adm. Gortney emphasized this was the "first phase of what will likely be a multi-phased military operation."

Adm. Gortney compared Libya's network of air defenses to those previously operated by the Iraqi military. The U.S. and its allies for years operated a no-fly zone over northern and southern Iraq. The "shock and awe" campaign that deposed the regime of Saddam Hussein in 2003 also included extensive air strikes.

"This is an integrated air and missile defense system, much like the one Iraq had that surrounded Baghdad -- built on older Soviet technology, but still good capability," Adm. Gortney said.

Most of those air-defense installations, Adm. Gortney said, were "on or near the coast, a fact which made their destruction vital to the enforcement of a no-fly zone, since so much of the air activity that we have seen and so much of the regime's military efforts have been in this part of the country."

Adm. Gortney said Saturday no U.S. aircraft were operating over Libya, but recent talk of a no-fly zone over Libya sparked speculation over whether high-end, radar-evading stealth aircraft like the Air Force F-22 Raptor might be employed.

In a Senate hearing Thursday, Gen. Norton Schwartz, Air Force chief of staff, said he had "no doubt" that the F-22 might potentially be useful in an aerial campaign against Libya. "I would have the expectation that at least in the early days it certainly would be used," he said.