BEIJING—Chinese authorities released lawyer and rights activist Teng Biao on Friday after more than two months in extrajudicial confinement, a day after a senior U.S. State Department official publicly lambasted China over its crackdown on dissent. 

Some analysts say that Beijing's decision to release Mr. Teng may be partly designed to ease tensions with the U.S. over human rights ahead of high-level meetings in Washington in May. U.S. officials raised Mr. Teng's case during a "human rights dialogue" in Beijing last week. 

Mr. Teng's wife, Wang Ling, told the Associated Press her husband returned home Friday afternoon but declined to provide further details. A spokesman for the U.S. embassy in Beijing also confirmed that Mr. Teng has been released but said the U.S. remains concerned over a deteriorating human-rights situation in China. 

"We continue to express deep concern over the use of extrajudicial detention against him and other activists," said the embassy spokesman, Richard Buangan. 

Human rights groups welcomed Mr. Teng's release, but described his confinement since mid-February as indicative of the erosion of rule of law in China. 

"Teng Biao's disappearance and his sudden, unexplained release is emblematic of the increasingly thuggish and unlawful conduct of Chinese security forces in stifling perceived dissent," said Phelim Kine, an Asia researcher with Human Rights Watch. 

U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Michael Posner, in Beijing last week for the two-day "human rights dialogue," said Thursday that he stressed Mr. Teng's case at the meeting. He rebuked China for "serious backsliding" on human rights, which he said was hurting relations with the U.S. 

Mr. Posner said the U.S. would continue to press human rights during this month's Strategic and Economic Dialogue, which brings together senior Chinese and U.S. officials for talks covering a broad range of economic and security issues. 

Lawyers such as Mr. Teng have been among those targeted during China's continuing crackdown on perceived political dissent. Dozens of writers, artists, lawyers, religious leaders and other rights activists have been arrested or confined to their homes in what experts describe as the most severe crackdown on dissent in more than a decade. 

"We're on new grounds here," Mr. Kine said. "We're seeing a degree of lawlessness and thuggishness on the part of the security forces that we previously didn't see." 

Mr. Kine said China's move made the U.S. susceptible to "hostage diplomacy," in which detained activists in China "are used by the Chinese government as a bargaining chip." 

Mr. Teng was an original signatory to the petition known as Charter 08, which, among other demands, called for rule of law and open elections in China. Liu Xiaobo, the Nobel Peace Prize recipient who helped draft the petition, is serving an 11-year prison sentence for sedition. 

In his news conference Thursday, Mr. Posner said the U.S. is particularly worried about the condition of Mr. Liu's wife, Liu Xia, who is believed to be confined to her home. 

Unrest across the Arab world since the start of the year precipitated a crackdown on political dissent in China amid online calls for a "Jasmine Revolution" that have spooked authorities. Many experts believe that crackdown is likely to continue as the country moves into a period of heightened political sensitivity in the lead-up to its leadership transition next year. 

 Write to  Brian Spegele at brian.spegele@wsj.com 