Two weeks ago, Arsenal was still in the running for a hypothetical Grand Slam of titles. It was in the final of the League Cup. It was one game removed from the quarterfinal of the FA Cup. It had beaten mighty Barcelona in the first leg of the Champions League Round of 16. And in the Premier League, it was in second place, four points behind Manchester United, with a head-to-head clash coming up at home on April Fools' Day. 

Over the past few years, despite playing some of the best European soccer this side of Barcelona, Arsenal has not won a trophy since capturing the FA Cup in 2005. The omens here were good.

But two weeks can be an eternity in soccer. Arsenal was upset by Birmingham City in the League Cup final. It then crashed out of the Champions League, falling 3-1 at Barcelona. And it was eliminated from the FA Cup on Saturday, following a 2-0 defeat at Manchester United. This setback was even more painful considering its opponent fielded a lopsided team, with just five regulars and three defenders playing out of position in the midfield. All that is left for the Gunners now is the Premier League.

If Arsenal doesn't win the English title, it will be six years without silverware, which is a serious drought for any top European side. To explain this period of underachievement, other clubs may point to financial difficulty, managerial instability or simply sub-standard players. None of this applies to Arsenal. 

The club has consistently turned a profit in recent years, and it's the fifth-highest-grossing club in soccer, according to Deloitte and Touche's "Football Money League" report. Arsene Wenger has been the manager since 1996, and he has near-total control over soccer operations. And during much of this drought, Arsenal had the third-highest wage bill, though it has now slipped to fourth. Most important, the club consistently played well: entertaining, attacking, creating and converting plenty of chances.

Of course, the notion of what constitutes good soccer is a source of eternal debate. But if you value a positive possession-oriented style, technically skillful players and teams that please the eye, then Arsenal have few peers. So why the lack of trophies?

The conventional narrative is that Wenger's teams are soft and that he is too stubborn to deviate from his utopian vision of the game—how it should be played and how teams should be assembled. There is little question that his early sides were physically more imposing. Over the past decade, most teams have gotten bigger, while the average Arsenal regular today is more than an inch smaller than in 1998, when Wenger won his first title. They were generally more aggressive, perhaps a function of the legendary back four he inherited from his predecessor, the no-frills  George Graham. His detractors say that Arsenal plays "pretty soccer," which means that sometimes, they lack the go-for-the-jugular Plan B. Rather than occasionally booting it long to see what happens, or peppering the net with shots, the Arsenal trademark is an obsession with passing to create the perfect goalscoring chance. From this Wenger will not deviate. 

Wenger hasn't splashed the cash like most of his competitors, either. Since the drought began, Arsenal has a positive net-transfer spend of around $25 million. According to the website TransferMarkt.de, its rivals are all squarely in the red: Manchester United (negative $80 million), Liverpool (negative $150 million),  Tottenham Hotspur (negative $275 million), Chelsea ( negative $332 million) and Manchester City (negative $582 million). By any measure, keeping a team competitive in those circumstances is a phenomenal achievement. 

Yet the curious thing is that Wenger has long insisted his lack of spending comes by choice, not by some kind of edict from above. His philosophy dictates investing in youngsters, mostly from abroad—often, he acquires teenagers before they are fully developed and adds the finishing touches himself. He also prizes value signings from mid-level clubs, like Bacary Sagna (picked up from Auxerre) or  Laurent Koscielny (who arrived from Lorient). He has never been shy about selling his star players for the right price. Indeed, Arsenal's positive transfer balance is as much a result of clever selling as it is shrewd buying.

The end result, critics say, is a team that plays well and represents a cash cow for its shareholders. It also ends up sacrificing results to its manager's obsessive dogma. 

But that's not entirely fair. The margin between success and failure, especially in a low-scoring sport like soccer, is tiny. During this so-called drought, Arsenal has reached three cup finals, including the 2006 Champions League final, while regularly finishing in the top four. And in this time period, Arsenal battled against rivals that were not just better-funded, but manned by some of the greatest managers in history:  Jose Mourinho, Carlo Ancelotti, Rafa Benitez and, of course,  Sir Alex Ferguson. All these managers have won multiple European trophies.

While turning the Gunners into one of the most distinctive and admired brands in the game, Wenger has won three league titles and four FA Cups at Arsenal. Hindsight is always 20-20, but sometimes droughts like this one are mere statistical quirks—and nothing more. 

On Monday, Bayern Munich announced that its manager,  Louis van Gaal, would be leaving at the end of the season. The decision came after three consecutive defeats that eliminated Bayern from the German Cup and effectively knocked the club out of the title race. (It's currently fourth, 16 points from the top of the table.) 

The club's decision to part ways with the Dutch manager is somewhat debatable. Van Gaal did come within 90 minutes of winning a historic Bundesliga-German Cup-Champions League Treble last season. On the other hand, Bayern's results this year have been poor, and the relationship between van Gaal and upper management reportedly was strained. 

The most-curious part of this announcement was the timing. By informing van Gaal that he won't be seeing out his contract, Bayern has made its manager a lame duck even though it still has plenty at stake this year. The club is still alive in the Champions League, and it needs to rise from fourth to third—or higher—if it wants to qualify for next year's lucrative competition, worth between $30 million and $60 million. This suggest thats while Bayern doesn't believe van Gaal is the right man to take the club forward, the board has enough faith in his professionalism to stick with him, rather than appoint an interim replacement.

Judging from Bayern's 6-0 drubbing of Hamburg on Saturday, the first game since the announcement, the club's board got this one right. At least for now.

— Gabriele Marcotti is the world soccer columnist for The Times of London and a regular broadcaster for the BBC. 

