STUTTGART, Germany—Chancellor Angela Merkel's conservatives are struggling to avoid a historic election defeat in the country's prosperous south, their own heartland, after a series of missteps that have fueled criticism of Ms. Merkel's leadership.

Opinion polls show the ruling center-right coalition trailing its left-leaning opponents only days before March 27 elections here in the state of Baden-Württemberg, where Ms. Merkel's Christian Democratic Union has held power for nearly 60 years.

The outcome remains open, but CDU officials fear Japan's nuclear crisis has tilted the race against them and in favor of their main rivals in the region, the antinuclear Greens. Ms. Merkel's sudden abandonment of her previous enthusiasm for nuclear power has harmed her credibility, polls suggest.

"This issue has certainly not helped us at this particular time," says Thomas Strobl, the CDU's secretary-general in Baden-Württemberg, his voice heavy with sarcasm.

If Sunday's result reflects the polls, it could plunge Ms. Merkel into her biggest political crisis since taking office five years ago. Though her government will continue, many in her party are increasingly worried about her leadership, which critics view as too risk-averse and pragmatic.

Besides the nuclear question,and the euro zone's debt crisis, Ms. Merkel has also taken flak across the political spectrum for her handling of the euro-zone debt crisis—in which her decisions to bail out near-bankrupt Greece and to pump rising amounts of taxpayer money into a safety net for other countries proved controversial—and on the Libyan conflict, where she is accused of failing to back Germany's Western allies.

A combination of federal fumbles and local grievances has given the Greens and their Social Democratic Party allies a shot at an unlikely victory in Sunday's state election.

Baden-Württemberg is a wealthy, culturally conservative region of 11 million people that stretches from the foothills of the Alps to the vineyards of the Rhine valley, and is home to luxury car makers  Daimler AG
DDAIY


-0.50
%




 and Porsche Automobil Holding SE. Conservative rule in the state capital, Stuttgart, has long been part of the landscape, but the CDU's perceived complacency after 57 years in power could be its undoing.

"They act like they can do whatever they want up there," says Gangolf Stocker, a retired painter turned political activist, pointing at the CDU mayor's office on an upper floor ofin Stuttgart's drab modern city hall.

Last year, Mr. Stocker helped to organize protests against the CDU's plan to demolish andredevelop Stuttgart's beloved 1920s train station. The demonstrations drew thousands of people—many of them longtime CDU voters who had never joined protests before—taking in an outpouring of fury that tookthe state government by surprise.

The CDU state premier, Stefan Mappus, was still struggling to recover from the train-station debacle when Japan's nuclear crisis rocked his campaign. The disaster has made Germans, both in Baden-Württemberg and nationally, more hostile toward nuclear power, catching the pro-nuclear Mr. Mappus flat-footed.

Only last fall, Ms. Merkel's national government controversially decided to extend the life of Germany's nuclear plants, which include two old reactors in Baden-Württemberg. The decision overturned a policy of phasing out nuclear power by 2021, pleasing German energy companies, and boosted support for the opposition Greens.

Amid the crisis in Japan, Ms. Merkel hurriedly announced a review of the extension and the temporary shutdown of seven older reactors, including those in the southwestern state.

Voters in Baden-Württemberg are unconvinced by the chancellor's change of heart, say pollsters. "People might give a party the benefit of the doubt when they gradually modify their position, but when they abruptly drop something like this it's seen as opportunistic," says Manfred Güllner, head of the Forsa opinion-polling institute.

"It's obvious that Ms. Merkel is trying above all to get through the elections," says Winfried Kretschmann, the Greens' lead candidate in Baden-Wurttembergin Sunday's vote.

The CDU and its junior Free Democrat allies are headed for about 43% of the vote, according to the latest opinion poll for state broadcaster ZDF. The poll puts the Green-SPD alliance several points ahead with 47.5%. If Sunday's result bears those numbers out, it could make Mr. Kretschmann the Greens' first-ever state premier.

Senior conservative officials in Berlin say they are braced for a backlash against Ms. Merkel within the CDU if it loses Baden-Württemberg. She is unlikely to fall: No German party has ousted its own chancellor in the postwar era, and Ms. Merkel has no obvious rival for the leadership.

But defeat Sunday could signal Ms. Merkel's star is beginning to fadeafter five years in power, while reviving confidence among Greens and Social Democrats that they can winGermany's next federal elections in 2013.

—Bernd Radowitz contributed to this article

 Write to  Patrick McGroarty at patrick.mcgroarty@dowjones.com and Marcus Walker at marcus.walker@wsj.com 