At about 1:30 a.m. Monday,  Alice Greenwald, the director of the Sept. 11 Memorial Museum at Ground Zero, wrote an email message to her staff. Then she carefully deleted one line.

"We really need to think about the end of the historical exhibition," Ms. Greenwald typed—and then erased. Instead, she sent out a note acknowledging "an incredible night."

She had second thoughts after deciding the evening was about "being part of this nation and part of this world community, witnessing something extraordinary," Ms. Greenwald said on Monday, about the death of Osama bin Laden.

But the morning was spent furiously planning how to incorporate the latest development in a story that continues to evolve, even as the days until the opening of the memorial in September and the museum a year later dwindle.

With most of the museum's exhibition design already completed, the timeline for incorporating this latest milestone is "pretty immediate," Ms. Greenwald said. Still, she vowed, "this will be in the museum." 

Ms. Greenwald cited two likely places: as a new component to a section that traces the events leading up to Sept. 11, 2001, and its aftermath, and provides historical context, and a digital display tracking media references since the attacks a decade ago.

"I think we will be referring to 9/11 for decades to come and this museum needs to be in a position where we need to be responsive to whatever the events are," she said. 

The $700 million memorial and museum will occupy eight of the site's 16 acres. About 80,000 square feet is devoted to exhibition space that will use artifacts —there are currently 17,842 in the collection—oral histories, and other media to tell the stories of lives lost on Sept. 11 and in the 1993 attack on the World Trade Center, which killed six people. 

"What happened today or yesterday with bin Laden's death is a huge chapter in the story," said  Joe Daniels, president and CEO of the National September 11 Memorial & Museum. "We have to be hypervigilant to see how what happens today, how that affects all the global implications that have come out of 9/11. There will be effects."

Foundation officials said that the national outpouring of emotion had not translated into a new stream of donations. The organization is about $40 million short of its goal for this year, said  Christy Ferer, the co-chair of the Development Committee, whose husband  Neil Levin was killed in the attacks.

"You always look for milestones to fund-raise around, and certainly the demise of bin Laden is cause for creating a milestone," Ms. Ferer said. But in terms of immediate impact, she said, "We don't see it yet."

Some board members said they were determined to use bin Laden's death to refocus attention on the memorial and museum as the 10th anniversary of the attacks approaches.

Board member Anthoula Katsimatides wept through the evening as a barrage of calls and emails plunged her back into the frantic hours surrounding her brother John's death nearly 10 years ago. 

When she woke up, her mind had cleared.

She was determined "to use this opportunity to really shine some light on our very important mission downtown because I don't want anybody to lose sight of that," she said. "The vindication is building the site and making it something absolutely magnificent."