The price of goods imported to the U.S. climbed 1.4% in February from a month earlier as costs increased for energy, industrial supplies and food.

Import prices increased 7% over the past five months, the Labor Department said Tuesday, with gains of more than 1% each month. Overall prices were up 8.5% since February 2010. While petroleum has been a major driver of import prices, other raw materials also are contributing to overall gains. Excluding petroleum, import prices increased 0.6% from January. Non-oil prices were 3.5% higher than in February 2010.

The latest figures suggest overall inflation should rise in coming months as products tied to global commodities, particularly energy and food, soar in price. But underlying inflation should remain relatively tame as other product prices face downward pressure due to relatively weak demand amid high unemployment.

Import prices for consumer goods excluding autos, for instance, rose 0.2% in February, after a 0.3% rise in January. But prices for imported foods and beverages increased 0.8% last month and have risen 15.8% over the 12-month period ending in February—the biggest year-on-year rise since the Labor Department's index was first published in September 1977.

Meanwhile, U.S. home builders' confidence inched up in March for the first time in four months, offering a glimmer of hope for the troubled industry. The National Association of Home Builders said Tuesdayits housing-market index climbed to 17, from a level of 16, where the gauge had remained since November. 

"Builders are cautiously looking forward to the spring home-buying season in hopes that improving economic conditions will help bring more buyers to the table," said  Bob Nielsen, a Nevada builder and the chairman of the NAHB.

A reading of 50 in the NAHB index means more builders view conditions as good than as poor. The last time the home builders' confidence gauge was in positive territory—that is, 50 or better—was April 2006.

 Write to  Jeff Bater at jeff.bater@dowjones.com 