The Weinstein brothers are making a renewed play for the small screen.

Harvey and  Bob Weinstein are among several Hollywood movie makers ramping up television production this year, with 15 shows in development and a commitment to spend more than $10 million per year on the initiative. 

The move signals a comeback of sorts for Weinstein Co., which underwent a major debt restructuring this past summer after producing a string of movies that flopped at the box office and depleted much of the $1.2 billion they raised to start the company in 2005. The restructuring, aimed at placing the studio on firmer financial footing, transferred partial control of its movie library to  Goldman Sachs Group.
GS


0.22
%




 

"We can't go back, but we can reboot, and that's what we're doing,"  Harvey Weinstein said in an interview Friday.

Weinstein Co., known for high-brow films like Academy-Award contender "The King's Speech," aims to have eight television shows on the air by the end of 2011. The slate includes a mix of reality and scripted fare, from "Mob Wives"—a series set to air on VH1 about four women who grew up in the mob or married into it—to "Marco Polo," a historical series that follows Marco Polo's time as a special envoy to Kublai Khan and has drawn offers from several cable networks.

"I think these shows can create some stability for the company and have the potential to be cash cows," said Mr. Weinstein, adding that the company is "cash flow positive," following its restructuring. "The movie business is up and down, but TV is more stable. With so many channels, the demand for original programming is so much greater." 

The Weinstein brothers' pivot into television comes at a crucial juncture for the entertainment industry. Hollywood is producing fewer movies since Wall Street financing dried up in the wake of the credit crunch and DVD sales have fallen. Feature film production in the U.S. fell to 677 movies in 2009, compared to 920 films in 2005, according to the Motion Picture Association of America. 

At the same time, television channels—which proliferated in the 1990s—have expanded into more households, creating a greater need for original programming. In 2008, the average U.S. household with a TV received about 130 channels, compared with roughly 96 in 2005 and 33 in 1990, according to Nielsen Co. 

As the entertainment landscape shifts, the Weinstein brothers aren't the only movie producers muscling their way into television. 

Several other film companies—including Summit Entertainment, the studio behind the "Twilight" franchise, and Legendary Pictures, which produced box-office hits "The Dark Knight" and "The Hangover"—are following suit, hiring new television executives, developing original programs and brokering deals with networks. Legendary Pictures is in the final negotiation over a deal with Warner Bros. Television and lured away a development executive from AMC to run its television business. 

To be sure, many movie companies have long produced TV shows as well. DreamWorks Studios, which launched "Spin City" more than a decade ago, has five shows in the works, including Fox's "Terra Nova." 

Lionsgate, which began as an independent film company in 1997, produces more than 15 prime-time shows, including AMC's "Mad Men." 

This isn't the first foray the Weinsteins have made into television. They first made a splash back in 2000 with "Project Greenlight," a reality series that gave first-time filmmakers a chance to direct a movie. In 2004, the brothers—while running Miramax at the  Walt Disney Co.
DIS


0.40
%




—launched the hit reality show "Project Runway," now on Lifetime.

As part of their television push, they plan to launch two spinoffs of "Runway" this year: one called "Project Runway: Masters," in which professional designers compete in fashion challenges to earn money for their favorite charities. Another is titled "Project Runway: Accessories," where designers create new clothing accessories each week. 

In scripted fare, the lineup includes two shows based on books: "The Nanny Diaries" and "The Mad Ones," based on a crime novel about the Gallo brothers and the New York mob in the 1950s and 1960s. 

Weinstein Co. has hired  Meryl Poster, former co-president of production at Miramax, to run its television business. 

Harvey Weinstein said the company would finance its $10 million annual commitment to the business by tapping into its cash flow, which has been bolstered by recent successes such as "The King's Speech," "Inglourious Basterds" and "Project Runway," which is estimated to generate $10 million to $15 million in profits per year for Weinstein Co.

The company also is partnering with television veterans including  Ben Silverman, former co-chairman of NBC Entertainment. Mr. Silverman is developing four shows with them, including "Marco Polo" and "Mob Wives." 

"Harvey and his company are willing to do the hard work to promote TV shows and really market them, to create a platform around them, all of which I found very attractive in this crowded marketplace," said Mr. Silverman.

Starz CEO  Chris Albrecht, who is considering several of the Weinstein Co.'s TV projects, says one of the draws is that as veteran movie producers, they have the ability to attract big-name talent. 

"They have a track record with extremely talented people who are very high up on the food chain not just in skill but also in notoriety—and that helps," he said. 

Harvey Weinstein says he's been talking to long-time collaborators such as  Quentin Tarantino and  Robert Rodriguez about doing television for some time. Laughing, he said: "Quentin and I actually discussed doing a cooking show together. It would be called 'Cooking with Quentin and Harvey.' But if you don't like our food, we will kill you." 