After the Jets punctuated their regular season with a 38-7 victory over the hapless Buffalo Bills on Sunday, Rex Ryan sidled up to his postgame dais and welcomed back a forgotten friend: his old persona. After a month-long hiatus, having been chastened by his team's sloppy play and cowed by uncomfortable questions about his personal life, "Brash Rex" made a triumphant return and pumped up his team's championship hopes.

"This football team is ready," Mr. Ryan said. "We want to win a Super Bowl and we want to do it right now."

As the AFC's sixth seed, the Jets (11-5) will visit the third-seeded Indianapolis Colts (10-6) on Saturday night in the first round of the NFL playoffs. For the Jets, who fell to the Colts in last season's AFC Championship Game, the rematch offers a shot at redemption.

But what to make of this team, which has somehow emerged from a tumultuous season with its title hopes intact? Good one week and horrendous the next, the Jets have been anything but boring. We never seem to know quite what to expect. A primer on their postseason prospects:

 1. Mark Sanchez is a better quarterback than he was last season: Mr. Sanchez has shown marked improvement in every facet of the game. Compared with the numbers he posted as a rookie, his passing yards are up (to 3,291 from 2,444), his touchdown passes are up (to 17 from 12), his interceptions are down (to 13 from 20) and his quarterback rating is up (to 75.3 from 63). The Jets have emphasized the passing game more this season, a product of Mr. Sanchez's growth and some new threats, including wide receiver Santonio Holmes.

 2. Indianapolis is a depleted opponent: The Colts got into the playoffs at 10-6, their worst regular-season record since 2002. They also have labored without two of Mr. Manning's favorite targets, slot receiver Austin Collie and tight end Dallas Clark, both of whom are out with season-ending injuries. Messrs. Collie and Clark had touchdown receptions against the Jets last season, and the Jets sought to address the soft spots in their secondary by acquiring cornerback Antonio Cromartie and safety Brodney Pool over the offseason.

 3. The Jets are road-tested: As the AFC's fifth seed last season, the Jets were on the road throughout the playoffs. And with a rookie quarterback and a rookie head coach, they knocked off the Cincinnati Bengals and the San Diego Chargers before falling at Indianapolis in the championship game. It was an unexpected run for the Jets, who extended the theme this season, going 6-2 on the road. A trip to Indianapolis doesn't make them nervous.

 1. Mark Sanchez is banged-up and inconsistent: Anyone hoping to get a read on Mr. Sanchez's sore throwing shoulder during Sunday's game got left in the cold. Mr. Sanchez handed the ball off eight times without throwing a pass, then took a seat. Mr. Ryan wanted to protect Mr. Sanchez, who sustained the injury during the first half of the Jets' victory over the Pittsburgh Steelers on Dec. 19. He hasn't been at full strength at practice, and he hasn't ruled out postseason surgery. Lest we forget, he also was capable of some less-than-thrilling performances even when he was healthy. In back-to-back losses to the New England Patriots and Miami Dolphins, he completed just 44% of his passes and was intercepted four times.

 2. Peyton Manning is still Peyton Manning: He has completed 66.3% of his passes this season, which is even more impressive when considering that he has never thrown the ball more—a career-high 679 pass attempts, thanks largely to the Colts' inept ground game, which ranks 29th in the NFL. He also ranks as Mr. Ryan's No. 1 nemesis. He eviscerated the Jets last season, throwing for 377 yards and three touchdowns. And while Mr. Manning will be without Messrs. Collie and Clark, he still should be able to lean on wide receivers Reggie Wayne and Pierre Garçon, who have combined for 2,139 receiving yards. The Jets' pass defense ranks sixth in the NFL, but the team suffered a huge loss when safety Jim Leonhard broke his right leg last month—and fellow safeties Eric Smith (concussion) and James Ihedigbo (high ankle sprain) have been dealing with their own issues.

 3. The road is hard: The Jets' 6-2 road record this season is misleading. Five of those six wins came against sub-.500 opponents. And as far as their playoff situation goes, the path to the Super Bowl figures to be infinitely more daunting than it was last season. If the Jets are fortunate enough to get past Indianapolis, a rematch with the New England Patriots—in Foxborough, no less—looms. Win that game, and a potential meeting with the Pittsburgh Steelers stands between them and a trip to Dallas. The odds are against them.

 Write to  Scott Cacciola at scott.cacciola@wsj.com 