BEIJING—The rate of increase in China's consumer prices eased slightly in April to 5.3%, though the government was widely expected to continue its campaign of raising interest rates and boosting bank reserve requirements to try to contain inflation.

Leaders of the world's second-largest economy have regularly said that taming inflation is their top priority, but they are wary of clamping down so hard that they sharply reduce China's rapid economic growth.

While the rise in the April consumer price index was slower than the 5.4% rise in March, it remains the second-sharpest increase in three years. It also slightly exceeded the 5.2% gain forecast in a Dow Jones Newswires survey of 14 economists. The CPI measures compare current prices with those of a year earlier.

Food prices jumped by 11.5% from a year earlier—again slightly lower than in March—but the sixth straight month in which food prices increased by double-digit numbers. Nonfood prices increased by 2.7% in April, the same as the month earlier. March's increase was greater than any monthly increase during the past five years. 

China has long seen high inflation as a harbinger of social unrest—the 1989 protests in Tiananmen Square came during a period of double-digit inflation—and authorities have used a variety of ways to tamp down price increases. But rapid economic growth also underpins the Communist Party's political legitimacy.

The result of the twin, and often conflicting, goals is a hodgepodge of policies that try to slow the economy to limit inflation, but not slow it very much. The global economy is ever more dependent on China getting the balance right so it can act as an engine of growth, given the tepid recoveries in the U.S. and Europe. 

Since October 2010, China's central bank has raised its one-year benchmark interest rate four times to 6.31%, and many analysts expect another one or two quarter-point rate increases before the end of the year. ANZ economist  Li-Gang Liu said the People's Bank of China may raise rates as soon as this weekend, while HSBC economist  Ma Xiaoping said the central bank could raise banks' required reserve ratio over the weekend. The reserves are funds that are placed with the central bank and aren't available for lending.

Even so, the current interest-rate level barely exceeds the expected rate of inflation. Chinese officials generally prefer to tinker with the economy by keeping tighter controls on banks and companies, rather than using measures like interest rates that could affect the economy more broadly.

China recently fined  Unilever PLC two million yuan, or about $308,000, for instance, for discussing future price increases in the health and beauty industry. The country's economic planning agency said the comments prompted people to rush to buy goods and "strengthened consumers' expectations of price hikes."

  Brian Jackson, an analyst for RBC Emerging Markets Research, said that the rate of inflation was bound to decrease by the end of the year because it would be compared with the end of 2010, when prices were rising more sharply than they were in the early part of last year. But that's unlikely to bring much relief to ordinary Chinese consumers. "If you're heading down to the market to buy food for the week, you'll still be facing high prices," he said. 

Mr. Jackson said he expected the effects of those rate increases also to help moderate inflation in the second half of the year, to increases of about 3%. But it remains to be seen how adept the Chinese government will be at moderating inflation without harming growth.

Other data released on Wednesday were ambiguous on that point. Value-added industrial output in April rose 13.4% from a year earlier, below the median forecast of a 14.5% rise by 14 economists polled earlier by Dow Jones Newswires. It was also lower than the 14.8% increase in March, suggesting a slight reduction in the pace of growth.



"The slowdown has begun, as reflected in the industrial production numbers. Still, the economy doesn't look like it's aggressively slowing," said Standard Chartered economist  Stephen Green. 

On the other hand, fixed-asset investment in nonrural areas, a closely watched indicator of construction activity, rose 25.4% in the January-April period from a year earlier, compared with a 25% rise in the January-March period. Real-estate development was a big driver of growth, said  Ruth Stroppiana, an analyst for Moody's Analytics, with residential investment rising 38.6% in the first four months of the year compared with the similar period in 2010. 

The expansion—and bursting—of a real-estate bubble is widely considered among the biggest potential threats to the Chinese economy, though many analysts expect the government's campaign to tighten interest rates and reserve requirements will ease the problem.

—Eliot Gao contributed to this article.

 Write to  Bob Davis at bob.davis@wsj.com and Aaron Back at aaron.back@dowjones.com 