INDIANAPOLIS—A few minutes after their loss on Tuesday night, the only noise in an otherwise silent Knick locker room was near Amar'e Stoudemire's locker, where Carmelo Anthony, knees wrapped with ice, walked over and started painfully discussing a few points from the game that had just slipped away from them. Stoudemire slid down in his chair and listened and a moment later Anthony walked to the other end of the room and began outlining the Knicks' problems:

Lapses on the defensive end. Loose balls that the Knicks couldn't capture. Rebounding issues. Not finishing possessions.

"I don't know, what is that. I don't know," Anthony said.

The Knicks lost to the Indiana Pacers on Tuesday night after Danny Granger's pull-up jumper with 0.3 seconds left. The shot, which capped off a back-and-forth fourth quarter, came over Knicks forward Shawne Williams, who was defending Granger one-on-one as soon as the ball was inbounded. The Knicks are now 6-6 since acquiring Anthony.

The Knicks had a chance to tie but couldn't get a shot off after Jared Jeffries's inbounds pass sailed over Landry Fields near the basket. Anthony looked frustrated after the play and Jeffries said he assumed Anthony couldn't get a shot off in time. Anthony had tied the game at 117 with 7.8 seconds left when he drove down the baseline

It was New York's second loss in three days to the Pacers. The Knicks recovered after trailing by as many as 15 in the third quarter. With five consecutive points by Toney Douglas, the Knicks closed the gap from 87-72 to 87-82 to end the quarter.

Anthony scored 29 points and added nine rebounds. Stoudemire had 21 with 10 rebounds and every Knicks starter was in double digits, including Fields, who had 17.

Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni said Granger's shot was guarded well. "I guess I'd like to see him miss," said D'Antoni when asked if he'd change anything. Echoing his and his players' comments during this three-week stretch since the trade, D'Antoni said the team needs to get better defensively—but that doesn't mean he'll be changing personnel.

"We're going to dance with certain guys and we have to figure out how to guard people," D'Antoni said.

The Knicks have fallen to 34-32, their grip on sixth place in the East, the spot they've held for most of the season, is just a half a game.