After dropping for more than a decade, the U.S. abortion rate has begun to rise slightly, according to an extensive new survey of providers by the nonprofit Guttmacher Institute.

The increase was just 1%, to 19.6 abortions per 1,000 women of child-bearing age in 2008, from 19.4 in 2005, the last year captured by the group's previous survey. 

The actual number of abortions performed also rose slightly in that period, to 1,212,350 from 1,206,200—the first increase since a steady march downward that began in 1990, the peak year for total abortions in the U.S. since the survey began tracking them in 1973.

Rachel Jones, senior research associate at Guttmacher, said the stalled decline may be tied to several factors, such as the fact that teenage-pregnancy rates appear to have stopped falling and the absence of any gains in contraceptive use in recent years. 

The recession may also have played a role, prompting people to think twice about the costs of raising a child, Dr. Jones said, though Guttmacher estimates that the abortion fall-off ended before the downturn started in 2007.

"We expect that the economy did impact unintended pregnancy and abortion, but other factors did as well," Dr. Jones said.

The number of abortion providers remained virtually identical, at 1,793 in 2008 compared with 1,787 in 2005—the first survey since 1982 that showed no decline. The flat result partly reflected a fuller count of certain facilities in California that weren't captured in the 2005 total. Without them, there would have been a 3% drop-off.

However, the accessibility of abortion services was unchanged, with 35% of reproductive-age women living in the 87% of counties that didn't have an abortion provider.

Tracy Weitz, an associate professor at the University of California, San Francisco, said the data showed the growing role of large abortion providers, with the number providing 5,000 or more procedures per year up by more than 50% since the last survey. This may be because they are better equipped to deal with laws seeking to restrict abortion and with anti-abortion activity such as protests, she suggested.

Dr. Weitz is on the board of a northern California ACLU affiliate that does some abortion-rights litigation.

The Guttmacher Institute is a research group that supports abortion rights, but its data are cited by groups on both sides of the abortion debate. The survey is seen by researchers as the most definitive source on U.S. abortion incidence and providers. 

The latest survey, carried out in 2009 and 2010, included responses from 1,525 abortion providers among the 2,344 surveyed, as well as data from state health departments and some estimates based on previous surveys or other sources.

In the Guttmacher survey, the relatively flat national abortion rate masked bigger shifts at the state level. Certain states saw sharp declines and others big increases in their abortion rates, including a 38% boost in Louisiana, to 16.1 per 1,000 reproductive-age women, and a drop of 13% in Wisconsin, to 7.4. The survey reflected abortions performed within a state, which could include those involving women coming from other states. Dr. Jones said the causes of state-level shifts were generally not clear. 

 Charmaine Yoest, chief executive of Americans United for Life, an anti-abortion group, said the state-level variations highlighted the importance of efforts by states to restrict abortion. 

Jim Sedlak, a vice president at the American Life League, another anti-abortion group, said the apparent end of the decline in abortions showed the need to stop federal funding that goes to organizations performing them, though such money is already blocked from paying for abortions. 

Planned Parenthood Federation of America, which supports abortion rights, said the 2008 numbers showed the need to improve education about, and access to, contraception. 

Last year saw an uptick in abortion-related laws passed at the state level, most including new restrictions or bolstering limits on the procedure already embedded in the federal health overhaul. With increased Republican dominance in statehouses and the U.S. House of Representatives, the issue is expected to get even more attention, partly because it could serve as part of a broader effort to take on the Democratic health law. 

For instance, Republican legislators in states including Indiana, Kentucky and Florida have recently introduced bills that would sharply limit or ban coverage of abortion by health plans offered in the new exchanges created by the federal law, according to Elizabeth Nash, a Guttmacher public-policy associate.

 Write to  Anna Wilde Mathews at anna.mathews@wsj.com 