Federal agents conducted their largest roundup ever of suspected mob members and associates, charging 127 people in the Northeast with crimes ranging from execution-style slayings to illegal card games. The sweep, of suspects with nicknames like Tony Bagels, Jimmy Gooch and Jack the Whack, comes years after the Mafia was all but declared dead. Jeffrey Lichtman, a well-known defense attorney, scorned the bust, saying, "When you peel back the first page of the indictment, you see lots of junk from the '80s and '90s." 

Rep. Gabrielle Giffords left the hospital less than two weeks after the Tucson rampage in which she was shot in the head at close range. The Arizona Democrat is showing encouraging progress but faces a long and arduous rehabilitation, with uncertain prospects.

The sole U.S. maker of a key drug used in capital punishment will permanently halt production of the drug.

A rare larynx transplant has restored the voice of a California woman unable to speak on her own for more than a decade.

Bedbugs are rapidly evolving to withstand the pesticides used to combat them, according to the first comprehensive genetic study of the awful critters. The findings come at a time of antibiotic-resistant infections and herbicide-resistant weeds. 

The Republican-led House voted to repeal Obama's signature health-care overhaul. The largely symbolic move could nonetheless kick-start substantive changes to the law's provisions, including taxes levied on insurers and penalties for uninsured Americans. House Republicans prepared for a vote next Tuesday—just ahead of the president's State of the Unionaddress—to cut spending to 2008 levels, though they are divided on the time frame. A drive to overhaul the tax code got off to a brisk start when the Business Roundtable threw its weight behind the effort. 

Obama ordered government agencies to review hundreds of federal regulations and make sure they aren't stopping businesses from growing and hiring, as he sought to build support among employers and pre-empt Republican attacks. Business leaders say an explosion in new rules for the president's health-care and financial regulatory overhauls has helped keep them from expanding. In another effort to mend fences with Main Street, Obama announced that GE chief Immelt would head a new White House board to create jobs.

Obama's approval rating climbed to 53%, up eight percentage points from December, as more Americans come to see the president as a political moderate, according to a new Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll. 

Chinese President Hu got a mixed reception on his Washington visit, as he and Obama played up the two nations' common interests and soft-pedaled the longstanding issues that divide them. That uneasy balance is emerging as the operating principle of the globe's most important bilateral relationship, though U.S. lawmakers pressed Hu on sensitive issues ranging from trade policies to human-rights abuses. The diverging paths of the two giants were clear as Beijing reported unexpected economic growth of 9.8% in the fourth quarter of 2010, making it all but certain that China passed Japan to become the world's second-largest economy. 

Newly elected Afghan lawmakers said they planned to convene the country's parliament on Sunday, defying President Karzai's order and throwing the country into a constitutional crisis. They said a special court Karzai created to probe electoral fraud allegations is illegitimate, a view shared by Western diplomats and Afghan election authorities. 

Spain plans to pour billions more euros into its troubled savings banks and force them to be more open about their lending practices as it strives to ward off an international bailout. The banks' fate is inextricably tied to that of Spain and, potentially, to the euro itself. 

Duvalier's surprise return threatened to further destabilize Haiti's already chaotic politics and complicate its efforts to recover from a devastating earthquake, a cholera epidemic and violently contested elections. 

A Tunisian prosecutor opened an investigation into the overseas assets of ousted President Ben Ali and his family, as the caretaker government granted recognition to all banned political groups and adopted an amnesty for all political prisoners. 

Italian Prime Minister Berlusconi denied prosecutors' claims that he abused his powers to cover up alleged sexual relations with an underage woman. Parliament now must decide whether to authorize prosecutors to search the premier's Milan offices. 

It was a week of tectonic shifts in Silicon Valley. Google named co-founder Page to succeed longtime CEO Schmidt, and Apple disclosed that CEO Jobs had gone on medical leave for unspecified health reasons, raising doubts about Jobs and the company's future. Google's was the biggest management shake-up since the Internet search giant was an obscure start-up. Schmidt, who has shared power with Page and co-founder Brin, takes up the new post of executive chairman in April. The move changes the face of one of the world's largest tech companies and comes as a new generation of founder-CEOs has risen in the Valley, including Facebook's Zuckerberg. Apple posted a 78% surge in profit and record sales of its gadgets for the holiday quarter.

Words in JFK's inaugural address (ask not). That makes the 14-minute speech, 50 years old this Thursday, the fourth-shortest of the inaugurals. 

Ounces in Starbucks' new Trenta. It'll cost about half a buck more than the 20-ounce Venti.

U.S. manufacturing jobs as a share of all nonfarm jobs, at their peak in November 1943. The war was then in full swing, but even in 1939 and 1940, manufacturing jobs accounted for 31% of jobs, on average. Last year, government data show, they enjoyed their first increase since 1997—but made up just 8.9% of nonfarm jobs.

Cows found dead in a Wisconsin field, now believed victims of a virus. This after thousands of blackbirds fell from the sky in Arkansas on New Year's Eve.

Average gain in the S&P 500 in the three months following a 30-day run above its 10-day moving average. In other words, stocks tend to keep climbing for a while even after big run-ups like the one in recent weeks. The index closed just below the average on Thursday. Start the clock. 

Net withdrawal U.S. consumers made from savings and investment accounts over the two years that ended in September.

In the recession and recovery, Americans have reached deeper into their savings than at any point in the past six decades. In fact, the 57 years before the two that ended in September saw nary a single net quarterly withdrawal. To some extent, people are acting exactly as policy makers want them to. By holding interest rates near zero, the Federal Reserve is creating an incentive to spend rather than save—or to "save" in a different way, by paying down expensive debt. In the longer term, though, Americans will need to do more old-fashioned saving as well. The less money they have for a rainy day, the more vulnerable they will be to job losses and other income shocks.

—Mark Whitehouse

 Sources: Peacock Data (JFK); Starbucks (Trenta); Labor Department, seasonally adjusted data (jobs); Associated Press (dead cows); Princeton Investment Research (stocks). 

Hewlett-Packard is overhauling its board, with four directors closely involved in the decision to oust former chief executive Hurd departing as five new directors, including former eBay CEO Whitman, take their places. 

General Electric said its outlook continued to improve as the company beat expectations with a 51% increase in fourth-quarter profit and secured its highest level of orders since 2007, after restructuring its sprawling industrial and financial portfolio. GE signaled a possible return to revenue growth of up to 5% in 2011, after a 3% decline last year. 

A Paris court found former Vivendi top executives Messier and Bronfman guilty of criminal charges related to the French media conglomerate's near-bankruptcy in 2002. The verdict ends an eight-year investigation and trial involving one of the most sensational corporate downfalls in recent European history. 

Warner Music Group enlisted Goldman Sachs to seek buyers for part or all of its business, a process that could lead to the sale or breakup of the world's third-largest music company, even as it pursues an acquisition of competitor EMI Group.

Two men were arrested for allegedly hacking into AT&T's website to gather the email addresses of about 120,000 users of Apple's iPad, including corporate chiefs, U.S. government officials and prominent media figures. Federal prosecutors alleged that they sought to promote themselves and Goatse Security, a loosely affiliated group of hackers.

Agribusiness giant Cargill plans to give up its majority stake in fertilizer company Mosaic in a transaction valued at about $24.3 billion. The move could make Mosaic, a leading seller of potash and phosphate, a more attractive takeover target, while helping to finance a major new charity.

Federal regulators signed off on Comcast's bid to control NBC Universal, imposing an array of conditions aimed at preventing the cable giant from hindering competitors. 

Danielle Chiesi, a key figure in the Galleon case, pleaded guilty to securities-fraud charges. The government said Chiesi was a key conduit for market-moving, inside information that helped make Galleon Group founder Raj Rajaratnam a hedge-fund star. The plea adds to pressure on Rajaratnam in what has become the largest insider-trading case in a generation.

Blue-chip stocks rose for an eighth week in a row amid largely encouraging early earnings reports. The Dow Jones Industrial Average gained 84.46 points, or 0.7%, for the week to 11871.84. The 10-year Treasury fell, raising its yield to 3.413% from 3.334% a week earlier. The euro rose to a two-month high against the dollar on Friday, briefly surpassing $1.36, after German business sentiment hit a record.

Goldman Sachs slammed the door on U.S. clients hoping to invest in a private offering of shares in Facebook. It said the media spotlight put the deal in danger of violating U.S. securities laws. The change-up could damage Goldman's ties to some of its most lucrative clients.

Want to buy a piece of a bailout insurer? The Treasury Department and American International Group picked the four Wall Street banks to jointly lead their first large offering of AIG shares in the coming months for a cut-rate fee. The winners: J.P. Morgan Chase, Goldman Sachs, Bank of America and Deutsche Bank. 

It's easy to take gold for granted. Its price has risen in each of the past 10 years, including a 30% gain last year, and hit an all-time high of $1,422.60 on Jan. 3. Yet gold has fallen 5.7% since that record, amid worries China will act to cool its red-hot economy by raising interest rates. That would further drain liquidity from the market and hurt zero-yield investments such as the yellow metal. Combine that with positive economic indicators for the U.S. and Europe, lessening gold's safe-haven appeal, and "the smoke signals are pretty ominous," one analyst said. 