Putting the Torah into app form and translating Jewish liturgy into slang are just two of the projects being funded by the Jewish New Media Innovation Fund. 

The fund is a joint collaboration of the  Jim Joseph, Righteous Persons and Charles and  Lynn Schusterman Family foundations. Over $500,000 was recently awarded to nine projects, including funding of roughly $170,000 to four projects based in the New York area. This is the first year for the fund and its purpose is to support projects that use digital media to reach the under-40 audience and connect them to Jewish traditions. 

"We believe it will help create new, innovative ways for young Jewish adults to explore their identities, connect with their peers and build strong communities," says Lynn Schusterman, chair of the Charles and Lynn Schusterman Family Foundation, one of the funders. "We also hope this initiative will result in the greater utilization and increased funding of new media tools and technologies by a wide range of Jewish organizations and individuals seeking to enhance, enrich and strengthen Jewish life."

The grants to New York-based organizations include the Idelsohn Society for Musical Preservation for a digital "box set" that explores Jewish history through music, and MyJewishLearning Inc. for its Jewish parenting website, kveller.com.

  Morgan Friedman is the creator of UrbanSefer which aims to take traditional Jewish texts and translate them in to the "fun, risqué style that you actually think and you actually talk, but with the most amazing, powerful and even holy ideas behind it," says Mr. Friedman.

The funding covers a website and online books. The first phase of UrbanSefer is to modernize the Haggadah, the text used during the Passover meal that recounts the Jewish exodus from Egypt. "The traditional Haggadah everyone goes around and recites these very ritualized specific parts to it. It's a group activity," says Mr. Friedman. "There are multiple times during the Passover Seder where everyone drinks their cup of wine. What is that if not a drinking game." 

The Torah app, called PocketTorah, allows users to learn the weekly Torah and Haftarah. "It's the ability to learn one of the most complex rituals within Judaisim in an easy way, on demand, when anyone ever wants to have the opportunity," says  Russel Neiss, co-creator of the app, which will be free because of the grant.

  Rachel Levin, Associate Director of the Righteous Persons Foundation, says that funding digital projects is a way to help "people connect to their tradition, and history and community....Clearly to do that in today's world, digital media has to play a part."

 Write to  Melanie Grayce West at melanie.west@wsj.com 