WASHINGTON—A key Republican lawmaker said she doesn't support rolling back the Securities and Exchange Commission's funding to fiscal 2008 levels, a move that has been broached by House Republicans for all federal government agencies. 

"My recommendation would be to probably not take them back to 2008 levels," Rep. Jo Ann Emerson (R., Mo.) told reporters after a hearing Tuesday. "They've got a big mission and they need the tools to do their job." 

Ms. Emerson heads the House Appropriations Subcommittee that decides how much money to spread among the SEC and a few other federal agencies overseen by her panel once broader budget priorities have been set by the Republican leadership. 

Her remarks Tuesday followed an appearance by SEC Chairman Mary Schapiro before the panel, in which Ms. Schapiro pleaded her case for boosting the SEC's funding to nearly $1.4 billion in fiscal 2012, a roughly $264 million jump over 2011 spending levels. 

Ms. Schapiro said the agency needed the money to hire 780 employees to bolster the agency's core enforcement efforts and to carry out new mandates from the Dodd-Frank financial law. 

Ms. Emerson declined to say what level of funding she would support for the SEC, only that she opposes paring it back to its 2008 budget, which was around $906 million. She also said her remarks were her "personal opinion," indicating that her view could be trumped by other Republicans seeking to slash budgets across the federal government. 

"Let's just say I think [Ms. Schapiro] makes a good case and I hope my colleagues can make a good case that at least 2008 levels is too drastic for the SEC," Ms. Emerson said. 

Ms. Schapiro has been locked in a battle with Republicans in Congress over the agency's funding. They have cited the SEC's failure to spot  Bernard Madoff's Ponzi scheme and other missteps in the run-up to the 2008 financial crisis to argue the regulator needs an overhaul before Congress gives increases its budget. More recently, Republicans have seized on Ms. Schapiro's supervision of the SEC's former top lawyer,  David Becker, who was allowed to work on matters dealing with the compensation of Madoff victims even though he inherited a Madoff account from his late mother. 

Ms. Schapiro said Tuesday that cutting the SEC's budget to 2008's funding would seriously harm the regulator's ability to enforce securities laws and carry out new duties it was assigned by the Dodd-Frank law, to police derivatives dealers, hedge fund advisers and credit raters. 

Such a cut would force the agency to either fire 1,000 of its roughly 4,800 employees or undertake "significant furloughs." The staff reductions would hurt the SEC's ability to crack down on securities fraud and market manipulation, she said. "It would have serious consequences for our core programs." 

At the hearing, Ms. Emerson noted lapses and evidence of waste at the agency, including a decision in July to lease nearly one million square feet of office space without first receiving funding from Congress. She said the SEC would need to improve its internal financial management, leasing practices and enforcement efforts "before we decide to provide the SEC with even more resources." She also noted the agency's budget has grown by around 160% since the collapse of the energy giant Enron Corp. in 2001. 

Ms. Emerson questioned Ms. Schapiro on whether she could be more efficient if she decreased the number of people reporting directly to her. Ms, Schapiro has 19 offices reporting to her and the Dodd-Frank law mandates the creation of five more offices that will also report to the chairman. "Perhaps it might be worth at least having a deputy or two to help run all those people," Ms. Emerson said. 

Ms. Schapiro said it would be helpful to have some flexibility from Congress to not have the new offices report to her. "All those functions that are contained in those offices are already being done elsewhere in the agency and reporting to different people and this would just bring them under me." 

At the hearing, Ms. Schapiro said she intended to ask Congress to boost the SEC's authority over issuers in the $3 trillion municipal-bond market. 

The SEC currently doesn't have the authority to supervise the disclosures of municipal issuers, as it does for other securities issuers. The regulator instead tries to influence the quality of such disclosures by imposing requirements on brokers that sell municipal bonds. 

"We'd like to come back to Congress and talk about whether there should be some more direct authority for the SEC with respect to content of disclosure by municipal issuers," Ms. Schapiro said. 

She also said she expected the regulator to act soon on a proposal to create a large stock-data repository to help diagnose market meltdowns more quickly. Proposed last May, the so-called consolidated audit trail became one of Ms. Schapiro's top priorities after the May 6 market crash. She said she hoped it would be finalized within a couple of months. 