Latvia is aiming to return to international capital markets as early as May as the Baltic state continues to rebuild its economy after the worst downturn of any country during the financial crisis, the country's finance minister said. 

"It is very important to turn back to the capital markets," Finance Minister  Andris Vilks told Dow Jones Newswires. "We are committed to doing that and I think timing is quite favorable for us—let's say from May." 

An upgrade from Fitch Ratings March 15 took Latvia back into investment-grade territory as its sovereign rating was hiked to BBB- from BB+. Analysts see this as paving the way for Riga to issue its first bond since its economy contracted a cumulative 25% in 2008 and 2009, according to figures from the International Monetary Fund. 

"The Fitch upgrade and other probable upgrades are important for the bond issue," Mr. Vilks said, adding a government review to be completed by Easter was also vital to the preparations for a return to international capital markets. 

Mr. Vilks said Latvia would look to raise 500 million euros or dollars, "as the benchmark liquidity criteria at this moment" from an initial bond offer "depending on the investor response and market conditions." Should the country's economic prospects brighten between now and May the country "could come out with a twice or three times larger sum than that," Mr. Vilks said. 

Latvia's gross domestic product grew 3.6% in annual terms in the three months to Dec. 31, expanding for the second quarter in a row and cementing hopes that the country's economy has turned a corner after its credit-fueled growth was brought to a halt in 2008. 

"We reached an economic turning point last year but at this moment it is even more visible because all major figures are improving," the finance minister said. 

It is difficult to assess how much interest Latvia would have to pay to borrow on international markets,  Annika Lindblad, an economist at Nordea bank, said. "They haven't been out on the market for a very long time so we don't really have a benchmark," Ms. Lindblad said. This also explains why Latvia might want to start with something like 500 million euros or dollars, rather than a larger amount, she added. 

Mr. Vilks said Latvia isn't in a rush to issue a bond. The country still has funds left from the $10.1 billion it borrowed from a group led by the European Union and the IMF in November 2008, according to Ms. Lindblad. 

Latvia is keen to get its relations with international investors back on a normal footing as it pursues euro-zone entry in 2014. A key part of these efforts will also be keeping inflation at the low levels demanded under the Maastricht criteria for adopting the single currency, Mr. Vilks said. 

Rising inflation is an "important obstacle for us" so we are going to "take already now some steps to involve society, not to provoke [society]," Mr. Vilks said. "We are hiking different taxes and fees [now] so as not to do that in coming years and we are going to make some kind of agreement with society to freeze the wage fund for the public sector for two years at least." 

Mr. Vilks would like private businesses to consider at least postponing wage rises as well, he said. 

Latvia's consumer price index rose 0.3% on the month and 4.0% on the year in February, data from Statistics Latvia showed March 8. 

"The main way for the government to keep domestic price pressure in check is through wages and not letting them rise too fast," Ms. Lindblad at Nordea said. "However, at the moment it is mainly food and energy prices, outside global factors, which are pushing up prices." 

The government must also cut its budget deficit to 3% of GDP by 2012 to meet IMF and EU targets from an underlying deficit of 6.1% in 2010, according to estimates from Fitch. This means it has little money available for wage increases anyway, Ms. Lindblad said. 

