BUDAPEST—Hungary's prime minister and the head of the European Commission tried to smooth over differences in a joint appearance Friday as Hungary takes up the rotating presidency of the European Union, but tensions between Budapest and Brussels could hinder progress on measures aimed at strengthening the bloc's economic recovery. 

José Manuel Barroso, president of the European Commission, said he welcomed a promise from Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orban that the country's new media law would be amended if it is found to violate EU guarantees of press freedom.

Mr. Orban, whose policies on issues from taxation to central-bank governance have strained relations with the EU since he took office last year, said he was confident that the media law, which allows regulators to impose fines for "unbalanced" news coverage, meets EU requirements.

But he said: "If we see that some kind of political concerns seem justified during the application of the law," his government would be ready "to remedy those."

The European Commission, the EU's executive arm, has been eager to contain the feud between Hungary and its critics elsewhere in Europe. The leaders' hope is to keep the differences from interfering with EU initiatives aimed at strengthening the 27-nation bloc's economy—such as adopting tougher penalties for states that don't stick to budget-deficit rules.

Mr. Orban said he expected a "stormy meeting" in the European Parliament later this month when Hungary presents the program for its six-month stint as president of the EU.

Hungary's "Strong Europe" program—which aims to build strong European institutions, improve economic coordination and encourage fiscal responsibility—isn't considered controversial.

But members of the European Parliament and governments of other EU member states have criticized Hungary's media law, enacted at the end of last year, as a threat to free expression, prompting a review of the legislation by the European Commission.

The commission is also investigating whether Hungary violated EU regulations with its series of so-called crisis taxes imposed temporarily on a handful of industries. The levies, which have primarily hit large, foreign companies, have generated complaints from businessmen and government officials.

Hungary is seeking to raise nearly $900 million annually for three years with a special tax on banks. Some economists, and Hungary's own central bank governor, say the tax could make it harder for Hungarian businesses and households to borrow money, holding back economic growth.

Other crisis taxes have been imposed on retail, energy and telecoms companies. All are supposed to last through 2012.

On Friday, Mr. Barroso said the EU favors "a common approach to a bank levy" so that taxes on financial institutions won't hinder competition. French President Nicholas Sarkozy and German Chancellor Angela Merkel have pressed for a global bank levy. 

"This is very much a work in progress," Mr. Barroso said.

He also said EU countries should be aware of the impacts that national economic policies have on the region as a whole, adding that governments should coordinate their budgets at the EU level before approving spending plans.

The EU last summer criticized Hungary for relying too much on temporary measures such as the bank tax to keep its budget deficit from widening. The EU said Hungary should instead look for longer-term ways to cut state spending. Mr. Orban, however, has said he opposes further austerity measures.

 Write to  Gordon Fairclough at gordon.fairclough@wsj.com and Margit Feher at margit.feher@dowjones.com 