 European finance ministers debated how to beef up their giant rescue fund for troubled euro-zone countries but on the first day of a two-day meeting here appeared to have reached no firm resolution on how to do it, amid German reluctance to open the doors to more and bigger bailouts. 

The European Central Bank said it settled €2.313 billion ($3.1 billion) in purchases of euro-zone government bonds.

 Latest economic indicators point to a slowing in Germany's economic recovery this year but strong manufacturing orders have raised the prospects for German industry, the Bundesbank said.  

Separately, the German central bank said the extraordinary rally in German government bonds last year saved the country around €3 billion in interest costs. 

 A former Swiss banker handed over documents to WikiLeaks that he alleges detail attempts by wealthy business leaders and lawmakers to evade tax payments. Rudolf Elmer, a former employee of Swiss-based Bank Julius Baer, said there were 2,000 account holders named in the documents, but refused to give details of the companies or individuals involved.  

 Italian prosecutors requested authorization from Parliament to search the Milan offices of Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi as part of prostitution case involving an under-age Moroccan woman. 

 Makeshift beds and all-night refreshments were being set up in the U.K.'s House of Lords, as peers in the upper chamber continue a marathon session scrutinizing the coalition government's bill to hold a referendum on voting reform. Peers from the opposition Labour Party are trying to hold the bill up because it also involves the redrawing of parliamentary boundaries, which the party says will favor the ruling Conservative Party. 

 Poland's government is preparing its own report on the plane crash in western Russia that killed Poland's president and 95 others that is expected to dispute central findings of a probe into the accident by authorities in Moscow.  



 The U.S. is pressing China to buy tens of billions of dollars in U.S. aircraft, auto parts, agricultural goods and beef to build goodwill when the two countries' leaders meet Wednesday. In the run-up to the closely watched event between Chinese President Hu Jintao and U.S. President Barack Obama, the two countries are jockeying to set the agenda for the visit, as they haggle over deals.  

 The U.S. and Russia will oppose destroying the last known stocks of the smallpox virus until they complete research to combat bio-terrorism in a debate that begins Wednesday among members of the World Health Organization.  

A spokeswoman for a medical center confirmed that former Peace Corps director and vice-presidential nominee R. Sargent Shriver has been hospitalized outside Washington. She said she could not comment on the 95-year-old Shriver's condition or say when he was admitted.

In Arizona, the husband of U.S. Representative Gabrielle Giffords says his wife's condition has improved so much that she has been able to smile and give him a neck rub as he has kept a near-constant vigil at her hospital bedside. Giffords, who was shot in the head on Jan. 8, still cannot speak, because of a tube in her throat that is helping her breathe.

 In Haiti, the return of deposed dictator Jean-Claude "Baby Doc" Duvalier after a nearly 25-year absence threatens to further destabilize the country's already chaotic politics and complicate efforts to recover from a devastating earthquake, a cholera epidemic and violently contested elections. Duvalier's intentions remained unknown Monday, a day after his return to the Caribbean nation from a long exile in France. 

 Chinese President Hu Jintao, who arrives in the U.S. on Tuesday, heads one of the world's most powerful countries, but is arguably among the least powerful of the world's major leaders—and almost certainly the least understood.  

China should take advantage of its positive economic environment to make reforms, Swiss bank UBS chief executive Oswald Grübel said. He highlighted areas where UBS thought reform was necessary such as liberalization of interest rates, adjustment of resource pricing, adoption of binding state-owned enterprise dividend policies, improvement of the social safety net, and moves to a market-oriented exchange rate setting.

 Singapore's non-oil export growth slowed to a 13-month low in December as shipments of key electronics products and pharmaceuticals declined, signaling more moderate growth in 2011.  

 Moody's Investors Service raised Indonesia's local- and foreign-currency debt ratings one notch to Ba1, one notch below investment grade, with a stable outlook, citing the country's resilient economy, improving debt and foreign reserve levels, and favorable economic policy.  

India is facing a surge in inflation, Reserve Bank of India Governor Duvvuri Subbarao said, a comment that will ratchet up expectations of higher-than-expected monetary tightening at the central bank's rate-setting meeting later in January. 

 A bomb ripped apart a minibus in a militant-infested area of northwestern Pakistan, killing all 17 people on board and two others in a nearby vehicle, police said. The bus was traveling between the cities of Hangu and Kohat close to Pakistan's lawless tribal region.  

 Israel's Defense Minister Ehud Barak abruptly announced he was leaving the Labor Party, dividing the movement that dominated Israeli politics for decades and setting off a chain reaction that cast new doubts over already troubled peace efforts with the Palestinians.  

 In Lebanon, a United Nations-backed prosecutor investigating the death of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri issued a sealed indictment, according to a statement released by the court. The pre-trial judge will decide whether the case presented by the prosecutor is strong enough to go to trial and will then issue any formal and final indictments and make the findings public. 

 In Tunisia, politicians and opposition figured forged a caretaker government just days after the popular overthrow of the country's longtime president, as a clearer picture emerged of the Tunisian army's role in the largely peaceful handover of power. The caretaker government will run affairs until new elections, which the constitution mandates be held within 60 days.  

Security officials say a man set himself on fire in an apparent protest outside the Egyptian parliament building in central Cairo. They say policemen guarding the parliament building used fire extinguishers to put out the fire engulfing the man, who was later taken to hospital.

Fitch Ratings raised South Africa's outlook to stable from negative, saying the country was emerging from the global recession more smoothly than anticipated, with credit fundamentals either in line with or better than its similarly rated peers. 

 China's growing military influence across the Asia-Pacific region will top the agenda when British Foreign Secretary William Hague and Defense Secretary Liam Fox arrive in Australia this week for bilateral talks.  

 Australian government officials have begun tapping bankers for advice on how to meet flood costs that could total 15 billion Australian dollars (US$14.8 billion) in Queensland, a region that accounts for a fifth of the nation's economy.  