Portugal successfully sold €500 million ($664.9 million) of six-month treasury bills Wednesday, but at sharply higher yields than in its September tender, as the week's most anticipated debt sale signaled that investors remain worried the country may yet need a bailout. 

Meanwhile, the European Union sold €5 billion of five-year bonds Wednesday, drawing strong demand for a deal that was a key test of investor support for the EU's sovereign bailout strategy and kicks off billions of euros of bond issuance scheduled for the next two years. 

The Portuguese treasury paid an average yield of 3.686% on the six-month Treasury bills, compared with 2.045% at the previous tender on Sept. 1, for the same maturity. Such an increase "is an unsustainable dynamic," said  Lena Komileva, head of G-7 market economics at Tullett Prebon in London. But she added, "This auction proved that there is no panic and expectations that Portugal's access to funding might dry up to such an extent that it will be forced to go to the European Financial Stability Facility are overdone."

The more crucial test of investor demand comes Jan. 12 if Portugal decides to sell government bonds. Investors are worried about Portugal's feeble growth prospects and heavy reliance on external debt, which may make it hard for the government to rein its budget deficit.

 The EU said its €5 billion bond issue attracted more than €20 billion of orders. The bonds yield 2.59%, or 0.712 percentage point more than German bunds.

Proceeds from the EU offering have been earmarked for the European Financial Stabilization Mechanism, an emergency funding program that, like the EFSF, is aimed at preserving financial stability in the bloc and supporting the monetary union. Ireland is getting €22.5 billion from the €60 billion program. 

"It is generally positive that they were able to put the order book together very quickly," said a banker not involved in the transaction. 

Separately, the Swiss National Bank confirmed a report that it has excluded Irish government bonds from being used as collateral for its repo operations.

A spokesman for the SNB said that only "securities that fulfil stringent requirements with regard to credit rating and liquidity are accepted as collateral by the National Bank." He referred to the central bank's daily updated "List of collateral eligible for SNB repos (SNB GC Basket)," according to which a number of bonds issued by Ireland have been excluded since Dec. 21. 

Besides Irish government bonds with a maturity over one year, securities issued by Anglo-Irish Bank Corp. and GE Capital UK Funding, which are both domiciled in Ireland, were also excluded. BNP Paribas said, "Obviously, the SNB regards the haircut risk as too high." 

—Mark Brown and Goran Mijuk contributed to this article.

 Write to  Emese Bartha at emese.bartha@dowjones.com 