As the portfolios of ordinary shareholders imploded in the second stock-market crash of the 21st century, CEOs looked up from the smoke and ashes and breathed a collective sigh of, "Hey, you know what? It's a buying opportunity."

Only CEOs don't have to buy. They get their crony boards to award them stock options.

More than 90% of the CEOs of companies in the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index loaded up with stocks or options in the grim, uncertain months between October 2008 and September 2009. And the value of this largely free equity has since grown by more than $3 billion, according to an analysis of S&P data published by The Wall Street Journal last week.

The crash allowed our fearless corporate leaders to bet on a scary market at an extremely low price with no risk to themselves. And since the market had crashed so hard, and stock was so cheap, they were able to bag larger numbers of options and shares as well.

Spin the wheel and wherever it lands, the boss is a winner again.

That's because when stocks crash, CEOs get new stocks.

This time, Washington put up taxpayer stimulus money. The Federal Reserve flooded the banking system with trillions of dollars. And interest rates went to zero. Bailing out the economy killed returns on savings accounts, but it pushed the Dow Jones Industrial Average from the 6500s to the 12500s. And the rising tide sure floated CEOs' boats.

How is it that the cost of everything in a corporation has to be constantly justified, except for the cost of the CEO? The market was in the tank. Millions of jobs would be annihilated. Why did CEOs deserve more equity? Retention pay? As if the crash had proved that they were worth retaining?

Stock options are supposed to align CEO pay with shareholder value. But here, CEOs essentially got paid for a market crash and a government-led recovery.

Many S&P 500 CEOs were handsomely rewarded simply because their share prices recovered to 2006 levels. Or not. Take  Capital One Financial.
COF


1.00
%




 Its stock traded in the $80s in 2006, fell to the $8s in 2009, and now trades in the $50s.

CEO  Richard D. Fairbank's gain for this performance was $34.5 million. Next time a Capital One commercial asks, "What's in your wallet?" say, "Not that much."

While none of this smacks of illegal activity, it's reminiscent of the stock-option backdating scandal that followed the Internet bust. There's nothing CEOs hate more than underwater stock options. They want no risk (unless it's with other people's money) and extravagant rewards.

To be fair, several executives did more than just ride on the economic bailout wagon. Ford Motor CEO  Alan Mulally, for example, has been credited with an impressive turnaround that did not require a federal bailout. His equity gain: $186.8 million. Not bad for a couple years of work, but no doubt supercharged by the crash.

The lesson here is that CEOs get paid for stocks to go up, but often, for stocks to go up, they have to go down. And this perverse economic incentive for a crash only ensures more crashes.