ISLAMABAD—Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, Pakistan's military chief, was in his study in his official residence at Pakistani military headquarters in Rawalpindi in the wee hours of Monday, May 2, when he received a call from a senior officer to say a helicopter had crashed in Abbottabad.



Gen. Kayani, according to a person familiar with his thinking, reached two quick conclusions: The chopper wasn't Pakistani because Pakistani helicopters rarely fly at night; therefore, it must be a foreign incursion that breached the country's air defenses.

His major immediate concern, this person said, was for the safety of Pakistan's nuclear missile installations. One is located a few dozen miles from Abbottabad, a garrison town north of Islamabad that is home to Pakistan's elite military academy.

It would take about four more hours for Gen. Kayani to receive a call on a secure line from his U.S. counterpart, Adm.  Mike Mullen, chairman of the U.S. joint chiefs, with the news that a team of Navy SEALs had flown deep into Pakistan, killed Osama bin Laden and returned to Afghanistan without alerting Pakistani authorities and unbothered by any Pakistani military response.

The killing of bin Laden marked an epic victory for U.S. forces. But for Pakistan's military and intelligence network, it has meant national humiliation.

The military, which has ruled Pakistan off and on for decades, is perhaps the nation's most respected institution. Yet its failure to find bin Laden in a town full of military retirees has exposed the limits of its intelligence capabilities. Its inability to detect the presence of foreign forces during the course of the raid has uncovered a singular lack of preparedness. And its response in the past week suggests it is struggling to come to grips with being in the unflattering spotlight put on it by its ally and biggest donor. U.S. officials have said they didn't think Pakistan could be trusted with advanced word of the raid.

"Terrorists strike across the country with impunity; now it seems that external forces can also enter undetected," said a scathing editorial in Sunday's edition of Dawn, a respected newspaper. "Are Pakistanis getting what they're paying for?"

While President Obama has decided not to release photographs of Osama bin Laden taken after the al Qaeda leader was shot to death Sunday by U.S. forces, other photos taken at the compound have been released by Reuters. 



On the ground

Diagram from the U.S. government

Photos inside and out

A military spokesman declined to take questions Sunday. Senior military officials have acknowledged an intelligence failure and Gen. Kayani has promised to call to account those responsible. Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani will address Parliament Monday and is expected to face calls from across the political spectrum for change at the top of the services.

The raid came to the notice of residents near bin Laden's compound at around midnight Sunday, May 1, witnesses said. "I looked outside my house, and saw some figures moving in the dark, but they warned me to stay away, speaking in Urdu," said Mohammed Ali, 33 years old, who works with a local charity. "I went back inside and heard the sound of gunfire, and then a loud explosion."

The explosion was most likely the demolition of one of the helicopters. U.S. officials say the helicopter was forced by a mechanical failure to make a hard landing that put it out of action and it was then destroyed.

Local police heard the explosion, too, and were fielding calls from residents, some of whom reported that a helicopter had crashed, according to  Mohammed Karim Khan, the senior superintendent of police in Abbottabad.

"We assumed it was one of ours and sent teams from several police stations in the area to investigate," he said. By the time police showed up, military security forces already were at the scene, Mr. Khan said. But they, too, had missed the Americans, reaching the compound about an hour after the strike began, according to residents. The SEAL team was on the ground for about 40 minutes.

Pakistani security officials shouted to residents to stay in their homes, and cautiously entered the walled compound, according to several witnesses. Inside, they found the helicopter wreckage and a house filled with three male corpses, one female corpses, and 17 frightened women and children, many of them hysterical and speaking in Arabic. They got their first inkling of what had happened when one of the surviving women, who had been shot in the leg, identified herself as  Amal Ahmed Abdulfattah, a 29-year-old Yemeni and bin Laden's youngest wife.

Maj. Gen. Ishfaq Nadeem, director general of military operations, made the call about the helicopter crash to Gen. Kayani about 1 a.m. Gen. Kayani called Air Chief Marshal  Rao Qamar Suleman, the head of the air force. He scrambled two American-made F-16 fighter jets from a nearby air base. But the U.S. helicopters already were out of Pakistani airspace, Pakistani officials say.

Around 2 a.m. local time, President Barack Obama telephoned his Pakistani counterpart,  Asif Ali Zardari, in Islamabad. President Obama told him U.S. forces had killed bin Laden in a raid into Pakistan. Mr. Zardari was stunned and silent for a moment, say people familiar with the conversation. Then he replied: "Congratulations, Mr. President."

Shortly after, Gen.  Shuja Ahmad Pasha, chief of Inter-Services Intelligence, Pakistan's main spy agency, received a similar call from  Leon Panetta, chief of the Central Intelligence Agency. Gen. Pasha immediately relayed the news to Gen. Kayani. By the time Adm. Mullen called Gen. Kayani, the mood was tense. After Gen. Kayani congratulated Adm. Mullen on "the good news," he told him "such actions were not acceptable," said a senior Pakistani defense official.

A U.S. military official denied that the call between Adm. Mullen and Gen. Kayani was tense.

The official said that Gen. Kayani didn't tell Adm. Mullen the operation was "unacceptable." 

Adm. Mullen, the official said, told Gen. Kayani that Mr. Obama wanted to handle the issue of the raid in an appropriately measured way. 

As word of the significance of the attack spread Monday morning local time, Pakistani officials sought to portray it as a joint operation, going as far as to claim the downed helicopter was one of theirs. Also that morning, Gen. Kayani and Gen. Pasha met with President Zardari and Prime Minister Gilani. In the meeting, there was a split between the generals, who wanted to protest against the unilateral U.S. operation, and the civilians, who felt the most important thing was to welcome bin Laden's death, according to officials.

The statement released later in the day by the Foreign Ministry said bin Laden's killing was in line with "declared U.S. policy" and made no mention of the military's anger. Pakistani officials also acknowledged the operation was entirely American. They say the helicopters weren't detected by radar because they were flying low through hills. There also has been speculation that the helicopters used "stealth" technology to avoid detection.

By Thursday, Pakistan's response had changed to reflect the military's outrage. Foreign Secretary  Salman Bashir in a news conference warned of "disastrous consequences" should the U.S. or any other country—such as archrival India—attempt a similar raid.

—Julian E. Barnes contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Matthew Rosenberg at matthew.rosenberg@wsj.com and Jeremy Page at jeremy.page@wsj.com 