If you've already ditched your New Year's resolution, you are not alone: These days, self-control isn't exactly America's strong suit. Our economy is hobbled because too many of us bought homes we couldn't afford. Obesity is rampant—fueling demand for devices like the "Liftseat 600," a motorized toilet that will raise a 600-pound person to a standing position. Even when failure carries a hefty price, self-restraint is hard: Had Brett Favre only counted to 10 before hitting "send," he might have avoided a $50,000 fine from the NFL—and kept some last shred of dignity. 

In "We Have Met the Enemy," Daniel Akst argues that the aggregate of such individual failings is a troubled society, one that has lost all sense of self- restraint. Why has our willpower so spectacularly abandoned us? In Mr. Akst's view, new technologies have removed the built-in delays that gave reason time to tame our baser instincts. Meanwhile, the erosion of community and hierarchy, of church and family, has robbed us of the external supports we relied on to keep ourselves in check. And while democracy and capitalism both demand and nurture self-mastery, they can also corrode it. 

To grasp the ordeal of self-control Mr. Akst begins by asking what the "self" really is. He draws from a capacious reservoir of source material, ranging from the scientific (it's all about the prefrontal cortex) to the literary and philosophical. Descartes posited that we are dual creatures, Walt Whitman that we contain multitudes.

Any inquiry into self-control also needs a standard, some ideal balance between severe self-denial and wretched excess. For his model, Mr. Akst chooses Odysseus from Greek mythology. Though Odysseus does occasionally yield to temptation—his interlude with Circe is one example—he mastered enough self-command to return to Ithaca. "When it counts," Mr. Akst notes, "he can resist." Readers may be less able to resist thinking of Odysseus' faithful wife, Penelope, as an even better exemplar of self-command.

Mr. Akst has spent time with the social-science literature and presents evidence, in an accessible way, that our lapses are not foreordained. True, serotonin levels and dopamine receptors are beyond our control, but we are not just hapless "addicts" of pornography or Wii. There are tried and true ways of keeping our desires at bay.

 By Daniel Akst  Penguin Press, 303 pages, $26.95

The most effective of these, Mr. Akst argues, is "pre-commitment"—taking measures to ward off a temptation that you know you probably won't resist, as Odysseus did when he ordered his men to bind him to the ship's mast to avoid succumbing to the sirens. At the national level, such a strategy might mean re-adopting the gold standard, to protect against the temptation to inflate away debt. At the personal level, it might mean pouring salt over half your dessert, to avoid eating more than you should.

Obviously the self's schemes for imposing control—no matter how ingeniously devised—are often doomed to failure. So what is to be done? For a self-described libertarian, Mr. Akst is surprisingly eager to hand the paddle over to government, endorsing paternalistic policies from stricter gun- control laws to bans on trans fats. He maintains that most people want government to save us from ourselves, citing, for example, "widespread support for the Social Security system from an electorate that suspects it won't save for its own retirement." The problem, in this case, is that government hasn't saved for their retirement either. In any case, the more we abdicate control to the state, the less we learn it for ourselves. As Mr. Akst notes elsewhere, willpower is like a muscle that must be exercised and trained.

The overwhelming conclusion of "We Have Met the Enemy" is that self-control means valuing the future more than the present. And the sorry state of our public finances shows that our public policy overwhelmingly favors today over tomorrow. This shouldn't be a surprise: Politicians do what they need to get elected now; 2025 is someone else's problem.

Sadly, the most powerful and time-tested solutions to the self-control dilemma get short shrift in Mr. Akst's account. A self-labeled "infidel," he generally sidesteps religion, at most granting that, "despite all its failings, it can be a useful inhibiting force." Traditional values and mores, too, are discounted; at one point he dismisses conservatives as people who think they "know what is best for everybody." 

Perhaps they know what is worst in everybody, having a keen sense of man's susceptibility to error. Hence the conservative impulse to trust tradition—a set of self-regulations developed by many people over time—as the best guide for how we ought to live. This is surely the kind of long-term view that Mr. Akst otherwise encourages. And religion offers the longest view of all—urging the believer to reject immediate comforts with an eye toward eternity and supplying a supportive community to help in the struggle.

If America is now self-indulgent, the cure isn't likely to be new legislation or software designed to keep us from browsing the Web at work, or even self-help strategies. Far more effective will be a strong moral framework, one flexible enough to help us through our current temptations, from McDonald's to iPads, and to help later generations withstand lures that we can't now imagine.

It is possible that Mr. Akst plays down such themes to avoid coming across as a scold—a smart move for anyone writing about self-discipline. And he does show himself to be a companionable cultural critic, adopting a breezy, conversational style that moves easily from Max Weber, Aristotle and "Anna Karenina" to B.F. Skinner, Warren Buffett and Donald Duck. Given how reluctant we are to ask tough questions about our behavior, Mr. Akst's approach is a helpful one, inviting a wide audience to think hard about a difficult problem and offering some ideas for solving it. Now we just need to muster the self-control to turn off the television, put away the snacks, and sit down and read a book. 

 Ms. Clyne is the managing editor of National Affairs. 