There was thick frost on the windows and 20 inches of snow outside as the 500 prisoners of war took their seats behind the German camp guards. With the crush of bodies, the temperature inside Barrack 27 rose to just above freezing, a small victory over the pitiless Silesian winter. Stretchers had been laid on the floor bearing patients from the hospital block; prisoners from the quarantined section, too, had been allowed to attend the concert on Jan. 15, 1941.

Only their instruments distinguished the men on stage. Dressed in Czechoslovakian army jackets covered in pockets and wearing oversize wooden clogs, the four French POWs took their seats: Etienne Pasquier on cello, Jean le Boulaire on violin, Algerian Jewish clarinetist Henri Akoka and, at an upright piano with keys that had a habit of getting stuck, the composer Olivier Messiaen. Concerts were not unusual in Stalag VIII-A, near Görlitz, Germany, but this was the first performance of a work written inside the camp. For months, Messiaen had been composing, under armed guard and on paper supplied by a senior German officer, a "Quartet for the End of Time."

What he offered his fellow prisoners that night was a work of transcending beauty with moments of archangel-like severity. An act of faith and a compositional tour-de-force that encompasses medieval modes and Indian rhythmic cycles, birdsong transcriptions and bold orchestrations, the "Quartet for the End of Time" is a masterwork of 20th-century chamber music.

Its roots stretch back to Verdun, France, where Messiaen, Pasquier and Akoka had met in the spring of 1940. Always a passionate ornithologist, Messiaen would ask Pasquier, his commanding officer, to assign him the early watch so that he could observe the awakening of the birds. It was there that he wrote "The Abyss of the Birds," an unaccompanied movement for solo clarinet that would become the third movement of his quartet—and one of the hardest works in the clarinet repertoire. But before Akoka could play it, the three musicians were taken prisoner.

The rest of the work took shape in Stalag VIII-A after violinist Jean le Boulure joined the trio and word of Messiaen's fame as a composer moved the camp authorities—equally keen fans, one suspects, of music and propaganda—to offer him special protection. Here, too, he would seek out the hours before dawn to listen to birdsong. On one occasion, he witnessed the hypnotic spectacle of the Aurora borealis. In his dreams, he had recurring visions of the angel from the book of Revelation who announces the end of time, "his face like the sun, his feet like pillars of fire."

The eight-movement quartet is the musical expression of this vision. It begins at dawn, with a movement titled "Liturgy of Crystal" in which the violin and clarinet imitate the songs of the thrush and the nightingale. Two movements are dedicated to the angel, and two to the immortality and eternity of Jesus. The other movements, in addition to the haunting "Abyss," are an interlude and a "Dance of fury, for the seven trumpets." 

Messiaen sheds the conventions of regular meter, creating rhythms based on Indian patterns of repeating cycles. In the durations and the pitch values of his note sequences he favors palindromes, musical utterances that, if reversed, would sound the same. He thus creates music in which there is no difference between forward and backward motion—to dizzying, sometimes disconcerting, effect. His "Dance of Fury," which leads all four instruments in a series of disorienting loops, is far from danceable. "I don't like being binary," Messiaen told his violinist during rehearsals. "I don't like walking on two feet, in step, in rhythm."

The unusual orchestration in this movement, with all four voices in unison, creates a strange brotherhood between these instruments. Though there is lots of movement up and down scales, it never leads anywhere.

The two movements of praise, including the final "Praise to the Immortality of Jesus," create a much more restful, meditative sense of timelessness. Here, the cello and violin are given tender lines that unfold slowly over halting piano chords. In the last movement, the violin soars high above, quietly, its notes so drawn out that the bow barely seems to move. Its melodic trajectory follows an arc unrelated to that of the piano, and yet the two instruments seem to be orbiting around the same focal point.

"Never before have I been listened to with such attention and understanding," Messiaen later said, recalling the reverential reaction of the mixed audience of farmers and intellectuals, factory workers and priests. "Even if these people knew nothing about music, they readily understood that this was something special." 

Over the decades, the details of the quartet's creation began to take on elements of myth, many supplied by the composer, who claimed to remember an audience of thousands, a cello with only three strings and a clarinet with side keys warped by heat from a paraffin stove. His widow told a researcher that he had composed it locked up in the camp's latrines. Rebecca Rischin separates these fictions from fact in her 2003 book "For the End of Time: The Story of the Messiaen Quartet."

"Quartet for the End of Time" is a seminal work of 20th-century music, no matter the circumstances of its creation. Not only was its composer liberated within months of its first performance, but he would return to the conservatory in Paris and live a long, fruitful life dominated by his love of birdsong, his interest in Indian spirituality, and his Catholic faith. In its suspension of rhythmic constraints and melodic teleology, the quartet points the way to a number of postwar developments in classical music. 

It may seem ironic that a work that sets out to herald the end of time does so in such modern language. Richard Strauss, mourning the Nazi's destruction of European culture from amid the ruins of Munich in 1945, wrote a "Metamorphosen" heavy with melancholy and references to Beethoven—a work marking the end of an era. The end of time, in Mr. Messiaen's hands, becomes the dawn of something else altogether: as awe-inspiring as the Northern Lights but also as sweet and hopeful as a songbird's first, questioning, call. 

—Ms. da Fonseca-Wollheim writes about classical music for the Journal.