BEIJING—After the unexpected resignation of its chairman, Gome Electrical Appliances Holding Ltd. likely will enjoy more stability but ambitious expansion plans could undercut its profitability.

The departure of the chairman,  Chen Xiao, announced Wednesday, ends a long battle between him and the company's jailed founder.

Some analysts say Gome is entering an era of stability with its newly appointed chairman,  Zhang Dazhong, the 62-year-old founder of Beijing Dazhong Electric Appliances Co., a onetime rival retailer Gome acquired in 2007. Analysts say Gome founder  Huang Guangyu—now serving a 14-year sentence in a Chinese prison for bribery and other illegal business practices—has a secure relationship with Mr. Zhang that is unlikely to spark a rivalry.

Still, there are major uncertainties. The reasons for the resignation of Mr. Chen, who took over for Mr. Huang in 2008 amid a criminal investigation, remain a mystery, and some suspect there could be more senior-level management changes ahead.

With Mr. Chen out of the picture, Gome, China's second-largest retailer by stores, is expected to expand rapidly over the next year, according to  Forrest Chan, analyst at CCB International Securities Ltd.

Mr. Huang in September said the company should aim to operate 2,200 stores by 2015. The listed company currently runs nearly 800 stores.

Profit will likely fall, said Mr. Chan. When Mr. Huang steered the company in 2007 and for the majority of 2008, he prioritized expansion over profitability. When trying to unseat Mr. Chen, who cut stores by 15% to 726 outlets in 2009 and saw its profit rise 34% to 1.41 billion Chinese yuan, or about $215 million, Mr. Huang criticized him for impeding the company's growth.

Gome's goal is to overtake competitor Suning, which aggressively expanded over the past year, becoming China's largest retailer, with about 1,300 stores.

Mr. Chen's departure is seen as a potential blow to U.S. private-equity firm Bain Capital, which had a strong alliance with Mr. Chen. Bain is Gome's second-largest shareholder, with a nearly 10% stake, after Mr. Huang, who owns about 32%. 

"We…look forward to working with them to grow Gome and create value for shareholders," Bain Managing Director  Jonathan Zhu said in a written statement Thursday.

From prison, Mr. Huang has sought to increase his family's control of the company. In late September, Mr. Huang attempted to have his younger sister unseat Mr. Chen, but shareholders narrowly rejected the resolution. 

Mr. Huang's wife,  Du Juan, who was released from prison last year after serving time for insider trading, attended a recent board meeting.

On Wednesday the company said Mr. Chen resigned to spend more time with his family, declining to comment further. 

The Hong Kong-listed company's shares rose 0.7% to 2.79 Hong Kong dollars (36 U.S. cents) Thursday, following the disclosure Wednesday of Mr. Chen's resignation. 