SEOUL—North Korea's authoritarian regime, in its annual New Year's message, on Saturday underlined its desire to take over South Korea and warned the South's government to stop what it called "north-targeted war moves" and a "smear campaign" against it.

Much of the nearly 6,000-word message repeated statements it made last year and in previous years. Most of it focused on a long-promoted drive by the North's government to build a "prosperous nation" by 2012, the 100-year anniversary of the birth of Kim Il Sung, who founded North Korea and was its absolute ruler from 1948 until his death in 1994.

Mr. Kim's son, Kim Jong Il, has led North Korea since then and, in late September 2010, tapped his youngest son Kim Jong Eun as his heir apparent, in a sign the family will attempt a third generation of control over the nation of 24 million.

As in the 2010 statement, the last 1,500 words or so of the 2011 message was devoted to the decades-long tension between North and South Korea. The Korean peninsula was divided by other countries in the aftermath of World War II. Since then, North Korea's regime has spoken of "reunification" under its totalitarian leadership. 

South Korea's government, meanwhile, envisions a united Korea with its democratic government in control. The North's government calls that vision "antireunification" and "treachery."

"Today there is no more vital task than national reunification for the Korean people," the North's message on Saturday said. "The stand of attaching importance to the nation, the stand toward independent reunification, is the touchstone by which to distinguish patriotism from treachery."

The message indirectly referred to North Korea's Nov. 23 attack of a South Korea-controlled island, the first attack by the North on South Korean land since the war of the 1950s. The North in Saturday's message again blamed South Korea's government and "outside forces," a reference to the South's allies the U.S. and Japan, for inciting the attack with "north-targeted war moves."

"The danger of war should be removed and peace safeguarded in the Korean peninsula," the message said. That was stronger language than it used in the 2010 New Year's message, when it said, "The way for improving north-south relations should be opened."

The 2011 statement went on to outline a number of steps the South's government should take to avoid confrontation, including a halt to weapons purchases and its military alliance with the U.S. "Collaboration with outside forces leads to war and national ruin," the message said. "The entire nation should never tolerate the criminal moves of pro-U.S. war hawks who stake their fate on foreign forces and drive the situation to the brink of war in collusion with them."

It called for "active efforts" to "create an atmosphere of dialogue and cooperation" between the two Koreas and said "free travel of and exchanges between people from all walks of life should be ensured."

The message also reiterated the North Korean regime's oft-stated themes of independent development, which it puts into practice by limiting freedoms of its citizens, including their ability to travel and obtain information about the outside world while telling them there is no life better that the one they are leading. 

"There are no party and people in the world as great as ours, which have an ever-victorious history and a highly promising future," it said.

The New Year's statement is one of the main messages of the year by the North's leadership to its people. It is printed in every major North Korean newspaper and read on state-run broadcasts. Its state news agency distributed the entire message, along with seven separate news stories about it early Saturday.

 Write to  Evan Ramstad at evan.ramstad@wsj.com 