Iran's plan to save money by significantly cutting subsidies for fuel, electricity and basic food items has had an unexpected response: many Iranians, cushioned from the impact and threatened with arrest if they complain, are quietly adjusting to the rising cost of daily living.

Gasoline consumption fell 14% by early January from the time the first cuts were introduced on Dec. 20, said Oil Minister Seyed Masound Mir Kazemi.

Household consumption of gas dropped 5%, energy officials said. Use of public transport has increased by nearly 20% since gasoline prices were raised from 1,000 rials (about 10 cents) per liter to 4,000 rials, according to transport officials. Fares for Tehran's buses and subway were increased by only 20%.

Authorities prepared for a harsher response. The first cuts were introduced only after multiple delays by a parliament concerned about public backlash. Restrictions were imposed on the media and a surge of security forces deployed in the capital to stifle expressions of discontent. And the government introduced a $40 per-person monthly stipend to soften the blow.

The government also threatened to severely punish businesses that raise prices to cover rising costs, further cushioning consumers.

Concerns about a backlash apparently persist: On Wednesday, authorities raised the limit on how much subsidized gasoline drivers can buy, and eliminated the limit on subsidized diesel used by trucks and buses. Diesel, a key fuel in Iran's economy, still costs 837% more than it did on Dec. 19.

Iran's handling of the plan could serve as an example for the region, analysts say. Other oil-rich countries in the Middle East that provide generous subsidies, including Saudi Arabia, also face concerns about balancing the long-term impact on their economies and resources against the threat of political instability.

"Eventually all these countries have to phase out their subsidies. They can take it slowly, but what made it urgent for Iran was fiscal pressure," says  Nader Habibi, professor of economy at Brandeis University in Boston.

Some Tehran residents who were asked about the shift expressed concern about whether they will be able to adapt once the full impact of the subsidy cuts reaches them. While consumers know their electricity is costing them more, they have yet to see the bills, which go out in February.

Despite these concerns, no protests or strikes have been staged, and opposition leaders Mir Hossein Mousavi and Mehdi Karroubi have acknowledged the economic need for cuts, while criticizing the timing.

Individuals and families are taking steps to reduce household costs. Minou Razazi, a 33-year-old mother of three, says her family has cut back on the use of appliances such as the microwave and blow dryer, and switched to energy-efficient light bulbs. With price increases getting more severe as consumption goes up, Ms. Razazi anticipates her electricity bill will be 10 times as high as before.

Abdullah Sarafzadeh, a food-industry engineer, said he has started using lower-grade gasoline and commuting on public transportation.

"First thing I did was to install a gasoline-reducing kit on my car. All our costs are increasing and we have to be creative," he said.

Other families say they are stockpiling basic food items such as rice, beans and meat—a measure likely to hurt shopkeepers.

While Iran's wealthiest citizens may not have to adapt, the changes are reaching Tehran residents considered upper-middle class. Weekend trips to the mountains or the Caspian coast are no longer affordable, says Sara Khatibi, a 39-year-old chemist. She says the neighborhood gym closed down its swimming pool because of increases in heat and electricity prices.

Iran has had one of the most generous subsidy plans among oil-rich countries, covering up to 80% of the cost of energy and basic good items—and leading to what the International Monetary Fund said was one of the world's highest rates of wasteful energy consumption.

International sanctions to force Tehran to compromise on its nuclear program, as well as government mismanagement, have added to the strains on the economy in Iran, which also faces growing inflation and unemployment.

The so-called Smart Subsidy Plan, a defining policy of President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, calls for a gradual, five-year phaseout. The government estimates the cuts—which were encouraged by the IMF and the World Bank—will save it $100 billion a year.

The full impact of the plan on Iran's economy has yet to be felt, as industries that ran on subsidized power and businesses that have been prohibited from raising prices bear the brunt of the initial cuts.

Tracking and transport businesses using diesel fuel are particularly at risk, unions say. Authorities have allowed truckers to raise their fees by 15%, but prohibited them from raising fees further to cover rising costs, including the 837% fuel-price increase.

Jamshid Nourani, a 60-year-old truck driver, complains about the damage from the rising costs. Cargo carriers have been allowed to raise their rates 15%, and no more.

"I'm slowly going out of business," he says. "I've loaded my truck only once in the past few weeks, and for a short trip."

 Write to  Farnaz Fassihi at farnaz.fassihi@wsj.com 