SHANGHAI—It's practically a given that China will overtake the U.S. as the world's largest economy, probably within the next two decades.

Read the full  Foreign Exchange report .

The yuan, however, may never kick the dollar off its pedestal.

It takes more than economic might for a country to establish its currency in marketplaces and treasuries around the globe. Indeed, the favored status of the dollar and the euro in international trade settlements—as safe-haven investments, and as the currency of choice for many nations' foreign reserves—depends on something China currently lacks: the rule of law and long-term political stability.

As corruption stays rampant and the rich-poor gap keeps widening, social instability remains a real threat to a country without a democratic system in place. For central banks to hold yuan for the long term, they need to be convinced that Beijing will establish a political system that makes the nation's future stable and easy to predict.

As a result, questions about the yuan's future depend largely on the even bigger question of when China will hold a free election.

Still, despite criticisms of Beijing's interventions in currency markets, it is clear that China is laying foundations for wider acceptance of the yuan.

Since July 2009, Chinese exporters in 20 regions have begun settling trades in yuan. Chinese imports settled in yuan remain less than 1% of all goods brought into China, but that share is expected to grow to 20% in 2015, according to a research report by London-based Standard Chartered Bank.

China is nurturing Hong Kong as an offshore center for trading and investing in yuan and yuan-based financial products. Key steps so far have been creating a market for exchanging yuan notes, and a so-called dim sum bond market, which features trading in yuan-denominated debt issued by foreign companies and Chinese bonds. Both markets have seen strong growth in recent months, reflecting long-term optimism in China's economy as well as continuing bullishness about the yuan.

Beijing also recently gave the Bank of China, one of the country's biggest state-run banks, permission to open yuan trading for customers in the U.S., a move seen as a symbolic government endorsement of foreign trading in the yuan.

These are important steps. But experts say China must do more to persuade local and foreign businesses to settle trades in yuan, and to encourage central banks around the world to hold yuan-denominated assets as part of their reserves. Streamlining currency regulations and creating more ways to reinvest offshore yuan in China will be crucial.

"An important step toward greater convertibility of the yuan would be further opening up China's domestic bond market to foreign investors," says Patrick Perret-Green, head of foreign exchange and local market strategy for Asia at  Citigroup Inc.
C


0.95
%




 in Singapore.

Beijing granted a small group of foreign investors access to its vast and potentially lucrative onshore interbank bond market in August, though a rigid quota system is in place.

In addition, China is considering allowing Hong Kong-based yuan funds to invest in the mainland stock market. And the Shanghai Stock Exchange has a plan to let foreign companies offer yuan-denominated shares.

Mr. Shen is the China bureau chief for Dow Jones Newswires, based in Shanghai. He can be reached at hong.shen@dowjones.com.