  NOTE TO READERS: This article was written in connection with a now-expired agreement between the Circulation Department of The Wall Street Journal Europe and Executive Learning Partnership that wasn't disclosed to readers. The impetus for writing the article was the agreement, but the reporting and writing were solely the responsibility of the News Department with no input or review prior to publication by the Circulation Department or ELP. However, any action that creates an impression that news coverage can be influenced by commercial interests is a breach of the ethical standards of Dow Jones & Co. 

Two of the companies in the Dow Jones Industrial Average that delivered the best stock-market gains in 2010 are run by women. Should investors be looking out for executive committees that have a high concentration of women and does this lead to better results?  Ann De Jaeger, a partner at the ELP Network, a strategy and learning consultancy, believes it does.

Read the complete  Wealth Adviser report .

  WSJE: Recent research has shown that businesses that recruit more women to their executive boards tend to achieve better financial results. Why do you think this is?   

 Ms. De Jaeger: For one thing, with a critical mass of women in decision-making bodies, these companies reflect the economy better. In most of the Western world, women constitute a majority when it comes to purchasing decisions even in sectors like cars, computers or DIY which were formerly considered as typically male. A 2009 Harvard Business Review article estimated that women worldwide control about $20 trillion in consumer spending each year. 

  WSJE: What specific traits do women bring to businesses that help to boost profits and returns?   

 Ms. De Jaeger: Generally speaking, they are more risk-averse than men. They have a focus on the sustainability of both profit and the business and tend to have a radar view – as opposed to men's laser view – which means that they also notice what the numbers don't reveal.

  WSJE: Are there any specific funds that choose investments based on how many women are on their boards?  

 Ms. De Jaeger: If you do an internet search for "investment funds women" you'll find plenty of them. There's no denying that shareholder pressure for gender balance is increasing rapidly.

  WSJE: Why is it that despite years of equality legislation only 3% of the boards of the total Fortune 500 are comprised of women and just 2 of those firms are run by women?  

 Ms. De Jaeger: The most depressing thing is that the numbers seem to go downwards instead of up. The heart of the problem is that equality legislation – in fact, political correctness as such, is the bane of gender balance. Women don't want to be treated in the same way as men. For instance, the linear career path which expects people to peak in their late thirties, doesn't work for women. 

  WSJE: Why do many successful women leave established companies early, before they can be promoted to board level?  

 Ms. De Jaeger: Because at a particular point, they realize that they have been too busy being someone else instead of themselves and therefore cannot bring their best to the table. Women seem to adapt to the prevailing – male – culture as they rise on the corporate ladder. They are not even aware of the fact that they are doing this – they simply play along and adapt out of a sheer survival instinct. 

  WSJE: Apart from direct government intervention, which is deeply unpopular among private businesses, how can big business get more women on their boards? Or do you believe governments in Europe need to use positive discrimination?  

 Ms. De Jaeger: It would be preferable if the drive to do something about gender balance came from within companies - from the strategic need to reflect the market and the talent pipeline in decision-making bodies. 

On the other hand, we see every day that progress is very, very slow. Too many companies adopt a compliance approach, a "fix the women" strategy – as if they can tick a box, run a couple of events, provide amenities that make life a little easier, but they don't allow for real inclusiveness. 

The thinking behind the quota legislation is that gender balance won't be reached organically, that it has to be enforced, which is unfortunate, but nevertheless a fact.