The Tribeca Film Festival on Monday announced the 44 films selected for its Spotlight and Cinemania sections, led by the directorial debut of Oscar nominee Vera Farmiga, as well as documentaries about Ozzy Osbourne, Carol Channing and the infamous Limelight nightclub, and new efforts from filmmakers Michael Winterbottom, Alex Gibney and Tsui Hark.

The festival, now in its 10th year, also announced a number of special screenings, as well as its ESPN Sports Film Festival sidebar. 

"We've got a good mix of different kinds of movies," said David Kwok, the director of programming for the festival, which will run from April 20 to May 1 in the city. "We've been trying for that every year, and this year it's really come together. We want to show what's happening now in cinema from the United States and abroad."

A likely highlight is "Higher Ground," which Ms. Farmiga ("Up in the Air," "The Departed") stars in and directed. Adapted from a memoir by Carolyn S. Briggs, the film examines the awakening of a woman in a fundamentalist community amid the social upheaval of the 1960s. In another drama with a religious theme, Kathleen Turner stars in "A Perfect Family" as a woman vying for "Catholic Woman of the Year" whose brood must pass muster with the church's idea of family values.

Comic excursions include Mr. Winterbottom's "The Trip," with British actors Steve Coogan and Rob Brydon playing themselves on a drive through the British countryside; and "A Good Old-Fashioned Orgy," an ensemble piece about a Hamptons party that goes awry.

Brooklyn-based actor Alessandro Nivola stars in "Janie Jones," playing a rock musician who goes on a road trip with the teenage daughter (Abigail Breslin) he's only just met. The film is one of several to be distributed by Tribeca Films. Other marquee names expected on the red carpet are Orlando Bloom ("The Good Doctor"), Keira Knightley ("Last Night"), and Hong Kong legend Chow Yun-Fat ("Let the Bullets Fly").

The documentary selection feature a number of New York stories. Billy Corben's "Limelight" traces the wild life and times of nightclub impresario Peter Gatien, owner of two fabled Manhattan discos. "Carol Channing: Larger Than Life" profiles the still vibrant 90-year-old Broadway legend. And actor Michael Raporport follows a crew of 1990s New York hip-hop heroes in "Beats, Rhymes & Life: The Travels of a Tribe Called Quest."

Elsewhere, Oscar-winning director Alex Gibney returns with "Catching Hell," the story of cursed Chicago Cubs fan Steve Bartman. The film the gala selection for the ESPN Sports Film Festival sidebar, which includes five other films featured in the Spotlight section. The films will have their final screenings in an all-day marathon on April 30.

Last week, the festival announced that the world premiere of Cameron Crowe's documentary "The Union" will open the event, with a free performance by the film's subject, Elton John, to follow the film. The outdoor screening is scheduled for April 20 at the North Cove at the World Financial Plaza. 

Founded by Jane Rosenthal, Robert De Niro and Craig Hatkoff in 2001 following the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center, the festival aims to bolster the economic and cultural revitalization of lower Manhattan.