Do you recall the honeymoon period when your favorite knife was actually sharp? You are not alone. We pulled our dullest cutting devices out of the kitchen drawer and tried out a collection of knife sharpeners. Consider our top five and recapture the joy of gliding through celery and sirloin.

 Accusharp $9 // accusharp.com  

 Plus: Simple as it gets. Grip the plastic handle, whip the device down your blade a few times, and you're ready to start chopping. Do we sound like an infomercial yet? The Accusharp can be yours for only nine dollars! 

 Minus: Produces an edge that's neither razor-sharp nor long-lasting. But hey, it's better than a dull chopper.

 Chef's Choice 1520 $170 // edgecraft.com  

 Plus: Fairly easy. Get your knife into the groove on this squat little bulldog of a sharpener, slowly pull it toward you and the motorized sharpening plates will do the rest. 

 Minus: Loud. If you've always admired the key copying machine at the hardware store, now you can own something that sounds just like it.

 Spyderco Sharpmaker 204MF $49 // spyderco.com  

 Plus: With ceramic sticks fanning out from a plastic base, this unit that calls to mind Edward Scissorhands can accommodate knives of all sizes (and, fittingly, scissors). Comes with a training DVD featuring charming '80s hairstyles. 

 Minus: Tricky to learn and sharpens slowly. Not brawny enough to sharpen chipped or seriously dull knives without the extra-coarse diamond-clad stick add-ons, which cost an extra $40.

 Shapton GlassStone 1000 $49 // woodcraft.com  

 Plus: The ultimate in sharpness and good for beginners: It's durable, doesn't require advance soaking like most other waterstones and leaves a good edge without the need for an additional polishing stone.

 Minus: Klutzes beware. It's up to you to hold the knife at the right angle, swipe it the right number of times and keep your fingers out of danger.

 Edge Pro Apex Model 2 $175 // edgeproinc.com  

 Plus: Includes a full set of Japanese waterstones that have been cut down to size and mounted in a jig so they always hit the knife at the right angle. Takes any knife to scalpel-like sharpness.

 Minus: Slow to operate, and the priciest of the bunch.