DAVOS, Switzerland—Global monetary imbalances could still cause another disaster for the world economy if they aren't addressed, French President Nicolas Sarkozy warned Thursday. 

In an address to the World Economic Forum, Mr. Sarkozy said that monetary imbalances "have risen fivefold in recent years … and could bring down the whole house of cards." 

Mr. Sarkozy also warned against the continued accumulation of massive foreign-exchange reserves on the one side and "vast" amounts of sovereign debt on the other. 

The French president had devoted a major address at Davos last year to lambasting the excesses of capitalism in general and the financial sector in particular, but this year he focused in a much shorter speech on the priorities of his presidency of the G-20, stressing the importance of continued decisiveness and action. 



"A G-20 that no longer takes decisions is a G-20 that will lose its legitimacy," he said. 

Mr. Sarkozy warned particularly against complacency as the economic crisis recedes, saying that the decisions taken by the G-20 in 2009 were relatively easy. 

"We didn't have any choice because we were standing on the brink of a precipice," Mr. Sarkozy said. "It's now that the going gets tough because some may imagine that they have a choice." 

Mr. Sarkozy returned to familiar themes of the need to reduce the volatility of commodity prices, and of the need to find an international monetary system that more accurately reflects the structure of the world economy today. He added, though, that he wasn't arguing for any return to a system of fixed exchange rates. 

"No one wants to weaken the dollar. The world needs the dollar," Mr. Sarkozy said. "But a dominant currency doesn't mean a single currency." 

Mr. Sarkozy was also emphatic in his defense of the euro, saying that those who were forecasting its demise "misunderstand" the nature of Europe. 

"The euro is Europe, and Europe is 60 years of peace on our continent," he said, adding in his own name and that of German Chancellor Angela Merkel that "we will never turn our backs on it, we will never abandon it." 

Taking questions from the audience, Mr. Sarkozy gave short shrift to JP Morgan Chief Executive Jamie Dimon, who pleaded for policy makers to ease the pressure that they have put on the banking sector since the financial crisis. 

Mr. Sarkozy said that the costs of the crisis were being borne around the world by "millions of unemployed who have no connection with all this." 

He continued that banks' use of off-balance-sheet vehicles to accumulate risks without appearing to "was one of the most extravagant, hair-raising things that I've ever come across … I'm not challenging the principle of securitization, but there must be a limit. If an offshore country can guarantee volumes 700 times its gross domestic product, are we talking about a market economy or a madhouse?" 

 Write to  Geoffrey T. Smith at geoffrey.smith@dowjones.com 