Problems at nuclear power plants in Japan over the weekend are being watched closely across Asia, where governments are contemplating dozens of new nuclear reactors despite opposition from environmental groups that have long argued the facilities are unsafe in a region prone to natural disasters.

China, Vietnam, Thailand and other Asian nations have more than 100 nuclear plants on the drawing boards as part of a regionwide effort to diversify energy sources beyond their traditional reliance on oil, natural gas and coal. The plants are viewed as a critical part of Asia's scramble to keep up with demand as energy consumption soars.

The push has also driven up the price of uranium world-wide in recent years and created major new expansion opportunities for equipment makers such as  General Electric Co.
GE


0.23
%






In an early sign that radiation leaks from the tsunami-damaged Fukushima Daiichi plant in northern Japan could embolden nuclear-power opponents elsewhere, Thailand Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva told reporters Sunday that the incident would "impact the decision of whether to build nuclear plants in Thailand" and that the country would need to look closely at safety before deciding whether to go ahead.

State-owned Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand is planning to build the country's first 1,000-megawatt nuclear power plant by 2020, but it still needs government approval. As many as four more plants are potentially under consideration.

In an interview later in the day, government spokesman Panitan Wattanayagorn said Mr. Abhisit has long opposed nuclear power because he fears the risk of accidents like the one in Japan, as well as the possibility of terrorist attacks. "The people who support the plans must have answers to these two issues," Mr. Panitan said, though he stressed the prime minister was willing to listen and wouldn't enforce his views if other factions in the government decided the country had to have the facilities. 

China, which is the biggest developer of new nuclear plants in Asia, reaffirmed its commitment to boosting nuclear-production capacity during the next decade as government and industry officials said over the weekend that the country's embrace of what's known as third-generation reactor technology made it less susceptible to some of the meltdown risks experienced by older reactors in Japan. 

"Some lessons we learn from Japan will be considered in the making of China's nuclear power plans," said Chinese Vice Minister of Environmental Protection Zhang Lijun, according to the state-run Xinhua news agency. "But China will not change its determination and plan for developing nuclear power."

Opposition to nuclear power has occasionally flared across Asia, though analysts generally agree it would take a lot for less-democratic countries such as China to abandon their plans. The opposition has tended to be stronger in countries with popularly elected governments and large environmental movements, such as India, Indonesia and Thailand, as well as in areas along geologic fault lines or in the line of typhoons, which repeatedly batter the area.

Indonesia postponed the construction of its first nuclear facilities several years ago, in part because of protests from villagers who feared damage from earthquakes. The Philippines scrapped a $2 billion, 620-megawatt nuclear power plant it built in 1984 in a seismically active area north of Manila amid concerns about safety and allegations of corruption in the construction. The busted project saddled the government with big interest payments for years to come.

It's likely environmental groups will try to raise more complaints about Asia's nuclear development plans. 

"I'm aware of the fact that these growing economic countries need a lot of electricity and power, but it is so dangerous to choose nuclear energy," said Ria Verjauw of the environmental group Friends of the Earth in Belgium. The latest episode in Japan "needs to be a very important lesson for the whole world" that nuclear projects should be reconsidered, she said.

China has said that increasing its nuclear power capacity will be an important part of achieving ambitious emission-reduction goals and weaning the country from a reliance on imported fossil fuels. By 2020, the government plans to have increased production capacity to 86 gigawatts. Combined annual nuclear capacity in China is 10.8 gigawatts currently, which accounts for roughly 1% of the country's total power-generating capacity. 

China has never experienced a major nuclear meltdown. Last year, however, a nuclear facility in Daya Bay, near the southern city of Shenzhen, experienced a small radiation leak, but officials said it didn't pose a threat to public safety.

Chinese nuclear expansion relies heavily on imported technology, including third-generation systems produced by Westinghouse, which was acquired by  Toshiba Corp.
TOSYY


-2.15
%




 in 2006.  Lu Qizhou, general manager of China Power Investment Corp., a major state-owned nuclear power company, said Chinese nuclear projects incorporating the latest technology could avert the cooling system problems being seen in Japan because the cooling systems operated with the use of gravity and didn't require electricity, according to Xinhua.

Increasing inland nuclear power projects has been one pillar of China's nuclear-expansion strategy. The development of a Xianning Nuclear Power Plant in Hubei province is among those, and it plans to use Westinghouse third-generation technology that officials have said mitigates any increased risks posed by building at inland locations.

"It's just like the flush toilet, no power is needed," Mr. Lu said of third-generation reactors, according to Xinhua. 

Vietnam, meanwhile, is planning its first two nuclear-power plants, with combined capacity of 4,000 megawatts and a price tag of up to $12 billion, in the southern coastal province of Ninh Thuan, with construction of the first plant to begin as early as 2014. (Japan will likely win a contract to build the second plant, following a joint statement late last year by the two countries' prime ministers.) Longer-term, Vietnam hopes by 2030 to build as many as 13 nuclear reactors in eight plants with a combined capacity of 15 gigawatts, or 10% of its total generating capacity, officials have said.

"I don't think the incident in Japan will have any impact on the nuclear-power-development plans in Vietnam," Vuong Huu Tan, head of the Vietnam Nuclear Energy Institute, told Dow Jones Newswires. The country's gas and hydropower potential is nearly fully exploited, and its coal must be imported.

If Asian countries aren't able to develop as much nuclear power as planned, they may find it difficult to meet their energy needs in the future. Already there are major shortages in some areas, especially in parts of Southeast Asia, where electricity demand is expected to triple by 2030 as other power options dwindle, according a recent report by energy consultancy Wood Mackenzie. Natural gas supplies in some areas are running out and environmental opposition to coal has made it harder for governments in places like Thailand to bankroll big new coal-burning plants.

Despite the setbacks to nuclear power in Indonesia in earlier years, officials are now mulling whether to restart planning for facilities to meet that country's enormous power shortfalls. Proponents are calling on the government to build up to two facilities on the Bangka Belitung islands off the coast of Sumatra south of Singapore, where industries are hungry for power.

The province is located on the opposite side of Sumatra from where a massive tsunami struck the province of Aceh in 2004, killing more than 100,000 in Indonesia alone. Backers have argued the soil has a granite base that makes it more stable than other areas, according to local news reports.

Teuku Faiza, a spokesman for Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, said "it is too early to comment" on how Japan's problems will impact any nuclear power development there.



—Wilawan Watcharasakwet, Oranan Paweewun, Yayu Yuniar and Vu Trong Khanh contributed to this article.

 Write to  Patrick Barta at patrick.barta@wsj.com and Brian Spegele at brian.spegele@wsj.com 