The municipal-bond market has become a bastion of calm—for now. Investors should take this opportunity to tweak their portfolios before the next wave of trouble hits.

Muni bonds have been rallying of late, turning a 2.4% loss during the first two weeks of January into a 0.1% gain through March 15. Volatility is easing, too: The Barclays Capital Municipal Bond Index has traded in a range of 0.3% this month—a far cry from January's 2.5%. 

Investors shouldn't mistake the tranquility for a healthy market, however. Municipalities issued just $28 billion of bonds this year through February, the lowest level since 2000. Without new bonds, investors have a difficult time figuring out where bonds should be trading, so they trade less frequently. 

"The same bonds keep getting shopped around," says  Neil D. Klein, senior portfolio manager at Carret Asset Management in New York.

More supply may be on the way. Municipalities have issued an average of $4.1 billion of bonds a week during March, up from just $3.5 billion a week in January and February. "Will demand be there or will the market sell off again?" asks  Warren Pierson, a senior portfolio manager at Baird Funds. "That will be the big test."

Adding to the uncertainty: The economic impact of the chaos in Japan, North Africa and the Middle East. In recent months, state and city revenues have been boosted by a stronger-than-expected economic recovery in the U.S., which has juiced tax collections. Revenues rose 5.2% during the third quarter of 2010, according to the U.S. Census Bureau, the fourth consecutive quarter of increases. 

"If macro factors push the U.S. back to slow growth, state revenues will take another hit," says  Christopher Mauro, director of municipal bond research at RBC Capital Markets. 

That doesn't mean the muni market is certain to crater. States are making improvements to their budgets by cutting spending or raising taxes. The presence of "crossover buyers"—investors who don't need the tax benefit but like the price—also may put a floor under some munis.

Advisers and strategists say investors should use this period of calm to assess their portfolios and make adjustments. Some suggest reducing muni holdings in the short term. "This is a good opportunity to lighten up," says  Jeffrey Gundlach, chief investment officer at bond-fund manager Double Line Capital. 

Others are doing some selective shopping, finding bargains where others aren't looking.  Marilyn Cohen, president of Envision Capital Management, a Los Angeles fixed-income money manager, expects more market turmoil, and has been buying "prerefunded" municipal bonds. These bonds are created when old bonds are refinanced and the proceeds are used to buy Treasurys, which are then placed in escrow. The coupons are paid out of the proceeds from the escrowed U.S. government bond. "They're really just Treasurys," Ms. Cohen says, but with a tax benefit.

Ms. Cohen recently bought a New York State prerefunded bond that yields a tax-free 1.74% through March 2014 (a three-year Treasury currently yields about 1%). The caveat: Investors need to make sure they are buying bonds backed by Treasurys, not Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac or other agency bonds.

Others are looking further afield.  Qi Lu, senior portfolio strategist at Altfest Personal Wealth Management in New York, has been buying bonds of highly rated municipalities that are insured by companies that have been downgraded to below investment grade. Many of those bonds, he says, trade at a discount because investors tend to look only at the insurer's rating, not the underlying municipality. 

He recently bought a Suffolk County, N.Y., water utility bond maturing in 2024 that, without insurance, would be rated AA+, just one step below the highest rating. The bond yields 4.84%, rather than the 4% typical of an AA+ bond.

"This isn't January," Mr. Lu says. "You have to explore the market and be more selective."