The Senate Democratic "message shop" these days is being headed up by Chuck Schumer, though it would seem the New Yorker isn't breaking much ground with his advice to his colleagues on how to address rising gas prices. Mr. Schumer's suggestion? Pretend it is 2008.

At his party's weekly policy lunch, Mr. Schumer told his colleagues to use next week's Senate recess to get in front of the gas issue, by once again blaming rising prices on "speculators" and oil companies. New Jersey Sen. Bob Menendez stepped up to help make the point, introducing a bill this week which he is calling "Use It or Lose It." Mr. Menendez and his co-sponsor, Florida Sen. Bill Nelson, will accuse oil companies of "refusing to produce on the millions of acres for which the government has already granted them leases" (or so reads their press release). The bill would "force oil companies to report specific plans" on how they intend to start producing more oil.

The Democratic scramble to come up with convenient bogeymen for higher gas prices comes in the wake of growing criticism of the Obama administration's de facto drilling moratorium in the Gulf. Rising oil prices are the result of lots of factors—including inflation and upheaval in Libya and elsewhere—though many Americans also see a connection with the White House's general hostility to fossil fuels. And President Obama's State of the Union proposal to further load taxes on oil companies, which would also raise prices, is now hanging over the White House. Even former President Bill Clinton recently pronounced the lack of new drilling permits in the Gulf "ridiculous," given the fragile state of the economy.

There was never a shred of evidence that "speculators" drove up oil prices in 2008, though Democrats certainly kept the accusation in the news. Their "Use It or Lose It" legislation, meanwhile, is designed to allow them to both pin rising oil prices on drillers, while excusing the refusal to give drillers any new offshore leases. Still, those arguments might be much harder to make given a White House with such a terrible energy record. Count on House Republicans, too, to be running hearings that seek to make a connection between rising prices and the Obama record, as well as to set the record straight on "speculation." It's not 2008.

To read more stories like this one, please subscribe to Political Diary.