WASHINGTON—Several Senate Democrats Tuesday proposed repealing about $2 billion in annual tax breaks for big oil companies as a debate over such incentives gained momentum amid rising gasoline prices and strong quarterly profits by oil giants.

Democratic Sens. Robert Menendez of New Jersey, Sherrod Brown of Ohio and Claire McCaskill of Missouri unveiled legislation Tuesday that would strip away several types of credits and deductions used by big oil and gas companies. The legislation would affect  Exxon Mobil Corp.
XOM


-0.40
%




,  BP PLC,  Chevron Corp.
CVX


-1.34
%




,  ConocoPhillips,
COP


-1.93
%




 and  Royal Dutch Shell PLC.

The oil industry has warned that gasoline prices would climb even higher and U.S. energy production would decline if the companies' tax incentives are removed. 

The bill unveiled Tuesday would require that revenue raised by eliminating the tax breaks would be used to pay down the U.S. deficit. A similar proposal being developed by Senate Finance Committee Chairman Max Baucus (D., Mont.) would use the revenue to develop clean-energy technology. 

Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D., Nev.) has said he wants to bring some form of the legislation to the floor of the Senate for a vote as soon as possible, but he hasn't said which proposal he favors. 

A Democratic aide said Mr. Reid wouldn't hold a vote this week because he wants Mr. Baucus to be able to convene a hearing on the oil industry's tax breaks. The hearing, scheduled for Thursday, is expected to involve executives of at least two top oil companies. 

Ms. McCaskill said she wouldn't vote for any bill that didn't use the revenue generated by the legislation to pay down the deficit. At a press briefing Tuesday, she said the measure she is co-sponsoring represents the "low-hanging fruit" in congressional efforts to tame the deficit. If Congress fails to pass the bill, "then I don't think anyone should take us seriously" about deficit reduction, she said. 

Sen. Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the top Republican in the chamber, called the Democrats' proposals "counterproductive" in remarks on the Senate floor Monday, and said they would increase fuel prices and make the U.S. more dependent on foreign oil.

The bill would modify a foreign-tax provision that allows the companies to receive a tax credit for every dollar of taxes they pay to foreign governments. The measure also would repeal a popular tax deduction known as the 199 deduction, which allows companies to deduct a certain percentage of their income. 

President Barack Obama proposed a repeal of tax breaks used by the oil and gas industry in his 2012 budget plan. The oil companies have been fighting the proposals on Capitol Hill. 

The American Petroleum Institute said in a briefing with reporters Monday that the industry was being singled out because of high gasoline prices. 

 Write to  Tennille Tracy at tennille.tracy@dowjones.com 