David Broder was often called the dean of the Washington press corps, but he spent as much time listening to voters as to power brokers. 

Mr. Broder, the Washington Post columnist who died Wednesday at age 81 of complications from diabetes, was "the high priest of political journalism," according to Timothy Crouse in "The Boys on the Bus," an account of the 1972 presidential campaign.

He stood out among political columnists both for his Rolodex and his sheer shoe-leather reporting. "My column is really just the tail of the dog," Mr. Broder told the Chicago Tribune in 1994. "I spend 90% of my time as a reporter."

During campaigns, Mr. Broder was known for visiting neighborhoods and knocking on doors of voters to gauge the national mood, putting their voices into his columns.

"I've learned that the most undervalued, underreported aspect of politics is what voters bring to the table," Mr. Broder told the Washingtonian magazine in 1996.

While not averse to insider sources, he was seldom chummy with campaign staffs and candidates, and worried that journalists compromised their integrity when they started rooting for the campaigns they covered.

Mr. Broder took for a mentor Alan Otten, The Wall Street Journal political reporter who advised him in 1960 to keep a distance from candidates.

In the Washingtonian interview, Mr. Broder said that Mr. Otten told him, "Deliberately lean a bit against the candidate you're traveling with. Hope that your counterpart traveling with the other candidate does likewise. That way the coverage stays balanced." 

The son of a dentist who swapped services for food during the Depression, Mr. Broder was raised in Chicago Heights, Ill. He was a poor athlete and said he ended up writing about sports instead of playing them. 

He matriculated at the University of Chicago at age 15, and was soon editor of the Chicago Maroon, a campus newspaper whose student staff included his future wife, Ann Collar. After graduation, the couple worked together for a time at the Bloomington, Ill., Pantagraph.

In 1955, Mr. Broder moved to Washington to cover politics for Congressional Quarterly, then moved to the Washington Star, the capital's second-tier newspaper, where he covered the 1960 presidential campaign.

Editor Ben Bradlee wrote in his memoir "A Good Life" that to attract Mr. Broder to the Washington Post in 1966, he "romanced him like he's never been romanced—in coffee shops, not fancy French restaurants, because Broder was a coffee-shop kind of man: straightforward, no frills, all business."

At the Post, Mr. Broder was put in charge of designing the paper's campaign coverage, and he scooped rivals by reporting rumors that Spiro Agnew would be named the 1968 GOP vice-presidential nominee.

In 1970, Mr. Broder's column went national, and three years later he won the Pulitzer Prize for Distinguished Commentary for his columns about President Richard Nixon and the Watergate affair. "I found his actions unforgivable," Mr. Broder wrote in a 1994 column the day after Mr. Nixon died. "It always puzzled me how anyone could become a Nixon fan."

Mr. Broder published books on a wide range of political topics, including a biography of Vice President Dan Quayle, and a critique of ballot initiatives, "Democracy Derailed."

His bald pate and owlish spectacles were familiar to viewers of news-panel shows such as NBC's "Meet the Press," where he set the record with 401 appearances.

 Write to  Stephen Miller at stephen.miller@wsj.com 