Mutual funds that invest in commercial real estate were star performers in 2010, up about 27%, more than double the gain of the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index.

Usually, it's a mistake to chase last year's leaders, but  Neuberger Berman investment managers  Brian Jones and  Steve Shigekawa think that there's still plenty of upside.

After a traumatic collapse that pushed prices of commercial real estate as much as 50% lower after the 2008 financial crisis, they believe that values have bottomed and that a multi-year recovery is under way, fueled by still-low interest rates, improving cash flows, rising demand and a scarcity of new development projects.

Messrs. Jones and Shigekawa run the top-performing $206 million Neuberger Berman Real Estate Fund (NBRIX), an institutional vehicle that opened to retail investors last June. The retail shares trade under the symbol NREAX. The fund, which invests in realty securities, especially shares of real-estate investment trusts, isn't cheap.

Individual investors must pay a 5.75% load and a 1.23% expense ratio. But the fund pays a dividend quarterly and has a 1.89% yield.

Mr. Jones says billions in real-estate debt will mature in the next few years. So far, banks generally have extended the maturity of loans rather than write them off. But that could change as bank balance sheets improve and the value of real estate rises, making write-offs less painful.

If a bank forecloses on the loan, takes the property back and wants to sell, real-estate investment trusts may be able to pick up a high-yielding building at an attractive price, thereby increasing the REITs' overall cash flow. That could lead to some juicy deals for well-capitalized public REITs and, by extension, Messrs. Jones and Shigekawa.

Neuberger Berman Real Estate has outpaced at least 97% of its peers over the past three and five years. Last year, it was up 31.5%, which put it in the top 10th of all real-estate funds.

The fund's current top picks include:  Public Storage
PSA


0.50
%




 (PSA), a large self-storage operator;  Host Hotels & Resorts
HST


0.72
%




 (HST); and  Simon Property Group
SPG


0.38
%




 (SPG).

Sustaining the fund's recent gains won't be easy. But Messrs. Jones and Shigekawa argue that commercial real-estate values will keep climbing, because of easier access to the debt market and to equity capital.

They expect rising dividends to continue to attract retail investors, foreign capital and pension money. In short, in their view, the market is recovering nicely from its long, devastating illness.

—For more stories, see barrons.com.