Filling out an NCAA tournament bracket ought to be easy. Instead, as anyone who's ever participated in an office pool knows, it's morphed into a giant psychology exam.

We bring to the exercise not just simple and precise analytical thinking, but childhood prejudices, irrational fears, junk math, loony logic and enough emotional scars to cast a dozen horror movies. 

If you're from outside the Midwest, you don't trust the Big Ten (except Michigan State). If you picked Kansas last year, you're haunted by how the Jayhawks ruined your bracket. You want to pick upsets, even though you lack the nerve to go with your gut. Then there's the annual question of whether your conscience will permit you to support Duke.

An interactive to help pick your NCAA bracket.

In an attempt to restore objectivity to March Madness, The Wall Street Journal created a "blindfold bracket" which can be found on WSJ.com. This bracket gives detailed descriptions of the two teams playing in every tournament matchup with one important exception: the actual names of the schools and all the prejudices and contrivances that come with them. 

We asked a panel of basketball experts try it out. What most of them found was that their selections in our blind taste test were markedly different from their ordinary picks. 

Mike Lemon, who won Yahoo's tournament-bracket contest in 2009, wound up with Kansas over Ohio State in this year's title game—a conclusion that contradicts his worldview. Although Lemon won the Yahoo contest in large part because he correctly picked Michigan State to reach the title game.

"I'm not a believer in the Big Ten typically," Lemon said. "There's no way I would have picked Ohio State had I known who I was picking."

Dave Berri, an associate professor of economics at Southern Utah University, came up with a Final Four of favorites Kansas and Pittsburgh and—surprisingly to him—San Diego State and North Carolina. Berri said he never would have picked the Aztecs to go that far, and he said he has a "bias" against Harrison Barnes, North Carolina's freshman star. "I think Barnes is extremely overrated," he said. "I never would have picked UNC to go as far as I picked them go to blindly."

Former Northwestern guard Tim Doyle, who says he reverts to his "nerd Northwestern days" in his analytical approach to filling out brackets, nevertheless wound up with fifth-seeded Arizona in the Final Four of his blind bracket. (His conventional bracket was heavy on favorites.) "Even in my picks, I get caught up with biases," he said.

Only one panelist came up with the same result in his blindfold bracket (Kansas over Ohio State) that he had on his own: Adam Meyer of Real Money Sports, a handicapping service. "In handicapping, I use some of the same factors that this bracket did: depth of the team, experience, knack for turning the ball over," he said. 

In the end, the whole process is a bit silly. Few fans, or even the paid analysts, are familiar with every tournament team, especially given the field's 68-team size. But if the people putting money on the line are trying to be objective, that should tell us something.

— Jared Diamond contributed to this article 

 Write to  Darren Everson at darren.everson@wsj.com 