BANGKOK—Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva said he will dissolve the House of Representatives by the first week of May, paving the way for a potentially bitter election campaign in the increasingly divided Southeast Asian nation. Under Thai law, an election must be held between 45 and 60 days after the dissolution.

Mr. Abhisit told reporters that the country has survived an economic and political crisis and the government has resolved a number of problems. Overall, he added, people are satisfied. Economic conditions have also become more favorable, he said.

"I want to see the country move forward," Mr. Abhisit said. "I don't want the political problem to be an obstacle or what holds back the country. I believe a lot of people feel that this is enough for all the political chaos. It's time to let the owners of the country, which are the Thais, to choose what they want."

He said amendments to the Election Commission's regulations—necessary for the vote—are ready to be submitted to parliament next week. "I intend to propose this House dissolution for the king's approval by the first week of May, which is the time frame that I'm pretty confident that the regulation and law will be ready," he said.

Next week the prime minister will face a no-confidence motion in parliament, though he is expected to survive that test.

Thailand was consumed by protests in April and May 2010, when antigovernment demonstrators known as Red Shirts—supporters of Thaksin Shinawatra, the premier ousted in 2006—occupied parts of central Bangkok's main shopping district before they were driven out by the army. The worst political violence in modern Thai history left more than 90 people dead.

During the unrest, Mr. Abhisit agreed to Red Shirts' demands for early elections. But after he declared November as his preferred time, his opponents reneged on a promise to end demonstrations, and the prime minister scrapped the plan.

Despite the unrest, Southeast Asia's second-largest economy grew by 7.8% last year thanks to a 28.1% rise in exports. But Thailand—like many across the region—is grappling with inflationary pressure as a result of rising commodity prices.

Political pressure on Mr. Abhisit has intensified, with the "Yellow Shirts"—a movement that helped topple Mr. Thaksin and that once backed Mr. Abhisit's administration—have now also turned antigovernment because of its handling of a border dispute with Cambodia.

The Oxford-educated Mr. Abhisit was elevated to power by parliament in December 2008 as the head of a military-supported coalition after a Thai court, citing vote buying, dissolved a government that backed Mr. Thaksin. The ruling came amid Yellow Shirt protests that closed Bangkok's international airport for nine days.

Observers believe that with the opposition still largely disorganized, Mr. Abhisit will be returned to power in the election, again with the support of coalition partners. But his path won't be smooth; Red Shirts have been holding rallies in recent weeks and vow to ramp them up during the campaign.

The government, which lacks widespread support among low-income workers, has been attempting to win them over with a series of populist policies, including an increase in the minimum wage and in civil-servant salaries. It has also promised to increase the minimum wage a further 25% over the next two years.

Mr. Abhisit's government has also started offering low-interest loans to taxi drivers, permanently exempted low-income households from electricity charges for, extended social-security coverage for informal laborers and continued a fuel subsidy.

 Write to  Leigh Murray at leigh.murray@dowjones.com 