 Ford's fourth-quarter profit fell 79% to $190 million as higher commodity prices, a loss in Europe and debt-related costs weighed on results. The auto maker said, on a full-year basis, 2010 was one of Ford's best years ever. Income for the year totaled $6.6 billion, up from $2.7 billion in 2009.  

Porsche Automobil Holding said it's determined to seek the dismissal of legal claims by a group of U.S. hedge funds despite their appeal against a New York court ruling in favor of the sports car maker. 

Maruti Suzuki, which controls nearly half of India's car market, posted an 18% decline in fiscal-third-quarter profit to 5.65 billion rupees ($123 million), as an increase in input costs and higher royalty payments offset gains from record car sales in the home market. Sales in the quarter were up 26% to 92.77 billion rupees. 

 Nissan shot past rival Honda in global sales for the first time in decades to become Japan's second-largest auto maker and the world's fifth-largest. Nissan's total sales were 4.08 million vehicles, up nearly 22% from a year earlier. Honda's sales rose just 5% from a year earlier to 3.56 million vehicles. 

 Recent Australian reports of potentially hazardous cockpit-instrument malfunctions on three different Airbus jetliners have prompted new safety concerns about future incidents elsewhere. Each of the jets, operated by an affiliate of Qantas Airways, temporarily lost critical airspeed-measuring devices and various automated flight-control systems, according to reports released by the Australian Transport Safety Bureau.  

 China Development Bank is among the finalists to buy a large stake in Germany's WestLB, a development that underscores Chinese banks' appetite for Western expansion.  

 Industrial and Commercial Bank of China will proceed cautiously in its drive into U.S. retail banking as it expands globally, Jiang Jianqing, chairman of China's largest commercial bank, said in an interview.  

 Mark Shafir, Citigroup's global head of mergers and acquisitions, has also been named co-head of the bank's global technology, media and telecommunications group.  

Citi is also reorganizing its energy, power and chemicals business. Energy and power will be split up into stand-alone sectors, while chemicals will become part of the global industrials group.

Chevron's fourth-quarter earnings surged 72% to $5.3 billion on strong oil prices, improved refining margins and a gain on the sale of an interest in a U.S. pipeline company by the second-largest U.S. oil company by market value after Exxon Mobil. 

 BP's partner in its Russian joint venture, TNK-BP, upped the ante in its conflict with the oil giant by calling for TNK-BP's quarterly dividend to be withheld—a move that could be a financial blow to BP. 

The move came as BP sought to draw the sting out of its escalating dispute with its Russian partners in TNK-BP by proposing "fast-track" arbitration between the two sides in Sweden to resolve their differences. 

 Confusion continued in the battle for control of casino tycoon Stanley Ho's fortune amid differing public statements about the billionaire's wishes. A law firm that said it represents Ho issued a statement on his behalf saying talks to resolve a quarrel among his four different families over control of his casino interests failed to reach a conclusion.  

Hours later, a public-relations firm representing the second and third families released a copy of legal motion signed by him dropping an earlier lawsuit he filed against them. It also later released a letter signed by Ho in which he supported their moves to transfer his holdings into their control. 

 Goldman Sachs boosted the base salary of its executives and partners for the first time since the firm went public in 1999, tripling Chief Executive Lloyd Blankfein's salary to $2 million. Goldman's salary increases, which affect all 470 partners out of the company's 36,500 employees, follow similar announcements by Bank of America, Citigroup and Morgan Stanley.  

 Hedge-fund manager John Paulson personally netted more than $5 billion in profits in 2010—likely the largest one-year haul in investing history, trumping the nearly $4 billion he made with his "short" bets against subprime mortgages in 2007. Paulson's take, described by investors and people close to investment firm Paulson & Co., shows how profits continue to pile up for elite hedge-fund managers.  

 A U.S. federal court denied Kraft Foods' request to block Starbucks from taking over the distribution of Starbucks-branded packaged coffee on March 1. The coffee-house chain is seeking to end a 12-year-old arrangement under which Kraft has been its principal distributor to retailers.  

Honeywell International's fourth-quarter earnings more than doubled to $369 million, up from $150 million a year earlier as it benefited from improved demand. 

The maker of aerospace, building-control and safety products also said private-investment company Rank Group will acquire its automotive consumer-products business for about $950 million. 

De La Rue's chief executive said the world's largest producer of banknotes was in discussions with Indian authorities over printing irregularities and described the negotiations as constructive. 

Comcast, the U.S.'s largest cable TV company, took control of NBC Universal after the government shackled its behavior in the coming years to protect online video services such as Netflix and Hulu. The takeover gave the cable-hookup company 51% control of NBC Universal, which owns the nation's fourth-ranked broadcaster, NBC; the Universal Pictures movie studio and related theme parks; and a bevy of cable channels including Bravo, E! and USA.

 Alpha Natural Resources says it has reached a deal to buy rival coal company Massey Energy for $7.1 billion in cash and stock. Massey, the U.S.'s fourth-largest coal producer by revenue, operates 19 mining complexes in Virginia, West Virginia and Kentucky. 

Massey also disputed each of the points federal safety officials made earlier this month about the likely causes of the explosion at a company mine in West Virginia that killed 29 workers last April. 

 Sanofi-Aventis said breast-cancer treatment BSI-201, a key drug in the company's development pipeline, failed to meet its goal in a late-stage study.  

German conglomerate Bayer formed a joint venture with Cadila Healthcare to sell health products to an increasingly affluent Indian middle class, focusing on women's health, metabolic disorders, heart disease, diabetes, cancer as well as diagnostic imaging devices. 

Actelion, Europe's largest biotech company, said it was discontinuing the development of its sleeping pill almorexant on safety grounds, after viewing the medicine as a potential multi-billion dollar blockbuster. 

Connecticut's attorney general said Google won't have to hand over user data it collected from unsecured wireless networks as part of his office's probe of the Internet giant's privacy problems. Attorney General George Jepsen said Friday his office reached a deal with the Internet company that allows him to begin settlement negotiations over whether Google violated state law. 

 Google is holding talks with the U.S. Justice Department to head off an antitrust challenge to its $700 million deal to buy ITA Software, the flight-data company. The two sides have discussed conditions that could help assuage the department's concerns about the deal, even as they both gear up for a possible court fight. 

Network equipment vendor Nokia Siemens Networks said it has "absolutely no interest" in the trade secrets of its Chinese rival, Huawei Technology. Huawei, which is privately owned, took legal action last week to delay the sale of some of U.S.-based Motorola's assets to Nokia Siemens, claiming it would improperly transfer the Chinese company's intellectual property. 