PRAGUE—As the Czech government prepares to introduce a new pension law designed to reduce the state's role in financing retirement payments, it is bucking the wider Central European trend. 

Struggling to close budget gaps, most countries in the region are rolling back reforms designed to make their national pension systems sounder in the long run.

As people live longer and the average age across the region rises, the number of retirees is growing and fewer workers are contributing to the pension pool. Governments realized they needed to prevent their public pension systems from eventually going bankrupt, so in the mid-1990s they began diversifying the ways in which pensions were financed. 

Governments, first in Hungary and later in Poland, Romania, Estonia, Lithuania and elsewhere, began forcing taxpayers to create a nest egg in privately managed pension funds. Money put into these funds is invested to cover future liabilities, whereas public systems distribute contributions from the working-age population to current retirees and nothing is saved.

Since the Greek and Irish bailouts, international bond markets have become keenly focused on short-term budget balances rather than on longer-term fiscal stability. Lenders are demanding sovereign borrowers show more respect for European Union rules that stipulate that budget deficits must stay below 3% of gross domestic product and total public debt outstanding must remain lower than 60% of GDP. 

Poland is responding to this push for a tighter budget. In May, the government is expected to finalize plans to reroute workers' contributions away from privately managed pension funds and into its own coffers to help finance general expenditure and cut debt. Lithuania and Estonia have taken similar steps over the past two years. While this may ease short-term fiscal burdens, none of the governments has explained how these raids on their pensions pots will eventually be made up.

Michal Szymanski, a member of the Polish government's recent working group on pension reform and a former chief executive of Polish pension fund Aviva PTE, says EU officials and bond investors may see higher government revenue and lower borrowing as an improvement, "but the [financial] condition of the country is going to deteriorate in the long term," he says, because the pension burden will be heavier down the road and the government is spending, rather than saving, the money paid in by current workers.

In Hungary, where public debt is now equivalent to 80% of annual GDP, private pension funds had been actively managing mandatory taxpayer contributions since 1997. But the government last year eliminated the mandatory contributions to private funds entirely, and this portion now goes to the government. 

"In the current situation, this [debt] burden can't be sustained, so people are trying different approaches," says  Peter Holtzer, a Hungarian financier and expert on pensions. "Hungary is the craziest," he says, because the government isn't just reducing contributions to privately managed pension funds, as is the case in most countries in the region, but is completely eliminating the private saving mechanism. 

On the plus side, the previous Hungarian government voted to gradually raise the retirement age to 63 in 2016 and 65 in 2021. The current government is considering enacting a law that would limit public pension payouts so the system doesn't run a deficit. Under this law, Hungarians would simply get a share of whatever was in the pension kitty—a sum likely to shrink as the number eligible for pensions increases. 

The Polish government is considering raising the retirement age by two years, but won't discuss any cuts to benefits.

The EU says it is concerned about the new approach. Amadeu Altafaj Tardio, a spokesman for the European Commission, the EU's executive branch, says that while the changes "may have a short-term positive impact on budgetary balances, they are likely to come at a cost to the long-term sustainability of public finances."

But not every Central European government is borrowing from the future.

In the next few days, the Czech government will present detailed legislation to create the kind of system others are scaling back, where a portion of the money that workers now pay into the public pension system would be diverted to privately managed funds.

To cover the expected shortfall to state coffers caused by the drop in contributions to the public system, the government plans to increase sales taxes and cut the employment taxes paid by employers, to encourage hiring and in turn boost income-tax revenue. 

Higher sales taxes would mean government revenue could weather economic downturns and high unemployment better than if it were reliant on payroll taxes, Prime Minister Petr Necas said last month.

Petr Pavelek, head of debt-management for the Czech Finance Ministry, earlier said the Czechs won't have to increase their overall borrowing as a result of the changes because revenue from the sale of state-owned companies and higher sales tax will together make up the shortfall. 

The Czech government currently allocates a third of the state budget to paying pensions. It forecasts that without reform, 50% of budgetary expenditure would go to fund pension payouts by 2050, and a full 100% by 2065.

 Write to  Sean Carney at sean.carney@dowjones.com 