(Please see Corrections & Amplifications item below.)

LONDON—Call it the decline of the Roman empire. Eight weeks ago, Chelsea was five points clear at the top of the Premier League standings and the team owned by the Russian tycoon Roman Abramovich looked on course to retain its title with something to spare.

Today it stands a distant fifth, nine points behind league-leading Manchester United, and mired in its worst run for 14 years, with just one win from its past nine matches. The reigning champion—and winner of three league titles in the past six years—is in the midst of a shocking collapse.

"It's the million-dollar question—what has gone wrong at Chelsea?" said  Derek Taylor, a 33-year-old data analyst and a member of a Chelsea fan group. "We were the team to beat a few weeks ago, now we're not even contenders and it looks like we'll be battling Bolton for fifth place for the rest of the season."

Football fans love to press the panic button prematurely. But this isn't an irrational freak-out. No team has won the Premier League title in January, but plenty have lost a chance to contend for one before the Christmas decorations come down. If Chelsea's season isn't completely lost, it's at least on the precipice of irrelevance.

It's been obvious for weeks that Chelsea hasn't played at a championship-caliber level, and a desperate defeat by Wolverhampton Wanderers on Wednesday only served to hammer home that point. During its recent decline, the club has now taken just 10 points from a possible 33 and it has won just one game in the past two months.

There are still 17 games remaining to determine its fate in the Premier League, as well as next month's UEFA Champions League round of 16 and Sunday's FA Cup match against Ipswich Town, but the biggest question right now isn't whether it can contend for the Premier League title, but whether it can crack the top five.

The most mystifying thing about all of this isn't simply the dismal sequence of results that has seen Chelsea drop 28 points already this season—as many as the club squandered in its entire 2009-10 campaign—but the fact that no one can fathom exactly what's wrong. Which means it hasn't been fixed.

"We are losing games and we don't always understand why," said Florent Malouda, the Chelsea midfielder. "The standard of play has dropped so suddenly. It's a very tough time for the club."

This being England—and this being football—everyone's got a theory. Top teams can struggle for a number of different reasons: Bad luck can play its part, as can a series of untimely injuries. Factors such as confidence, momentum and team chemistry are fleeting, they can disappear as quickly as they arrive.

But some observers are starting to ask whether Chelsea's faltering season is the first evidence of a shift in the game's foundations amid new regulations governing the spending of Europe's leading football clubs. 

"The landscape of football is changing with the new financial rules," said  Alex Fynn, a football consultant who advised the English Football Association over the creation of the Premier League. "For clubs like Chelsea, that will radically alter the way they do business."

UEFA's Financial Fair Play initiative, which is set to kick in from the start of the 2013-14 season based on financial records from 2011-12, is aimed at ensuring clubs do not spend more money than they generate. Only those clubs that are in the black—or whose losses don't exceed $7 million—will receive a licence permitting them to play in UEFA's lucrative continental competitions like the Champions League or the Europa League.

The result: Deep-pocketed teams are no longer able to bludgeon the opposition with their checkbooks. For Chelsea, the reduced investment has contributed to a perfect storm as an aging squad and an unfortunate schedule have conspired to place the team under pressure at the most important part of the season.

In anticipation of the new regulations, Chelsea trimmed roughly £20 million ($31 million) from its player payroll last summer by releasing five highly paid internationals: Michael Ballack, the Germany midfielder; Brazilian full-back Juliano Belletti; English playmaker Joe Cole; and the Portuguese duo Ricardo Carvalho and Deco. 

Although two new players—Yossi Benayoun and Ramires—were recruited to cover the departures, head coach Carlo Ancelotti announced that he planned to use the opportunity to blood some of the club's young players. Meanwhile, the core of the team is starting to show its age. John Terry and Ashley Cole each turned 30 this season, while Frank Lampard, Didier Drogba and Nicolas Anelka each passed that milestone in the past two years.

The upshot is that Chelsea's squad now appears to be a curious mix of creaking limbs and callow kids, without the seasoned pros needed to rotate the starting lineup and keep the regular starters fresh.

"They haven't been replaced with the same type of players," said John Hollins, the former Chelsea head coach. "There was a decision to go for youth, but they have really stuck their necks on the line by throwing them in rather than giving them 10 or 15 minutes here or there."

In fact, Chelsea has used just 21 players in its 21 league games this season, fewer than all but two of the Premier League's 20 teams. By contrast, Manchester United has used 29, while Arsenal and Tottenham Hotspur have used 25 and 26 players respectively.

"In the past, we had a big squad and could rotate and put other players in," said Mr. Terry, the Chelsea captain. "We don't have that now."

The quirks of the fixture list haven't helped either. Chelsea started the season on a tear, brushing aside West Bromwich Albion, Wigan Athletic, Stoke City, West Ham United and Blackpool as the club won its first five games, scoring 21 goals and surrendering just one. 

West Brom and Wigan were both subjected to six-goal thrashings and conventional wisdom held that Chelsea was a near-indestructible machine destined to retain its title with ease. But since then, the most mechanical team in football hasn't been firing on all cylinders. 

The difference is that unlike its early opponents, which represented a mix of the unproven, the disappointing and the catastrophically bad, the club has faced a tougher schedule in recent weeks, including games against title contenders Arsenal and Tottenham Hotspur. 

Against teams who aren't afraid to attack, the squad's weary bodies and lack of depth has been exposed.

"At the beginning of the season, we didn't concede goals and scored a lot," said Petr Cech, the Chelsea goalkeeper. "Now we're making wrong choices, wrong passes. We're not used to seeing Chelsea play the way we are playing right now."

 Corrections & Amplifications 

Chelsea trimmed roughly £20 million ($31 million) from its player payroll last summer by releasing five highly paid internationals. An earlier version of this article incorrectly converted £20 million to $26 million.

 Write to  Jonathan Clegg at jonathan.clegg@wsj.com 