HONG KONG—Asia's growing wealth is causing a major personnel shuffle in the hedge-fund world, as global funds look to establishing footholds while star managers strike out on their own. 

A case in point: 40-year-old  Julius Gaudio, the youngest member of hedge fund  D.E. Shaw's six-person executive committee, moved to Hong Kong in the autumn partly to meet more frequently with some of the region's biggest investors. 

"Our investor base is becoming more Asian," he said in an interview. "I'm getting in front of them."

The big New York hedge-fund operator also hired  Qin Xiao, former chairman of mainland lender  China Merchants Bank Co., to join its China advisory board. 

But keeping talent can be difficult.  D. E. Shaw partner  Liang Meng, chief executive of the firm's Greater China private equity unit, handed in his resignation in recent weeks to go raise capital for his own fund. "He's taking advantage of a pretty robust environment for fund launches right now," said Mr. Gaudio. 

More than two years after the global financial crisis hit Asia's nascent hedge-fund scene, assets under management are climbing once again and hedge fund launches have overtaken the number of closures. 

Assets under management as of December hit US$129 billion, up from US$117 billion a year earlier but still below their December 2007 peak of US$176 billion, according to industry tracker Eurekahedge. Asian hedge funds saw particularly strong net asset inflows during the fall. In the fourth quarter, a net US$3.4 billion flowed into Asian hedge funds, according to Eurekahedge. Fund launches in Asia last year totaled 155, outstripping the number of closures at 100, Eurekahedge said. 

Some big name funds are opening shop in Asia and moving key players out to Hong Kong. GLG Partners opened an office in the region in the autumn and last week named  Andrew Thatcher executive director with a remit to develop its Asian business. Mr. Thatcher moved to Hong Kong earlier this year. Other funds to hang out their shingle recently in Hong Kong are Soros Fund Management LLC and Viking Global Investors.

  John Paulson, who made his name betting against subprime mortgages in 2007, received a license from Hong Kong's Securities and Futures Commission to deal in securities last month. 

But even as marquee names in the industry bulk up, some are losing key players who decide they can raise capital for their own funds. 

Last week, the head of Highbridge Capital Management's Asia investments,  Carl Huttenlocher, told colleagues he was leaving the multibillion-dollar hedge-fund firm owned by  J.P. Morgan Chase & Co.
JPM


-0.12
%




 to start his own fund, people familiar with the matter said. He oversaw about $2 billion in assets, including the Hong Kong-based Highbridge Asia Opportunities Fund.

Western investors pulled out of Asian hedge funds during the financial crisis, leading many to shut down. But fund managers now are banking on the idea that a strong Asian investor base could lend greater stability. 

By the end of 2009, there were some three million Asia-Pacific high net worth individuals up 26% from 2.4 million, according to a recent report by Capgemini and Merrill Lynch, equaling the number in Europe for the first time. Their wealth jumped 31% to $9.7 trillion, surpassing Europe's wealthy with $9.5 trillion, and they are gradually shifting their wealth into alternative investments including hedge funds, the report said

Capgemini and Merrill Lynch forecast that 8% of their portfolio will be in alternative investments by 2011, up from 5% in 2009. 

D. E. Shaw, which was once the giant in the industry, dropped to 20th place among U.S. hedge funds in terms of assets under management, from fifth last year, according to trade publication AR magazine.

D.E. Shaw lost 40% of its hedge funds assets in 2010, ending with $14.23 billion, AR said. Firm-wide assets, including those not in hedge funds, dropped 24% to $19 billion as of Jan. 1.

"It feels like it's turned the corner," said Mr. Gaudio about the firm's assets under management, who added that new capital is coming in from different geographies and types of investors.

—Mohammed Hadi contributed to this article.

 Write to  Alison Tudor at alison.tudor@wsj.com 