WASHINGTON—The House voted 239-160 Wednesday to eliminate public money for presidential elections, agreeing to use the savings toward paying down the deficit. It would mean White House hopefuls must raise hundreds of millions of dollars on their own in order be competitive.

Much like House Republicans' symbolic repeal of the health-care law, the bill likely won't get a vote in the Senate, where Majority Leader Harry Reid opposes it. And even if it did, President Barack Obama is certain to veto it.

But the bill, introduced by Rep. Tom Cole (R., Okla.), represents how some budget cuts can help the new GOP House majority achieve political goals, even if the savings are relatively modest. The Congressional Budget Office estimates savings of $617 million over 10 years.

"I don't think it ranks very high on anybody's priority list," Mr. Cole said earlier this week, "unless you happen to be half a dozen people running for president."

Only 10 Democrats voted for the measure, and 24 Democrats did not vote. Party leaders said the bill would allow corporate dollars to flood U.S. elections.

"This was an essential post-Watergate reform," said New York Rep. Steve Israel, who leads the Democrats' campaign arm in the House. "This is an attempt to stack the deck."

"It's a terrible bill," said Rep. Jerrold Nadler (D., N.Y.). "We don't want all our presidential candidates to either be wealthy self-funders or people who are selected and supported by big business."

Taxpayers fund the system by checking off a box on their tax returns that lets the federal government set aside $3 of taxes owed for the fund; the portion of taxpayers who check the box has been declining over the years.

Presidential contenders currently receive matching federal dollars during the primaries if they meet certain requirements and agree to an overall spending limit. 

In the general election, major party candidates get a multimillion-dollar lump sum if they forgo private fund-raising; the amount was $84 million in 2008. Candidates can skip the system and raise unlimited sums, as Mr. Obama did in 2008. 

The White House said in a statement that the current system is broken and needs to be fixed, not dumped.

The fund, established in the wake of the Watergate scandal, gives dark-horse candidates a chance in the money race and minimizes the influence of larger donors, government watchdogs say. Mr. Cole says the system is antiquated and a waste of federal money.

Earlier in the day, the House approved an amendment that sets aside all savings from the bill to pay down the federal debt. But it voted down a measure by Rep. Tim Walz (D., Minn.) that would have outlawed campaign spending from groups that do not have to disclose their donors under a special section of the tax code.

After the vote, Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell announced he introduced matching legislation in his own chamber. 

Mr. Obama is expected to raise close to $1 billion for his 2012 re-election bid. Mr. Cole said he expects the Republican challenger to forgo public funding as well.

 Write to  Danny Yadron at danny.yadron@wsj.com 