A surge of deal making around the world combined with record low interest rates for corporate borrowers to mark a robust year for global stock and bond offerings in 2010.

Read the complete  Year-End Review report .

Stock offerings globally were down about 1.5% this past year at $893.43 billion compared with $907.5 billion in 2009, but the year came to a strong finish in the fourth quarter as the market absorbed a record quarterly total of $350 billion of deals. The 2009 fourth quarter, when $329.1 billion of stocks were sold, was the prior record-setting quarter. The bond markets were historically busy, but overall global corporate debt offerings were down 1.7% to $6.05 trillion from $6.16 trillion of debt sold in 2009. 

Volatile markets and concerns about the health of European nations such as Greece and Ireland brought moments of pause, but investors continued to buy up stock and bond deals from around the world, suggesting fears about liquidity crises are abating. With a historically high amount of cash in corporate coffers, continued U.S. stimulus efforts, and increased clarity on the financial-regulation landscape, Wall Street is likely to continue to push for more deals and find investors hungry for increasingly risky investments in 2011 despite some potential pitfalls. 

"The capital markets by and large demonstrated greater access to companies at better terms than many would have expected," said  Raj Dhanda, head of global capital markets at Morgan Stanley. He added that investors like U.S. mutual funds attracted large amounts of cash and were willing to deploy it around the world. 

The stock market experienced one of its worst moments ever in May, during the height of concern about Greece's financial future. The Dow Jones Industrial Average plunged 1,000 points in a matter of minutes, before recovering about two-thirds of the decline, in what came to be known as the "flash crash." 

Still, the market for initial public offerings and secondary stock sales remained robust, and much of the deal making came from overseas, particularly Asia. 

Global IPOs totaled $280.1 billion, more than double the $114.8 billion raised in 2009, and the second-highest pace of global offerings since 2007, when $298.8 billion was sold.

  Agricultural Bank of China Ltd. in July sold $22.1 billion of shares in Shanghai and Hong Kong in the largest global IPO on record, according to data tracker Dealogic.  American International Group Inc. carved out its Asian insurance business,  AIA Group Ltd., in October, selling $20.5 billion of shares in Hong Kong in the world's second-largest global IPO. Brazilian energy company Petrobras in September sold $26.5 billion of shares to the public in September in a follow-on stock sale. 

IPOs from Asian-based issuers dominated the IPO market this past year, contributing over 60% to the total global volume with more than $180 billion in offerings, said Dealogic. China alone doubled 2009's $50.6 billion of IPOs, selling $104.3 billion, making up 37.2% of the world's deals.

"It's quite a big statement," said  Stephen Scherr, head of Goldman Sachs's Financing Group. "The supply of opportunities in China is almost without limit. The scope of commercial activity is large, and it lasts as long as the market remains well-bid for those opportunities."

In the U.S.,  General Motors Co. emerged from the government's ward with an $18.1 billion IPO in November—the second-largest IPO in the U.S., after  Visa Inc.'s March 2008 $19.7 billion offering, according to Dealogic.

Other large offerings in the stock and bond markets came out of Japan, India and South Korea, as well as from Latin America and Europe. 

The international diversity of offerings came despite a wave of sovereign financial crises in Europe that caused periods of fear and volatility, testing investors' mettle after two years of quick fingers on the sell button. The European Union and the International Monetary Fund have bailed out Greece and Ireland, and investors are currently weighing the chances that Portugal and Spain may also need rescuing.

Still, bankers are eager to point out to investors and to potential issuers that those who got in at the IPO price of many issues have seen positive, if not strong, returns. For example, investors in GM at its IPO price of $33 a share are up 11.7%. Some investors in AIA Group have seen their investment grow by more than 12%, and investors in Agricultural Bank of China have captured a return over 20%.

Companies around the world issued about $2.05 trillion of corporate investment-grade bonds, down 27% from 2009's record-setting $2.82 trillion, partly because the U.S. no longer offered banks the chance to sell government-guaranteed debt. However, the number of deals increased 22% to 9,668 in 2010, from 7,953 deals, according to Dealogic. 

The junk-bond market, by contrast, went on a tear in 2010, particularly in the fourth quarter as investors reached for higher-yielding investments in riskier assets. Companies in weaker financial condition sold $406.7 billion of high-yield bonds in 2010, up 59% from 2009's level, according to Dealogic. 

Some of America's largest investment-grade companies were able to borrow billions this past year at the lowest cost of capital on record, according to Dealogic.  Wal-Mart Stores Inc. borrowed $3.75 billion in chunks due in three, five and 10 years at record low levels of 0.75%, 1.5%, and 3.25%.  Coca-Cola Co.,  Microsoft Corp.,  PepsiCo., and  eBay Inc. also borrowed money for three years at a rate under 1%.  Johnson & Johnson and  Colgate-Palmolive Co. are spending under 3% a year to borrow money for 10 years. 

The pitch is "come early to avoid disappointment," said  Ivor Dunbar, global head of capital markets at Deutsche Bank. "These rates are in some cases the bargains of the millennia." 

Elsewhere, private-equity firms are beginning to become more active. They are using the high-yield bond market and the leveraged-loan market to help make investments with cash they have on hand as well, said  Peter Toal, head of Americas leveraged-finance syndicate at Barclays Capital. 

At times, the high-yield market felt "red hot," said  Jim Merli, head of debt capital markets at Nomura Securities International Inc. 

Indeed, some deals done in 2010 have carried the hallmarks of pre-crisis headiness, when investors poured cash into any deal that came to market despite declining yields and doubtful protections for buyers. 

"The market has been generally more open to taking risk," said  Larry Wieseneck, head of global finance and risk solutions at Barclays. 

Hospital operator HCA Inc. last year created a new subsidiary company to borrow over $1 billion in the junk-bond markets to help pay a $2 billion dividend to the private-equity firms that own it. The bonds are rated among the lowest levels by credit-ratings firms and carry few protections for investors against the company selling more debt or doing what it pleases with collateral. 

Still, most bankers say this type of deal is an anomaly, not a trend. "The vast majority of deals are sensible," Mr. Dunbar said. "I don't see cause for concern in this market." 

  Morgan Stanley upended  J.P. Morgan Chase & Co.'s ranking as the top global underwriter of stock offerings this past year in part because it won many large deals tied to the U.S. government, including the Treasury's sale of $10 billion of Citigroup Inc. stock and a joint-lead position in General Motors' IPO. Morgan Stanley led deals totaling $77.87 billion in proceeds, capturing market share of 8.7%.  Goldman Sachs Group Inc. and J.P. Morgan followed in second and third with 7.6% and 7.3% of the deals, respectively. 

In the debt markets,  Barclays PLC's Barclays Capital overtook J.P. Morgan's lead role last year, heading up $461.23 billion of deals. Some new players like  UBS AG and  Credit Suisse Group plowed ahead, moving up from rankings at Nos. 12 and 9 in 2009 to 5 and 6 this past year, leading $301.44 billion and $299.73 billion of deals, respectively. 

Bankers believe that 2011 could bring another batch of big offerings, but they say the momentum can continue only if companies are more willing to part with the cash they have amassed over the past couple of years. That would mean companies need to hire people, acquire other companies, build new businesses and invest in new technology—agenda items that were shelved when the economy plunged into recession in 2008. 

American companies are sitting on almost $2 trillion of cash—the highest level of corporate savings in half a century. Some of that cash has come from companies refinancing debts or funding future debts in the current, low-interest-rate bond markets over the past year. 

"Anyone who could or wanted to refinance probably did so," Nomura's Mr. Merli said. "There is a risk that the calendar for new debt offerings is somewhat lighter next year."

President Obama recently met with several chief executives to discuss ways they may open their pocketbooks and begin hiring or otherwise spending to help boost the sluggish economy. 

Companies' hoards of cash will start to get put to work in the next year as firms either spend to grow or to reward shareholders by buying back stock and paying dividends, said  Justin D'Ercole, head of Americas investment-grade syndicate at Barclays. 

Companies in the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index more than doubled their pace of share buybacks in the third quarter from the same period of 2009, S&P said. 

The Federal Reserve is also likely to approve some banks' requests to pay dividends to shareholders early in 2011, a step that could provide another boost to bank stocks. 

 Write to  Liz Rappaport at liz.rappaport@wsj.com 