SEOUL—South Korean consumer inflation decelerated for the first time in five months as fresh-food prices stabilized and a stronger Korean won curbed imported inflation. 

Inflation is likely to moderate further in May as prices continue to stabilize due to government measures and as fresh-food prices decline with warmer weather that will bring more supply following an unusually cold winter and early spring, economists said. Also, a decision by local oil refiners to cut oil product prices temporarily will be fully reflected from the May data. 

Still, "that doesn't change the chances for a rate hike in May," Hyundai Securities chief economist Lee Sang-jae said. "The oil product price cut is temporary, while global oil prices are still rising." 

He expects annual inflation to track above 4% until the third quarter and said this will heighten the need for more rate increases, perhaps at least once a quarter. 

In April, the consumer price index, or CPI, rose 4.2% from a year earlier, Statistics Korea said Monday, a tad slower than 4.3% expansion forecast tipped by economists polled by Dow Jones. In March, it was up 4.7%. 

Compared with a month earlier, the CPI was unchanged, compared with 0.2% gain forecast by economists and a 0.5% increase in the preceding month. 

Core inflation, which excludes volatile energy and agricultural product prices, decelerated to 3.2% from 3.3% on year and to 0.2% from 0.3% on month. 

An index measuring fresh food prices rose 7.7% in April from a year earlier, decelerating from the 19.0% increase in March and 25.2% jump in February. 

The price data comes just a day after Asia's fourth-largest economy reported robust exports during April. 

Last month, exports rose 26.6% on year to $49.77 billion, faster than the 20.6% rise forecast tipped by economists, while imports were up 23.7% on year to $43.95 billion, compared with a forecast for a 23.9% gain. The trade surplus of $5.82 billion was bigger than the expected $3.36 billion. 

While the industrial output numbers for March were "somewhat tepid," production is still expanding and exports are leading the economy," said Hyundai's Lee. He added that the central bank will change its strategy of increasing rates gradually only if exports look like they will slow. 