FREMONT, Calif.—City leaders here hope to develop a parcel of land near a future BART station into an office park and research facilities to attract jobs, but  Union Pacific Corp.
UNP


1.10
%




 has thrown a monkey wrench into the plans.

In late December, the city says it was taken by surprise when the railroad company purchased the 160 acres from Nummi, the defunct auto-making venture that operated a car factory at the site, for an undisclosed amount. 

Now, Fremont is faced with negotiating with Union Pacific over what will become of the parcel, which the railroad says it might use for a rail yard.

The land is near a Bay Area Rapid Transit station scheduled to open as early as 2014. For nearly a year, the city had studied how to bolster its economy with the station as its centerpiece, drawing up designs for facilities to attract high tech and green tech businesses. Fremont is looking for ways to replace jobs it lost when its industrial base declined.

"We have a wait-and-see attitude," said  Fred Diaz, Fremont's city manager. "Because of its location this land is very valuable, and so we hope we can work something out."

Mr. Diaz said nearly 30 developers were interested in acquiring the land, which became available after the Nummi, or New United Motor Manufacturing Inc., plant closed last April.

One developer who had expressed interest in the land, David Cropper, managing director San Francisco-based TMG Partners, said the site was appealing because parcels of its size rarely come on the market in the Bay Area. His firm made a bid for the land but declined to say for how much. TMG remains interested in the land, he added, and would consider working as a partner with Union Pacific if the rail company pursued a plan in line with Fremont's vision for the location. 

Scott Moore, vice president of public affairs for Union Pacific, said the Omaha, Neb., company was attracted to the land because it is flat, has good access to interstate highways and is zoned for industrial use. 

He added that prior to learning the land was available, Union Pacific had no plans for expansion in Fremont.

Mr. Moore said it could be a full year before the railroad decides what to do with the property, though a rail yard is a possibility. 

This week, Union Pacific, which is the nation's largest railroad, operating more than 32,000 miles of track, invited Fremont's city council to meet with executives in Omaha in the next few months to discuss a vision for the area. 

"We have seen what the city is thinking about doing, and it's not in line with our vision for the property," said Mr. Moore. He added that Union Pacific's vision doesn't involve office buildings and apartments.

Fremont saw a burst of growth in its tech sector during the 1990s and into the following decade, only to stall when the tech bubble burst, said Brad Kemp, director of regional research at Beacon Economics, a Los Angeles-based firm with offices in the Bay Area. He said the city is making the right move by attempting to rekindle that growth, and should try to strike a deal with Union Pacific while detailed development plans have yet to be finalized.

"There's the threat that the railroad company may want to make it a repair facility or even storage, which would generate hardly any economic activity for the city," Mr. Kemp said.

Before Nummi closed, state and local politicians attempted to intervene and secure a deal to keep the nearly 30-year-old plant in operation. With more than 5,000 jobs at stake, leaders feared the economic impact would cripple the area.

The plant was created as a partnership between General Motors Co. and Toyota Motor Corp., but in 2009 GM decided to pull out as it approached bankruptcy. Last year, Toyota decided to close the factory.

Local and state leaders eventually attracted electric car maker Tesla Motor Inc., which bought the facility last year for more than $40 million. Fremont also received a $330,000 grant from the federal Economic Development Administration to study other uses for the land surrounding the plant. Union Pacific bought the land before the city could finish the study.

  Lori Taylor, Fremont's economic-development director, said that until Union Pacific emerges with a plan, the city cannot move forward on development on the land at issue. While Tesla has helped to offset the loss of Nummi jobs, it isn't enough, she added.

"It's really important that we add jobs in that area," said Ms. Taylor.

 Write to  Bobby White at bobby.white@wsj.com 