SEOUL— SK Telecom Co. said Wednesday its first-quarter net profit was up 57% from a year earlier, thanks to a one-time gain from the sale of its stake in SK C&C Co. and a rise in the number of smartphone subscribers.

Soaring demand for high-end handsets in South Korea and the launch of new tablet computing devices in the domestic market will help improve the mobile operator's earnings in the coming quarters, most analysts said, although they added profitability could be dented by regulatory changes—industry participants expect the government, in its zeal to curb inflation, to urge telecom companies to lower their rates—and the cost of infrastructure upgrades, for which there is growing customer pressure.

South Korea's largest mobile carrier by subscribers said its net profit in the three months ended March 31 rose to 537.3 billion won (US$499 million) from 343.3 billion won a year earlier, exceeding the average 405.6 billion won forecast of six analysts polled by Dow Jones Newswires. The earnings are calculated under International Financial Reporting Standards, which South Korea's financial regulator mandated starting this year.

SK Telecom's sale of its entire 4.1% stake in SK  C&C,
CCGGY


0.33
%




 a technology services provider and an affiliate of the SK Group, also helped boost the mobile operator's bottom line in the first quarter. It gained 152.5 billion won through the sale, part of SK group's efforts to end its cross-holding structure and become a holding company.

Operating profit was up 29%, to 614.3 billion won from 476.2 billion won, on brisk smartphone sales and lower marketing expenses, the company said, while sales were up 3.8% to 3.909 trillion won from 3.764 trillion won.

"The second-quarter (operating) profit is expected to be better than the first," said Yang Jong-in, an analyst at Korea Investment & Securities. "With the new smartphone and tablet offerings flooding into the market from the second quarter, the rise in the number of smartphone subscribers could possibly outweigh the company's increased capital spending and any required telecom rate cuts by the government."

Mr. Yang forecast a higher upside potential for the company's stock price, which he currently targets at 202,000 won ($187.77). The stock closed Wednesday at 166,000 won, up 0.6%.

On Tuesday, the carrier said it raised its 2011 capital-investment budget by 15%, to 2.3 trillion won, to speed up the upgrade of its network services. The mobile operator said the additional 300 billion won will be spent on upgrading its data service quality by expanding the capacity of its third-generation networks and deploying the next-generation network technology, called long-term evolution. SK Telecom plans to launch LTE services in July to meet growing demand for wireless data services.

The mobile operator started offering  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.86
%




's iPad tablets from last week, just a month after the company began selling the iPhone 4, putting an end to rival mobile operator  KT Corp.'s exclusive distribution of the touchscreen device in the domestic market.

Korean mobile operators have been expanding their smartphone lineups and increasing their spending to address the wireless data-services market, where growth is accelerating, and make up for dwindling revenue from voice calls in the country's increasingly saturated telecom market.

SK Telecom said it has secured six million smartphone subscribers as of Wednesday and expects to exceed its target of 10 million by the end of the year.

In the first quarter, SK Telecom said its marketing expenses were down 7% from a year earlier, to 785 billion won from 844 billion won, while average revenue per user—a key industry gauge for long-term growth—was down 2.3% to 40,393 won from 41,333 won.

At the end of March, SK Telecom had 25.99 million subscribers, up around 4.7% from a year earlier. 