TOKYO—The Bank of Japan has been stung for years by charges of intransigence in responding to this nation's moribund economy. Now it is punching back. 

  Masaaki Shirakawa, the BOJ's bookish, rail-thin governor, is on an unapologetic campaign to make a case that might surprise his detractors: The Japanese central bank is in fact a misunderstood pioneer of innovative monetary policies meant to combat price deflation, such as near-zero interest rates and aggressive securities purchases, that other big central banks now are trying. And it continues to seek ways to push the boundaries of monetary policy by trying to reawaken Japan's animal spirits. 

In an apparent paradox, he also makes the case that these policies don't always work, and he is now focused on trying to redefine the way economists understand deflation, a debilitating drop in consumer prices across the economy. He argues that the Bank of Japan's hands are tied because weak consumer spending and business investment are related as much to the country's declining population, which the bank can't control, as to money supply, which it can.

"I have a lot of frustration with simplistic criticism," Mr. Shirakawa said in a lengthy interview with The Wall Street Journal in a meeting room near his office, armed with stacks of carefully collated notes.

Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke, when he was at Princeton, was among those lecturing the Japanese for being too timid. He has since told associates he regrets his sometimes-harsh tone then. 

Mr. Bernanke will have an opportunity to explain his own policies Tuesday, when he gives semi-annual testimony on the economy to Congress. He's expected to take heat from Republicans for risking inflation. 

Central banks around the world have been experimenting with unorthodox policies as they struggle with the aftermath of the financial crisis. The BOJ, long thought unique, is now a window on the challenges that come with this, as well as on the political challenges central banks increasingly are facing today. In Japan, politicians have formed a group called the Anti-Deflation League; one leader of it gives Mr. Shirakawa a grade of "F." 

Responding to the central bank's critics, the 61-year-old Mr. Shirakawa said, "The Bank of Japan has been a lonely forerunner that has implemented novel, innovative measures in a large-scale manner." 

He added, speaking in English and regularly clearing his throat as he searched for precise, carefully hedged language, "When we announced these measures, these measures attracted little attention or were considered as bizarre measures. But, in retrospect, the so-called credit easing adopted by the Federal Reserve is essentially the same as what we did in the early 2000s."

"I'm not saying that monetary policy is not important. Monetary policy is surely important, and we are making every effort to overcome deflation. What I'm saying is that Japan's deflation can't be solved by a massive increase in monetary base alone. Those efforts have to be complemented by other structural measures." More from the interview> 

When pressed, he declined to name a single mistake the BOJ had made in 15 years of fighting deflation. He wryly pointed back at Western critics who blamed Japan's prolonged stupor on the BOJ and missed the makings of America's own housing bubble.

Mr. Shirakawa, who studied at the University of Chicago in the 1970s, is turning the tables. At closed meetings that top central bankers hold regularly in Switzerland, Mr. Shirakawa has been reading carefully scripted mini-lectures to his counterparts. 

At a meeting in September, as the Fed was preparing to launch a bond-buying campaign to spur the economy, Mr. Shirakawa warned about the limitations of such unconventional policies, based on Japan's experience. 

And in a series of speeches, he has been taking his case to the public. He peppered one speech last year with 34 footnotes, 23 pages of charts and 33 references to scholarly work. 

The gist of Mr. Shirakawa's case: Far from being asleep at the switch, the BOJ in the 1990s and 2000s helped to stave off a U.S.-like Depression after Japan's bubble burst. 

He also says the central bank hasn't gotten enough credit for continuing small but significant experimental policies that he hopes will act as "a catalyst" to spur broader risk-taking and policy changes in Japanese government, business and banking. Using another scientific metaphor, he says he is trying to help reverse Japan's "decrease in economic metabolism," a job the central bank is taking on only because nobody else seems to be able or willing to do so.

Mr. Shirakawa is emerging as an unlikely voice for the Japan leadership at home and abroad, in part because, even under intense criticism, he is the most stable policy maker in a weakened government. In his roughly three-year tenure, he has worked with four prime ministers and seven finance ministers. 

Last year, the Bank for International Settlements, a coordinating body for central banks, made him vice chairman of its board, the first time a Japanese official has had so high a position there since the 1930s.

Japan has been a puzzle to economists for years, like a patient with a low-grade fever that doesn't get worse, doesn't get better and won't go away. Textbooks predicted that after Japan's property bubble burst in the early 1990s and consumer prices started falling, prices would go into a downward spiral. The spiral never happened. Instead, 15 years of very minor but nagging deflation set in, and the economy's growth rate slowed to a crawl. 

The BOJ became a laboratory for unorthodox but ultimately ineffective policies. It has bought Japanese government bonds, asset-backed securities, corporate debt and even stocks. The purchases pumped money into the financial system and were also meant to encourage risk-taking by banks and investors, Mr. Shirakawa says. But they failed to reinvigorate the economy or end deflation. 

In October, the BOJ added a new twist—5 trillion yen of securities purchases that included exchange-traded stock funds and real-estate investment trusts. After an intense debate last year the bank took the especially unusual step of channeling cheap loans toward a few favored industrial sectors, including energy, environment and health care. 

"The facility in itself may not be able to solve the fundamental problems that Japan is faced with," Mr. Shirakawa says. "But it could perform as a catalyst to initiate much-needed reactions by the government, firms and banks to collectively address the problem."

Officials now are taking a close look at pushing that even further, perhaps funneling money to firms that package bank loans and other assets into securities, in an attempt to recharge moribund credit markets. The program is controversial inside the BOJ because such targeted lending typically isn't the domain of a central bank. 

Things might be turning up for the bank, after another economic contraction in the fourth quarter. The BOJ projects the economy will expand at about a 2% annual rate for the next couple of years, aided by growth in Asian developing economies. With Japan's currency stable and its economy expanding again, pressure on the BOJ to do more has diminished. 

The bank expects Japan to climb out of deflation, too. Yet the excitement over 2% growth is testament to Japan's sharply diminished expectations. 

"There is no imminent hope for Japan to crack out of this weak growth trajectory," said  Stephen Roach, nonexecutive chairman of Morgan Stanley's Asian operations. 

Mr. Shirakawa is developing his own ideas about how deflation works. He was trained in part by Milton Friedman; Mr. Shirakawa proudly notes he took the legendary economist's last Chicago class in 1975. Mr. Friedman said inflation was purely a function of how much money a central bank gets circulating through an economy. More money causes more inflation.

Mr. Shirakawa says Japan's experience shows deflation can't be fixed by simply flooding the economy with cash. "That proposition has been disproven by the facts," he says. 

He says another factor has been at work: Japanese businesses and households have become so discouraged about the economy's long-term growth prospects, largely because of the nation's declining population and slower productivity growth, that they keep reining in their spending. Those are problems he says the BOJ can't fix on its own, even though it is rolling out programs he says might help. 

The critics say that all along, the BOJ has been too late to move, too timid when it did move and too eager to pull back its policies when the economy seemed to be on the mend. 

Mr. Bernanke has tried to avoid what he sees as BOJ mistakes. He cut interest rates quickly as the U.S. financial crisis deepened. And the Fed chief dislikes the term "quantitative easing," a term that became associated with Japan's money-pumping efforts in the 2000s. 

Mr. Bernanke, rather than emphasize how much money he's injecting into the financial system, is focused on how many long-term securities he is taking out of the hands of private investors, which he believes leads to more risk-taking while also curbing long-term interest rates. 

The Fed's holdings of long-term government bonds and government-backed mortgage debt have rocketed to $1.7 trillion from $457 billion in January 2009. 

The Bank of Japan has been reluctant to dive too aggressively into Japanese government bonds. Its holdings grew to 67.2 trillion yen (around $800 billion) in 2004 from 45.7 trillion yen in 2001, but they are lower today than in 2004. 

  Koichi Hamada, a Yale professor and former teacher of Mr. Shirakawa in Tokyo, says the BOJ's latest securities-buying program of 5 trillion yen, or about $60 billion, is just a tenth of the Fed's most recent bond-purchase program and is too small. 

It isn't just pride that drives the BOJ governor to speak out. Central banks, though they try to act otherwise, are political entities as much as technocratic ones. Central-bank chiefs around the world have been jolted by the political backlashes they have faced since the financial crisis. Many are trying to win back public opinion. Mr. Bernanke has gone on the CBS show "60 Minutes" twice in three years to explain his decisions. 

The Bank of Japan also faces political attacks, a threat to its prized independence, which dates only to 1998. 

The Anti-Deflation League, formed last year within the ruling Democratic Party of Japan, now includes nearly a quarter of all representatives in the lower house of the Diet. Rival party members who typically war over other issues mingled a week ago at a cocktail party meant for BOJ bashing. The group wants to bind the Bank of Japan to a target of achieving rising consumer prices. 

If it can't reach that target, "maybe we should be able to fire them," said  Yoichi Kaneko, the parliamentarian who gives Mr. Shirakawa an "F" for his efforts. "He is a very good scholar, but he hates to make a commitment," Mr. Kaneko says. 

Another nightmare scenario, from the BOJ's perspective, would be if it were forced by politicians to fund the government's immense debt, which after years of fruitless fiscal stimulus has grown to twice annual economic output. Mr. Shirakawa says he has no intention of going down this path.

He has no apologies for critics. The attacks don't stand up to scrutiny, he says. 

One example: His opponents say the BOJ's programs aren't big enough. Mr. Shirakawa fires back that the bank's asset holdings, one measure of how aggressive it has been, are larger than the Fed's as a percentage of economic output.

The Bank of Japan's asset holdings haven't grown much lately, and are below a December 2005 peak. But critics don't recognize how much they did grow last decade as the BOJ battled to revive Japan's economy, he says. 

The BOJ governor has spent most of his career inside the central bank. As a young man in the 1970s, he got a two-year leave to study at Chicago. His professors were impressed and wanted him to stay to get a Ph.D. The BOJ told him he had to return if wanted to keep his job. "Since I didn't have courage, I decided on going back to the Bank of Japan," he says. 

In some ways, Mr. Shirakawa runs the central bank like the intense graduate-school experiences of his youth. As he rose through the ranks, he developed a reputation for conducting brainstorming sessions that dragged on for hours, and making demands for detailed research from the staff. 

Behind his back, underlings teasingly called him Q-Chan, the nickname of Japanese marathon runner  Naoko Takahashi, fabled for running back-to-back marathons as part of her regular training. 

Mr. Shirakawa doesn't mind the analogy. "The Bank of Japan was a forerunner," he says. 