BRUSSELS—European Union member states are close to an agreement that would significantly broaden EU sanctions on Libya, a senior European Union official said Friday, citing concerns that the current measures don't specifically target Libya's sovereign wealth fund or its central bank. 

This week the EU adopted a travel ban, an arms sale prohibition and a freeze on the assets of 26 Libyans, including Col. Moammar Gadhafi, his family and close associates. 

On Friday, however, a consensus emerged among EU members that the sanctions should be expanded in the coming days to specifically name key targets such as the Libyan Investment Authority, the North African country's wealth fund, the EU official said. The EU remains uncertain, however, over what measures it can take against the Central Bank of Libya.

 U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner plans to visit Germany on Tuesday to discuss the global economy as well as sanctions on Libya and Iran. 

At meetings with "senior government officials" in Frankfurt and Berlin, Geithner will talk about "global efforts to impose sanctions applying maximum pressure" on the regime of Mr. Gadhafi, the Treasury Department said Friday. 

People within the EU have said in recent days that member states are split over whether the sanctions already pave the way to freeze the assets of the Libyan central bank and wealth fund. The wealth fund is believed to hold assets worth upward of $60 billion, much of them in Europe. 

While some countries have argued that the entities are already covered because they are effectively controlled by the Gadhafi regime, Italy has been one of several governments arguing that the EU cannot target the funds and central bank at present, another EU official said. 

An Italian official said the issue for his government was whether the wealth fund and the central bank are mere extensions of Gadhafi's regime or autonomous institutions that ultimately belong to the Libyan people. 

"You need to make sure that cutting the flow of money towards the regime doesn't penalize the Libyan public," the Italian official said. 

A potential freeze on the wealth fund "could be taken into consideration," the Italian official said, because its operations aren't viewed as being inextricably linked to the welfare of the Libyan population. The central bank, however, "needs to be looked at again," the official said. 

Any attempt to isolate the Libyan central bank from assets under the sway of the regime could be difficult. The central bank's governor, Farhat Omar Bengdara, sits on the board of the wealth fund, which holds stakes in a broad swath of Italian companies, including UniCredit SpA, Italy's biggest bank. Mr. Bengdara, who is also deputy chairman of UniCredit, wasn't available for comment.

 Write to  Laurence Norman at laurence.norman@dowjones.com and Stacy Meichtry at stacy.meichtry@wsj.com 