SEOUL—The Bank of Korea Thursday raised its benchmark interest rate for the second time this year as inflation hit a 27-month high, but hinted afterward that hereout it would likely move only gradually.

The vote to raise the base rate—by 0.25 percentage point to 3%—wasn't unanimous, BOK Gov. Kim Choong-soo said. Still, the BOK became the latest Asian central bank to try to head off the inflation that has been fueled across the region by fast economic growth, loose monetary policies and soaring prices of food, oil and commodities. Central banks in Vietnam and Thailand raised rates earlier this week.

The Korean won eased against the U.S. dollar on short-covering after the decision. The stock market edged lower, bond futures ticked higher and interest-rate swaps fell sharply on Mr. Kim's comments suggesting that further rate increases will come at a slower pace than previously thought.

Looking at the market reaction, "it's as if the BOK cut the policy rate," SK Securities analyst  Yum Sang-hoon said.

At a briefing after the decision, Mr. Kim said steady and gradual rate increases were "preferable for the economy in the long-run." That led analysts to conclude the BOK will take a breather of one or two months to see how rising prices of oil and raw materials affect the economy.

"Given that the policy rate is still very accommodative, more hikes seem inevitable," Woori Investment & Securities bond analyst  Park Jong-youn said. "The key is how fast the BOK will move. Unless the political unrest in the Middle East worsens, the hikes will likely come every other month."

Five of the 11 analysts surveyed by Dow Jones Newswires after Mr. Kim's news conference forecast a policy-rate increase of 0.25 percentage point in May; four others picked June. April and July got one vote each.

The BOK says South Korea's economy appears on track for solid growth in coming months, helped by exports and increasing investment in consumption and facilities. That leaves inflation as the top policy challenge, and fighting it means tempering demand-led inflation as the domestic economy grows strongly. Sales at the country's major department stores rose at their fastest pace on record in January.

"There is a need to manage demand-side inflation when there are shortages in the supply side," Mr. Kim said.

The BOK also raised the interest rate on soft loans to commercial banks by 0.25 percentage point to 1.5%. That rate is applied to special low-interest loans, which banks are expected to pass on to smaller companies. 

"Looking ahead, the committee, while taking overall account of financial and economic conditions both at home and abroad, will conduct monetary policy with an emphasis on ensuring that the basis for price stability is firmly anchored while the economy continues its sound growth," the BOK said in its policy statement.

South Korea's consumer prices in February were up 4.5% from a year earlier, the second month running the inflation rate has exceeded the BOK's target range of 2% to 4%. Core inflation, which excludes volatile energy and food prices, reached an 18-month high of 3.1% last month.

BOK data released earlier Thursday showed annual producer-price inflation accelerating to a 27-month high in February, fueled by rising costs of oil and raw materials and adding urgency to efforts to rein in consumer prices.

The producer price index in February was up 6.6% from a year earlier, an acceleration from January's 6.2%. The PPI is typically a good leading indicator of consumer prices.

In a report issued Wednesday, a day before the policy meeting, the BOK said it expects inflation pressures to come from both the supply and demand sides as the domestic economy makes a solid recovery.