Republican senators effectively blocked President Barack Obama's ability to nominate a director for the new consumer financial-protection agency, saying they won't confirm anyone for the post—regardless of party affiliation—unless the agency is restructured.

The move makes it likely Mr. Obama will resort to a so-called recess appointment, tapping someone to run the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau when Congress is out of session. The agency needs a confirmed director in place by July 21 or, according to the legislation that established the agency, its new powers to attack fraudulent and abusive financial practices can't be put into effect.

The GOP threat could also spur the White House to appoint Elizabeth Warren, a longtime critic of the financial-services industry who pushed to create the agency and is currently helping to set up the agency as an adviser to Mr. Obama. The White House has shied away from nominating Ms. Warren for fear she couldn't win confirmation. But she remains popular with many Democrats, particularly those in the left wing of the party.

A spokeswoman for the agency declined to comment.

In a blunt letter to Mr. Obama, 44 Republican senators said they won't confirm anyone for the post because the agency lacks accountability and its director would enjoy too much unfettered power. Since Senate confirmation requires 60 votes, the Republican resistance ensures no nominee will be confirmed.

"The present structure of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau…violates basic principles of accountability and our democratic values," the letter states.

Senate Banking Chairman Tim Johnson (D., S.D.) blasted the Republican position, calling it "just another attempt by Republicans to delay and derail these critical new protections." 

The GOP ultimatum is the latest hurdle for the nascent agency, which was created to police consumer financial products, such as credit cards and mortgages, when Congress passed last year the Dodd-Frank financial-regulation overhaul. 

The agency, which is opposed by many business groups, is under attack on Capitol Hill where Republicans are seeking to replace its director post with a five-member commission, give Congress authority over its funding and make it easier to overturn its rules. This week, several bills aimed at weakening the agency passed a House subcommittee.

Much of the ire has been directed toward Ms. Warren. But the GOP senators made clear it doesn't matter if the White House nominates her or anyone else, saying they won't support anyone for the post until changes are made.

The changes they seek include establishing a board to oversee the agency—rather than a single individual—and subjecting the agency's budget to the appropriations process rather than having its funding come from the Federal Reserve.

The White House is unlikely to support those changes. Administration officials say the agency is subject to oversight, including annual reports to Congress justifying its budget. 

Amy Brundage, a White House spokeswoman, said the agency's "sole mission is to protect American families and provide the tools they need to make smart financial decisions.…The president believes that American families who were the hardest hit by this financial crisis deserve an independent watchdog to protect consumers and prevent predatory lending and other abuses in the future. " 

The administration has been struggling to find a director to lead the agency, with several candidates rebuffing its overtures.

The White House has unsuccessfully reached out to Democrats such as former Michigan Gov. Jennifer Granholm and former Delaware Sen. Ted Kaufman, as well as attorneys general from Iowa, Illinois and Massachusetts, according to people familiar with the matter. Others under consideration for the post include Democratic former Ohio Gov. Ted Strickland and Federal Reserve Board member Sarah Bloom Raskin.

Many on the left want Ms. Warren to have the director's job, and some potential candidates have expressed concern that accepting the post could be seen as stepping on her toes.

 Write to  Deborah Solomon at deborah.solomon@wsj.com 