LAHORE, Pakistan—A U.S. consular official shot dead two armed men after they stopped him in a crowded street in the Pakistani city of Lahore, triggering a public protest in a nation where anti-Americanism is fierce.

A pedestrian was also killed when he was struck by a car from the U.S. Consulate that came to rescue the diplomat as he was being chased by a crowd.

Scores of people protested and burned tires outside the police station where the American man was being held after the shooting. Television footage showed the man's white Honda car, with a civilian registration plate, riddled with bullet holes and the windshield smashed.

Lahore police chief Aslam Tareen said the American shot both men after they pointed guns at him at an intersection. One of the alleged robbers died on the spot while the second succumbed to injuries in a local hospital.

Authorities registered a double-murder case in the incident, said Rana Sanaullah, the law minister of Punjab province, of which Lahore is the capital, in a televised statement. In Pakistan, a case is filed for investigative purposes; charges, if filed, would follow the investigation.

Police identified the man as consular employee Raymond Davis, and said he would be produced before a magistrate on Friday. The U.S. Consulate confirmed that an employee was involved in an incident in Lahore, without providing further details. 

Police said a murder case has also been registered against an unidentified person after a complaint was filed by the family of Ebadur Rehman, the pedestrian killed by the consulate car. 

Scores of people gathered outside the hospital where Mr. Rehman's body lay, chanting anti-American slogans and demanded that the American should be tried for murder. Members of Pakistan's National Assembly, meanwhile, called for action in the deaths. 

Consular employees would customarily be covered by diplomatic immunity from any legal action.

Mr. Sanaullah, the law minister, said it was too early to say whether the men killed were robbers. It was also unclear whether the attackers had links to the militant Islamist groups that have mounted attacks across Pakistan in the past two years.

Lahore, Pakistan's second-largest city after Karachi, has in that time been hit by terrorist attacks that have left hundreds dead.

Western diplomats in Pakistan are given strict security guidelines because of threats from militants, but are restricted in carrying firearms. In several incidents, U.S. diplomatic cars were stopped by security agencies in Lahore and Islamabad and searched for weapons, prompting tensions with local authorities.

Some Pakistani media outlets have been fanning anti-American sentiment with charges of American conspiracies in Pakistan, including accusations that diplomats were involved in spying.       