SEOUL—The U.S. sees no need to redeploy nuclear weapons to South Korea, a senior U.S. official said Wednesday, despite increasing pressure from some ruling-party politicians here. 

"We have no plan and we have no intention to deploy U.S. tactical or other nuclear weapons in South Korea. Moreover, we don't believe that there is a military need to do so,"  Robert Einhorn, the State Department's special adviser for nonproliferation and arms control, said to reporters during a visit at South Korea's foreign ministry. "The United States and South Korea can have a robust, effective deterrent without the deployment of U.S. nuclear weapons in South Korea."

The pressure comes from politicians worried by North Korea's attacks on the South last year and its continuing nuclear-weapons program, but Mr. Einhorn said U.S. military forces have multiple ways of quickly countering a North Korean nuclear attack on the South.

The U.S., which has been South Korea's main defense ally for more than 60 years, withdrew its nuclear weapons from South Korea in 1991, a move that satisfied neither side in the inter-Korean conflict. North Korea frequently accuses the U.S. and South Korea of continuting to keep U.S. nuclear weapons in the South. South Korean officials have long debated whether to have the U.S. redeploy its nuclear weapons here or start developing its own.



That debate reheated last year following two North Korean attacks, in March on a naval ship and in November on an island. The then-defense minister said at a parliamentary hearing the week before the second attack that South Korea should consider asking for U.S. nuclear redeployment, but the government hasn't acted on the matter since.

In the past week, one of the country's most powerful politicians urged President  Lee Myung-bak to make the request, and editorials in several newspapers followed suit.

"We have no options to frustrate the North's nuclear ambitions," said the politician,  Chung Mong-joon, a former chairman of the ruling Grand National Party and potential presidential candidate in 2012. "That explains why some people here say that South Korea needs to be armed with nuclear weapons."

Putting U.S. nuclear weapons back in South Korea would also likely be a jolt to North Korea's main ally, China, which has thwarted United Nations Security Council discussions of both North Korea's attacks on South Korea and its self-disclosed uranium-enrichment activities.

Mr. Einhorn told reporters the U.S. would continue to seek a Security Council statement on the North's uranium work.

He flew to Seoul to continue negotiations between the U.S. and South Korea on a new agreement on civil nuclear cooperation. The current pact, set in 1972 and changed slightly in 1974, will expire in 2014.

Since that agreement, South Korea's nuclear-energy industry has grown huge; its 21 nuclear reactors supply about 40% of the country's electricity. The country's major utilities and construction firms also sell nuclear-plant technology abroad.

North Korea, meanwhile, has used nuclear technology principally to develop weapons. It tested nuclear explosives in 2006 and 2009.

Mr. Einhorn said the new agreement between the U.S. and South Korea on nuclear cooperation "has to recognize the differences that have developed in the last 30, 40 years."

 Write to  Evan Ramstad at evan.ramstad@wsj.com 