 Renault said it finalized compensation for three senior managers wrongfully dismissed in January following an industrial espionage investigation.  

The French auto maker also said Matthieu Tenenbaum accepted its offer to return to the company, while Michel Balthazard and Bertrand Rochette declined to return.



Sweden's National Debt Office said it saw no reason to deny Russian businessman Vladimir Antonov ownership in Dutch car maker Spyker Cars, raising the prospects that Spyker will be able to rescue its troubled auto maker Saab Automobile.



 Almost exactly two years after Chrysler Group was ushered into bankruptcy, it is now poised to repay the entire $7.5 billion in loans it received from the U.S. and Canadian governments, and deepen its alliance with Fiat. 



Earthquake-hit Honda Motor posted a 38% decline in net profit in its fiscal fourth quarter to ¥44.55 billion ($543 million) and foreshadowed more trouble ahead.



 Banco Santander said that another weak quarter in Europe outweighed strong growth in Latin American, pushing down its overall net profit by 4.8% to €2.11 billion ($3.12 billion).  



 Deutsche Bank reported a 17% jump in first-quarter net profit to €2.1 billion ($3.11 billion), lifted by recent acquisitions and the performance of its investment bank.  



Merck reported a 78% rise in first-quarter net profit to €341.1 million ($504.6 million), buoyed by a disposal and sales from life-science division Millipore, which it bought last summer. 



Booming commodity prices prompted German pharmaceutical and chemical company Bayer to raise its forecast, after strong sales of crop-protection products helped its first-quarter net profit increase 8.4% to €684 million ($1.01 billion) despite charges for restructuring and litigation. 



 A committee of Berkshire Hathaway directors put the blame on the stock-trading controversy dogging the conglomerate squarely on former executive David Sokol, saying he misled top executives, including Chairman and Chief Executive Warren Buffett.  



Unilever posted a 7% rise in first-quarter sales to 10.9 billion euros ($16.13 billion) on growing demand in emerging markets, but warned that its first-half profits will decline owing to sluggish demand in mature economies and rising commodity prices. 



Procter & Gamble's quarterly profit rose 11% to $2.87 billion as sales increased across all its segments. Net sales rose 5.5% to $20.23 billion as volume grew 5%.



Pepsico's profit dropped 20% to $1.14 billion on a prior-year gain as the food-and-beverage company gained due to higher world-wide snacks and beverage volume. 



Exxon Mobil, the world's largest publicly traded oil company by market value, posted a 69% rise in first-quarter earnings to $10.65 billion on higher oil prices and stronger refining margins. 



Gazprom, the world's largest producer of natural gas, posted a 24% rise in full-year net profit in 2010 to 968.56 billion rubles ($35.12 billion) as both prices and volumes recovered. 



 Royal Dutch Shell's first-quarter net profit soared 60% to $8.78 billion on high oil prices, upstream production growth and continued cost-cutting. 



Italian eyewear maker Luxottica Group posted a 21% increase in first-quarter profit to €115 million ($170.1 million), helped by a sales rebound in the U.S.



 AIG filed a lawsuit against money managers ICP Asset Management and Moore Capital Management in a New York court, alleging it suffered losses from insuring complex mortgage securities created and managed by ICP. 



U.S. insurance company Liberty Mutual Group and Irish government-owned Anglo Irish Bank agreed to buy loss-making Quinn Insurance Limited, Ireland's largest general insurer that was put into administration last year amid the economic crisis. 



Nomura Holdings reported a 35% drop in net profit in its fiscal fourth quarter to ¥11.90 billion ($145 million), with overseas operations remaining unprofitable for the fourth straight quarter. 



Shareholders loudly told NYSE Euronext's board of directors to open talks with unsolicited bidders Nasdaq OMX Group and IntercontinentalExchange, warning that an agreed deal with Deutsche Börse undervalues their company. 

Earlier, NYSE Euronext said first-quarter net profit rose 26% to $177 million and that its integration planning with Deutsche Börse is on track. 



British Sky Broadcasting said net profit for its fiscal third quarter dropped 39% to £174 million ($289.5 million), though the year-ago figure was boosted by sale proceeds from a forced divestment of its stake in U.K. terrestrial broadcaster ITV. Revenue rose 13% to £1.65 billion.

 Sanofi-Aventis reported a 29% drop in first-quarter net profit to €1.22 billion ($1.8 billion), hurt by growing competition to key drugs.  



AstraZeneca reported a 4.7% rise in first-quarter net profit to $2.91 billion on strong growth in emerging markets, robust sales of top-selling drugs and the release of a financial provision. 



A U.S. government-funded study comparing the Genentech drugs Lucentis and Avastin to treat the leading cause of blindness showed both were equally effective at treating an eye disease, but also found a higher rate of "serious systemic events" among patients treated with Avastin. 



McDonald's is planning its biggest expansion in China, aiming to open 700 new stores by 2013 as the fast-food giant faces increasing challenges from competitors. 



 Wal-Mart Stores is quietly bringing back rifles, shotguns and ammunition to hundreds of U.S. stores as the hurting retail giant seeks to reinvigorate its one-stop shopping appeal and attract more male customers.  



 Microsoft's fiscal third-quarter profit jumped 31% to $5.23 billion as the software giant reported higher sales at four of the company's five segments. 

 Software maker SAP reported first-quarter net profit growth of 4% to €403 million ($596.2 million), far below expectations.  



Panasonic said it has slashed 17,600 jobs over the past year and plans to cut another 17,000 over the next two years as part of its efforts to streamline overlapping operations following its acquisition of Sanyo Electric.

The company also posted a narrower net loss of ¥40.7 billion ($496 million) in the three months through March, compared with an ¥88.9 billion loss for the same period a year earlier.



Samsung's second-generation Galaxy S phone, launched in its home country of South Korea, shows few apparent changes in appearance from the first-generation model that prompted a lawsuit by Apple last week. 



NTT DoCoMo said net profit for the first quarter fell 38% from a year earlier to ¥45.5 billion ($554.6 million) due to an earth quake-related loss and amid increasingly intense competition for new mobile phone subscribers. 



 Exelon, the largest operator of nuclear plants in the U.S., agreed to buy electricity generator and utility operator Constellation Energy Group in a stock-for-stock deal valued at about $8 billion. 