India's Tata Power Co. is one of the shortlisted bidders for a 30% stake in a coal unit owned by Indonesian conglomerate Sinar Mas, two people familiar with the matter said Tuesday.

While the people didn't disclose the financial details of the Tata Power bid, one of them told Dow Jones Newswires that Sinar Mas was seeking at least $300 million for a 30% stake.

Both people, who asked not to be named, said up to seven bidders have been shortlisted.

"There are two to three Indian companies on the shortlist, and Tata Power is one of them," one of the person said.

Tata Power, India's largest private power producer by volume, is part of the salt-to-steel-to-cars Tata group. Its officials couldn't be immediately reached for comment.

Sinar Mas has interests in pulp and paper, crude palm oil, banking and energy. Sinar Mas unit PT Golden Energy Mines, in which a 30% stake is up for sale, holds three coal blocks with combined reserves of more than one billion tons, mostly from its block in Kalimantan, in the Indonesian part of Borneo. It also has two blocks in Sumatra, in northern Indonesia. The islands of Sumatra and Kalimantan hold most of Indonesia's coal reserves.

Tata power's bid comes at a time when local companies scramble to secure scarce coal assets to feed growing demand from the rapidly expanding power and mining sectors.

Recent acquisitions of coal assets include Indian utility JSW Energy Ltd.'s agreement to purchase Canada-based  CIC Energy Corp. for C$422 million, and Indian power and infrastructure group Lanco Infratech Ltd.'s acquisition of Australia-based Griffin Coal Mining Co.'s mining assets.

The rush for coal assets is tipped to continue, with the  Aditya Birla group also readying to make a binding bid after making the shortlist to buyout Australian coal-miner  Whitehaven Coal Ltd., a person involved in the process said Monday.

Other local companies including India's  Essar Energy PLC, Adani Power Ltd. and the state-run Indian consortium set up to secure coal assets have all said in recent months that they are looking to buy coal assets.





  