NEW DELHI (Mint)--Tata Capital Limited's Growth Fund has raised its first tranche of money after having begun marketing in July 2010, said a company official on condition of anonymity.

The fund has raised $200 million, largely from domestic and international limited partners, or investors in private equity funds. Nearly 40% of the fund was raised from domestic investors, while those from abroad contributed just over a third. Tata Capital put in the rest of the money.

The money collected is half the $400 million that the growth fund wants to raise. The fund hopes to obtain $100 million from domestic limited partners, and a further $300 million from international investors. The contribution of high networth individuals in the fund is expected to be negligible, which is traditional in corporate private equity funds such as this.

International institutional investors are decreasing their asset allocation in India, making it difficult for Tata Capital to raise money, the company official said.

The most enthusiastic investors in India, such as  CDC Group Plc., the UK government's private investment division, now prefer other growth economies.

"The structure of how [limited partners] want to invest in India is changing," the person said. "Previously, the flow came through a fund of funds approach—but the allocation model is now becoming increasingly 'disintermediated'—that is, investors are looking at making direct investments into India. They are saying that if they see a good investment they would rather invest directly."

The company confirmed that 95% of the money raised thus far is from a diverse mix of institutional investors, who "know and understand the India opportunity". Tata Capital used the Japanese firm,  Mizuho Securities Co. Ltd, as its placement agent.

  Akhil Awasthi heads the five-person team which will run the fund. He joined Tata Capital, a subsidiary of Tata Sons Ltd and a non-banking financial company, in November 2009. Before that he spent 12 years at Baring Private Equity Partners as a partner leading the healthcare team.

The Tata Capital fund will be positioned to make deals in the $15-25 million range— slightly under the sweet spot for most mid-market, growth-stage funds.

Japan Bank for International Cooperation, the international wing of the Japanese government's Japan Finance Corp., has invested $25 million in the fund to invest principally in Indian growth companies.

This commitment, which was made last year, remains unaffected by the recent natural disasters the country has experienced.

Tata Capital's official spokesperson declined to comment on some of Mint's queries due to legal stipulations.

"We believe the real growth story of India for the coming decade will develop in (small and medium-size enterprises) who have developed a robust business model at a small scale and are now ready to reap the benefits of growth," the company told Mint in an e-mail response.

The growth fund will look at minority transactions without focusing on any particular sector. The team running the fund is bullish on businesses that will emerge as India becomes increasingly urbanized. The secondary area of focus will be information technology and related services.