  Danielle Chiesi—brassily blond, provocatively attired and outrageously blunt—cut quite a figure in the shadow world where tech-company insiders and hedge-fund moguls swapped gossip about silicon chips and bottom-line earnings.

Then, the former beauty queen was swept up in the largest insider-trading case in a generation, nabbed by federal agents in 2009 who turned her contacts into witnesses and secretly recorded their incriminating conversations. Ms. Chiesi, the government said, was a key conduit for market-moving, inside information that helped make Galleon Group founder  Raj Rajaratnam a hedge-fund star.

On Wednesday, the 45-year-old Ms. Chiesi, low on cash and unable to quash the damning wiretaps, pleaded guilty to three counts of conspiracy to commit securities fraud. She faces more than three years in prison, which would be the longest sentence handed down in the Galleon matter thus far.

The plea adds to mounting legal pressure on Mr. Rajaratnam, who faces trial late next month. A spokesman for Mr. Rajaratnam, who has denied wrongdoing, declined to comment.

"This guilty plea causes me great pain. I'm deeply ashamed by what I did," Ms. Chiesi said Wednesday, choking up at a hearing in a New York federal court. She said she had "ruined a 20-year career" by committing the crimes and "brought disrepute to what was an honorable profession." 

Her remorseful remarks contrasted with more salty language on display in the case. In one wiretapped exchange, she told a contact she would be "like Martha f---ing Stewart" if she was caught passing a tip to a contact, referring to the television personality's obstruction-of-justice conviction in a previous insider-trading case.

How information was allegedly shared in Danielle Chiesi's personal network

Ms. Chiesi is the 17th of 24 defendants to plead guilty in the case, which gripped Wall Street and corporate America because it was a high-profile example of prosecutors' willingness to rely on wiretaps to build a case alleging wrongdoing in the financial world. 

Ms. Chiesi's plea is the most significant in the case. Wiretap transcripts showed Mr. Rajaratnam working closely with Ms. Chiesi, then a hedge-fund manager, who served as a key link between him and a network of contacts, particularly in the technology world. Recordings from Ms. Chiesi's phone led to a number of hedge funds with whom she allegedly swapped information, people close to the situation say.

The guilty pleas by Ms. Chiesi and other defendants make it more difficult for Mr. Rajaratnam to combat the government charges, lawyers uninvolved in the case say. 

Jeff Ifrah, a white-collar lawyer in Washington, said jurors can be swayed against a defendant if multiple people in an alleged conspiracy admit guilt in the same case. "An additional guilty plea will add to that pressure," Mr. Ifrah said, particularly from such an important defendant.

Mr. Rajaratnam's spokesman declined to comment on whether his client would plead guilty before trial. The same federal judge in New York who ruled on the wiretap issue, Richard J. Holwell, will oversee the trial of Mr. Rajaratnam.

The guilty plea provides a boost to a wide-ranging effort by the government to prosecute insider trading on Wall Street and in corporate America. The development comes amid a separate criminal insider-trading case that has led to arrests in recent weeks of consultants and employees of an "expert network" firm that matches hedge funds with company employees who are paid to provide them with information. More charges in that case are expected this month. 

The guilty plea caps a downward spiral for Ms. Chiesi, from Binghamton, N.Y., who worked at a Bear Stearns hedge fund. Ms. Chiesi admitted to receiving inside information about International Business Machines Corp., Sun Microsystems Inc. and Advanced Micro Devices Inc. and passing it along to her contacts.

Ms. Chiesi's lawyer, Alan Kaufman, said she didn't trade personally on the information. None of those companies was alleged to have done anything wrong. 

Ms. Chiesi's relationship with Mr. Rajaratnam is at the center of the Galleon case. She met Mr. Rajaratnam in the summer of 2007 after she told a Galleon employee at a technology conference that she wanted to be introduced to the hedge fund manager. Soon after, she met Mr. Rajaratnam at a restaurant near the hedge fund's offices in midtown Manhattan. 

Early in the morning of Oct. 16, 2009, agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation knocked on Ms. Chiesi's door, confronting her with the evidence they had gathered. 

She walked into the hallway of her Manhattan apartment, worried about letting the agents in because they might find a marijuana joint in the apartment from a party the night before, according to a person familiar with the matter.

When the agents asked her if she had a weapon, she told them she had a fish and a cat, the person says.

Ms. Chiesi refused an offer to cooperate in the investigation by recording conversations with her contacts, the person says, and was arrested, throwing on a white sweater for a "perp" walk.

In the following months, Ms. Chiesi maintained her innocence. She embarked on a campaign to repair her reputation, appearing in a fashionable suit with a new hairdo at her next court date. On Wednesday she was dressed in a black pant suit with her hair neatly pulled up.

As the government gained more guilty pleas from defendants in the case, she felt betrayed by her contacts, people familiar with the matter say. She enrolled in French culinary school in Manhattan, hoping to one day become a chef like her grandfather, the person familiar with the matter says.

Ms. Chiesi also attracted media attention after one of the other defendants in the case conceded he had a romantic relationship with her. Last year,  Robert Moffatt Jr., a former IBM executive, admitted in court papers to having "an intimate relationship" with Ms. Chiesi. Mr. Moffatt, 54, is serving a six-month sentence. A lawyer for Mr. Moffatt declined to comment.

Ms. Chiesi also had a romantic relationship with her former boss at Bear Stearns,  Mark Kurland, according to the person familiar with the matter. The 62-year-old Mr. Kurland pleaded guilty to conspiracy and securities fraud last year and is currently serving a 27-month sentence in an Otisville, N.Y., federal prison. Ms. Chiesi has told people close to her that she "never cared about coin. I did it all for Mark Kurland." 

A lawyer for Mr. Kurland declined to comment.

In recent months, her finances had become strained, the person says. She spoke with her lawyer about the possibility of a guilty plea, but was urged by the lawyer to wait until the judge ruled on whether the wiretap evidence would be allowed at trial, the person familiar with the matter says.

In mid-December, after the wiretap ruling, Ms. Chiesi became distraught, realizing that a guilty plea was in the offing and that she would serve a prison sentence as a result, the person says.

Ms. Chiesi could have faced a maximum sentence of 155 years in prison if she had been convicted of all 16 counts against her, the government said. 

At the hearing Wednesday, Ms. Chiesi says she is now seeing a psychiatrist and is taking anti-anxiety medication.

 Write to  Chad Bray at chad.bray@dowjones.com and Susan Pulliam at susan.pulliam@wsj.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications  Danielle Chiesi is the 17th of 24 defendants to plead guilty in the Galleon insider-trading case. A previous version of this article incorrectly said she was the 16th defendant in the Galleon case to plead guilty.