The options market has a handful of signals for investors looking to the new year. The most glaring: Rougher trading in the stock market may be right around the corner.

Read the complete  Year-End Review report .

Investors can plumb prices in the options market for hints on stocks' outlook, specific sectors or even scenarios like bank-stock dividend increases. The broadest measure of investor sentiment, the Chicago Board Options Exchange's Volatility Index, suggests the market is more confident than at any time since the financial crisis. The "fear index" of Standard & Poor's 500 options prices recently sunk to levels last seen in July 2007, suggesting a green light for stocks. 

But sophisticated investors also trade futures on the VIX, as the gauge is also known, to hedge or act on their views a few months out. Those futures show skepticism in the form of much higher volatility expectations. March contracts point about 38% higher than recent VIX levels, a view that would bring some gyrations to the stock market if it bears out. 

"You definitely have some upcoming catalysts that could drive volatility, such as earnings results or renewed European sovereign concerns," Credit Suisse equity derivatives strategist  Terry Wilson said. Mr. Wilson, who predicts that a rockier market could come as soon as January, calls the relatively low prices of options an opportunity to guard stock portfolios. 

The low VIX level itself, viewed against its elevated futures, strikes some observers as cautionary.  Dan Bystrom, head of U.S. equity derivatives trading, at MF Global Inc., views the contrast as one of several signs of overcomplacency in the market, at a time when a variety of macroeconomic head winds could blow stocks back.

Diving down to specific sectors shows the market's quite placid volatility outlook isn't fully echoed in a few key areas. For instance, for stocks to advance on full throttle, emerging markets and financial services are two areas where many investors would want to see a bullish outlook. 

But over-the-counter "outperformance" options on emerging markets and financials show the market isn't pricing in much direction for either. The odds look to be roughly even for emerging markets and financial stocks to outperform or to underperform the S&P 500 index next year, according to a recent analysis of those contracts by UBS AG's derivatives strategists. 

UBS also looked at the options market's view for the S&P 500 to fall to the 1000 level any time this year. The probability came in at a not-insignificant 38%.

The uncertainty persists even though at least some of the stock market's most hotly anticipated positives are showing up in the options market. For instance, the prospect for bank-stock dividend increases was one of the factors boosting investor confidence this past fall. Options have a say on that subject, since their prices reflect an "implied dividend" in order for the contracts to trade. The outlook is growing more positive.

  J.P. Morgan Chase
JPM


1.40
%




 & Co.'s options show a widely anticipated dividend increase, as do contracts for  Wells Fargo
WFC


0.90
%




 & Co. and  PNC Financial Services Group Inc.,
PNC


0.59
%




 according to an MKM Partners analysis.  US Bancorp
USB


0.11
%




 is also pricing in an increase, albeit smaller, the firm found.

Much of the anxiety leads back to the same subjects that roiled markets in 2010: Europe's sovereign-debt woes, the potential overheating of the Chinese economy or the uneven state of the U.S. recovery.

"Volatility is going to be a lot like 2010—low for much of the year, but we may see some spikes as these macro head winds emerge from time to time," UBS AG equity derivatives strategist  Mitchell Revsine said. 

One area that bears an especially close look is the health of the U.S. consumer. Retail is a sector that strategists mention repeatedly when recommending which stocks to hedge.

Credit Suisse recently recommended locking up some of the holiday froth in retail stocks by buying put options on the SPDR S&P Retail exchange-traded fund. In particular, the firm read  Best Buy Co.
BBY


0.64
%




's tough quarter as a sign that analysts have overshot the good news that many retailers can deliver.

"There's an opportunity to acquire cheap protection right now, because volatility in the market has been so muted lately," Credit Suisse's Mr. Wilson said.

 Write to  Brendan Conway at brendan.conway@dowjones.com 