NFL owners have locked out the players. NFL players are suing the owners. And with football's future looking increasingly uncertain, there sits in East Rutherford, N.J., the $1.6 billion stadium the Giants and Jets built.

Thank goodness for futbol.

When the U.S. national team takes on Argentina's national team at 7 p.m. Saturday in New Jersey, they'll do it in a New Meadowlands Stadium that kept futbol—AKA soccer—a consideration in its building only a tad less than it did American football. Soccer's sightlines were weighed by the architects, the seats in the corners were made removable to leave room for corner kicks and the bidding to be one of the country's prospective World Cup sites began before construction was complete.

"The new stadium is the best. The demographics in New York are the best. This is the perfect environment for me," said promoter Henry Cardenas, who manages the commercial rights for the Argentines and who has now produced more than 150 international soccer matches in America. 

"It is a sellout Saturday, so I will be back," he said. "Easy."

That is like the once sweet-sounding croon of a vuvuzela to Mark Lamping, CEO of the New Meadowlands Stadium.

A self-professed soccer fanatic, Lamping didn't want to admit that the United States' coming up empty in the latest round of World Cup bidding hurt his now year-old stadium. But had the U.S. been awarded the 2022 World Cup, Lamping would have had his pick of international friendlies for the next 10 years. Teams would have wanted to play on the pitch they'd eventually compete on, and East Rutherford would have quickly become one of the world's premier soccer destinations.

"We think we can still be that," Lamping said, pointing to the perfect sellout mark the stadium has thus far amassed for soccer.

The New Meadowlands Stadium's first professional event— three months before its first Giants-Jets preseason game—was the World Cup tune-up last May between Mexico and Ecuador, which drew 77,507. In its first match after the World Cup, the U.S. drew 77,223 to East Rutherford for its match with Brazil. 

This has long been a strong soccer community; quarterfinal and semifinal matches of the 1994 World Cup were at the old Giants Stadium, as was the opening doubleheader of the 1999 Women's World Cup.

A person involved in international soccer scheduling said that history is why New Meadowlands Stadium secured an as-yet-unannounced June 11 game between Italy and Ireland. Lamping said he couldn't confirm that game until all the paperwork was complete, but he did acknowledge aggressively courting "some of the top clubs in the world."

The ticket revenue at a soccer game is more than at a concert, but not what it would be for a football game because of lower ticket prices. Still, with seats ranging from $45 to $325 for Saturday's game, Cardenas said he can command higher prices for soccer in the New York-metro area than anywhere else. He guessed that the ticket revenue alone from Saturday's game would be $5 million.

While New Meadowlands Stadium will be the promoter for some games, the cost of staging this particular game falls to Cardenas. He said he paid a rental fee of roughly $600,000 to New Meadowlands Stadium, which includes wages to the game-day event staff, and paid to put in the grass field over the stadium's Field Turf, which runs about $200,000. Advertising and promotion are his responsibility. He keeps the ticket revenue and the New Meadowlands Stadium Company takes the parking and concession fees. 

Lamping said the money generated by the event is secondary to the "once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to see this type of competition and to see Lionel Messi," the world's highest-paid footballer. And, of course, to forge recognition as a soccer mecca.

The CONCACAF Gold Cup is coming here in June, with a first-round game at 25,000-seat Red Bull Arena in Harrison, N.J., then a quarterfinal at the New Meadowlands Stadium.

 Red Bulls managing director Erik Stover said officials at both sites communicated frequently and are not in direct competition because of the seating capacities of their facilities.  

 Write to  Aditi Kinkhabwala at aditi.kinkhabwala@wsj.com 