There's an acidic remark by Dorothy Parker, the New Yorker wit of the 1920s, that just about sums up our present economic predicament. She was asked if she'd heard the news that President Calvin Coolidge was dead and responded: "How can they tell?" 

How can we tell that our long-awaited recovery is alive? Once the pulse began to beat a little more strongly last year it was assumed that we were on course to something like full health. Recently attention has been mostly focused on the various deficits, the debt ceiling, and the budget battles. They're all matters of concern but all of them will be more menacing if the nascent recovery is stalled or even reversed. Is that happening? Or are we on an ascent at last with 192,000 new jobs added to nonfarm rolls last month?

Three elements offer clues: consumer spending, housing and unemployment.

Importantly, the bubble of exuberant consumerism that powered the U.S. economy for the last 10 years of the 20th century and for most of the first years of the 21st century has burst. In reaction to economic hard times, American consumers are planning for the worst rather than hoping for the best, and they continue to pay down household debt instead of spending cash.

Who could blame people for holding back when we see roughly 50 million Americans on one or more taxpayer-supported programs, be it food stamps or unemployment benefits? This downturn may not have the 1930s feel of despair, but in large part that is because, as the economist David Rosenberg of the wealth-management firm Gluskin Sheff put it, "The modern day soup line is a check in the mail."

An unprecedented number of Americans are borrowing against their 401(k)s, canceling their life insurance policies, and forgoing physicals. And that isn't all. The American consumer today is fearful of the impact of higher food prices, higher gasoline prices, higher insurance costs, higher everything. The inflation of food and fuel alone has absorbed the December tax cuts agreed to by Congress and the administration. 

So where has the recent modest growth in the economy come from? It is primarily due to massive amounts of federal government stimulus and a huge inventory swing, both of which will peter out this year. Only the wealthiest 10% of the population, whose stock portfolios have come roaring back, are doing well, but their spending is not enough to spur the economy or create much additional hiring. 

Why are all the vital signs discouraging? Quite simply, it is because households are still carrying far too much debt on their balance sheets. Relative to income, debt today is approximately twice as high for families as it was in the 1980s. Total borrowing in relation to disposable, personal after-tax income leaped to approximately 136% in the first quarter of 2008 from 60% in the early 1980s before it began to recede. It has now declined to 117% of income compared to the pre- bubble norm of 70%. To return to that level, debt would have to be reduced by another $6 trillion. Similarly, the debt-to-asset ratio in relation to household assets is currently 20%, but the pre-bubble norm was 12.5%. The deleveraging process still has a long ways to go. 

As more U.S. households pay down their debt, the slowdown in consumer spending will continue. The savings rate, which had averaged 8.6% during the 1980s and 5.5% in the 1990s, dropped to an alarming 2.8% in the 2000s. No longer are households engaging in mortgage equity cash-outs to the tune of over $80 billion per quarter, as they did in 2006. Cash-out refinancing today has dropped by 90%, contracting the available funds that helped power the pre-2007 spending binge. 

Not surprisingly, middle-class Americans are growing increasingly leery of debt. This trend will continue as more families realize their retirement nest egg is going to be a whole lot smaller than they expected. Credit cards provide a marker. In a survey taken towards the end of last year by Javelin Strategy & Research, only 45% of households used credit cards in 2010, compared to 56% in 2009, and 87% in 2007.

Virtually every index of consumer sentiment supports this sense of consumer restraint. In a recent poll taken by the Pew Research Center, 71% of American consumers say they are buying less expensive brands, 57% say they have trimmed or eliminated vacations, 11% have postponed marriage or children, and 9% have moved in with their families, reducing spending on alcoholic beverages, clothing and restaurants. In other words, roughly 25 million unemployed or partially unemployed Americans are focusing on basic necessities. They make up a part of the 42 million Americans on food stamps.

Quite simply, American households are seeking to become net savers, not net borrowers. This is hardly surprising when real median household incomes are down over 4% from the 2000-2009 decade, according to recent research conducted by Mr. Rosenberg at Gluskin Sheff. Net worth has declined by more than $100,000 for the average household compared to just three years ago, and total household net worth is $12 trillion lower today than at the pre-recession peak—an unprecedented decline of 18.5% over three years. The bulk of this loss comes from diminished home equity, and with more than six million homes in inventory or in foreclosure, prices have been declining again for the past six months. 

In short, the triple whammy of weak consumer sales, a weak housing market, and a deeply anemic job market is still very much with us. There are no quick fixes to the post-bubble credit collapse. The painful process of deleveraging is far from over. Current debt loads are not sustainable either by incomes or asset values, which are falling. 

That's why our economic pulse is so weak. Real GDP growth is less than half of what one would ordinarily expect to see coming out of such a deep downturn. And there has been virtually no recovery at all with respect to housing, income levels and employment. 

The government's February jobs report reaped a slew of cheerful headlines. But much of the bounce came in construction, where workers were kept idle by January's snowfalls. Job gains for the past three months averaged just 135,000—we need 150,000 a month just to keep pace with population. And government figures don't take into account the two million plus discouraged workers who've dropped out of the labor force over the past year and a half and are still unemployed. If counted, the jobless rate would have been 11.5% in February.

Government programs may have provided an early, if minor, lift to the economy, but clearly they have not sustained it. One possible engine of recovery may be the improving profitability of corporate America, if the cash finds its way into increased capital spending and employment. But with companies uncertain about the future, that's not happening.

Like it or not, our increasingly anemic recovery may yet require the jolt of a substantial new stimulus. For any such defibrillation shock to be effective—or politically feasible—it must not spook the bond market. That means the patient must be assured of longer-term reductions in the major expenditure programs of the national government. Until we have a credible and convincing plan, it seems we'll have an economy that is neither certifiably dead nor robustly alive. 

 Mr. Zuckerman is chairman and editor in chief of U.S. News & World Report.  