Toyota Motor Corp.'s latest massive recall likely won't dent its reputation much, crisis-management experts predict. But the auto maker still should take steps to minimize possible damage, some specialists suggested. 

Toyota officials "have done a pretty good job of communicating with their core buyers'' since their 2010 recall of 3.4 million vehicles, said  Eric Dezenhall, CEO of Dezenhall Resources, a crisis-management firm in Washington. Retaining loyal customers "is a lot of what good crisis management is about,'' he continued. 

Thanks to prior outreach efforts and lack of injuries related to the latest recall, Mr. Dezenhall believes Toyota should proceed in a low-key manner by simply encouraging owners to bring their vehicles in for repairs. A massive ad campaign "doesn't help them at this point,'' he said. Garden-variety recalls are different "than cars running out of control.''

Other experts disagree, however. The latest recall "is damaging the brand more,'' and may discourage potential Toyota buyers because they see a car maker with persistent quality problems, observed  Gerald C. Meyers, a University of Michigan business professor of organization and management. He also is a former auto-industry executive.

Mr. Meyers thinks Toyota should increase its planned spending on Super Bowl ads and offer commercials that promote the brand "as being safe, secure and reliable.'' 

Another tactic would be for Toyota President  Akio Toyoda to take a public stance about this week's recall. Last year, he went on a charm offensive following the auto maker's quality woes. Those efforts included a tearful public apology. 

Mr. Toyoda "has to get out early'' this time because he waited too long last year, said  Jerry Doyle, principal of CommCore Inc. a New York firm that handles crisis communications and management. Mr. Doyle proposes that the Toyota president issue a statement or give a news conference stating, "We are now prepared to manage this. We know where the problem is.'' 

Recent safety headaches also have tarnished the reputation for  Johnson & Johnson,
JNJ


0.63
%




 a maker of products ranging from Band-Aids to the anti-inflammatory drug Remicade. It's trying to recover from a series of product recalls since 2009. In response, J&J suspended manufacturing at a U.S. plant and made changes at a Puerto Rico facility, which together reduced the company's 2010 sales by about $900 million. 

 Write to  Joann S. Lublin at joann.lublin@wsj.com 