 LONDON—The U.K.'s prosecution service said it will review evidence held by police about the alleged widespread use of dubious reporting tactics by the News of the World newspaper, the latest development in a long-running scandal.

The saga began several years ago with the newspaper's use of private investigators to obtain personal information about celebrities, politicians and other public figures, notably through breaking into mobile-phone voice mailboxes, or hacking.

The News of the World's royal-family correspondent and a private investigator employed by the Sunday tabloid were jailed in 2007 after a two-year investigation found them guilty of hacking into the phone messages of some members of the royal family. 

The case also has political overtones, because the prime minister's director of communications,  Andy Coulson, had been the editor of the News of the World until 2007.  Mr. Coulson denied that the hacking went beyond the reporter involved,  Clive Goodman, and has repeatedly said that he was unaware that such practices were used in his newsroom. 

Late Friday, the Crown Prosecution Service said it planned to review evidence held by police in relation to those two individuals as well as material that has come to light since. It will then decide whether to advise the police to re-open an investigation. 

 The prosecution service said it was conducting its review following developments in the civil courts.  Actress  Sienna Miller is suing News of the World's parent company, News Group Newspapers, in a U.K. court for breach of privacy related to phone hacking. The News of the World recently suspended an editor,  Ian Edmondson, following "serious allegations" about his conduct. 

News of the World is owned by  News Corp., which owns Dow Jones & Co., publisher of The Wall Street Journal. News Corp.'s international media office referred a reporter to News of the World for comment. 

In a statement, News of the World said it would "co-operate fully" with the crown prosecution in its assessment. The Crown Prosecution Service said in a statement that "the purpose of this assessment is to ascertain whether there is any material which could now form evidence in any future criminal prosecution relating to phone hacking."

 Write to  Cassell Bryan-Low at cassell.bryan-low@wsj.com 