Residents of Jackson Heights are making an 11th-hour attempt to prevent an athletic field owned by a private school from being taken over by a developer. 

The Garden School, which runs from nursery school through 12th grade, has been struggling financially and was in talks with the city to sell its 29,000-square-foot athletic field situated across from Travers Park on 78th Street.

However, trustees of the 87-year-old Queens school voted last week to reject the city's offer, choosing instead to consider bids from developers. The city wasn't offered the opportunity to make a counterbid.

According to local City Council Member  Daniel Dromm, who was facilitating sale talks with the city, the Department of Parks & Recreation made an offer of $4.7 million for 20,000 square feet of land or $4.8 million for the entire field, with a clause allowing the Garden School to use the property during school hours.

At an emergency community meeting Wednesday night attended by about 150 residents, school officials said they wanted to work with the city but they were facing financial pressures to move quickly.

"Our first choice has always been a deal with the city with a park, but we don't want to put the Garden School at risk," said  Arthur Gruen, president of the school's board of trustees.

Mr. Gruen said the school had received a bid of $5.4 million for a plan to build apartments on the field. He didn't identify the bidder, but said there was no deal yet. Other developers are also interested, he said. 

  Michael Rakosi, vice president of the school's trustees, said a recession-driven decrease in enrollment was one reason the school was in need of cash to cover operating costs and stay afloat. "Our students are children of working class families, not from families with unlimited money," he said.

In addition, Mr. Rakosi said "it can take a long time to get that money from the city" in land deals. The process of acquiring the field could take as long as two years, according to  Philip Abramson, a parks department spokesman. 

But Mr. Dromm's office calls that time estimate pessimistic and said there are volunteers who are willing to speed up the process.

"I don't know if the parents are going to tolerate having a four- to six-story building in their school yard and put up with construction and a shrunken school yard," Mr. Dromm said.

In a city district that ranks among the lowest in park space per resident, the idea has angered many residents, many of whom see this as a scarce opportunity to increase green space in the area.

"We cannot afford to have another apartment building getting rid of some of the last park space left in this area," said  Dudley Stewart, president of Jackson Heights Green Alliance.

Parents of some students at the Garden School also object to the loss of the property to developers.

"There is no way I'll continue paying that kind of money to a private school that doesn't provide something so basic—a school yard," said Susan Collins, whose 9-year-old daughter has been attending the school for two years.

Others were surprised to learn about the potential sale of the field. "I had no idea this was going on," said Martha Rodriguez, whose granddaughter attends the Garden School. "I grew up here and for the school to not care about the community's needs is unacceptable," she said.

Because the athletic field is situated just across from Travers Park, 78th Street is closed off and used as additional play space for kids during the summer. The acquisition of the athletic field would have allowed the creation of a much larger contiguous public space, backers say.

The Garden School has class sizes of 10 to 12 students and subsidizes the cost of tuition by as much as $600,000 annually so needy students can attend, said  Richard Marotta, headmaster of Garden School.

The Wednesday meeting concluded with community members saying they would approach banks and foundations in an attempt to forestall an immediate sale of the property.

"The city has the money and it's just a matter of finding the money to cover the school's expenses in the short term," said Mr. Stewart. 