BRUSSELS—The European Union's top advisory body on online privacy will issue an opinion this month saying that information collected by phone and Internet companies on customer locations must be treated like names, birthdays and other personal data, EU officials say.

That means smartphone giants like  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.96
%




 and  Google Inc. will likely have to obtain user consent before gathering the data, delete the information after a certain period of time and keep it anonymous.

The opinion, to be published by the alliance of European national regulators, called the "Article 29 Working Party," highlights the growing importance of mobile technology and the EU's position as the global leader in regulating the use of private data by tech companies. The opinion isn't binding, but it's likely to be adopted as a guiding principle by most national regulators.

The group "will say that geo-location data has to be considered as personal data," an EU official said. "The rules on personal data apply to them."

Viviane Reding, the European Commissioner for Justice, has already promised to "expand data protection to other areas" in a proposal she will publish before the end of the year. "We're looking at...localization data services, behavioral advertising, basically anything that's dealing with new technology," said  Matthew Newman, a spokesman for Mrs. Reding.

The opinion will set up another tussle between EU regulators and tech companies over personal data, especially when used for advertising, after a long battle over what constitutes user "consent" to place small files known as cookies on personal computers to target advertising. The result was a compromise under which advertising firms place an icon on each ad offering users the chance to see how their data are being used and to decline such use.

By compiling data from cellphone towers, satellites and Wi-Fi hotspots, phone and Internet companies can track devices, a technology that has helped police find fugitives and allowed parents to track their children.

France, Germany, Italy, Ireland and the U.K. have already opened investigations into geo-location data. "We've received complaints from people concerned their movements have been tracked without their consent," said  Diarmuid Hallinan, a spokesman for the Irish Data Protection Commissioner. The Irish commission is investigating the complaints, working on the assumption that location data is private.

Collecting location data "is a legitimate device that helps businesses offer better services," said  Kimon Zorbas, director of the Interactive Advertising Bureau, which represents the online industry. "It's like the IP address on computers, which needs to be processed to see where people are coming from, which is crucially important."

"Apple is not tracking the location of your iPhone," the company said in a statement. "Apple has never done so and has no plans to ever do so."

"Some location-related information is stored locally on the device for a limited period of time," said  William Echikson, a spokesman for Google. "Any location data that is sent back to Google location servers is anonymized and is not tied or traceable to a specific user." Location sharing on Google's Android system already requires user consent, Mr. Echikson noted.

Last week, U.S. lawmakers sent letters to six companies, including Apple and Google, to ask exactly how location data are stored on phones and what's done with it.

In Brussels, privacy has replaced antitrust concerns as the main technology-related issue in Europe. Two top EU officials—Mrs. Reding and Digital Agenda Commissioner Neelie Kroes—are drafting new privacy rules.

"European investigators are pressuring companies to respect users' privacy and data protection rights," says  Wim Nauwelaerts, a privacy lawyer at Hunton & Williams LLP in Brussels. "These companies are going to have to tell authorities how users have been informed and to what extent they've given their consent."

 Write to  John W. Miller at john.miller@dowjones.com 