SYDNEY—Rising water levels in northeastern Australia threatened to cut off the city of Rockhampton in Queensland state, while the U.S. government offered aid to some 200,000 people affected by the record floods.

Months of rainfall across the state have flooded an area the size of France and Germany combined, costing billions of dollars in damages and lost activity, evicting thousands from their homes, and hitting production at mines estimated to account for 40% of the global trade in coal used in steelmaking. 

In response, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said in a statement that the U.S. "stands ready to provide assistance." 

With the Fitzroy River at 9.2 meters (about 30 feet) above its river bed and expected to peak at 9.4 meters Wednesday, Rockhampton's last link to the outside world is likely to be cut over the next 24 hours. 

The airport for the city of 77,000 people is partially flooded, with the ramp now open only to emergency vehicles, authorities said. The partial isolation of the city, the first since 1991, could last as long as a week. 

Queensland's state treasurer, Andrew Fraser, said Tuesday that growth projected for the state's economic output for the year ending June 30, 2011, would be revised down to less than 3% from 3.5% as a result of the flooding, with 680 million Australian dollars (US$691.3 million) already factored in for disaster spending. 

"These floods are going to hit the bottom line hard," he said. 

Standard & Poor's said Tuesday that the floods could delay Queensland's expected return to a triple-A debt rating but wouldn't have a downward impact. 



The weather's most far-flung impact may be a rise in the price of coking coal, a commodity essential for making steel . Close to two-thirds of the world's seaborne supply of coking coal is produced in Queensland's Bowen Basin, a swath of land to the west of the country's Great Dividing Range that forms an immense storm drain for rain falling over the coastal ranges. 

Regional floods in 2008 saw contracts struck for US$365 a metric ton, nearly 50% higher than the latest free-on-board Australia price for premium Peak Downs brand coking coal, quoted by Commonwealth Bank of Australia at US$253 a ton. 

Steel trader Stemcor predicted a 30% jump to as much as US$330 a ton in the coming months. "We expect to see a huge problem and a hue and cry up to March, which will create a lot of pressure on the spot market," said  Vineet Mehra, director of Stemcor India. 

  Bethanie George, an analyst at Wood Mackenzie in Sydney, said it was hard to pick out in advance how much the rainfall would affect prices. 

"The fall in supply would have an upward pressure on prices. There's also the factor of market sentiment—buyers could be concerned about supply security and that could cause further upward pressure. That can play a big role in prices in the short term." 

Macquarie estimates that around 100 million metric tons of annual coking coal production, or 40% of global supply, is under or likely to come soon under force majeure arrangements, which indemnify producers against natural disasters. 

Miners including  BHP Billiton Ltd., the world's biggest coking-coal producer,  Rio Tinto
RIO


-0.39
%




 PLC,  Anglo American
AAUKY


-1.02
%




 PLC and  Peabody Energy Corp.
BTU


-2.99
%




 have all declared force majeure on their Queensland coalfields.

Authorities at the Bowen Basin's four coal ports warned that a full picture of how badly the rains have hit mining operations had yet to emerge.

  QR National Ltd. reopened the Goonyella rail system, a major coal-haulage rail that serves two coal terminals, on Dec. 31 after a week of closure following a derailment by an  Asciano Ltd.
AANOF


-2.33
%




 train Dec. 24.

"From the terminal's perspective we're operating business as usual but in view of the derailment, it's probably going to be another week or so before we're aware of the full impact on the mine sites of the wet weather," said  Andrew Garrett, a spokesman for Dalrymple Bay Coal Terminal, the region's biggest coal port and one of those served by the Goonyella rail.

 Write to  Geoffrey Rogow at geoffrey.rogow@dowjones.com 