NEW YORK— Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.29
%




's "Jobs premium" isn't what it used to be. 

Shares of the consumer-electronics giant fell less than 3% a day after the company disclosed that Chief Executive  Steve Jobs would take another unexpected medical leave. 

While Mr. Jobs remains the principal architect of Apple's products, marketing and image, Tuesday's moderate stock-price decline suggests that Wall Street has moved on with its fixation with the famously hands-on CEO. Instead of focusing on his long-running health issues, investors are instead shifting their gaze upon the company's growth prospects. 

"A few years ago, the stock would be down 20% to 25% easily," said  Shaw Wu, an analyst at Kaufman Bros. "It's not as meaningful anymore." Any such premium likely was washed out during Mr. Jobs's last leave two years ago, analysts have said, and the stock's surge since January 2009—shares have nearly quadrupled—is based on the company's strength in the market and its balance sheet. 

More immediately, analysts are expecting strong results when Apple reports its fiscal first-quarter results after the close of market Tuesday. Analysts, on average, expect Apple's per-share earnings to rise 47% to $5.40 as revenue increases 56% to $24.43 billion, according to Thomson Reuters. Expectations of a blowout quarter may be tempering some selling Tuesday. 

Still, while the CEO's medical leave shouldn't derail the company's current momentum, it could have longer-term implications. 

Mr. "Jobs's absence should have no material impact on Apple's financial performance over the next several years," Needham analyst  Charlie Wolf said. What Apple loses during the leave "is the ability to redefine markets and industries going forward—in short, the option value of future innovations." 

After an initial sharp decline of as much as 6.5% Tuesday, Apple shares rebounded, recently off 2.5% to $339.66. Based on that price, the stock remains up 5.3% this month from its 2010 close of $322.56 and the company carries a market cap of about $311.6 billion, keeping Apple as the world's most valuable technology company. 

Apple shares have rallied 64% over the past 12 months due to the success of its iPad tablet computer, expectations surrounding the launch of its iPhone smartphone on Verizon Wireless and increased sales of its Mac computers, which last week were named the fastest-growing line of personal computers in the U.S. Verizon Wireless is a joint venture of  Verizon Communications Inc.
VZ


-0.19
%




 and  Vodafone Group PLC. 

Goldman Sachs analyst  Bill Shope recommended buying Apple on any weakness Tuesday because the long-term fundamentals remain intact. He said Apple's multiple of 15.1 times earnings "already represents a significant historical discount, and we see no direct risk to earnings from this move." 

Mr. Shope, who reiterated his 12-month target price of $430, added that "Apple's $51 billion in cash and investments could be partially distributed to shareholders to stabilize the shares." 

Nonetheless, Apple's disclosure raises many questions about the company's longer term direction. Mr. Jobs didn't give a date for his return, and the 55-year-old CEO has looked increasingly frail with each public appearance. Few CEOs have been as closely linked to their company's success as Mr. Jobs has. 

While no one person is expected to replace Mr. Jobs entirely, Apple's team of top management—Chief Operating Officer  Tim Cook, who will be taking over temporarily, product designer  Jonathan Ive, and marketing chief Philip Schiller—is seen filling the many roles that Mr. Jobs plays. 

"While this creates uncertainty, we believe the product pipeline is set for the next two years and Apple's bench strength has come through before," said  Peter Misek, an analyst for Jefferies & Co. 

The leave marks the third time in the past decade that Mr. Jobs has been forced to step back from his role at Apple. He took a medical leave in 2004 and then again in the first half of 2009, returning to the company in late June of that year. Mr. Jobs, a survivor of pancreatic cancer, received a liver transplant while on leave in 2009. 

Mr. Cook ran the company during the previous leaves, and analysts expect only minor changes under Mr. Cook, who has been seen as an executive focused on operations. 

"We could see changes to more mundane corporate issues such as a dividend policy as we believe Jobs was the most vocally opposed," Mr. Misek said. 

 Write to  Roger Cheng at roger.cheng@dowjones.com and George Stahl at george.stahl@dowjones.com 