TUNIS—Tunisia faced renewed instability as three ministers in the new caretaker government resigned under pressure from the country's powerful labor union, illustrating the myriad new forces struggling for influence following last week's ouster of the country's authoritarian president.

The move by the General Union of Tunisian Workers, a key organizer of the antiregime protests that helped to force President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali from power, reflected widespread public anger about the inclusion of Mr. Ben Ali's longtime ruling party in the transitional government.

The resignations weren't expected to stop the new government from functioning. But they appeared to quickly influence political decisions among the country's new leaders. Within hours, Prime Minister Mohammed Ghannouchi and interim President Fouad Mebazaa—both stalwarts of the old regime—canceled their membership in the Constitutional Democratic Rally, known in English as the RCD.

At least one other minister resigned from the government, state media said. The minister, a leader of one of Tunisia's few registered opposition parties, was considered close to the trade-union movement.

The developments represent how intensely the nation's new political actors—from trade unions, fledgling green parties and exiled Islamic groups—are jockeying for power to shape the pace and face of reform here.

Mr. Ghannouchi cobbled together a coalition government over the weekend after Mr. Ben Ali fled to Saudi Arabia on Friday following 23 years in power. But what he presented as an inclusive body filled with technocrats, fresh independent faces and "clean" holdovers from the last government hasn't met key opposition factions' demands.

The trade union, one of the country's largest membership organizations in what has been a tightly controlled police state, announced Tuesday morning it was withdrawing its support for the new coalition, said Sami Tahrir, a member of the executive committee. The decision was made during an emergency meeting of union members who voted to overturn their leaders' weekend decision to join the coalition, he said.

"We won't join the government until the RCD is abolished," said Mr. Tahrir, referring to the ruling party. "There is too much corruption and we have to have a fresh start," he told a cheering crowd of union members gathered in the center of the capital.

In rolling demonstrations in Tunis's central square throughout the day, protesters called for more ministers to join the government boycott, saying they didn't trust the former ruling party to institutionalize the democratic freedoms promised by the prime minister.

Security troops at one point Tuesday fired tear gas at demonstrators in the capital, apparently when marchers disobeyed police orders to draw back from a thoroughfare. Last week, by contrast, police fired live rounds at demonstrators.

So far, Islamic organizations have been noticeably absent from the political scene. Religious slogans haven't been in evidence amid the protest movement of the past month, as largely leftist trade unions have taken the lead in the demonstrations, drawing on Tunisia's educated middle class.

The country's first president, Habib Bouguiba, instituted a strict secularization program during the 1960s. 

The exiled Ennahdha party, the best-known of the Islamic movements in Tunisia, says it was surprised by the intensity of the internal protest movement that started in December, according to Samir Dilou, who spoke on Ennahdha's behalf from Tunis.

"No need to hide it—we were caught off-guard by the popular uprising," said Mr. Dilou. "It means we have to be self-critical, take a good look at ourselves and see what we can propose for Tunisia."

Rachid Ghannouchi, the 69-year-old founder of the party, was sentenced in absentia on charges of plotting to overthrow Mr. Ben Ali's government. Mr. Ghannouchi, who has lived in exile in London since 1993, denies those charges. Ennahdha members said Mr. Ghannouchi bore no relation to the prime minister of the same surname.

Mr. Dilou said Mr. Ghannouchi would like to return to Tunisia, but that he was waiting for the caretaker government to lift penalties against him. He said Ennahdha may participate in upcoming parliamentary elections, adding that the party was committed to nonviolence and religious moderation. 

The appeal of Mr. Ghannouchi's movement, which was never registered inside Tunisia and has no formal structure, remains unclear among Tunisians.

Current and former diplomats in Tunisia say Mr. Ghannouchi represents a moderate Islamic voice who has long espoused democracy and pluralism. "He's not violent and he's fairly progressive. This is not by any stretch an al Qaeda-style individual," says Mona Yacoubian, a retired State Department analyst specializing in North Africa who is now a special adviser at the U.S. Institute of Peace's Center for Conflict.

Meanwhile, the streets of Tunis were filled with people eager to benefit from the new freedoms of speech and assembly. Despite a state of emergency declared last week, security police and anti-riot units positioned through downtown streets allowed groups of hundreds to gather and march down the narrow, winding streets of the city center.

The nature of the demonstrations was amorphous and emotional. Men in business suits stood with handwritten signs saying "No to RCD." Pedestrians joined in small groups to sing the national anthem.

Mohsin Mouttoug, a physics lecturer, illustrated the exuberance of the crowd. He said he had completed registration of a new pro-environment party earlier Tuesday morning and was walking through downtown to sign up new members.

Mr. Mouttoug, 50 years old, said he supported the right of all political groups, even Islamists, to participate in the new democracy. The only red line that should be drawn, he said, should be against the continued presence of the old ruling party.

"They [the RCD] are the greatest threat to our country. They are the only ones who can steal our freedom. We need fair elections so that everyone can choose what comes next," Mr. Mouttoug said.

Tunisia's events continued to reverberate around the region Tuesday. Two Egyptian men attempted to set themselves on fire Tuesday in downtown Cairo, in apparent imitation of the event that sparked the Tunisian crisis that came a day after another Egyptian man burned himself in front of parliament, the Associated Press reported.

 Write to  Margaret Coker at margaret.coker@wsj.com and David Gauthier-Villars at David.Gauthier-Villars@wsj.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications: Fouad Mebazaa is the interim President of Tunisia. An earlier version of this article incorrectly named him the interior minister and incorrectly spelled his name.