WASHINGTON—The U.S. agency that regulates railroads said Tuesday it will consider a major overhaul of rules to force freight-rail companies to compete more aggressively for farmers, coal producers and other shipping customers. 

The Surface Transportation Board announced it would hold a hearing in May to study possible changes designed to spur competition, and it asked railroads to weigh in. The rules under consideration would be designed to make it easier for shippers to challenge rates and to gain access to competing railroads on segments currently served by a single rail company. 

The agency said the initiative responds to the longtime concerns of shippers that railroads are raising rates and posting higher profits even though productivity hasn't increased at the same pace. The agency said it was sensitive to railroads' concerns that new rules could hurt the industry's financial health and reduce money used for track expansion and maintenance. 

"We need to strike a balance between providing access to competitive rail transportation for shippers while maintaining the rail industry's impressive economic renaissance," said Daniel R. Elliott III, appointed by President Barack Obama last year to serve as the board's chairman. 

The initiative would be the first time in a decade the board has undertaken such a review to study anticompetitive concerns, the board said. It comes as the board faces pressure from such congressional lawmakers as Sen. Jay Rockefeller (D., W.Va.), a coal-industry ally, who have pushed for tighter regulation of freight railroads to bring down shipping rates. Mr. Rockefeller unsuccessfully pushed for a bill last year to reregulate the industry. 

Edward R. Hamberger, president of the Association of American Railroads, the industry's main trade group, said rail companies believe current regulations enable companies to build and maintain a rail network that is spurring economic growth, and that regulations shouldn't be changed. "This country's rail renaissance was made possible because today's reasonable regulations allowed the railroads to invest $480 billion in the last 30 years, creating the world's safest, most efficient, most affordable rail network," he said in a statement.

His association represents the major freight railroads:  CSX Corp.
CSX


0.53
%




,  Union Pacific Corp.
UNP


-0.30
%




, Burlington Northern Santa Fe Corp. and  Norfolk Southern Corp.
NSC


0.30
%




 

 Write to  Josh Mitchell at joshua.mitchell@dowjones.com 