TOKYO—Japanese power companies are delaying plans to restart nuclear reactors and build new ones because of concerns about radiation escaping from  Tokyo Electric Power Co.
9501


0.14
%




's Fukushima Daiichi nuclear complex. 

Several planned reactor restarts and new building projects have been pushed back, including in areas not affected by the earthquake and tsunami that damaged the Tepco facility. 

Japan has 54 civil nuclear reactors, the world's third-largest fleet after the U.S. and France. The disaster knocked 14 reactors offline, along with extensive fossil fuel-powered generating capacity, forcing Tepco to introduce rolling power cuts. 

On Friday, the company said that power rationing and blackouts in northeastern Japan could last until summer. 

Its efforts to restore power have been hampered by the modular structure of the country's power grid, which makes it tough to bring in electricity from areas not directly affected by the earthquake. 

Some reactors will never work again, including some or all of the aged Daiichi units, which were already approaching the end of their normal life span. 

  Kyushu Electric Power Co.
9508


-0.57
%




 Thursday said it has decided to postpone the planned restart of two reactors at its Genkai nuclear power station on the western island of Kyushu, more than 435 miles from the main quake zone, while it awaits the outcome of the Daiichi crisis. 

That followed an announcement from  Chubu Electric Power Co.
9502


0.21
%




 that it is pushing back the start of building work for a reactor at its Hamaoka nuclear power complex in central Japan.  Kazuhiko Okabe, Chubu's executive officer and Tokyo office general manager, said checking and enhancing the safety of Hamaoka's existing three reactors is a priority. 

  Chugoku Electric Power Co.
9504


1.11
%




, Tepco and  Electric Power Development Co.
9513


1.42
%




 have also halted construction work on new reactors. 

Prior to the quake, 15 of Japan's nuclear reactors were closed for servicing. How quickly many of these will be allowed back into service isn't clear. 

 Write to  Mari Iwata at mari.iwata@dowjones.com 