LONDON—U.K. manufacturing output rebounded in January, growing at its fastest annual rate in 16 years, official data showed Thursday. 

The data, which come hours before an eagerly anticipated interest-rate decision from the Bank of England, are an early indication that the economy may have recovered in the first quarter of the year after a surprise contraction at the end of 2010. 

The Office for National Statistics said manufacturing output rose 1% in January from December, its fastest rate of growth in 10 months, and was 6.8% higher than the corresponding month of 2010. That was the fastest annual rise since November 1994. 

In December, by contrast, output fell for the first time in eight months as the cold weather hit production of building materials, specifically nonmetallic minerals. That sector rebounded in January, growing 9.9% in monthly terms. 

Manufacturing makes up just under 13% of gross domestic product, meaning growth in the sector doesn't guarantee an economic recovery overall. The services sector, which makes up around three-quarters of output, has struggled to grow strongly in recent months, according to recent surveys. 

That weakness in services—and the consequent uncertainty over the U.K.'s economic performance in the first quarter—is behind most economists' forecast that the BOE will take no action on interest rates later Thursday. 

Economists expect rates to rise from their all-time low of 0.5% in the coming months, however, possibly as early as May, as the central bank's rate-setters worry that above-target inflation may become embedded if they don't act. 

Signs of a strong manufacturing sector will be welcomed by Prime Minister David Cameron's government, which hopes to build up the sector to reduce the U.K.'s reliance on financial services. 

The ONS figures were slightly stronger than expected. Economists had forecast manufacturing output to rise 0.8% month-to-month and 6.5% year-to-year. 

The wider measure of industrial production—which includes manufacturing, mining and quarrying, electricity, gas and water supply—grew 0.5% in January from December and 4.4% in annual terms, the ONS said. The annual rate was the fastest since December 1994. Both figures were a touch stronger than expected. 

The ONS raised its estimate of its December readings, showing marginally stronger annual and monthly growth rates for industrial output, and a firmer annual rate for manufacturing. 

 Write to  Jason Douglas at jason.douglas@dowjones.com 