WASHINGTON—The U.S. Supreme Court on Tuesday upheld an Internal Revenue Service requirement that medical residents pay Social Security taxes. 

Full-time students who work are generally exempt from Social Security taxes, but law clerks and tradesman apprentices are not. 

The high court, in an unanimous opinion by Chief Justice John Roberts, upheld a Treasury Department rule that said medical residents are full-time employees, not students. 

Justice Roberts said the department's interpretation was a reasonable one, rejecting arguments by the Mayo Clinic that the rule was arbitrary. 

"The department certainly did not act irrationally in concluding that these doctors...are the kind of workers that Congress intended to both contribute to and benefit from the Social Security system," Justice Roberts wrote in a 15-page opinion. 

"Mayo Clinic is disappointed with the U.S. Supreme Court's decision that residents do not qualify for the student exemption" to Social Security taxes, said Bryan Anderson, a spokesman. 

He said that both Mayo Clinic and its residents have been paying Social Security taxes while the case was pending, so they won't owe back taxes to the government. 

Nevertheless, the financial stakes in the case were significant for teaching hospitals and the government. 

There are currently about 100,000 medical residents nationwide. Social Security taxes on the residents' wages would bring in around $700 million annually, according to court papers. 

The Social Security tax equals 12.4% of wages. Half of the tax is paid by the employer and half by the employee. For a medical resident earning a $50,000 stipend, that represents $3,100 paid by the resident and $3,100 paid by the hospital. 

"At a time when our members are looking at reduced resources, we could have used these resources for other things, like patient care and education programs," said Ivy Baer, regulatory counsel at the Association of American Medical Colleges. 

 Write to  Brent Kendall at brent.kendall@dowjones.com 