After a number of voting mishaps in Connecticut's close governor's race last year, former Secretary of the State  Susan Bysiewicz was harshly criticized for her role in the confusion. 

Now the Democrat who is running for U.S. Senate in 2012 is under fire again: A new report by state auditors found several examples of poor record-keeping in her office, including overstating fees it collected by $5.2 million and allowing employees on leave to rack up sick days. 

"The Secretary of the State has an important responsibility with record-keeping and elections, and this report adds to the concerns that have come up over the years about where Bysiewicz's priorities lay," said  Zach Janowski of the Yankee Institute for Public Policy, a conservative think tank based in Hartford, Conn.

On election night, after a neck-and-neck gubernatorial race, polling sites in Bridgeport, Conn., ran out of ballots. Ms. Bysiewicz ordered polls to stay open—which some called an overstep of her authority—and called the election for Mr. Malloy, a fellow Democrat, before all the votes were tallied. He was officially declared the winner a week later.

  Mark Bergman, a spokesman for Ms. Bysiewicz, who in January announced her plans to run for the U.S. Senate seat vacated by  Joe Lieberman in 2012, said: "At the end of the day, people can take partisan swings at Susan, but she isn't focused on the past. She's focused on how we can make elections in Connecticut better."

Other recent missteps have thrust Ms. Bysiewicz into the spotlight: She had to drop a bid for state Attorney General last year after judges ruled she had not practiced law long enough. Soon afterwards, Democratic Sen. Richard Blumenthal, who was state Attorney General at the time, accused her of digging into a state database to contact people for campaign purposes. No criminal investigation was launched. 

The auditors' report released on Feb. 25 raised issues about oversight and management at Ms. Bysiewicz's previous office. 

Connecticut's Office of the Secretary of the State is charged with managing corporate and other records for the state and collecting fees for the service. State auditors found errors in all 20 accounts they reviewed, leading the office to overstate its coffers by $5.2 million.

Auditors also pointed to questionable practices over three years when 30 employees accrued sick days as if they were working full-time even though they were on unpaid leave.

Other problems included reduced fees that were granted to out-of-state businesses without proper investigations to see if they were warranted. 

"While not all of these issues may have been resolved by the time she left office, they were all addressed by Susan," Mr. Bergman said. 

The current Deputy Secretary of the State,  James Spallone, said his office has begun an investigation into the issues and plans to address the auditors' recommendations shortly. 

 Write to  Shelly Banjo at shelly.banjo@wsj.com 