Myanmar convened its first parliament in more than two decades on Monday, setting the stage for the selection of a new president to head one of Asia's most secretive states.



Although analysts and residents say they doubt much will change in the near term in Myanmar, a resource-rich state controlled by the military since the early 1960s, the latest steps are being watched closely by foreign diplomats and investors for any sign the country is becoming more open to reform—an outcome investors hope could lead to a softening of Western economic sanctions.

The first order of business on Monday was expected to be the formal opening of the massive new parliament building in the capital of Naypyitaw, a remote redoubt in central Myanmar far from major population centers and the prying eyes of most international and local observers. The parliament will be composed almost entirely of military allies—the junta-backed candidates who dominated November's national election, Myanmar's first in 20 years. The election was widely condemned by dissidents and Western governments amid reports of fraud.

A quarter of the parliamentary seats were already reserved for military nominees before the vote, and the government-backed Union Solidarity and Development Party won nearly 80% of the remainder. The main opposition party in the vote, the National Democratic Force, ended up with just 12 of more than 600 seats in the national parliament.

Anyone other than lawmakers found wandering into the parliament while it is in session will be subject to a one-year prison term, according to laws released by the government late last year. Attempts to reach the Myanmar government, which rarely speaks to foreign journalists, were unsuccessful.

The next step after the formal opening will be the selection of a new president by the parliament. The decision-making process has been shrouded in mystery, typical for Myanmar. Many analysts have long expected the country's current leader, 77-year-old Gen. Than Shwe, to retire or at least drift into the background, controlling the new government from behind the scenes. But a growing number of analysts and dissidents have said in recent weeks that the strongman may choose to have himself declared president to ensure he isn't sidelined by ambitious younger generals.

Others cited as possible presidents include Shwe Mann, until recently the junta's third-ranking general, and Thein Sein, Myanmar's prime minister and head of the Union Solidarity and Development Party.

"I'm a bit surprised at how unclear it all still is—we have no idea who is going to be president," said  Sean Turnell, a Myanmar expert at Macquarie University in Australia.

Those who see Myanmar's recent path as a slow road to democracy say they are still hopeful the launch of a new parliament could lead to positive changes in the long term, especially if the military decides it wants to improve relations with Western governments in a bid to lift the economic sanctions.

Leaders of the 10-country Association of Southeast Asian Nations, which includes Myanmar, have said that they believe Myanmar is making progress and that the U.S. and Europe should reward its government by loosening the sanctions.

Pro-democracy dissident and Nobel laureate Aung San Suu Kyi has indicated since her release from seven years of house arrest in November—just days after the vote—that she may be open to rethinking her longtime support for sanctions. In a taped address to the World Economic Forum in Davos on Friday, Ms. Suu Kyi said she "looks forward" to the day when more foreign investors can operate in the country, though people familiar with her thinking say she first wants to see more meaningful concessions, such as the release of more than 2,000 political prisoners.

Other opposition leaders say they intend to use the new parliament to see how far they can push the new government. Khin Maung Swe, a former political prisoner and a leader of the National Democratic Force, said in an interview with The Wall Street Journal last week that his party intends to introduce two motions: one an antitrust bill to encourage more competition at a time when the government is selling off many state assets to politically connected businessmen; and the other a call to release political prisoners.

"We have to be patient," he said. "We want to build up political confidence and build trust among our national groupings."

Other possible legislation could seek to give residents greater legal rights in buying and selling land—a reform backed by many economists who believe better land laws are needed to encourage more investment in the country's beleaguered agricultural sector.

If the parliament agrees to hear such bills, it could be a sign the regime intends to allow at least some measure of debate on sensitive issues—a step forward in the mind of some analysts.

Other analysts are more pessimistic.

"If the NDF thinks proposing a few bills on land tenure and competition in the economy are going to constitute what they consider a small but significant policy progress, they are delusional," said  Maung Zarni, a Myanmar research fellow at the London School of Economics. "Introducing a few bills in the rubber-stamp parliament is not going to make a dent—it would be like applying first-aid tactics to a patient with advanced cancer."

—Celine Fernandez  contributed to this article. 