NEW DELHI – India's federal government has decided to cancel the allocation of 14 coal blocks and one lignite block to end-user companies - including five coal blocks of state-run NTPC Ltd. - and plans to give all the coal blocks to Coal India Ltd. for early development, the country's coal minister said Thursday. 

"Precious coal resources were lying there without being utilized. It is a message to all the companies to whom we have given coal blocks for captive use to expedite production," Sriprakash Jaiswal said. "Squatters won't be appreciated." 

The government's decision leaves NTPC with just three coal blocks for captive use. NTPC officials weren't immediately available for comment. 

The decision is in line with India's strategy to augment domestic coal output, which is lagging primarily due to delays in Coal India securing environmental clearances for some of its mines. Coal India, the world's biggest coal producer, meets more than 80% of India's need for the fossil fuel. 

The world's second-fastest growing major economy is facing a shortage of about 142 million tons of coal for the fiscal year that began on April 1. Local production of coal in India is expected to be 554 million tons against demand for 696 million tons, according to government estimates. 

The shortage has forced state-run and private companies in India to buy costly imported coal and scout for coal assets overseas. 

More than half of India's power generation capacity of 173.6 gigawatts is based on thermal coal. The country aims to add 163 GW of capacity in the 10 years through March 2017. 

India has so far allocated more than 200 coal blocks with combined reserves of about 50 billion tons to companies in sectors such as power, cement and metal. India is the world's fourth-largest coal producer after China, the U.S. and Australia, according to a 2010 statistical review of world energy by  BP. 

The government has opened up India's coal mining sector in the hope of prompting higher output to fuel the expanded electricity generation needed to power the country's rapid economic growth and cap mounting fuel import bills. 

While commercial coal mining in India is still limited to state-run Coal India and Singareni Collieries, the government has been allocating coal blocks for captive mining to end-user companies, although many of these reserves remain underdeveloped. 

The cancelled blocks of NTPC include two in Chatti Bariatu, which recently attracted bids from a unit of Australia's  Leighton Holdings Ltd. and India's Singareni Collieries Co., and four others for development, NTPC chairman  Arup Choudhury said on April 29. 

Besides the deposits in Chatti Bariatu in the eastern India's Jharkhand state, the Coal Ministry decided to cancel Brahmini and Chichro Patsimal coal blocks and Kerandari, allocated to NTPC in the same state. 

Shares of NTPC Thursday closed down 2.88% at 173.55 rupees ($3.91) on the Bombay Stock Exchange, while the benchmark index ended 1.40% lower. 

Separately, the Coal Ministry said it has also decided to partly forfeit bank guarantees given by the 15 private companies and recommended issuing warning notices to 29 companies that are sitting idle on coal blocks. 