Disappointing earnings, shrinking revenues and optimism that somehow the economy is improving despite an ongoing housing hangover -- this is what America's biggest banks offered as they released year-end financial results last week.

"Last year was a necessary repair and rebuilding year,"  Bank of America
BAC


2.86
%




 CEO  Brian Moynihan said Friday.

Yes, we know. The shards of our broken economy remain scattered on the ground and we're gluing them back together. What else could Mr. Moynihan say as he announced a 2010 loss of $2.2 billion?

"We enter 2011...against a backdrop of an improving economy," he said. But then he qualified: "Full economic recovery depends on housing-market stability."

And until we can return to housing-market stability, banks can borrow for next to nothing and lend at rates once charged only by Mafia loan sharks.

Banks enjoy guarantees not to fail unless the U.S. government goes down with them. They remain more or less free from regulations that might significantly curb their reckless risk-taking. And they continue to pay their executives better than rock stars or baseball players.

Yet given all these advantages, a spotty financial performance is the best they can do?

We jacked the national debt to almost $14 trillion to avert a Great Depression that the banks nearly caused.

Yet banks remain overloaded with souring loans, plagued by falling real-estate values and forced to battle each other for the scraps of a smaller American pie.

Many banks reported profits for the year -- including  Citigroup,
C


0.84
%




 which was in the black for the first time since 2007 -- yet still fell short of expectations. But the big picture isn't bank earnings or the lack thereof due to various goodwill writedowns or impairment charges. It's revenues.

For 2010, revenues fell: 13% at Goldman Sachs to $39 billion; 8% at Bank of America to $111.4 billion; 5% at Citigroup to $86.6 billion; 4% at  Wells Fargo
WFC


0.91
%




 to $85.2 billion; 3% at  J.P. Morgan Chase
JPM


0.14
%




 to $104.8 billion.

A healthy business lowers prices as it grows revenues. But much of the reported bank profits came from raising fees, selling divisions or gutting the house -- which usually means firing people and emptying buildings, adding to the national malaise.

They also pinched loan-loss reserves.

Banks benefited over the past year from a decrease in consumers defaulting on mortgages, auto loans, revolving loans and credit cards.

Some herald the decline in consumer defaults as a sign of an improving economy -- and maybe it is. But any protracted downturn will shake out the deadbeats. And when the banks pull back on their lending, as they did following the big bust, there will eventually be fewer loans on which to default.

In this way, loan quality improves even if the economy doesn't. And the banks can tap funds set aside for loan-loss reserves and call them profits.

—Al Lewis is a columnist for Dow Jones Newswires in Denver. He blogs at tellittoal.com; his email address is al.lewis@dowjones.com 