A severe fuel shortage has emerged as the primary problem hampering Japanese relief efforts in the northeastern pocket of the country.

More than a week after being hit by a powerful earthquake and tsunami, a lack of gasoline in the region still slows delivery of other essentials such as food, as well as search efforts for those still missing. Amid a heating-fuel shortfall, evacuees are freezing in shelters.

The shortage has led the government to discourage volunteers from going to the disaster-hit areas, citing risks that they may not have access to the gasoline to return.

Last week, people across the region were so desperate to get gas that some broke into the cars tossed by the tsunami. Many of the hundreds of severely damaged cars near Sendai's port had their gas tanks forced open. Some that were overturned had holes punched in their tanks where people frantic for fuel had siphoned gasoline.

Government officials say the problems will largely be solved by the time the recovery efforts reach their second week. But the fix has been complicated by the multiple causes behind the shortfall. Supplies have been pinched by panic-hoarding and by quake-triggered refinery fires. Traffic jams for delivery vehicles along key delivery routes have been aggravated by blackouts, which have cut train service. And the number of fuel-transport vehicles has been cut sharply in recent years because of environmental limits. 

"This is an unprecedented situation. We're trying to secure supplies while battling the triple whammy of a disaster, the nuclear problems and the hoarders," said an official at the policy-planning division of the Agency for Natural Resources and Energy, who asked not to be named.

Infrastructure also is a problem. In one city that lost hundreds of residents from the tsunami, all but two gas stations were destroyed. Officials received barrels of gasoline from Japan's Self-Defense Force but had no facility licensed to handle the flammable material. Instead of allowing bureaucracy to halt their food delivery, body collection and medical-emergency activities, city officials are pumping gas into emergency vehicles with a hand-cranked pump in the back of their emergency headquarters.

"We have no choice but to take this extraordinary measure," said one local official, who asked not to be named or placed for fear of having their makeshift gas station closed by the authorities. The back-door gas station also is kept from the general public, because "people are making death threats over gasoline," the official said.

The initial shortage came when the March 11 magnitude-9 earthquake and tsunami swept northeastern Japan, knocking out six refineries around the country, stretching from the quake zone down to Yokohama, south of Tokyo.  Cosmo Oil Co.
CMOOY


-3.51
%




 said it took until Monday, 10 days after the quake, to extinguish the fire at its Chiba facility. 

Beyond the supply reduction, fuel producers say environmental rules have limited their ability to ramp up delivery quickly. 

"We have sufficient inventory but we can't deliver the fuel due to logistics problems," said  Yoshihiro Hashizume at the Petroleum Association of Japan. He said the number of tanker vehicles hauling fuel has dropped on a shrinking demand for petroleum. According to the association, the number of tank trucks fell to 6,966 in 2010 from 17,744 in 2005 as the result of increasing pressure for energy efficiency and for curbing climate change.

The dire situation is gradually starting to improve as the government implements urgent steps, including shipping fuel from the northern Hokkaido prefecture and transferring 300 tanker vehicles operating in western Japan.  JX Holdings Inc.
JXHLY


0.73
%




 restarted production Monday its refinery in Yokohama. 

In Sendai, one of the largest cities affected by the disaster, car owners, gas-station managers and government officials say gasoline supply has moved toward a return to normal in the past two days, though there is a a long way to go.

  Kanako Otsuki was holding a hand-drawn "End of Line" sign Monday, more than a mile (nearly two kilometers) from the gas station of  Idemitsu Kosan Co.
5019


0.62
%




 where she works. While the line was long, she said, everyone would get gas if they waited two hours. Two days ago, waited more than 10 hours for gas for her own car, and there was no guarantee it wouldn't run out. 

"We will stay open until the gas is gone," she said.

In another part of Sendai, Hiromitsu Sugawara stood in the long line at the Cosmo gas station holding a red gas can. It took about an hour for him to get his turn at the pump—half the time it took Sunday. After he fills the can, he takes it to his office and fills whoever's car needs it. Then he gets back in line.

"It's my third time today," he said. "This is basically my job now."

 Write to  Eric Bellman at eric.bellman@wsj.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications  As of January 2011, the crude-oil distillation capacity of Japan's active refineries was 3,723,900 barrels per day; the capacity of those shutdown because of the earthquake and tsunami was 617,500 and the capacity of partially active refineries was 175,000. A graphic that accompanied a previous version of this article labeled the units in millions instead of in thousands.