LONDON—The U.K. government is eyeing a package of measures to support certain industries, the prime minister's spokesman said Tuesday, as the government continues efforts to switch the agenda away from its austerity plans.

U.K. Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne and Business Secretary Vince Cable will hold a series of cross-departmental meetings in the coming weeks aimed at drawing up the plans, Mr. Osborne told Tuesday's cabinet meeting, the spokesman said. 

The meetings will look at "cross-economy issues such as planning, regulation" and at "particular problems" business is facing, the spokesman said. They will also "look at sectors... and try and create a package of measures on the supply side that can support growth," the spokesman said, giving health care, advanced manufacturing and construction as examples. 

However, the spokesman couldn't say whether there will be any fresh money available to support such measures, which will likely be announced in the budget on March 23. 

Prime Minister David Cameron met with dozens of business leaders Monday in a bid to promote job creation. 

Among the issues that came up from the meeting was U.K. employment law. The government is reported to be preparing measures to ease employers' burdens by making it harder for employees to resort to legal action for unfair dismissal. 

Mr. Cameron has launched a series of initiatives since the start of the new year aimed at showing that the government is working to promote growth amid still-difficult economic conditions. 

In addition to Monday's meeting with business executives, the U.K.'s new trade minister Stephen Green sat down with Mr. Cameron, Mr. Cable and the U.K.'s trade ambassadors on Tuesday morning to discuss export promotion. 

Mr. Cameron has made trade promotion a central part of his government's economic agenda and has expanded the number of trade ambassadors—top executives who help promote U.K. businesses abroad. 

However, with the government pushing ahead with tax rises and spending cuts worth some £111 billion ($172.93 billion) over the next four years, economists fear U.K. growth could slow significantly in coming months. 

The government so far has struggled to lay out a detailed growth agenda. The treasury and the business department had promised a white paper on growth before Christmas laying out the government's main plans for supporting the economy. However, the paper didn't emerge and has been postponed until the budget. 

That led opposition leader Ed Miliband to criticize the government's plans. 

"They have had eight months to come up with a growth strategy and all they can come up with is a proposal to make it easier to sack workers," he said, referring to the mooted changes to unfair-dismissal legislation.