SINGAPORE—CapitaMalls Asia Ltd. said it submitted an application for a secondary listing in Hong Kong as the Singapore-listed shopping-mall developer looks to access a wider funding base. 

"This secondary listing will complement our focused expansion strategy in China," Chief Executive  Lim Beng Chee  said at a news briefing. "It will widen our investor base, enhance research coverage [on the company and its] profile and liquidity, as well as give us an additional avenue for financing." 

"We need to find investors who are more familiar with the market in which we are operating.... We want to enhance CMA's attractiveness to investors in Hong Kong and China," he said, adding that more than two-thirds of its current shareholders are from Europe and the U.S. 

The proposed listing on the main board of the Hong Kong stock exchange would allow the developer to tap Chinese capital and debt markets, drawing on corporate, insurance and retail investors, but Mr. Lim said there aren't any immediate fund-raising plans.

"It's not necessary that a listing in Hong Kong must come with an equity raising. From now until the listing, if it happens that we have a big acquisition then maybe [we could do so]. But today, we don't have the need for this," he said. 

The secondary listing could take place in three months at the earliest because the approval process will take about 10 to 12 weeks, Mr. Lim said, adding that the Hong Kong-listed shares will be quoted in Hong Kong dollars. 

A person familiar with the matter said that assuming the regulatory hurdles are cleared relatively soon, the listing could take place in June or July.

"At this point in time they have signaled they are able to raise the capital they need, but if they needed to raise equity [through the Hong Kong exchange] they could do it shortly after listing," the person said. 

CapitaMalls Asia plans to hold an extraordinary general meeting April 21 to seek shareholder approval for the Hong Kong listing. Mr. Lim doesn't expect shareholders to object to the plans. 

CapitaMalls Asia listed on the Singapore Exchange in a US$2.02 billion initial public offering in late 2009, spun out of CapitaLand Ltd., Southeast Asia's largest property developer, which owns 65.5% of CapitaMalls Asia. 

China accounts for about 37% of CapitaMalls Asia's property portfolio value. 

The company, which has 53 retail properties in China in 34 cities worth S$9.7 billion, said the proposed listing is subject to approval being obtained from the relevant authorities and will also be dependent on prevailing general economic and capital-market conditions. 

The developer doesn't have plans to recycle its capital by divesting its Chinese assets, which are still relatively new, Mr. Lim said, adding it may choose do so in the future by selling them to private funds, rather than to investment trusts. 

CICC and J.P. Morgan are joint sponsors for the proposed listing. 

Shares of CapitaMalls Asia resumed trading 2 p.m. Monday in Singapore, after being placed in a trading halt earlier, and ended down 1.7%.

 Write to  Sam Holmes at samuel.holmes@dowjones.com 