The scandal of indicted  Xinhua Finance
9399


0.47
%




 founder  Loretta Fredy Bush burned some of the sharpest minds on Wall Street, including one of the richest self-made women in the U.S.

Last week, Ms. Bush was indicted by a U.S. grand jury on charges that she and two Xinhua directors committed conspiracy, mail fraud, and made false statements, enriching themselves by $50 million. It was the latest incident to highlight the sometimes opaque finances of publicly traded Chinese companies.

Among those affected by the scandal was  Lynn Tilton, the flamboyant chief of private-equity firm Patriarch Partners. Ms. Tilton, through her solely owned company, started taking a personal stake worth tens of millions of dollars in Xinhua Finance in 2004. She said she never sold a single share. Patriarch also extended more than $50 million in loans to a Xinhua subsidiary that trades in the U.S., much of which it hasn't been paid back, she said.

Now, after the subsidiary defaulted on those loans and its shares dropped 99% from their peak, Ms. Tilton is trying to recoup the loans and reduce the losses from what turned out to be a costly friendship, she said. The two bonded over their similar backgrounds and co-owned a house in Hawaii.

"I see now that this was never really a friendship," Ms. Tilton said Friday. "I was deeply betrayed by the trust I put into this personal and professional relationship."

Ms. Tilton's experience suggests even the "smart money" can be taken in amid the lure of China's huge, rapidly growing market. And she isn't alone.  Larry Kramer, founder of the MarketWatch financial-news service, served two years as a director of that subsidiary, brought on board by Xinhua at a time when its corporate governance faced heavy criticism in 2007. MarketWatch is now owned by News Corp., which owns The Wall Street Journal.

Mr. Kramer said he doesn't feel burned and that he liked Ms. Bush. He said he had no inkling of any wrongdoing when he was on the board, and noted that the allegations against Ms. Bush deal with the parent company, not the U.S. subsidiary on whose board he served. Ms. Bush once headed the subsidiary and its former chief financial officer was one of the directors indicted with her.

A company controlled by billionaire supermarket mogul  Ron Burkle invested tens of millions of dollars in the Xinhua subsidiary's shares, which are now nearly worthless. It couldn't be determined whether Mr. Burkle still owns shares. But as of May 2010, when the stock had dropped 94% from the price he paid, Mr. Burkle held 8.7% of the subsidiary, according to the company's annual report. Mr. Burkle and his company's representatives couldn't be reached for comment.

Ms. Bush and two former Xinhua directors,  Shelly Singhal and  Dennis Pelino, are accused of engineering a series of undisclosed self-dealing transactions that netted them $50 million, according to the indictment filed in U.S. district court in Washington, D.C. Mr. Singhal and Mr. Pelino both denied the allegations through statements from their attorneys.  Mark Srere, Mr. Singhal's attorney, said his client is "confident that a jury will find no merit to the government's case."  Atlee Wampler III, who represents Mr. Pelino, said his client "looks forward to his day in court and opportunity to be exonerated."

Attorneys for Ms. Bush couldn't be reached for comment. In a statement last week, the attorneys said Ms. Bush's activities were "legitimate business transactions" and that the government's allegations were "based on the unprecedented and flawed application" of U.S. criminal law to legal and accounting decisions in China and Japan, where Xinhua Finance's stock trades.

Xinhua Finance, which declined to comment, said in an earlier statement responding to the indictment that Ms. Bush and the others indicted are no longer with the company, and that the company and its current employees aren't under investigation. A spokesman for Xinhua Sports & Entertainment Ltd., the U.S.-traded subsidiary in which Ms. Tilton, Mr. Burkle and Mr. Kramer were involved, couldn't be reached for comment.

The Securities and Exchange Commission is investigating some of the dozens of Chinese companies trading in the U.S that have recently faced criticism over their accounting and disclosure. In the past few months, about 35 Chinese companies have acknowledged accounting problems or had trading of their shares halted amid such concerns.

Ms. Tilton said she and Ms. Bush met when Ms. Bush acquired Mergent, a company owned by Patriarch. The two quickly bonded, she said. Both had been single mothers who had faced similar challenges in their careers.

Patriarch loaned Xinhua Finance Media, later renamed Xinhua Sports & Entertainment Ltd, more than $50 million to expand and make acquisitions. The loan was an unusual move for Patriarch, whose strategy usually involves acquiring companies through distressed debt. Ms. Tilton personally took a stake worth tens of millions of dollars in Xinhua Finance, the parent company.

In 2010, Xinhua Sports began breaching the covenants on its loans, and when it defaulted about six weeks ago, Ms. Tilton said, Patriarch took over its underlying companies, including a mobile-phone company and an events-planning firm. Patriarch is preparing them for sale to recover the outstanding loan balance of $40 million. Patriarch is also pursuing litigation "at all levels," according to the firm, and may recoup money if the defendants are forced to forfeit proceeds, as the indictment calls for.

Ms. Tilton still holds all of her stake in Xinhua Finance, but those shares are currently trading on the Tokyo Stock Exchange for about 1,300 yen (about $16.12), down from their 2005 peak of more than 140,000 yen.

Yucaipa Cos., controlled by Mr. Burkle, invested $25.7 million in common shares of Xinhua Sports in 2007, and another $30 million in convertible preferred stock in 2008, giving it a 12% stake. At the time of the second investment, Ms. Bush touted it as "a vote of confidence in both the fundamentals and growth prospects for our company."

Yucaipa's investment was made at $6 per U.S. traded share. The shares now trade at 18 cents, and liquidators are being appointed for the company, according to a Xinhua Sports filing with the SEC. 

Mr. Kramer didn't lose as much money, about $60,000 he spent on Xinhua Finance Media shares that are now worth little. But the company touted his 2007 appointment to its board, along with other new independent directors, as a means of "enhancing" its corporate governance. At the time, Xinhua was facing heavy media scrutiny over the independence of its directors and related issues. 

"I think they did want me on the board to help their reputation," Mr. Kramer said.

 Write to  Michael Rapoport at Michael.Rapoport@dowjones.com and Robert Frank at robert.frank@wsj.com 