NEW DELHI -- A rule put in place last year on the pricing of convertible instruments that made it difficult for foreign private equity and venture capital funds to invest in Indian companies was scrapped recently.

According to Indian law, foreign private equity and venture capital investors can only use certain types of equity and equity-linked instruments that are compulsorily convertible into equity shares. Until April 2010, their preferred instrument was the so-called compulsorily convertible preference shares. This instrument became a certain number of ordinary shares after a predetermined period. And if the shares of the company in which the investment had been made fell or the performance of the company dipped, it converted into more shares. This essentially meant a fixed exit price. 

After months of discussion involving Foreign Investment Promotion Board, the Reserve Bank of India, trade groups such as the Confederation of Indian Industry, the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and the Indian Private Equity and Venture Capital Association, the rule was scrapped last month. 

Private equity and venture capital firms are now free to use their preferred instrument as long as they stick to the guidelines suggested by the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion.

"For all equity issues by listed companies—whether it is a preferential allotment, equity raising through qualified institutional placement, and compulsory convertible preference shares, the Securities and Exchange Board of India has prescribed a floor pricing," said Puneet Singh Kochar, director of investment banking at Motilal Oswal Securities Ltd.

Adding, the conversion for compulsorily convertible preference shares or an equity placement by preferential allotment or a placement cannot take place below the level set by the market regulator.

In a convertibles issue, there is an incentive for the promoter to improve business and increase profitability so that at the time of conversion, shares convert at a higher price and there is a lower dilution of stake, Mr. Kochar said. 

"If performance is poor, he will have to give a larger share of his company as conversion happens at a lower price, subject to the [regulator's] floor," he said.

Last year, the Indian central bank issued a circular that said that no fixed exit price could be provided to the foreign investor by Indian companies. 

Worried that this could mean a fall in foreign direct investment, the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (part of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce) proposed that the formula for conversion of equity-linked instruments be set upfront at the time of issuance. It said that for listed companies, the actual future conversion price could not be lower than the price worked out according to guidelines prescribed by the market regulator.

For unlisted companies, the price would be determined by using a discounted cash flow methodology.