SYDNEY—Australian authorities warned Tuesday that the death toll from massive flooding in the state of Queensland could increase drastically after flash floods killed eight people and left 72 others missing, while heavy rains continued.

Residents in central Brisbane, the state's capital, were warned by police to move to higher ground as flood waters threaten the city. Australian Broadcasting Corporation reported Tuesday that Brisbane River, which flows through the city, had breached its banks.

On Monday, cars, houses and roads were washed away as flash floods tore through a strip of an area known as the "Great Dividing Range," sweeping through isolated towns in the resource-rich state's south.

"There is no doubt we are now in a very different disaster," aid Anna Bligh, premier of Queensland, at a news conference. 

Darkness and fog prohibited the state emergency-service helicopters from overnight rescues, and some people were still waiting to be rescued from roofs Tuesday morning, the Associated Press reported.

Weeks of rains and flooding have taken a heavy economic impact on Queensland, with the cost of rebuilding infrastructure estimated so far by the state's government at five billion Australian dollars (US$4.96 billion). 

The state's coal industry is estimated to be incurring losses of A$480 million a week because of flooded pits, according to Australia & New Zealand Banking Group Ltd. Economists estimate that the flooding as a whole will shave around 0.1 percentage points to 0.25 percentage points off Australia's gross domestic product, spread over the final quarter of last year and the first three months of 2011.

Hardest hit was the Toowoomba region, which lies about 70 miles west of Brisbane. 

With rainfalls of nearly eight inches in places, rescue workers said the sheer volume and pace of water hitting the town of Toowoomba was unexpected adding to difficulties evacuating residents and people trapped. 

Ms. Bligh said the that water would need to be released from the Wivenhoe Dam, built to protect Brisbane—one of Australia's largest cities—from upstream floodwaters following devastating floods in 1974.

"Without a doubt the Wivenhoe Dam has already saved Brisbane from a catastrophic flood in the next 48 hours. ... The dam will see releases over the next two to three days, larger than it has ever seen in its history since it was fully operational in 1984."

The dam's operator said Tuesday that the dam was built to withstand such events, and Ms. Bligh urged residents in the city not to panic.

Vast tracts of Queensland have been under water since early December, forcing the closure of coal mines and destroying crops, raising fears if a significant impact to the economy. 

Experts are now warning of the risk of disease outbreaks, including diarrhea, respiratory and skin infections.

Driving the floods has been the La Nina effect, where warm sea surface temperatures contribute to heavy rains. 