DETROIT—Steve Dungan has a $5,000 bonus check on the way from Ford and a dream of vacationing in Ireland with his wife. But for now, the Dungans are staying put, and the money is going in the bank.

"It just doesn't seem to make a whole lot of sense to buy something big right now, unless it's something you need," said Mr. Dungan, 49 years old, who works at  Ford Motor Co.
F


-0.81
%




's axle plant in Sterling Heights, Mich.

The U.S. auto industry's return to profitability will put more than $400 million in bonuses in the pockets of unionized workers this year, the first big payout after a decade-long drought. But the economic impact of those payouts on Michigan and other auto communities is likely to be muted, with pent-up demand tempered by 10 years of piled-up obligations.

  General Motors Co.
GM


-0.98
%




 is paying its 19,000 hourly employees in Michigan an average of $4,200 each. Ford's checks will average $5,000 for its 40,000 hourly employees, half of whom are in Michigan. Chrysler Group LLC, which is controlled by Italian auto maker Fiat SpA, isn't yet profitable, but paid hourly workers a performance award of roughly $750 on Feb. 11. Profit sharing is mandated by the union contract, though payouts this year exceeded the mandated formula. Salaried employees also receive bonuses. 

In the past, generous annual bonuses helped fuel Michigan's leisure and construction industries, showing up at boat dealerships, home-theater showrooms and vacation spots "up north." This year, workers like Mr. Dungan have more modest plans, such as paying off debts and rebuilding savings.

"I've got two kids in college, so I'm not looking to buy any big-ticket items," said Mr. Dungan, who used to apply his bonuses to major home improvements. "We'll just put it in the bank."

Today's resurgent auto industry is a shadow of the one that soared in the 1960s and again in the late 1990s. In Michigan alone, employment in the automotive sector has contracted by two-thirds in just the past decade, and incomes are down. Over the past four years, average compensation for hourly workers including benefits but excluding overtime—which is currently infrequent—has fallen by approximately 25%, to about $55 an hour from around $75 an hour. As a result, the industry has less power to pull the state's broader economy out of its long slump.

"Good news for the auto industry is still very good news for Michigan," said Charles Ballard, an economist at Michigan State University. "But it is not such a big deal as it would have been 30, 40 years ago."

At Fairlane Ford in Dearborn, near Ford headquarters, sales manager Eric Ryan said he expected only a slight uptick in sales. "Hopefully they utilize it getting a new vehicle sooner rather than later. But there are other obligations those people have as well," Mr. Ryan said. "You have to be realistic. I am a dealership in the state of Michigan."

A few miles away at Rosenau Powersports, general manager Charles Terrell said his business had contracted more than 70% in two years. He worries about sticker shock when old customers look to renew their fleets of motorcycles, all-terrain vehicles and snowmobiles.

"A line worker—a guy who puts a left door on a Ford Taurus—used to make $95,000 to $100,000 a year with overtime," Mr. Terrell said. "Now that guy is a $60,000-a-year guy. Does he have four toys? No. Now he has two."

Still, said Pete Beauregard, owner of Colony Marine in St. Clair Shores, the industry's rebound improves overall consumer confidence. 

At Detroit's annual boat show in February, Mr. Beauregard said, sales doubled from a year ago; he credits about 25% of that to the auto comeback.

"Even if they are not a GM, Ford or Chrysler employee, so much feeds off of automotive here that the attitude of the purchaser is dependent on automotive," he said.

For Ford line worker Ron Anikewich, 36, the payout was particularly timely. His computer just crashed, so part of his bonus is earmarked for a new one. As for the rest, "I have a couple bills that I am planning to pay off," he said. "I'm deciding which ones." 

 Write to  Kate Linebaugh at kate.linebaugh@wsj.com 