TUNIS, Tunisia—Politicians and opposition figures forged a caretaker government Monday, days after the popular overthrow of Tunisia's longtime president, as a clearer picture emerged of the army's role in the largely peaceful handover of power.

The caretaker government formed Monday will run affairs until fresh elections, which this North African country's constitution mandates be held within 60 days. It includes a handful of ministers from the former regime, including Prime Minister Mohammed Ghannouchi and Foreign Minister Kamel Morjane. Both have reputations among diplomats and opposition leaders as competent professionals. Opposition leaders took three portfolios.

Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali served as Tunisia's president for 23 years before protests swelled over the past month against lack of opportunity and unemployment under his rule, and against what demonstrators from across Tunisia's society called corruption in the presidential family. Mr. Ben Ali fled to Saudi Arabia late Friday, the first leader in the broader Middle East felled by popular uprising in nearly two decades.

Tunisian political developments continued to captivate and apparently inspire people across the wider Middle East. In Egypt on Monday, a man set fire to himself outside parliament, apparently following the lead of the young Tunisian whose self-immolation is credited with sparking Tunisia's protests in December. Arab media reported three more cases of self-immolation in Algeria and one in Mauritania.

As details of last week's events begin to emerge, the army is credited by local and international officials, as well as by many Tunisians, for decisions that helped lead to Mr. Ben Ali's sudden departure and in helping maintain a relative calm in the days since.

Tunisian and European officials briefed on Tunisia's government collapse credit Gen. Rachid Ammar, the military chief of staff, with refusing an order to open fire on demonstrators last week as protests gained momentum. In the tense 72 hours after Mr. Ben Ali fled the country, Gen. Ammar's soldiers took the lead in stabilizing the nation, these officials say. That gave civilian leaders the space to fill the political vacuum.

"The reason why Ben Ali fell so quickly is undoubtedly linked to the fact that the first ring around him decided to withdraw its support," said a senior European defense official briefed on Tunisia. 

Observers say that in a region rife with military dictators and occasional coups, Tunisia's armed forces and Gen. Ammar himself have shown little personal political ambition. That has added to the optimism expressed by opposition figures and many citizens that the North African country could institute real political reforms.

"The army has proven itself loyal [to Tunisians] and a strong institution. The army has no tradition of coup or intervention in political affairs," said Ahmad Bouazzi, an opposition leader who participated in the weekend coalition government discussions.

No security or military officer took part in discussions to form a caretaker government, say opposition members who were involved in the talks. 

Apart from the new heads of the interior and defense ministries, officials with a security background aren't prominent in the new cabinet. The caretaker government draws widely from Tunisians who weren't members of Mr. Ben Ali's party and had been sidelined from politics. These include lawyers, academics and even a blogger, who was given a post for youth and sports. 

Mr. Ghannounchi, in his national address to announce the new leadership, said that government was committed to releasing all political prisoners and investigating cases of corruption from the former regime.

The Tunisian army, which by one U.S. estimate numbers about 27,000 troops, hasn't exerted much influence on the country's recent history. Deployed solely to control the nation's borders, it has been largely on the sidelines in the strong internal police state that grew under Mr. Ben Ali's rule. One Tunisian official said police and internal security forces are about seven times the size of the army. 

Tunisians blame domestic security agencies and police forces for the human-rights abuses, widespread arrests and torture they allege were a hallmark of the country. Internal security forces were called in to crush nationwide protests that kicked off last month.

The army's intervention on Jan. 12 is seen as a turning point that helped bring about Mr. Ben Ali's demise. The previous weekend, internal security forces opened fire on demonstrators in the provincial town of Kasserine, in one of the bloodiest clashes during the month-long protests against Mr. Ben Ali's regime. When demonstrations erupted in Kasserine on Wednesday, Gen. Ammar refused a presidential order for the army to open fire, say Tunisian and European officials briefed on the incident.

By Thursday, video clips posted to the Internet showed incidents in which army soldiers apparently intervened to keep security forces from beating or shooting demonstrators. On Saturday, Tunisians kissed army soldiers manning tanks around key installations in the capital.

The army's prestige rose further over the tense weekend, as special forces launched mopping-up operations to fight and arrest police units that the acting government said were allied with the former regime and responsible for "sowing chaos."

"Our army is a beautiful army. It moved in to protect us, not to work against us," said Kamal Hmail. "They could have taken advantage of the situation."

 Write to  Margaret Coker at margaret.coker@wsj.com 