  Bryan Robson was one of the most successful soccer players of his generation as part of three different professional clubs in England. His time with Manchester United propelled him to stardom and earned him the moniker "Captain Marvel." He was the longest-serving captain in the club's history.

He is the third Englishman to manage the Thai national squad and joins the list of former European managers taking on coaching jobs in soccer-crazy southeast Asia, as nearby powers like Japan and South Korea progress in the World Cup and sponsors invest in the region. International and league games—not to mention visiting European clubs—often draw huge, raucous crowds.

Mr. Robson, 54 years old, started in Thailand in 2009, and the successes have been few. At the AFF Suzuki Cup last December, Thailand settled for two draws and one loss in the group stages. At the Asian Cup earlier this year the squad again failed to move beyond the qualifying stage, with one win, three draws and two losses.

His struggles to lift Thailand to the realm of the region's soccer powers contrast with his successes as a manager in Europe, where he shifted into the role of manager in 1994. He led Middlesbrough to three cup finals at Wembley (though Boro did lose them all), and also guided them to promotion to the Premier League. Mr. Robson later moved to West Bromwich Albion, where he had played decades before, and helped the Baggies avoid relegation.

He spoke with Leigh Murray recently in Bangkok about adjusting to the challenges of managing across lines of language and culture. The following interview has been edited.



WSJ: Is it difficult for foreign managers to succeed in Asia?

Mr. Robson: As long as you understand the culture of the people in the country that you're in, then no. I feel that European cultures…people like myself who have coached for England, coached in the Premiership, you understand the football side and you can see where [players] need to improve. You're not going to get success in countries in Southeast Asia until the mental approach is different. Licensed coaches have got to be in place.

Coaches need to understand the fitness coaching side of it, when players need rest, nutrition. That's another side of it that I find in this part of the world—nutrition is not great for being a strong footballer. A lot of players know this and understand it, but because of the culture they don't really take it on board. 



WSJ: Do you use the same philosophy here as in England?

Mr. Robson: The management side, coming to a country like Thailand, is a little bit different because in England, British players and European players and even when I've had Brazilians they expect to get a bollocking sometimes because that's just inbred in European football, that the coach will lose his temper now and again as long as it's in a controlled manner and it's for the right reasons.

The first thing I learned when I came to this country…you know it's not in the culture in Thailand to be really aggressive in the way that you manage in any business. So you have to calm that down, or bite your tongue, or count to 10 when something makes you rage a bit.



WSJ: So you've had to adjust your management style?

Mr. Robson: You've got to adjust to what you feel is going to get the best out of the players here. I was quite impressed with the squad of players I have. One of the things one of the senior lads asked me to do recently, he said would I go a little bit more towards the European style of management, and if I felt that I needed to tell anybody off or tell them off as a group, to actually implement that into my management style. So I thought that was a good thing for the Thai boys to say because obviously they want to get better and they might think if it's good enough for a Man United player, or it's good enough for Premier League players or England, then it's got to be good enough for us. So I thought they were quite brave in saying that because it's not the culture of the Thai people.



WSJ: What are your career highlights?

Mr. Robson:Overall, two of them stand out. I thought my seven years at Middlesbrough were very successful, where Middlesbrough were 14th in Division 1 when I took over then to get them promoted, go to three cup finals when they've never been to a cup final in their history. And then obviously still being the only manager and the only premiership club at West Brom to be bottom of the league at Christmas and actually stay up. So for me in management those are probably the two things that stick out.



WSJ: What would you tell someone who wants to be a soccer manager?

Mr. Robson: The first thing you've got to realize is your family life to a certain degree goes out the window. It's a 24-hour-a-day job, seven days a week. And there's always something happening around the football club which you're concerned about or it plays on your mind, whether it's picking the team, whether it's a problem with one of your players, your planning of training, planning the staff, the actual general running of the club if the chairman wants you to have that involvement. 



WSJ: Do you have any desire to go back to coach in the Premiership?

Mr. Robson: I wouldn't say no, but there's only certain jobs that I would sort of take the challenge.

I enjoy international football to a certain degree better than the league football, because when you're running a club it's 24 hours a day. International football you just prepare for a long period of time to the competition that you're going to be playing, or the international matches you're going to be playing , and then all the players go back. But that frustrates you sometimes because I can see weaknesses in certain players that I've got and I'd love to be working with them on the training pitch to improve that part of the weakness that I see in them.

 Write to  Leigh Murray at leigh.murray@dowjones.com 