MUMBAI—Maruti Suzuki India Ltd. posted an 18% decline in fiscal-third-quarter profit Saturday, as an increase in input costs and higher royalty payments offset gains from record car sales in the home market. 

Net profit in the period ended Dec. 31 fell to 5.65 billion rupees ($123 million) from 6.88 billion rupees a year earlier. That was lower than the 6.04 billion rupee average of estimates in a Dow Jones Newswires poll of 12 analysts. 

Sales in the quarter were up 26% to 92.77 billion rupees, India's largest car maker by sales said in a regulatory filing to the stock exchanges. 

Maruti, which controls nearly half of India's car market, has been benefiting from a fast-expanding local economy that is fuelling demand for new vehicles. The company sold more than 100,000 vehicles in the local market for two consecutive months in the quarter. 

It sold a record total 330,687 vehicles, up 28% from a year earlier, in the quarter, which included exports of 31,160 units. 

Vehicle sales have been helped by launch of new models and variants. The company introduced small car Alto K10 in August, and a new version of the Wagon-R in April. It had also introduced three new models in the past fiscal year—the Ritz and Estilo hatchbacks and the Eeco multipurpose van, which have been in good demand. 

Stiff competition prevented Maruti from raising prices in the quarter. 

"The quarter saw pressure on margins primarily due to adverse foreign-exchange movement and higher royalty payout. Increase in commodity costs also impacted the margins," a company statement said. 

The company spent 69.59 billion rupees to buy steel, aluminum and other raw materials in the quarter, up 27% from the year-earlier period. 

Other expenses for the period jumped 37% to 9.15 billion rupees—including 4.60 billion rupees as royalty payment to parent  Suzuki Motor Corp.
7269


-0.02
%




 

Royalty as a percentage of sales stood at 5.3%, higher than the year-earlier period. 

"Large impact on margins is due to the yen-rupee exchange rate and discounts. Exchange rate hurt margins by 25 basis points on quarter and discounts by 60 basis points," Chief Financial Officer  Ajay Seth said at a post-earnings conference call. 

Maruti launched new models or variants of existing vehicles to compete with companies including Hyundai Motor Co.,  General Motors Co.
GM


-0.33
%




 and  Ford Motor Co.
F


-0.38
%




, which introduced small cars in India in last few months to challenge the Suzuki unit's leadership. 

Maruti also started using new-generation K-Series engines, which are more fuel-efficient, on most of its vehicles. These engines, developed by Suzuki, attract higher royalty then those used previously. 

The company, 54.21%-owned by Suzuki Motor Corp., is investing close to 37 billion rupees in setting up two new plants at Manesar in the northern state of Haryana to raise total vehicle production to 1.75 million units a year by the fiscal year ending March 31, 2012, or early 2012-2013. It currently has an installed capacity to make 1.2 million cars at its two factories—one each in Manesar and Gurgaon, also in Haryana. 

Maruti is trying to advance starting the two new factories as capacity bottlenecks and higher demand have led to a huge wait on its models. 

"The first new Manesar plant should be ready by 2011 while the second new plant is expected to start operations by end-2012," Maruti Chairman R.C. Bhargava said in December. 

 Write to  Nikhil Gulati at nikhil.gulati@dowjones.com and Gurdev Singh Virk at Gurdev.Singh@dowjones.com 