FRANKFURT—Euro-zone bank lending expanded further in February, indicating that bank credit will increasingly underpin the region's economic recovery amid signs that inflationary pressures from monetary growth remain in check. 

Private-sector lending increased 2.6% in February from a year earlier, after rising 2.4% in January, data from the European Central Bank showed Friday. 

The annual growth rate of broad money, or M3, accelerated to 2% in February from 1.5% in January, above economists' forecasts of a 1.7% increase. 

"The credit markets are gradually leaving the crisis behind," said  Peter Vanden Houte, an economist at ING Bank. 

Loans to non-financial firms gathered pace, rising by an annual rate of 0.6% in February, after climbing 0.5% in January, the data showed. 

But such loans "still lag behind" those to the private sector in general, said  Annalisa Piazza, a strategist at Newedge Group in London. 

The euro zone's recovery from the global financial crisis has been hindered by weak bank lending, particularly to businesses. 

Bank lending to households remained robust, although the annual rate of loans growth fell slightly to 3% in February from 3.1% in January. 

Lending for house purchases, which is widely regarded as a leading indicator of the region's business cycle, dipped to 3.8% in February from 3.9% in January. 

While the annual growth of M3 surged in February, the three-month moving average held steady at 1.7% between December and February, the same as in the preceding period. 

That is below the ECB's 4.5% growth reference value for the three-month average, which it considers to be in line with an inflation rate of just below 2% over the medium term. 

"The ECB probably still concludes that at least based on monetary indicators, inflationary pressures over the medium term should remain contained," said  Michael Schubert, an economist at  Commerzbank
CRZBY


0.55
%




 in Frankfurt. 

That is "unlikely to deter the bank from raising rates in the near future," given its belief that the excess liquidity in the economy prior to the financial crisis has yet to be fully unwound, Mr. Schubert added. 

A string of ECB officials have indicated in recent days that the central bank is likely to increase interest rates as soon as next month. ECB President  Jean-Claude Trichet said Monday he had "nothing to add" to the ECB's policy statement March 3, when the central bank warned that "strong vigilance" was needed on inflation. 

The ECB credit data make it "all but certain" that the ECB will start raising interest rates soon, given its concerns that keeping rates too low for too long "might create the same excesses as we saw a few years ago," Mr. Vanden Houte said. 

M3 comprises currency in circulation, overnight, short-term deposits and debt securities of up to two years, repurchase agreements and money market fund shares. 