FLORHAM PARK, N.J.—A long time ago, Trevor Pryce was talking to John Elway. Mr. Pryce was a young defensive end with the Denver Broncos then, and Mr. Elway was his teammate, the great quarterback whose career was nearing its end.

Mr. Elway told him about what a grind an NFL training camp can be. Funny, only now—after 14 years of playing professional football, after his 6-foot-5, 290-pound body has sustained thousands of collisions that at their most benign level carry the impact of small auto accidents—could Mr. Pryce see the irony in the old pro's insight.

"He played quarterback," Mr. Pryce said Monday as the Jets cleared out their lockers. "You just stand there, hand the ball off. You're not getting hit. He had a red jersey on. Nobody could go near him. He was immune."

 Like the rest of his teammates on the Jets, whose season ended Sunday with their AFC Championship Game loss in Pittsburgh, Mr. Pryce will now have time to allow his body to recover from the ravages of an NFL season, perhaps more time than he's ever had since entering the league in 1997.

 He admitted Monday that he's contemplating retirement. And depending on how long the NFL's labor dispute lasts, teams might be unable to hold the organized team activities (OTAs) and extended preseason camps that have turned football into a year-round sport and put players through weeks of physical exertion before the real games begin.

Mr. Pryce, 35 years old and a native of Brooklyn, called this the "rigor mortis" of pro football, a neat turn of phrase befitting a man who in his spare time writes screenplays and has sold story ideas to Sony and Disney. He has enjoyed and excelled at football—he was selected to four Pro Bowls and in Denver played on two Super Bowl-winning teams—but seems not to need the game in his life. 

That quality separates him from so many other players worried about how to procure health insurance in the event of a lockout (the NFL has said it will stop covering players during a work stoppage), when their offseason will end and what they'll do with themselves in the meantime.

"There are definitely some areas of concern," Jets guard Brandon Moore said.

Mr. Pryce seemed nonplussed about the impasse, predicting that the league's owners and its players association would resolve their differences in June. The issue that bothered him most was the owners' desire to extend the regular season from 16 games to 18, and given his injury history, it's little wonder why. In 2004, he had back surgery and played only two games. In 2007, he broke his wrist and played only five games.

"Eighteen games is a bad, bad idea," he said. "That would be one of the things that will lend to my decision [whether to retire]. 'I've got to play 18 games? I have no friggin' idea how we [play 16]. I've done it 14 times, and every year…you're like, 'Oh, my God, I'm dizzy.' It can be a bit much."

Last fall, the Jets had plucked Mr. Pryce from the Baltimore Ravens, who had released him to make room on their roster to sign another player. The Ravens had intended to re-sign him, but Jets head coach Rex Ryan, who as Baltimore's defensive coordinator had coached Mr. Pryce, lured him away before the Ravens could act, appealing to Mr. Pryce's loyalty to him. 

Already, Mr. Ryan has told Mr. Pryce that he wants him back on the Jets next season, that the team could use the depth along the defensive line that Mr. Pryce provided. But Mr. Pryce said he replied by telling Mr. Ryan: "Rex, I love you to death, but I'm not doing training camp.'"

It would likely take a second, stronger appeal from Mr. Ryan to coax Mr. Pryce into considering a return, and even that might not be enough. For Mr. Pryce speaks like someone satisfied that he has nothing left to accomplish, nothing else to gain, from football.

"I have two rings," he said. "But at the end of the day, you realize it's a team sport. I mean, that's what makes the game great. You have to rely on other people to get the thing you want most, because you cannot get it by yourself. It's not like boxing or something that's one-on-one where you control it yourself. Other people control aspects for you.

"That's what makes winning championships so special, and that's what made going to the AFC Championship so special to me."

So he'll go home, rest, scribble down a few more screenplay ideas whenever the inspiration should strike him. He appeared Wednesday on ESPN2's morning talk show "First Take.''

 He's the old pro now, and with every day that passes without a resolution to the league's labor strife, it will become so much harder for him to summon the will to play, so much easier to let the game go.

"Hopefully, we can have a season next year," Jets kicker Nick Folk said. "A lot of guys want to. A lot of these guys are praying for one."

A few lockers to Mr. Folk's left, there was one who isn't.

  