DETROIT—The auto show that begins this week gives Detroit the chance to show off a hometown industry on the mend and a downtown flush with upscale hotel rooms.

But many conventioneers' image of Detroit may be shaped by the dark and vacant former Hotel Pontchartrain, directly across from the Cobo Center convention hall. Fully renovated in 2007 then shuttered in 2009, the steel-and-glass hotel stands as a conspicuous symbol of Detroit's stunted redevelopment efforts.

For 18 months, the hotel known as "the Pontch" has been in limbo. A 2009 bankruptcy filing staved off a bank foreclosure, just as the hotel's lender itself went into receivership. Since then, its owner, Shubh Hotels LLC of Boca Raton, Fla., has been battling a court-appointed receiver over unpaid utility bills and security bills, which were only sorted out earlier this week. A white piece of paper with the words "Temporarily Closed Due to Repairs" is taped on the windows near the entrance of its two lobbies.

On Tuesday, Shubh will ask a U.S. Bankruptcy Court judge in Florida for permission to borrow up to $5 million to make repairs on the 357-room hotel and reopen it as soon as March, said  Susan Lasky, Shubh's attorney. "They had hoped to be open in time for the auto show but it didn't work out," she said. If the judge denies that request, the property will likely be foreclosed on, making a sale possible. 

If it reopens, the Pontch would face a far tougher market now. Detroit has seen a surge of new upscale hotel rooms over the past two years. The Westin Book Cadillac, with 488 rooms, and the Doubletree Guest Suites, with 203 rooms, both opened in late 2008 following restorations of derelict buildings. Both are a few blocks from the Cobo Center convention hall.The city also has three new casino-hotels, with about 400 rooms each, in and around downtown.

Despite recovery by the auto makers and more hiring, Michigan still struggles with double-digit unemployment and a soft hotel market. The state's unemployment rate of 12.4% in November was the second highest in the nation behind Nevada at 14.3%. Of the top 25 major hotel markets in the U.S., the Detroit area was among the worst when it came to room rates. The average room rate, according to Smith Travel, has fallen 5.8% to $74.80 through November 2010 from the same period in 2009.

The dynamics of the hotel market mirror the zero-sum pattern of Detroit's recent redevelopment efforts. While the downtown core has managed to attract its share of new projects and jobs, largely through heavy incentives, the gains tend to come at the expense of properties elsewhere in the city and suburbs. Amid a stagnant market, outlying office hubs like Southfield, Troy and Livonia are struggling with rising vacancy rates and depressed rents.

"For the last 20 years it's been musical chairs for downtown Detroit and the surrounding area," said Todd Szymczak of NAI Farbman who is the real-estate agent for the Pontch hotel. "Landlords spend their time fighting for the same tenants."

While the new hotels are poised for a bonanza as the auto show opens to the media Monday, the Pontch will bring in just $15,000, said local attorney David Findling, the hotel's court-appointed receiver. Its terrace, which faces Cobo, is being rented by auto maker Saab for an event while the hotel itself is being draped from top to bottom with a Mercedes-Benz advertisement. 

The 25-story Pontch, built in 1965, was once a luxury landmark in Detroit. Its location and the view from "the top of the Pontch" made it a popular destination for partiers, as well as an attractive investment for thrift boss Charles Keating, who owned the hotel in the 1980s.

Shubh acquired it in 2006, spent $35 million on renovations and reopened it in 2007 as the Sheraton Detroit Riverside Hotel. But Sheraton quickly withdrew its brand after Shubh stopped paying its franchise fees, according to court documents. By mid-2009, with the loss of its national brand and an economic crisis gripping Detroit, the Pontch struggled to pay its debt and staff and maintain services.

Ashley Tester, 28 years old, of Philadelphia, remembers arriving at the hotel on Memorial Day weekend 2009 for Detroit's annual electronic-music festival, and seeing about 100 irate travelers waiting in the lobby.

"When we got to the hotel, we noticed that there were a lot of windows opened and you could see the drapes blowing in the wind," she recalled. "We later learned it was because the hotel had no air conditioning. When we finally got to the front desk, we were told there were no clean rooms."

The crisis came to a head in the summer of 2009, during the National Baptist Convention, when the hotel was booked to capacity and the air conditioning failed again. "It was a total nightmare for our delegates, the organization and the city," said Marsha DuPont, who handled accommodations for the convention. "At one point we had 300 people crammed into the lobby. The staff was yelling and screaming in the corridors because they hadn't been paid."

The hotel closed in August and a bankruptcy filing followed in October. Shubh currently owes about $30 million on the property, said Ms. Lasky, its attorney. "They want to reopen this property and pay back the bank every penny," she said. 

But for now, the main sign of life at the Pontch is in the lower lobby, where a guard stands watch 24 hours a day to keep out squatters.