British Prime Minister David Cameron said his country wouldn't rule out the use of "military assets" in confronting Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi. 

Mr. Cameron also told Parliament that he had asked the Ministry of Defence to work with "our allies" on plans for a military no-fly zone. 

"We do not in any way rule out the use of military assets," Mr. Cameron said. "We must not tolerate this regime using military force against its own people."

The U.K. has already used the British military to evacuate its nationals out of Libya, but Mr. Cameron appeared to tell Parliament that he could deploy them against forces loyal to Col. Gadhafi. Western leaders have weighed whether to enforce a no-fly zone in Libya in a bid to stop Col. Gadhafi from using planes to attack rebel positions and civilians. 

Along with France, the U.K. is perhaps the only European country with the military capability to use force in Libya. 

Among the options for enforcing no-fly zones, the U.K. is considering flying Typhoon fighter jets out of its air base on Cyprus, a person familiar with the matter said. The country has already moved into the region Hercules transport planes, AWAC aircraft used to direct aircraft in airspace and A10 and VC10 tanker planes used to refuel aircraft. 

Britain wouldn't look to enforce a no-fly zone unilaterally if no other country agreed to help police it though, the person said. 

Over the weekend, British special forces were used to extract foreign nationals from Libya, while a Royal Navy frigate has ferried evacuees from the port of Benghazi in recent days. In one evacuation a Hercules transport plane was fired at as its tried to take off, with bullets entering its cockpit and one round bounding off the pilot's helmet, the person familiar with the matter said. 

Mr. Cameron said that the U.K. has now evacuated 600 nationals who were spread out across 20 different locations across Libya. He estimated that about 150 British nationals remain in the country, though many are dual nationals and all but a "very small amount" want to stay. 

He said that events in the Middle East offered a "once in a generation opportunity" to bring democracy to the region. "It falls to all of us to seize this chance to fashion a better future for this region, to build a better relationship between our peoples, to make a new start," he said. 

Over the weekend, British special forces were used to extract foreign nationals from Libya, while a Royal Navy frigate has been ferrying evacuees from the port of Benghazi in recent days. Mr. Cameron said that the U.K. has now evacuated 600 nationals who were spread out across 20 different locations across Libya. He estimated that there are some 150 British nationals left in the country, though many are dual nationals and all but a "very small amount" want to stay. 

"Our message to Colonel Gadhafi is simple: go now," he said.

 Write to  Alistair MacDonald at alistair.macdonald@wsj.com 