TAIPEI— AU Optronics Corp. reported Thursday its fourth-quarter net loss widened from a year earlier due to a drop in panel prices and a rising New Taiwan dollar. 

The company's results reflect the tough conditions the flat-panel industry faces amid sluggish TV demand and weak prices. Analysts said although the loss was larger than expected, the rising trend in prices in the coming months should help the company swing back to profitability by the second quarter. 

Taiwan's biggest flat-panel maker said in a statement its net loss for the three months ended Dec. 31 was NT$11.47 billion (US$395.0 million), compared with a net loss of NT$6.93 billion a year earlier. Six analysts polled by Dow Jones Newswires had earlier forecast a net loss of NT$6.25 billion. 

AU Optronics, the world's third-largest flat-panel maker by revenue after Samsung Electronics Co. and  LG Display Co., said the average selling price of its TV panels fell 17% to US$197 in the fourth quarter from US$238 a year earlier, while the average selling price of its computer panels fell 17% to US$53 from US$64 a year earlier. During the fourth quarter, the Taiwan dollar rose about 3%. 

AU Optronics said it expects TV panel shipments in the first quarter to fall slightly from the previous quarter and the average selling price of such panels to remain flat as demand begins to recover. 

  Morgan Stanley
MS


0.28
%




 analyst  Frank Wang said he projected prices would begin to recover by March or April. 

"These things are cyclical and the fourth quarter was the worst part of the cycle, we are expecting it to turn around," he said. "The cycle should be better this year, the supply side addition will be more moderate, and since we're in the midst of the recovery demand should be better." 

AU Optronics' shipments of liquid-crystal displays used in computers will likely rise slightly from the fourth quarter, while the average selling price will likely rise by a low single-digit percentage over the same period, Chief Financial Officer  Andy Yang said at an investors' conference. 

The company's first-quarter utilization rate will likely average mid-80%, Mr. Yang said, without giving a comparison. 