LONDON—European stocks finished mostly higher, tracking gains on Wall Street, while Russian shares extended losses on news of an explosion at Domodedovo Airport, Moscow's busiest commercial airport. 

In Moscow, the Micex stock index slumped 1.5% to 1720.70. 

The Stoxx Europe 600 index gained 0.3% to end at 281.99, reversing earlier losses. U.S. stocks were solidly higher by the close of European trading, boosting sentiment. Upbeat economic news from the euro zone encouraged investors as well.

Factory orders in the euro zone rose 2.1% in November from October, as Germany continued to lead a recovery in industrial production accelerating from the 1.4% increase in October. .The figures came as a survey from financial-information provider Markit showed the pace of growth in the euro zone's private sector accelerated to a six-month high in January.

The news, as well as comments from Jean-Claude Trichet, president of the European Central Bank, reiterating the bank's willingness to raise interest rates to forestall inflation, boosted the euro against the dollar.

Oil futures fell, while gold rose modestly. 

The French CAC 40 index rose 0.4% to 4033.21, marking a seventh gain in 10 trading days, as shares of Compagnie de Saint-Gobain SA rallied 2.7% to €42.72 ($58.16). UBS raised its price target on the building-materials firm to €50 from €37 and reiterated its "buy" rating. 

Bucking the positive trend, shares of Philips slumped 5.5% in Amsterdam. The group reported an 84% rise in fourth-quarter profit to €463 million, which fell short of the €500 million consensus forecast. 

Philips, which makes televisions as well as lighting and medical equipment, said comparable sales fell 4%, mainly due to weak consumer demand in Western Europe. 

Technology-related stocks were mostly lower across Europe. Shares of chip-equipment maker  ASML Holding NV dropped 1.3% in Amsterdam and  STMicroelectronics
STM


2.02
%




 fell 0.7% in Paris. 

Germany's DAX 30 edged up 0.1% to 7067.77, rising for a second day. 

Car shares were mostly lower. Daimler fell 0.5% and  BMW
BMW


-0.68
%




 shed 0.8%. Italian auto group  Fiat SpA fell 2.8% after it was downgraded to "underperform" from "neutral" by Bank of America Merrill Lynch. 

  Philippe Gijsels, head of research at BNP Paribas Fortis Global Markets, said Monday's market moves show that investors are moving out of stocks with broader exposure to emerging markets — the big winners of 2010 — and into defensive holdings. 

In addition, stocks are generally no longer going up in response to good earnings news, he said. 

"Most companies have published earnings ahead of expectation, but the individual stocks are not benefiting," Mr. Gijsels said. "For me, this is the very early stage of a corrective move." 

J.P. Morgan analyst Mislav Matejka said, however, that investors shouldn't give up on cyclical stocks. In a note to clients, the analyst said cyclical stocks may have room to rise 50% from current levels if the trend seen in the last economic cycle is repeated. 

In London, the FTSE 100 index, which Mr. Gijsels said is more exposed to defensive stocks than other markets, rose 0.8% to 5943.85. 

Among U.K. shares,  Royal Bank of Scotland Group PLC dropped 1.9% and  Lloyds Banking Group PLC fell 3.4% amid worries about future regulation of the sector. 

The losses followed a weekend speech by  John Vickers, head of a committee set up to review the U.K. banking system. He stressed the potential advantages of ring-fencing the retail-banking activities of big banks to prevent losses spreading from their riskier activities. 

The losses in banking were balanced by gains for defensive stocks such as  British American Tobacco PLC , which gained 4%, and distiller  Diageo
DEO


0.10
%




 PLC, which rose 1.4%. 

Markets in fiscally weaker European countries had a mixed session. 

In Dublin, the ISEQ index rose 1.7% after the Green Party pulled out of the country's coalition government but said it will still support a finance bill crucial in Ireland's plan to get support from the European Union and the International Monetary Fund. 

The highly volatile shares of Allied Irish Banks dropped 1.5% and  Bank of Ireland fell 1.7%, as the turmoil hurt Irish bond yields. 

But the effect on the equities index was outweighed by a 3% gain for construction group  CRH PLC. UBS upgraded the company to "buy" from "neutral" and also raised its view of the European construction sector to "overweight" from "neutral."

Mid afternoon in New York, the euro was trading at $1.3669, up from $1.3615 late in New York on Friday. The dollar was at 82.50 yen, down from 82.56 yen.

Comments by Saudi Arabian Oil Minister Ali Naimo that were interpreted as a sign that the kingdom could raise production to keep prices in check weighed on oil futures. Crude for March delivery on the New York Mercantile Exchange fell $1.04 per barrel, or 1.2%, to $88.07. 

Gold futures for February delivery on Nymex's Comex division of the New York Mercantile Exchange were up $1.80, or 0.1%, at $1,342.80 per ounce.

Dan Strumpf, Ainsley Thomson and Nicholas Winning contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Simon Kennedy at simon.kennedy@dowjones.com 