  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS


0.03
%




 could lose as much as $3.4 billion in damages and other litigation-related matters involving securities it underwrote in the last few years for which the purchasers are now suing to recover losses or to force the firm to buy them back. 

In a securities filing Tuesday, Goldman estimated that the figure, in the upper range of estimates, was "reasonably possible." 

The Wall Street firm disclosed this worst-case scenario to comply with new rules from the Securities and Exchange Commission regarding contingent liabilities. The accounting standard demands that companies state what is less than likely, but has more than a slight chance of happening. These potential legal losses are on top of what companies have already set aside. 

Banks face a mountain of lawsuits related to the financial crisis, particularly from investors who bought mortgage-backed securities that later tumbled in value. 

  J.P. Morgan Chase
JPM


-0.07
%




 & Co. said Monday that it faces up to $4.5 billion in legal losses in its own worst-case scenario, the highest estimate of any of the banks reporting so far.  Citigroup Inc.
C


0.90
%




 estimated potential losses of $4 billion last week, while  Bank of America Corp.
BAC


3.06
%




 put its worst-case number at $1.5 billion and  Wells Fargo
WFC


1.34
%




 & Co. estimated $1.2 billion above reserves. 

On Monday, American Express Co. said it could face up to $500 million in losses from various lawsuits and federal inquiries beyond what it has already set aside. 

Morgan Stanley didn't disclose an estimate for potential legal losses, instead electing to repeat its prior disclosure of $518 million in potential damages related to two separate legal proceedings over complex debt instruments. 

  John McInnis, an accounting professor at the University of Texas at Austin's McCombs School of Business, said the disclosures are highly discretionary, and the standard merely says disclosure "may be" required in order that the financial statements not be misleading. 

There also may be a solid reason not to disclose, he added. Not giving a number could be a sign the company was reluctant to tip its hand to plaintiff's attorneys about how much they are expected to lose, or willing to pay to settle. 

Goldman said in its annual report to the SEC that plaintiffs suing it over losses from mortgage-related securities had cumulative losses of approximately $457 million as of December. The plaintiffs, including the Federal Home Loan Banks of Seattle, Chicago and Indianapolis,  Charles Schwab Corp.
SCHW


0.30
%




, Cambridge Place Investment Management Inc., Basis Yield Alpha Fund (Master) and Landesbank Baden-Wuerttemberg, have filed complaints in state and federal courts against Goldman, alleging that "offering documents for the securities that they purchased contained untrue statements of material facts and material omissions" and they are "generally seeking rescission and damages." 

Goldman also said it expects to be the subject of "additional putative shareholder derivative actions, purported class actions, rescission and 'put back' claims and other litigation, additional investor and shareholder demands, and additional regulatory and other investigations and actions with respect to mortgage-related offerings, loan sales, CDOs, and servicing and foreclosure activities." CDOs, or collateralized debt obligations, are debt instruments. 

Last year the firm paid $550 million, the largest SEC fine paid by a Wall Street firm, to settle charges it misled investors in one such CDO product it packaged with the help of hedge fund Paulson & Co. As a result of that settlement, Goldman revised its business practices, vowing to be more clear in its financial reporting and establishing new committees to focus on conflicts of interest and client relations. 

Meanwhile, Goldman disclosed it had 25 days in 2010 in which its traders either made no money or lost money. That compares with 235 days in which they were in the black, including 68 days in which they had trading gains of $100 million or more. 

Trading in the fourth quarter was the weakest of the year, with 13 days in which Goldman's traders had zero gains or posted losses. The second-worst quarter was the three months ended in June, when Goldman had 10 days at or below zero. 

Goldman said its value-at-risk limit was exceeded once last year to facilitate a client transaction and was resolved by a reduction in the risk position on the following day. 

The firm also reduced its risk limit once during the year to reflect lower risk utilization. Average daily value at risk last year was $134 million, down from $218 million in 2009. 

Goldman also said its Litton Loan Servicing subsidiary, which had suspended evictions, foreclosures and sales of foreclosed properties in a number of states due to concerns about improper procedures industrywide, had recently resumed some of those activities. 

—David Benoit and Liz Rappaport contributed to this article.

 Write to  Liz Moyer at lizmoyer@dowjones.com 