CAIRO—Hundreds of Islamic radicals escaped from prison during the Egyptian uprising that ousted President Hosni Mubarak last month. 

Now, protesters are pressing for the release or civilian retrial of the country's remaining political prisoners—including, to the alarm of U.S. officials, militants involved in scores of terror attacks.

In a narrative taking hold among Egypt's new revolutionaries, these al Qaeda-affiliated militants are seen as having been pushed to violence by the excesses of the overthrown dictatorship. Now, these people say, the militants represent no threat to the future democracy. 

"They are victims—what they have done is a reaction to torture," said Wael Abbas, one of the prominent youth campaigners behind the demonstrations on Cairo's Tahrir Square that precipitated Mr. Mubarak's downfall. 

Khaled Dweik, who has helped run the tent city that until Wednesday hosted protesters, agreed. "Terrorism is impossible in Egypt now," he said. "If you have repression or injustice, people either go kill others or kill themselves. But if they have freedom, they express their creativity and help build their country."

Many of the Islamist prisoners in Egypt belong to Gamaa Islamiyya, a movement that was responsible for killing hundreds of foreign tourists, policemen and secular intellectuals, in addition to involvement in the 1993 World Trade Center bombing in New York. Gamaa Islamiyya was, along with Ayman al Zawahri's Egyptian Islamic Jihad, a founding member of al Qaeda. Several Gamaa Islamiyya leaders have renounced violence over the past decade. 

Some 500 prisoners jailed for links to Gamaa Islamiyya have already been set free in two batches over the past two weeks, said Montasser Zayat, a former Gamaa Islamiyya activist who is now an attorney representing Islamist detainees. 

"The euphoria of the popular revolution shouldn't make us Pollyannaish about the reality of terrorism," said Juan Zarate, the U.S. deputy national-security adviser for combating terrorism from 2005 to 2009. "Al Qaeda is trying to take advantage of the events on the ground. One of the primary concerns of the U.S. government is to find out which hard-core jihadis have escaped, and which role could they play in the reinvigoration of al Qaeda's presence in Egypt." 

The U.S. government has raised the issue of past and potential releases of dangerous militants with Egypt's ruling Supreme Council of the Armed Forces, officials say. The Egyptian military didn't respond to requests to comment.

A U.S. counterterrorism official said the U.S. is concerned about the prisoner releases and is monitoring the situation closely. He added, however, that the U.S. hasn't seen evidence that any of the released Islamists have resumed militant activities. 

Israel is concerned about Hamas militants who escaped and made their way home to the Gaza Strip. An Israeli official said those escapees, believed to number at least six, represent a threat to Israel. He said Israel expected Egypt to continue its longstanding cooperation to curb the flow of weapons from Egypt to Gaza—a Palestinian enclave ruled by Hamas, which hasn't renounced violence against the Jewish state. The Israeli official said the fate of Islamic radicals still imprisoned in Egypt is an internal Egyptian issue. "It's very delicate," he said. "We're not voicing any demands." 

Shadi Hamid, head of research at the Brookings Institution's Doha Center, said the military would balk at freeing the most hardened militants. "The last thing the military wants is people who believe in the use of violence to be free," he said. "I don't think it's something we have to worry too much about."

The military has assented to other recent protester demands, however, including heeding their call to replace Egypt's prime minister and allowing protesters to enter state security offices to look through documents. 

Under Mr. Mubarak, who was the target of an Islamist assassination attempt, the country's vast state security apparatus, known in Arabic as Amn al Dawla, harshly repressed the Islamist militancy, often torturing suspects and rounding up entire families. The country's emergency laws—in effect since Islamists gunned down Mr. Mubarak's predecessor, Anwar Sadat, in 1981—allowed the suspects to be held without trial for years. Those who were eventually convicted usually received their sentences from military courts.

The U.S. took advantage of this after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, renditioning to Egypt scores of terrorism suspects. 

"There is no justification for terrorism. But if these people were subjected to torture, and tried in special tribunals where normal standards of evidence do not apply, they should be retried again in a civilian court," said Khaled Hamza, an activist with the youth wing of the Muslim Brotherhood, an Islamist movement that actively participated in the uprising against Mr. Mubarak and decades ago renounced violence.

State security offices in Cairo and other cities where such evidence would have been held have been overrun in recent days. Many files were allegedly shredded by state security officials before they abandoned the buildings. Protesters entered the buildings in a bid to secure some of the documents. Dozens have since been posted on Facebook.

Some of the documents appear authentic. But activists say others look like crude forgeries that aim to advance new agendas. In a reflection of conspiracy theories swirling through Egypt, one purportedly shows that state security itself orchestrated some of the biggest terror attacks, including the 2005 bombing of tourist hotels that killed some 80 people in the Sinai peninsula. Other documents purport to prove that state security was behind the bombings of Christian churches.

"One of the political goals of the corrupt regime was to sow division between Muslims and Christians so it could rule over the people," said Fathi Abdel-Rahman, another leader of the protest camp on Tahrir Square who spent five years behind bars as a suspected Islamist. "No one who is in prison now bombed anything. They all are innocent victims of the previous system and should be released immediately."

—Adam Entous in Washington and Richard Boudreaux in Jerusalem contributed to this article.

 Write to  Yaroslav Trofimov at yaroslav.trofimov@wsj.com 