Leather-goods maker Coach Inc. plans to gradually move some production out of China, where labor costs are rising, and into lower-cost countries, such as India and Vietnam. 

At the same time, China is proving a boon to Coach's sales, as residents that have become more affluent buy the retailer's status-symbol bags. Comparable-store sales grew by double digits in China, which Chief Executive Lew Frankfort called "our fastest-growing business." 

On Tuesday Coach reported that second-quarter profit rose a better-than-expected 26% on a 19% increase in sales. The company also said it expects sales and profit to increase at least 10% for the rest of the year and plans to repurchase as much as $1.5 billion of shares by June 30, 2013. 

Net income rose to $303.4 million, or $1 a share, in the three months ended Jan. 1, up from $241 million, or 75 cents, earned in the year-earlier second quarter. Sales rose 19% to $1.26 billion, the New York-based company said.

Coach is growing in the U.S., Mr. Frankfort said, with North American comparable-store sales rising 12.6%. Speaking of the American customers, Mr. Frankfort said in an interview, "She's spending more than she did before the recession," by 5% to 10%.

Mr. Frankfort said the retailer continues to expand its Web presence: Online sales are its fastest-growing full-priced channel in the U.S. Direct-to-consumer sales, which are largely made up of online sales, grew 17% in the second quarter. 

The retailer saw a 36% leap in inventory, which Mr. Frankfort said positioned the company well as it moves into the spring half of the year. 

For the latest quarter, gross margin—which remained at 72.4%— fell short of Wall Street expectations. The company said that margins were crimped by more sales through their outlet stores, where prices are cheaper. 

Coach has lowered the company's average handbag price by about 10% to bolster demand during the economic downturn. 

The company had 347 retail stores and 129 factory outlets at the end of the quarter in North America. In Japan, Coach had a total to 171 retail locations and in China, 52. 

Direct-to-consumer sales increased 17% to $1.1 billion in the latest quarter.

Coach on Tuesday also announced plans for a $1.5 billion stock buyback, which will expire June 30, 2013. About $35 million remains under the company's previous stock repurchase authorization. 

 Write to  Karen Talley at karen.talley@dowjones.com and Andria Cheng at andria.cheng@dowjones.com 