ATHENS—European leaders look increasingly willing to boost a European Union bailout fund, as the bloc's finance ministers prepare for a regular meeting in Brussels next week. 

European Commissioner Michel Barnier Friday said the European Union has decided in principle to boost the support mechanism for cash-strapped member states and help to support the euro.

"The position of the EU is clear and there has been a decision to boost support mechanisms. The specifics of this will be decided by finance ministers," Mr. Barnier said at a press conference in Athens after meeting with Greek political leaders.

It wasn't clear when EU governments will settle final details such as the volume and scope, but there is an emerging consensus that the euro-zone needs to do more to shore up its defenses against government defaults. 

The EU last year created a €440 billion ($587.44 billion) support fund known as the European Financial Stability Facility, but financial markets are concerned that even at that size, the funds may not be sufficient if an economy the size of Spain needs help. 

In Paris, French Finance Minister Christine Lagarde told reporters Friday that euro-zone members are considering expanding the EFSF to ensure the bloc's stability and are willing to explore new ways to use the fund that could include buying euro-zone sovereign debt on the secondary market. 

"Our work includes looking at a variety of instruments. It's not just the fund coupled to a figure," Ms. Lagarde said, adding that euro-zone leaders are also looking at how to ensure a smooth transition from the temporary €440 billion rescue fund to the permanent crisis-management mechanism agreed upon at an EU summit in December. 

While expanding the size of the EFSF is one of the options up for discussion next week, finance ministers will also consider whether the fund should be used in a preemptive manner and be able to buy euro-zone government debt, Ms. Lagarde said. 

Germany continued to appear unconvinced. Finance Minister Wolfgang Schaeuble Thursday expressed opposition to an expansion of the EU rescue fund, but mentioned possible measures to make the full size of the fund available, which could in practice result in additional payments from more solvent euro-zone countries such as Germany or France. 

German government spokesman Steffen Seibert said Friday that Germany remains "absolutely convinced" that the size of the rescue fund for troubled euro-zone countries doesn't need to be boosted. "The fund currently is sufficiently equipped to fulfill its tasks," Mr. Seibert said in a regular government press conference. "So far, only a small part of its funds has been used." 

Ms. Lagarde said that using new tools should go hand in hand with improving the governance of the euro-zone through increased policy coordination. Allowing the EU fund to buy euro-zone government bonds on the secondary market would help drive down yields on the bonds of debt-laden bloc members such as Ireland, Portugal and Spain, while also helping ease investor wariness regarding these countries, people close to the French finance ministry said. 

The European Central Bank is already buying those bonds to help prevent their yields from surging to unsustainable levels, which would effectively cut the countries off from bond markets. But the ECB has insisted its Special Markets Program is temporary. 

Belgium's Finance Minister Didier Reynders has said the fund's amount should be doubled. However, Ms. Lagarde said governments would eventually need to attach a figure to the fund's extended financial capability if its expansion was deemed necessary, because any increase needs the approval of national parliaments. 

Meanwhile, Mr. Barnier expressed confidence that EU economies could achieve annual average growth rates of between 2% and 3% "if we can surpass some deficit and debt problems."

"Greece is in a difficult situation and it is in a state of emergency, but there is hope for the future," Mr. Barnier said, adding that Greece took the right decisions even though they have meant tough sacrifices for the people. 

The commissioner said that Greece has a number of advantages within the EU in sectors like tourism, shipping and agriculture that it needs to exploit and capitalize on. 

"Greek banks are healthy, which is not the case with some other banks, but they will be the ones to decide whether they have to restructure or merge," Mr. Barnier said in response to a question. 

Greece's government and central bank have repeatedly said they would like to see consolidation in the fragmented local banking sector to achieve mass and economies of scale, especially in view of the local recession, sovereign crisis and liquidity problems. 

—Nick Skrekas in Athens contributed to this article.

 Write to  Costas Paris at costas.paris@dowjones.com and Bernd Radowitz at bernd.radowitz@dowjones.com 