For Connecticut Sen.  Joe Lieberman, the political middle ground is getting shaky.

The former Democrat is regularly courted by Senate leaders of both parties, not just because he is now an independent, but because in the Senate many key issues are decided by just one or two votes.

In his home state, however, Mr. Lieberman will face a new challenge over the next two years: figuring out how to hold onto his seat in the face of possible strong challenges from both the right and left.

Up for re-election next year, Mr. Lieberman recently told a television interviewer he hasn't yet decided whether to run, but if he did it would likely be as an independent.

While Senate Democrats regularly suggest he should re-join their party, closer to home there is much less affection.

Polls in the past two months show Mr. Lieberman's approval ratings in Connecticut are in the 30's, a dangerous place for any politician up for re-election.

And Democrats in particular have grown weary of him. In 2006, Connecticut Democrats gave the party nod to  Ned Lamont, a businessman whose campaign centered on opposition to the Iraq war.

Mr. Lieberman had the last laugh, defeating Mr. Lamont in the general election, but the senator's alienation with members of his old party appears to have continued.

  Gary Rose, a professor of politics at Sacred Heart University in Fairfield, Conn., said the senator "is persona non-grata to Democrats, because he's burned too many bridges with them.''

Already, a number of Democrats are eyeing the race.

"It's a wide open race within the Democratic party,'' said Mr. Rose. "I think you're going to have several really important and interesting contenders.''

At the top of that list are Reps.  Chris Murphy and  Joe Courtney, and former Secretary of State  Susan Bysiewicz.

Mr. Murphy is viewed as a rising star in the party, particularly after he and the other Connecticut Democrats won their races in 2010, a year that featured GOP and tea-party candidates drubbing Democratic incumbents, including in neighboring New York.

"Clearly Connecticut was partially immune to the national Republican wave and I think we learned that cookie-cutter national messages don't work in Connecticut,'' said Mr. Murphy.

Mr. Murphy said he was "definitely considering'' a run for Senate and might decide in a matter of weeks, even though the general election is nearly two years away. 

"The unfortunate nature of the modern senate campaign is you can't wait too long to make a decision,'' said Mr. Murphy.

Another advantage for Democrats—and potential disadvantage for Mr. Lieberman—is that in 2012 President Barack Obama will be running for re-election, and that may well drive up Democratic voter turnout.

In addition to an energized Democratic base, Mr. Lieberman could also confront problems on his right flank. 

  Linda McMahon, the former wrestling executive who spent tens of millions of dollars in her unsuccessful Senate run last year, is viewed as a strong possibility in any Republican primary. When Mr. Lieberman won in 2006, it was partly thanks to a lackluster showing by the GOP candidate.

  Doug Schwartz, a pollster for Quinnipiac University, said the coming election looks more difficult for Mr. Lieberman than the one he faced in 2006, but he could still find a way to win.

"You don't want to count out Joe Lieberman. He's a smart, respected politician who fooled everyone in 2006 when he lost the primary and came back and won,'' said Mr. Schwartz.

 Write to  Devlin Barrett at devlin.barrett@wsj.com 