  ﻿
S


7.82
%




 Sprint Nextel Corp.
S


7.82
%




 extended the wireless industry price war to its fast 4G service Tuesday.

The country's third-largest carrier by subscribers rolled out a new fourth-generation smartphone, the HTC EVO Shift, for $149. The price is significantly below the sticker price of its existing 4G smartphones designed to work on its wireless broadband network. On its website, Sprint sells the HTC EVO for $199 and the Samsung Epic for $249. All require a two-year data plan.

The move comes right as rival Verizon Wireless is expected this week to unveil at least four smartphones designed to work on the 4G network it launched a month ago. Sprint had the 4G market to itself for two years and rolled out the country's first 4G phones over the summer. But Verizon, the country's largest wireless carrier, launched its 4G service last December now has a network that covers as many people and is threatening to catch up in devices.

A person familiar with the matter said Verizon Wireless, a joint venture between  Verizon Communications Inc.
VZ


0.44
%




 and  Vodafone Group PLC, is not going to release pricing data on devices at the Consumer Electronics Show this week.

  David Owens, Sprint's vice president of consumer acquisition, said it went with the low price because it wants to use discount pricing to help expand the EVO brand to a broader swath of the U.S. population.

"We just felt that it made sense and we need to break past that $200 barrier for 4G devices," said Mr. Owens. "It is an incredibly aggressive price point."

The EVO Shift also has fewer features than Sprint's existing 4G handsets, for instance it has only one camera and a smaller screen than the original EVO. But the Shift has a slide-out hard keyboard that the original EVO lacks.

All three of Sprint's 4G phones run on  Google Inc.'s Android operating system. So-called fourth-generation wireless networks promise much faster speeds for connecting to the Internet, making it easier to watch streaming video or move large files. Sprint used its lead in 4G to help stem subscriber losses and revenue declines last year.

Mr. Owens said the EVO Shift marks the beginning of an aggressive push by the carrier to maintain its leadership in 4G devices as competitors emerge. Last year, Sprint released two 4G smartphones. The carrier plans to release more this year, in addition to tablet computers that run on wireless 4G broadband service, Mr. Owens said.

Sprint, which has kept its service prices below those offered by Verizon Wireless or  AT&T Inc.
T


0.69
%




 in order to compete, does charge a $10 premium for 4G data service. 

Sprint also sees the Shift as an opportunity to build on the EVO brand, which debuted with the HTC EVO smartphone last year.

Mr. Owens said Sprint is the only carrier that HTC allows to use the EVO brand, and that will remain true for the foreseeable future. Last year, Mr. Owens said Sprint spent a significant amount of its marketing budget promoting the EVO name.

"We have a franchise with EVO," said Mr. Owens. The HTC EVO Shift "builds on that franchise."