After years of tinkering with its All-Star format, the National Hockey League took a page from the world of fantasy sports with its latest incarnation: letting the players choose their own teams.

Detroit Red Wings defenseman Nicklas Lidstrom and Carolina Hurricanes forward Eric Staal were selected as captains and will pick their teammates on Friday night (Versus, 8 p.m. ET), ahead of Sunday's All-Star Game in Raleigh, N.C. (Versus, 4 p.m. ET)

"It's something that all of us, especially in hockey, grew up doing," Brendan Shanahan, the NHL's vice president of hockey and business development, explained. "Stand back and the captains will pick teams." 

Like most of us who play fantasy sports, they probably will just wing the selections. But just in case, we approached several hockey and fantasy experts to give these captains some groundwork:

 TIP # 1: GET PHYSICAL  

Florida Panthers Assistant General Manager Mike Santos said that the key to building any team usually begins with a top goalie. But because all six available goalies are just about even in terms of skill, he instead suggested that the captains go for a physical presence. "The game has become a no-contact scrimmage," Mr. Santos said, "and if you can put some guys on your team that are going to play with some physical element, all of a sudden the guy that thinks he's going to go out there and skate around without any body contact is going to be real surprised." 

Mr. Staal, for instance, is big, strong, and isn't afraid to get physical. If he picks players similar to himself, who aren't afraid to rattle the boards, the team should fare well. "Anybody can get a guy who can go out there and show off his skills. There are going to be 25 of them out there in this game," Mr. Santos explained. "Guys that play with grit and guys known for being good defensive players are guys you want in this game."

Red Wings' general manager, Ken Holland, pulled Mr. Lidstrom aside and suggested building the team with defenders, because that position wins games. "I don't know how serious he was," admitted Mr. Lidstrom, who has been named the NHL's best defender six times and won four Stanley Cup trophies.

 TIP #2: LISTEN TO YOUR FAMILY 

Here are the odds for which NHL All-Star will be drafted first and which will be drafted with the last pick, courtesy of online gaming website Bodog.com.



Mr. Staal has a unique problem. His brother, Marc, is a New York Rangers' defenseman, and one of the All-Stars available to be selected. "I've had a lot of pressure from my mom telling me to make sure I pick Marc," he said. 

This strategy will surely go better than when he participated in a fantasy hockey draft and selected New Jersey Devils' winger Zach Parise with his first-round pick. Mr. Parise suffered a knee injury early in the season and isn't expected to skate again until March. "That kind of ended my run at fantasy," Mr. Staal said. "Hopefully at this event there won't be any injuries." On the other side, Mr. Lidstrom said that he has been fielding advice from all comers. "A lot of people have input," he said. "Even my kids."

 TIP #3: PRACTICE DRAFTING 

Peter Schoenke, president of fantasy sports company RotoWire.com, said that, no matter how well-laid plans are before drafts, weird things happen, and Messrs. Staal and Lidstrom shouldn't discount the value of doing mock drafts before they take the stage. "You kind of want to know all the contingencies," Mr. Schoenke explained. "If the other captain starts out by taking a goalie and defenseman with his first two picks, how do you react? You want to practice so you don't get caught by surprise." 

 TIP #4: CHANNEL TIC-TAC-TOE 

Dr. Avinash Dixit, a professor of economics at Princeton University and author of The Art of Strategy: A Game Theorist's Guide to Success in Business and Life, said that the NHL will have several aspects of game theory at play over the weekend, most notably the first mover and second mover battle. 

"The main thing that game theory insists you remember is that other people are doing things," he explained. "You're not making the decision in a passive environment." He said that if one captain, the first mover, starts off by selecting a skilled forward, the next pick will likely be a top defenseman or goalie to counter the move. He likens the second mover logic—being able to react to what the first person did—to a game of tic tac toe. "You try to block the line they're currently trying to form, but while you're doing that, they may try to form some other line." Played correctly, Dr. Dixit said, tic-tac-toe should always end in a draw. 

 TIP #5: GET BOTH SEDINS 

Vancouver's dynamic twin scorers, Henrik and Daniel Sedin, have played together on the same team since they were 6 years old. Both will be in the player pool. "It's special to go with your brother," Henrik said of Sunday's game, "and it would be special to play on the same team with him." That being said, it's probably best to take any Sedin."I don't know if having one on one team and one on the other would do anything other than keep them both from being on the same team," Mr. Santos said.

 TIP #6: TAKE BRENT BURNS WITH THE FIRST PICK 

The Minnesota Wild defenseman is listed on Bodog.com at 50/1 odds to be the first selection in the draft. We may or may not have some money riding on him.

—Nando DiFino 