Big consumer-products companies are going back to school.

Businesses including  Sprint Nextel Corp.,
S


-2.38
%




 Levi Strauss & Co. and  Mattel Inc. 
MAT


-1.57
%




are sponsoring college classes and graduate-level research to get help with their online marketing from the young and hyperconnected. Sprint, for example, supplies a class at Boston's Emerson College with smartphones and unlimited service in exchange for students working gratis on the company's local Internet push.

Universities, in some cases, receive funding or proprietary consumer data from companies for their research. Students get experience they can display on their résumés, and add lively classes to the usual mix of lectures and written exams. 

"We are helping students to go out and get hired," says  Randy Hlavac, an instructor at Northwestern University's Medill School. "They've done the work."

The partnerships are emerging as businesses are scurrying to bolster their ability to engage with their customers on the Web by using Facebook, Twitter and the like. 

Of course, some parents may be surprised to learn their tuition dollars are helping to underwrite corporate marketing in addition to their children's education.

Sprint provided students in an online marketing class at Emerson College with 10 smartphones with unlimited wireless access. In exchange, students blogged, tweeted, produced YouTube videos and posted Facebook updates about the launch of Sprint's 4G network in Boston. "We're teaming up with the class again this semester it worked so well," says Sprint spokesman  Mark Elliott.

On a recent Tuesday evening, the students of Emerson Social Media—or #ESM, as the students refer to it on Twitter and elsewhere online—settled on the concept of a Twitter-based scavenger hunt to help spread the word among Boston's college population about Sprint.

"The winner could maybe get a free phone," a student said.

"Or maybe, like, free service for life," said another.

"We should probably check with Sprint before we offer that," said student Caroline Richov, who explained how the students would execute the campaign by posting instructions to Twitter and Facebook. She suggested telling people to take a Sprint phone, go dance in front of Boston's Quincy Hall, and upload a video of themselves "and we'll tell them why it's better to use Sprint."

Ms. Richov says her experience using Sprint's Evo smartphone and working for the company has changed her opinion of the brand, which she associated with "the old, clunky, Nextel phone."

"I am certainly more likely to go with a Sprint phone than I ever was before," she says.

The Emerson class is the brainchild of instructor  David Gerzof. He solicited "clients" for the class by tweeting: "Looking for Boston Start-ups that want an Emerson College team to run their PR or Social Media outreach for the next 4 months." Sprint and other start-ups contacted Mr. Gerzof, who also added friends and relatives to the client roster.

In addition to Sprint, the class this semester is working to build online visibility National Public Radio's "On Point with Tom Ashbrook;" Privy, a start-up that offers group discounts; and  Margaret Richard, Mr. Gerzof's mother-in-law and the host of the public television exercise show, "Body Electric."

In a recent class, Mr. Gerzof lectured on the role Facebook and Twitter played in Egypt's political demonstrations. Then he introduced  Lane Sutton, a 14-year-old with a Twitter following of nearly 3,500, who commands speaking fees as high as $300. The young Mr. Sutton, who lectured at Emerson free, suggested students tweet at 11 a.m. or 6 p.m. for maximum exposure.

Their instructor introduced  Lauren Vargas, who oversees community outreach for Radian6, a Web-analytics software company. Each semester, it waives its usual fees, which start at $600 a month, for six social-marketing classes and for three graduate students. "These are the people who are going to be using our product when they're out of school," Ms. Vargas says.

Projecting the Radian6 search page from her computer monitor onto a screen, she explained how to refine searches to find mentions of brands across the blogosphere. She also highlighted the limitations of the software. "Be aware that with a term like 'wicked awesome,' the computer will score that as negative," she said.

For decades, drug makers, car companies and other manufacturers have lent financial support to universities conducting research relevant to their businesses. But industry previously shied from supporting research of "soft" social sciences, says  Irving Wladawsky-Berger, a longtime executive at  International Business Machines Corp.,
IBM


0.02
%




 who oversaw its Internet division and now is a visiting lecturer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 

Now, computer science is increasingly employed in the study of human behavior and shopping habits. "What is new is we can extend science to marketing,"  Wladawsky-Berger says.

The University of Southern California's Annenberg School for Communication & Journalism last fall launched the Annenberg Innovation Lab. The lab is underwritten by IBM, Levi Strauss, Mattel and Verizon Communications Inc. Participants research consumer behavior using vast quantities of previously unavailable data provided by the sponsors.

"It's allowing for a new kind of research that just wasn't even possible a few years ago," says Dmitri Williams, an associate professor at USC Annenberg conducting research using Levi Strauss data.

Fox Sports Net, a group of regional sports channels, works with schools such as USC and the University of Florida as part of a program it calls Creative University, which launched in 2008 and will be rolled out to 10 schools by the fall. (Fox Sports Net and Dow Jones & Co., publisher of The Wall Street Journal, are both owned by News Corp.)

Last semester,  Kyle Daly took a Creative University class at Arizona State University's Walter Cronkite School of Journalism and Mass Communication. The class broke into teams to vie for the right to revamp and generate buzz around FoxSportsArizona.com, the website for the network's affiliate there.

Mr. Daly and his team presented an idea to Fox Sports Net executives, calling for viewers to build their own pages. Viewers would post photos and videos of themselves and friends celebrating their favorite local athletes, with links to Fox Sports Net's team-news feeds and statistics. 

The network is working to implement the strategy, says Chris Hannan, senior vice president of marketing.

"I've already updated my résumé," says Mr. Daly.

 Write to  Katherine Rosman at katherine.rosman@wsj.com 