  Mitch Marrow defied expectations in 1998 when he became the rare Ivy League player drafted by the National Football League. After injuries cut short his playing days, the University of Pennsylvania graduate started a promising hedge-fund career. 

The transition into finance is commonplace for athletes and Ivy Leaguers alike. What happened next is not. This year, Mr. Marrow left Wall Street to open a series of dog day-care centers with his mom on the Upper West Side.

Every day, Mr. Marrow, 35 years old, commutes back and forth from Westchester with his mother, Sandra, to the Canine Club, two dog day-care centers he bought in January for about $750,000. 

He has exchanged sleek corporate offices for a corner booth at Pizzeria Uno, where he conducts most of his meetings. Instead of earning seven-figure bonuses, he estimated he's already invested $1 million in upgrading facilities. Mr. Marrow has traded barking bosses for ones who are even more merciless.

But it is the daily car rides with his mother that stood out in his mind during a recent interview.

"If you gave me a short video of that car ride a year ago, I'd be like, this is from a bad dream," Mr. Marrow said with a grin. "It's like a 'Seinfeld' episode. A horrible, horrible 'Seinfeld' episode."

Mother and son quickly made a pact to not always discuss business—and then another one to not always discuss the family.

"It's a unique relationship," Ms. Marrow said.

Other football players have gone on to unconventional careers; former New England Patriots quarterback  Drew Bledsoe founded a winery, others have gone into architecture or acting (Mr. Marrow tried his hand at that briefly, too).

For Mr. Marrow, football itself was an unconventional choice: He was a highly touted baseball prospect in high school, but abandoned the sport to take his shot at making the NFL—despite not being recruited by a single college.

Mr. Marrow was drafted in the third round by the Carolina Panthers, but injuries in training camp prevented him from playing a single down.

Crushed, he flung himself into the financial-services industry, gritting his teeth into a smile as he recounted football stories at business functions. "I used that to help open some doors and get people to listen to some of the non-football stuff I had to say," he said.

By 2010, he was earning more than $700,000 with seven-figure annual bonuses, he said.

Then his mom mentioned she was interested in starting her own business. As he researched opportunities, he became intrigued by one industry that had consistently posted profits despite the faltering economy: pets.

There are 467 licensed dog day-care centers in New York, according to the city Health Department. But while living on the Upper West Side, Mr. Marrow had struggled to find centers he trusted to tend his own two dogs, a 220-pound St. Bernard and 165-pound bull mastiff. Instead, he paid dog walkers to visit his apartment up to six times a day.

When Mr. Marrow learned of two distressed day-care centers on the Upper West Side, he made his move.

The Marrows concentrated on revamping the dog areas, laying down colorful interlocking square flooring, painting the walls a sky blue, complete with clouds and landscape murals. They separated the dogs by size, added standardized navy beds, and installed a new air-filtration system.

Now, the company is already expanding. In June, they expect to open a 2,000-square-foot addition to the 72nd Street location, that will also offer an additional 1,500 square feet of outdoor space. Mr. Marrow has identified 10 more spots across the New York for new locations.

Mr. Marrow also installed web cams similar to those used in day-care centers or high-quality nanny-cams. Some of the feeds are now viewed by actual nannies.

"It is kind of funny," said  Brianna Simpson, a nanny on the Upper West Side who began dropping her 17-pound dog Petunia at Canine Club in February. She tracks Petunia's progress on her phone and computer while her human charge naps.

"She's my baby," Ms. Simpson said. "The family I nanny for, that's their baby."

At Canine Club, she'll click open the web cam to see staffers serenading dogs on their guitars. "I think that's pretty specific to this place," she said. "It felt homier."

Mr. Marrow said that vibe can be traced to his mother. Without her moderating influence, "Some good people would be scared off by me because I think everyone should work like their life depends on it all the time," Mr. Marrow said. "She says, 'Slow down. You're not in the same place that you were.'"

Still, going into business with your mom can have collateral damage for all family members. His mother, who oversees marketing and the décor of the stores, brought in furniture from her own house to create a warmer feeling in the reception areas.

"I wanted to inherit some of those pieces," said Mr. Marrow's sister,  Rachel Marrow Dalton, laughing. "I got over it." 