At the Playwright Irish Pub on West 35th Street, the Kentucky Derby used to be one of the busiest events on the calendar, trailing only St. Patrick's Day. 

This Saturday, following the demise of New York City's Off-Track Betting operation, the place once known as the most popular Derby Day bar in Midtown will have a skeleton staff.

"We're going to lose probably 80% of our business," said John Doherty, one of Playwright's owners. "It's a bloody shame, because without gambling now, we're just like every other bar in the world."

Until OTB closed in December, the Playwright housed an official betting parlor. The window located inside the restaurant took in about $140,000 in wagers on the Derby last year alone, Doherty said. Now, hundreds of Playwright customers, and thousands of gamblers across the region, are preparing to face their first Derby in 40 years without OTB to take their bets. 

In a city where it's possible to do just about anything imaginable, it's suddenly become enormously difficult to legally put money on the most prestigious horse race on the planet. 

For those who can't resist laying down a bet, the best move is to head to area racetracks, which still have windows open and say they've seen surges since OTB shut its doors. Attendance at Aqueduct Race Track is up an average of 52% per race day since January, and the on-track handle is up 78%.

 As a result, the New York Racing Association is expecting large crowds Saturday, as refugees from OTB come out to bet in person. NYRA spokesman Dan Silver said that in the past, only Belmont Park would be open for the Kentucky Derby. This year, Aqueduct will open as well.

Frank Drucker, a spokesman for Empire City at Yonkers Raceway, said his track is also preparing for larger crowds by staffing more tellers, ordering more programs and making sure all of the self-service machines are equipped to handle increased use. "It's always a really big day, but without OTB around there's no doubt it's going to be even bigger," Drucker said. "It's going to be difficult to recover dollar for dollar what was being wagered at OTB, but we know this is going to be a big day for all the tracks in the area."

Another option for people looking to place a bet is the world of online gambling. The NYRA has a program allowing for wagers through an Internet site or on mobile devices. 

As far as Doherty is concerned, however, that sort of betting method doesn't replace the experience of rumbling up to a window, slips in hand, and then screaming at the television as the horses cross the line. "The younger man has it on their cell phone, or they can call NYRA, but the old man doesn't want to do that," Doherty said. "Our phones have been ringing nonstop all week, and all I can tell them is we'll have food and drink, but you can't gamble here anymore."