Like a little boy with a birthday gift, Albert Hammond, Jr., a guitarist for the Strokes, rips open a box containing vinyl copies of the band's new album "Angles." "This is the first time I'm seeing this," he says, smiling, as he stands in the New York City office of Wiz Kid, the Strokes' management company.

"Angles," due out March 22, is the Strokes' fourth album, and their first since 2006. On the band's past releases, singer Julian Casablancas wrote the lion's share of the music, but on the new album, the songwriting credits go to the entire group. That evolution is due in part to the side projects, solo records and guest appearances (including Mr. Hammond's two solo efforts) that each of the band's members took on during the four-year break. 

Mr. Hammond, 30, entered rehab for drug addiction as the group prepared to create "Angles." Afterward, he and his bandmates recorded an album's worth of songs but, unhappy with the results, they went to his upstate New York studio and re-recorded most of the material—without Mr. Casablancas, who skipped the upstate sessions. 

The guitarist spoke with the Journal about the difficult birth of the Strokes' new album, and whether there will be another. 

  Speakeasy: Media, entertainment, and the Arts 

 What do you think all the solo projects by Strokes band members added to the group? 

I think it added perspective more than anything. You could maybe see what your strengths and weaknesses were more by yourself. At least for me I began to see how the five of us create something bigger than ourselves.

 Why did you decide to shift to a more group dynamic to write the new songs? 

It was a slow shift. The first album Julian wrote and we kind of arranged together with what our abilities were at the time. By the third album, you could see there was more songwriting being shared. With this one, people had so much time, so much material, we just started mixing parts. It's all a learning process, except our learning process gets put into a package like this and then gets put out.

 I read recently that while you guys were in the studio, Casablancas would send his vocal tracks via electronic files. How did the actual collaboration work? 

Julian took a step back from the record because he felt like he couldn't voice an opinion without pushing through until he got something that he liked. And in that process he would shut down everyone else. So he took it upon himself to not do that, to see if we could all become stronger.

 How did you feel about not having your lead singer there for key recording sessions? 

Obviously we would rather have had the five of us. That's kind of what it is. I just tried to understand the bigger process, you know? Not to get caught up in "Why is he not here?"

 What was the recording process like? Was there a lot of arguing back and forth? 

There's everything in the studio, just like life. There's extreme moments of joy—otherwise you wouldn't be doing this—and that's the foundation of it. Somewhere in there you're all in love in some way. 

 You recorded this album twice. Why? 

It was stale. It almost sounded like someone was trying to record the sound of success. You can't really capture that. It would have been too daunting to tell everybody, let's go upstate and re-record the whole album. We would have just quit. So we just said, we're going to go there and record "Machu Picchu," which we hadn't done, and that went so well, it just captured a sound that we hadn't had before—it was modern and angular. So we kept going.

 At any point in these last few years, did the Strokes ever talk about breaking up? 

The conversation never took place where we talked and said, "We're done, let's formally not play." Of course there are moments. I still worry about it. I don't think the worry ever goes away. It's part of working with people.

 Do you ever watch episodes of VH1's 'Behind the Music' and think, Hey—that's us! 

We always wanted to avoid the clichés, and you sometimes fall into them. 

 Which rock clichés have the Strokes fallen into? 

We did them all. I know I did a whole bunch. Youth, money and drugs. That's just recipe for all kinds of funny stories. And if you're able to survive it then you have other stories and hopefully you can do something with them.

 Are the Strokes planning a fifth album? 

We've spoken about it. The songs keep getting better, we keep getting better as players. As you grow, you deal with each other in a calmer, more mature way. If we can create something new, I don't see why we wouldn't keep on trying.