TUNIS, Tunisia—Tunisia's interim government issued an international arrest warrant for deposed President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali and his wife on charges of illegal enrichment, Justice Minister Lazhar Karoui Chebbi said.

Tunisian officials have also started investigations into alleged abuses committed by the former leader, who fled to Saudi Arabia on Jan. 14 after monthlong protests against his 23-year rule. 

The ostentatious lifestyles of the president's extended family and widespread corruption allegations fueled the antigovernment protests, with demonstrators defying the fearsome security police that flourished during Mr. Ben Ali's years in power. 

Many of those same security officials are now in charge of investigating the former president and his associates. 

Authorities have already frozen assets belonging to Mr. Ben Ali's family and his in-laws in Tunisia and in Switzerland.

Mr. Chebbi said the former leader and his wife, Leila, are being sought for "illegal acquisition" of assets and "illicit transfers of funds abroad."

Mr. Chebbi said that arrest warrants had been issued for other members of the extended family, but he didn't offer specifics. 

Mr. Ben Ali hasn't made any public statements since he left Tunisia for Saudi Arabia this month. It is unclear whether he or his family members have retained legal counsel. The head of the Tunisian lawyers' association said he didn't know of any local lawyers with current relationships with the former president or his relatives. 

Interpol confirmed its Tunisian office had issued an alert seeking the arrest of Mr. Ben Ali and six of his relatives on behalf of the Tunisian authorities on charges of alleged property theft and the illegal transfer of foreign currency. The statement didn't name the six relatives. 

Mr. Chebbi confirmed Wednesday that members of Mr. Ben Ali's family had fled the country and that their whereabouts were unknown. 

The most prominent of those relatives are Belhassan Trabelsi, the brother of the president's wife, and the president's son-in-law, Sakher el-Materi. 

Emails and phone calls to several Tunisian businesses owned by Messrs. el-Materi and Trabelsi were unanswered.

Mr. Chebbi also confirmed that relatives of the former leader had been arrested in Tunisia in the aftermath of Mr. Ben Ali's departure from power. They include Mr. Ben Ali's nephews Murad and Imad Trabelsi, who had business interests in Tunisia.

Meanwhile, a cabinet reshuffle is expected this week in Tunisia's interim government, which is under pressure to purge former allies of Mr. Ben Ali. 

 Write to  Margaret Coker at margaret.coker@wsj.com 