Brooklyn's Ditmas Park has seen a wave of new residents arrive in recent years, with newcomers drawn by the area's burgeoning food scene, picturesque homes and bucolic suburban qualities. Large free-standing homes with driveways, garages and even pools offer more space for a fraction of the price seen in Park Slope or other parts of Brownstone Brooklyn.

The new arrivals are just the latest generation to appreciate Ditmas Park, said Hal Lehrman, a broker and who has lived in the neighborhood for more than 20 years. "It's not a renaissance," Mr. Lehrman said. "People seem to keep rediscovering the neighborhood, but it's been there."

There are only a few retail and entertainment options in Ditmas Park since the area is still primarily residential. But Cortelyou Road, one of the main drags in the neighborhood, has basic necessities like grocery stories and pharmacies and a number of new restaurants. 

Ditmas Part sits south of Prospect Park and just north of Midwood, Brooklyn. The neighborhood derives its name from the Van Ditmarsen family, one of the early Dutch farming families who settled in the area in the late 17th century. 

Suburban development in the area began to take off at the start of the 20th century, thanks to transportation improvements connecting Brooklyn to Manhattan, the opening of the Brooklyn Bridge and the construction of Prospect Park. 

Around that time, developers began building free-standing, two-story houses with attics. The facades of the houses commonly used shingles and clapboard and some also use brick. While there are some co-ops in the area and a handful of new condos, the houses are still the most sought-after properties in the neighborhood. 

No two houses are quite alike, Mr. Lehrman said. On Westminster Road, there is a five-bedroom, 3½-bathroom home on the market for $1.299 million. The three-story Victorian home built in 1904 still has many original details, like the woodwork and stained-glass windows. It also has a free-standing garage and a pool.

In Ditmas Park's historic district, there is a five-bedroom, 2½-bathroom house for sale at $1.299 million. Some of the original details in the home include a wood-burning fireplace, window benches and coffered ceilings. There is also a covered driveway and a garage. 

Of the 92 residences currently listed for sale on real-estate site StreetEasy.com, the median asking price is $452,500, or $373 a square foot. In neighboring Kensington, it is $297 a square foot, and in Park Slope, it is $667, according to StreetEasy. The big homes in Ditmas Park, however, often start at around $1 million.

The area's co-ops also offer inexpensive housing options. On Newkirk Avenue, there is a one-bedroom unit in a building constructed around the 1950s for sale at $275,000 and listed by Mr. Lehrman. The unit has a renovated kitchen, oak floors and a separate office. The building has laundry room, bike storage and a garden. 

Near the boarder of Midwood and Ditmas park, there is a new condo development on Ocean Avenue called the Waterfalls on Ocean. About 40% of the 64 units in the building are sold and residents can move in beginning in about 60 days, said Andrew Booth of Corcoran Group. 

The condos have been drawing a mix of people in search of starter apartments and other residents in the neighborhood looking to downsize, Mr. Booth said. 

The facility has a private playground, a lounge area for hosting parties, a fitness center and parking. Each unit has private outdoor space, oak floors and granite and stainless steel in the kitchen. All the one-bedrooms are sold. Two-bedrooms start at $379,000 and three-bedrooms at $410,000. 

 Schools: Ditmas Park schools are in District 22. Schools in the area include P.S. 139 Alexine A. Fenty, P.S. 245 and P.S. 217 Colonel David Marcus School. Brooklyn College Academy, a middle and high school, and Brooklyn Dreams Charter School are also in the area. 

In 2010, 60.1% of District 22 students in grades three through eight received a proficient score on the math exam, and 49.6 % of students received a proficient score on the English Language Arts exam. In 2006, the results were 66.4% for math and 60.5% for reading.

Private schools in the area include Brooklyn Seventh Day Adventist School (nursery school to eighth grade), Elemental Arts Montessori and Cortelyou Early Childhood Centers. 

 Parks: The nearest park is Prospect Park, the second largest in the city at 585 acres. In its early days, the area was the site of the Battle of Brooklyn, one of the first major skirmishes during the Revolutionary War. 

Landscape architects Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux of Central Park fame designed the diamond-shaped green space in 1866. 

The neighborhood is close to the southern section of the park, which has a 60-acre lake with a big population of largemouth bass available for catch-and-release fishing. When it gets warm, there are also electric boat tours. 

Prospect Park's Parade Ground is also close and features a football field, baseball fields, a soccer field and basketball and volleyball courts.

 Entertainment: At nearby Brooklyn College there is the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts, which features dance, music and theater. During the summer, Prospect Park also hosts the "Celebrate Brooklyn! Performing Arts Festival," which has concerts, films and dance performances. 

 Shopping: While primarily a residential neighborhood, basic retail options are available in Ditmas Park like hardware stores and pharmacies. For groceries, there is the Flatbush Food Coop. On Campus Road near Brooklyn College, there is the independent book store Shakespeare & Co. And at Sycamore, a bar and floral shop, you can both pick up a bouquet and have a drink. 

 Dining: In recent years, Ditmas Park has developed a reputation for food. The Farm on Adderley is a popular brunch destination. 

Mimi's Hummus serves Mediterranean food, Café Madeline is coffee shop with breakfast and lunch options and Ox Cart Tavern serves new American fare. Try a glass of wine at the Castello Plan.

 Write to  Joseph De Avila at joseph.deavila@wsj.com 

This Victorian home has a total of 15 rooms, including seven bedrooms and 2½ bathrooms. It has parquet floors, pocket doors, stain-glass windows and original tile on the mantle. It has a large foyer, a music room and a large garden in the back.

This Colonial Revival home with five bedrooms and 2½ bathrooms was built in 1894 in Ditmas Park's historic district. It measures 3,150 square feet and has a wood-burning stove, an eat-in kitchen with new appliances and a rear porch that leads to the garden.

This five-bedroom, 3½-bathroom Victorian home measures 2,367 square feet. The home was constructed 1904 and many of the architectural flourishes have been refurbished, including the home's woodwork and stained-glass windows. Outside there is a freestanding garage adjacent to a deck and pool