The global economic crisis has forced policy makers to confront a long-simmering problem fraught with political danger: the growing burden that public pension systems are placing on government budgets in an era of large deficits and mounting debt. 

With the global elite gathered in Davos this week, there is much fretting about the threat to the developed world's public finances posed by their aging societies and slow post-crisis economic growth. Doubts about governments' ability to pay pension benefits are central to these worries.

Public retirement plans have helped sharply reduce poverty rates among the elderly across the developed world over the last 60 years. The plans are among the most sacred welfare-state programs, and few politicians have risked the electoral backlash that would likely arise from an effort to cut pension benefits.

But now, national and local governments in the U.S. and Europe—nudged and in some cases forced by the crisis—are moving to pare back these plans in ways that might have been politically unthinkable a few years ago.

"The crisis took a system that was rather stressed at the seams and broke some of the seams," said  Nicholas Barr, an expert on pensions at the London School of Economics.

In Europe, even countries with healthy budget positions are being forced to reform their pension systems. The European Commission said in 2009 that it expects Luxembourg, which boasts one of the European Union's lowest budget deficits, will see pension payments chew up nearly 25% of gross domestic product in 2060, tied with Greece for the largest pension burden in the EU.

The sovereign debt crisis has prompted Greece, under pressure from the EU and the International Monetary Fund, to raise the minimum retirement age and slash benefits, prompting violent protests in the streets of Athens. 

A number of other EU countries have pension systems that the European Commission expects will pose major economic burdens over the next fifty years: Spain and Belgium are both expected to spend around 15% of GDP on public pensions; Slovenia is expected to pay nearly 19% of GDP, and Ireland is seen spending roughly 11% on pensions. Rising numbers of retirees, sharp economic contractions during the crisis and overly generous pension promises have to varying degrees put severe strains on these systems.

Labor unions have been the staunchest opponents of efforts to cut benefits, leading protests in Greece, Spain and elsewhere against government pension cuts. Union officials say cuts aren't inevitable if governments can engineer higher economic growth and employment rates, which would maximize the number of workers paying into the pension system.

"The battle is not only to raise birth rates," said  Henri Lourdelle of the European Trade Union Confederation. "The true battle is to raise productivity, to raise employment, to raise investment." 

Raising the retirement age is one of the main steps being pushed by EU governments. With people living much longer than they did 50 years ago, a higher retirement age would simply maintain the ratio of working years to retirement years.

But critics note that wealthier people have seen most of the gains in life expectancy. A higher retirement age would disproportionately reduce benefits to poorer, less-educated workers.

Nevertheless, a higher retirement age needs to be part of pension reforms, says Mr. Barr of the London School of Economics. 

"You can't let that sad fact immobilize pension policy forever," he said. "Unless it's part of the story, the rest is a waste of time."

Spain's government Friday is set to approve draft legislation that will raise the country's retirement age to 67 from 65 currently. To win unions' support, the government has offered the possibility of workers retiring earlier than 67 in certain cases.

In the U.S., state and local governments face a looming crisis in their ability to pay benefits, experts say. As with other pension funds around the world, the crisis knocked their investment portfolios, exacerbating the funding challenges that already existed because of the growing number of U.S. retirees whose benefits must be paid. 

A key question in the debate over U.S. pension reform is the size of the problem. Some estimate that the gap between current U.S. state and local pension assets and future obligations to pay benefits is more than $3 trillion. But this figure depends heavily on the return that pension funds will earn in the coming decades.

The $3 trillion estimate assumes that funds will earn only the "risk-free" rate: the return that comes from investing in U.S. Treasury bonds and other super-safe government securities. Most funds invest more aggressively and can expect to earn higher returns, which will do much to close the funding gap.

But this is a dubious strategy, says  Doug Elliott, a Brookings Institution expert on pensions. It carries a significant risk that state and local pensions—which are mainly "defined benefit" plans that guarantee payments to retirees for as long as they live—won't be able to make promised payments if their more aggressive investment strategies don't yield the promised returns.

"Counting on Santa Claus in the form of the stock market to take care of the problem is too risky," Mr. Elliott said.

A report last year from the Pew Center on the States, a think tank on U.S. state-level public policy, says the funding gap in state pension funds is $1 trillion. But that figure underestimates the problem because it relies on reports from the states themselves, which tend to assume investment returns that are unrealistically high, many experts say.

 Write to  Matthew Dalton at Matthew.Dalton@dowjones.com 