WASHINGTON— PG&E Corp.
PCG


0.41
%




 discouraged the use of automatic-shutoff valves on major natural-gas pipelines, according to a company memo released Tuesday by federal safety investigators at a hearing on a California gas explosion that killed eight people.

  ﻿
PCG


0.41
%




Following the September explosion of a PG&E pipeline in San Bruno, Calif., more than 47 million cubic feet of natural gas was released, fueling a fire that raged for more than one and a half hours. Only after PG&E employees manually shut off pipeline valves was the flow of gas stopped so firefighters could begin battling the conflagration.

Federal safety officials have supported but not required the use of automatic-shutoff valves to stop the flow of gas from ruptures since at least 1999.

Keith Slibasager, PG&E's manager of gas-system operations, testified Tuesday that the company could have isolated the problem and cut off the gas in 20 minutes if it had installed automatic valves on the line.

The PG&E memo was among thousands of pages of documents released by the National Transportation Safety Board as it began hearings on the explosion Tuesday in Washington. Company policy discouraged use of the shutoff valves because they would have "little or no effect on increasing human safety or protecting property," the 2006 memo said. 

The San Bruno accident destroyed 38 homes and heavily damaged 70 more in the San Francisco suburb. Video footage displayed at the hearing showed flames engulfing the neighborhood as gas escaped the broken line, sounding like a passenger jet taking off. 

The memo was prepared by Chi-hung Lee Sr., a PG&E gas engineer, who also testified Tuesday. The utility didn't endorse automatic-shutoff equipment "as a general mitigative measure" but only for "specific conditions such as bridge crossings, river crossings, earthquake fault crossings, etc.," the memo said. 

PG&E didn't install automatic-shutoff valves along the San Bruno line, though an NTSB analysis showed that the pipeline crosses the San Andreas Fault at two points. 



During questioning by NTSB officials at Tuesday's hearing, Mr. Lee said he had prepared the memo after reviewing industry research reports. He acknowledged that the memo didn't address a 1999 Department of Transportation report that said use of remote-controlled or automatic-shutoff valves, especially in populated areas, would be "effective and technically feasible and can reduce risk" to people and property. That report also concluded that the use of such equipment wasn't "economically feasible" in many cases.

PG&E officials testified that the utility faced permitting and technical difficulties that impeded use of automatic shutoff equipment. 

But Edward Salas, PG&E's senior vice president of engineering and operations, said the utility had "taken a step back" since the accident and that its policy has shifted to favor use of the automatic valves.

U.S. Rep. Jackie Speier, a Democrat who represents the San Francisco Peninsula area that includes San Bruno, has introduced legislation that would require installation of automatic-shutoff equipment for the biggest pipelines, or those that pass closest to populated areas. Mrs. Speier, who attended the hearing, said PG&E has endorsed her legislation. 

 Write to  Rebecca Smith at rebecca.smith@wsj.com 