TOKYO—Less than two years after voters ousted Japan's longtime ruling party from power, a new revolt may be emerging in local election campaigns around the country that could foreshadow a further splintering of the nation's already-fractious politics.

A new breed of independent candidates with colorful backgrounds has emerged as contenders in local races in some of Japan's biggest cities and prefectures. Many espouse tax cuts and a greater role for local governments—ideas that make them sound similar to the tea-party movement in the U.S., although their platforms differ significantly and most of the candidates aren't affiliated with each other. 

Their catchy slogans take aim at the now-ruling Democratic Party of Japan, but they are also unwilling to align themselves with the opposition Liberal Democratic Party, which controlled the government for half a century. 

Their expected success in gubernatorial and local assembly elections scheduled for April 10 and April 24 could further complicate the political outlook if turmoil at the national level leads to new national parliamentary elections later this year. Japan's political scene already is split, with the surprise resignation Sunday of Japan Foreign Minister Seiji Maehara underscoring the DPJ's inability to push measures to shake up the economy and address the nation's debt-ridden finances. Japan Prime Minister Naoto Kan said Monday that Chief Cabinet Secretary Yukio Edano will temporarily succeed Mr. Maehara.

In a poll released by Tokyo Broadcasting System Monday, 18% of respondents said they approved of Mr. Kan's government, while 81% said they disapproved. 

"The DPJ came to power with so much fanfare, but rather than making changes and improvements, they are running the country into the ground," said Miki Watanabe, a founder of a pub chain, who is running for governor in Tokyo as an independent. "National politics are now descending into chaos. I am running to save Tokyo, to keep it from sinking with the rest of the country."



In Nagoya, an industrial hub in central Japan, an independent candidate touting a flat 10% cut in city income taxes scored a landslide victory in a February mayoral election. Mayor Takashi Kawamura is now scouring the nation to recruit local candidates for his new party, Genzei Nippon, or Tax Cut Japan.

"It is a lie that the economy is treating everyone badly," Mr. Kawamura said. "Taxpayers are trudging through hell, but people who live on taxpayers' money are living in heaven." 

To help pay for it, the 62-year-old politician wants to halve the annual pay for local assembly members from the current 16 million yen, or about $194,000. Despite declines in population and wealth in many Japanese communities, local assemblies remain large and their members well-paid.

Still, many in Japan believe Mr. Kawamura's popularity derives from his flamboyant personality rather than growing support for small government. In a country where social benefits such as universal health care and subsidized child care are taken for granted, political debates are more about maintaining and expanding expensive programs, even in the face of big national and local deficits.

To maintain those perks, polls show, a majority of Japanese are resigned to the idea of tax increases. "Rather than being carried away by tax cuts, he should focus on paying down municipal debts," Japanese fiscal-policy minister Kaoru Yosano, a DPJ member, said recently. Nagoya's outstanding municipal debt totals 1.8 trillion yen, or about $22 billion.

In Osaka, a regional party led by its popular 41-year-old governor, Toru Hashimoto, is aiming to sweep the race for local assembly seats. His platform: Osaka Capital Vision, a plan to gain more independence for Japan's No. 3 city by population so it can reinvigorate its sluggish economy and play catch-up with Tokyo.

In Tokyo, an entrepreneur and a former comedian are among potential candidates aiming to succeed the retiring Shintaro Ishihara, a three-term governor who has suggested he wouldn't seek re-election. Neither Mr. Kan's DPJ nor the LDP have been able to come up with gubernatorial candidates . 

Leaders in the April 10 vote include independent Mr. Watanabe, a 51-year-old founder of Watami Co., the pub-chain operator that now owns and operates nursing homes. Mr. Watanabe, whose campaign mantra is "Management Power for Tokyo," recently met with an expert from a major U.S. consulting firm to learn about the policies of New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg. 

"This country is awash in debts because politicians didn't have management sense," Mr. Watanabe said. "If you keep borrowing more than what you bring in, the result, obviously, is bankruptcy."

Another independent, Shigefumi Matsuzawa, has entered the Tokyo race after a successful stint as governor of neighboring Kanagawa prefecture. His platform centers on expanding autonomy for the metropolitan region, which has remained economically healthy. 

Other potential candidates for Tokyo governor include Hideo Higashikokubaru, a former comedian who succeeded as governor of remote Miyazaki prefecture, playing salesman to its local products. Renho, the DPJ's administrative reform minister who goes by one name, has also been mentioned, but the current crisis probably would make it difficult for Mr. Kan to part with the high-profile female member of his cabinet. 

Experts say the recent emergence of local parties is a result of a 1995 law change that gives more decision-making power to regional governments. Today, more-affluent areas like Tokyo are fighting to keep more of their wealth for their own residents while rural communities are trying to hold on to their traditional entitlements.

"The movement for decentralization has been swelling," said Masayasu Kitagawa, a Waseda University professor and former governor of Mie Prefecture, adding that the chaos in the central government is accelerating the trend. 

—Miho Inada contributed to this article.