 (Please see Corrections and Amplifications below.) 

The House of Representatives won't undergo merely a partisan change when the new Congress convenes on Wednesday. It will, in many ways, undergo a generational change as well.

A new and younger set of Republicans lawmakers will move in when their party takes control of the House. Perhaps more important, the change also will empower a new and younger set of Republican leaders who will run the House—and who figure to be in positions of power within their party for years, if not decades, to come.

Overall, the influx of 87 new Republican House members who will be sworn in Wednesday will lower the average age of House Republicans to 54.9 from 56.5 in the last Congress, a new Wall Street Journal analysis of ages in the new Congress shows.

By contrast, Democrats in the House are moving in the opposite direction on the age scale. The 2010 election swept from office some of the party's younger members from moderate swing districts, and the result is a Democratic caucus that is both more liberal and grayer. The average age of a Democratic House member will rise to 60.2 from 58. 

See the average age of the House of Representatives and the Senate, from 1949 to 2011.

The Republican wave is literally bringing a new generation of GOP legislators to Washington. Michigan's third district will be represented by 30-year-old Justin Amash, Illinois's 11th district by 32-year-old Adam Kinzinger, Alabama's second district by 34-year-old Martha Roby. And so on.

More striking is the generational change in House leadership. That change isn't so dramatic at the very top. New Republican House Speaker John Boehner is 61 years old, compared with 70-year-old outgoing Democratic Speaker Nancy Pelosi.

But just below the Speaker the change is stark. The new House Republican Leader will be Rep. Eric Cantor, 47. Outgoing Democratic Leader Steny Hoyer is 71.

The number three spot in the Republican leadership, the post of majority whip, will be held by Rep. Kevin McCarthy, 45. By contrast, outgoing Democratic whip James Clyburn is 70.

Mr. Cantor insists this generational change is no accident. It's the direct result, he says, of the so-called Young Guns program that set out to recruit a new set of Republican congressional candidates for the 2010 campaign. That program was established by Messrs. Cantor and McCarthy, along with 40-year-old Rep. Paul Ryan, who now will become chairman of the budget committee. (Mr. Ryan succeeds departing Democratic chairman John Spratt, 68.)

The broader question is what substantive impact this wave of new, young Republicans will have on Congress's work. Mr. Cantor says the generational change will produce more unconventional approaches—and that the newcomers' common denominator is a commitment to attack government spending.

"I think that these are individuals who know we can't keep doing things and striking deals the way it's been done in the past," he says in an interview. "We have to start acting like governors, and the way families are acting, and that means stopping the spending."

Even Republican leaders acknowledge, though, that they may sometimes have their hands full controlling their youth movement. Others predict the passionate views of these conservative newcomers, many with tea-party loyalties, may stand in the way of compromise, even when their leaders decide it's necessary. (Think: raising the federal debt ceiling.)

"What's discouraging about it among Republicans is that it reinforces an intensely ideological view of the world, with relatively little sense of institutional loyalty or commitment, and no real embrace of Congress as a deliberative body where members can engage in good-faith negotiations," says Tom Mann, a congressional scholar at the Brookings Institution. 

But not doing things the way they've been done before is the point for many new members; Mr. Cantor says to expect "thinking outside the box."

As it happens, there's something of the same kind of change going on in the Senate, but there the generational change is more intriguing among Democrats. The average age of Senate Democrats has dropped just slightly—to 63.1 from 63.4—but more important is the emergence of a new set of younger Democratic senators, including the Udall brothers, Tom of New Mexico and Mark of Colorado; Michael Bennet of Colorado; and Jeff Merkley of Oregon. They also are eager for change, and have been leading a charge to reform the Senate's antiquated filibuster rules.

Of course, youth won't be served everywhere. The House Appropriations Committee, which passes around federal spending, will be run by the venerable Republican Rep. Hal Rogers, who turned 73 on New Year's Eve. 

Still, as of Wednesday, it will be possible for the 49-year-old president, Barack Obama, to meet with the House's majority leader, majority whip and budget committee chairman—and for all in the room to be under the age of 50.

 Corrections and Amplifications 

Data analysis for a graphic accompanying this column was by Daniel N. Fehrenbach. The chart's source line incorrectly gave Mr. Fehrenbach's middle initial as J in a previous version. 

 Write to  Gerald F. Seib at jerry.seib@wsj.com 