TEL AVIV—Israeli officials are limiting their response to rocket attacks from Gaza amid fears that greater violence there could feed into the unrest sweeping the Arab world. 

Gaza militants are carrying out the heaviest barrage of rocket fire on Israeli cities since a war in the territory two years ago, testing Israel in a week of tension. 

U.S. and Israeli officials expressed concern Thursday that Arab governments will step up criticism of Israel to deflect attention away from demands for democratic reform in their own countries. 

Any Arab criticism that taps anti-Israel sentiment could embolden militants and further fuel tensions in the region.

U.S. officials privately have urged Israel to remain measured in any military response to the recent escalation of violence, according to people familiar with the discussions.

President Barack Obama called Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on Thursday, expressing concern about the escalation in violence and reaffirming the U.S.'s "unwavering commitment" to Israel's security, the White House said. 

Israel and the Palestinians are experiencing the worst flare-up of fighting in years, with a bombing that killed a British tourist in Jerusalem and rocket attacks in the southern Israeli cities of Beersheba and Ashdod on Wednesday, and the killing of four Palestinian civilians by Israeli mortar shells on Tuesday. 

Hamas and Israel have said they wished to restore the relative calm that has prevailed. 

A major escalation in violence, particularly in Gaza, could create a new political crisis in neighboring Egypt, which has supported Israel's blockade of Hamas-controlled Gaza. 

And with elections planned in the coming months, Egyptian policy makers might be prone to public pressure not to hinder weapons flow to Hamas, an Israeli official said. 

Israel has been relieved that its conflict with the Palestinians hasn't factored into the region's turmoil. 

Defense Secretary Robert Gates and Israeli Defense Minister Ehud Barak alluded to those concerns at a news conference at Israeli's military headquarters in Tel Aviv on Thursday. Mr. Gates condemned Wednesday's bombing and the recent rocket attacks and said Israel would decide how to respond. But Mr. Gates said the theme of demonstrations sweeping Arab states was "directed inward" rather than at the U.S. or Israel.

"I think we all just need to be mindful that we don't want to do anything that allows extremists or others to divert the narrative of reform that is going in virtually all of the countries of the region," Mr. Gates said.

Rocket fire from Gaza crept closer to the Tel Aviv metropolitan area on Thursday—landing between the southern port city of Ashdod and Rishon Lezion. A homemade rocket also struck the southern Israeli town of Sderot. No casualties were reported. 

Israel, meanwhile, attacked a rocket launch squad, a weapons storehouse and weapons-smuggling tunnels. 

While municipalities in southern Israel kept schools closed for fear of attacks, there was criticism from some Israeli politicians that the response was too muted. 

Echoing measured remarks Wednesday by Mr. Netanyahu, Mr. Barak, the defense minister, on Thursday said Israel would retaliate, but at a time and place of its choosing. "We keep the right to pass the judgment about how, when, and what kind of amount of firepower" to use in response, he said.

Islamist militant group Hamas, which rules Gaza, also might be trying to dial back hostilities. On Wednesday, a spokesman for Hamas was quoted on Israel Radio saying that group is committed to restoring calm with Israel and was reaching out to the international community. 

Some Palestinians said they believed Hamas helped instigate the recent escalation to complicate plans for a visit to Gaza by Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas, who has been at odds with Hamas for several years. A new war with Israel could turn the public against Hamas, however, and undermine its control of the territory.

Gazans, who had braced for an Israeli ground assault, are still scarred by the three-week war with Israel two years ago that left some 1,400 people dead, many of them civilians. Hamas was caught off guard when Gaza civilians were exposed to Israeli fire power. 

"Of course they don't want a war,'' said Samer Abu Ahmed, a former security official in Gaza from the rival Fatah party, "because they are not up for it.''