SEOUL—South Korean President Lee Myung-bak will replace five ministers in his cabinet, including Finance Minister Yoon Jeung-hyun in a response to defeats for his ruling party in recent by-elections for parliamentary seats, the presidential office said Friday. 

The cabinet reshuffle was expected and isn't likely to lead to any significant changes in government policy. Such personnel changes are common after electoral setbacks as the president seeks to regain the political initiative. 

Mr. Lee nominated current Labor Minister Bahk Jae-wan as the new finance minister. Lee Chae-pil, vice labor minister, will be promoted to replace Mr. Bahk. 

Mr. Yoon is one of the longest-serving members of the cabinet, having been in the post since early 2009. He offered to resign late last year following the meeting of Group of 20 leading nations in Korea and has expressed fatigue publicly several times recently. 

Analysts and officials say the appointment of a new finance minister is unlikely to result in major changes to macroeconomic or foreign-exchange policies, which are the product of lengthy discussions with the presidential Blue House, the ruling party and other economic and financial authorities. 

Still, the change of the head of the broad economic team comes before the finance ministry releases its twice-yearly economic outlook in June. It's widely expected to revise down its forecasts for economic growth of about 5.0% for this year and raise its inflation forecast from around 3% to reflect external factors such as rapid gains in global oil prices. 

The president also named Kwon Do-youp as Minister of Land, Transport and Maritime Affairs, Suh Kyu-yong as Minister of Food, Agriculture, Forestry & Fisheries and Yoo Young-sook as Minister of Environment. 

Unification Minister Hyun In-taek and Justice Minister Lee Kwi-nam, who had widely been expected to be replaced in the shake-up, will retain their jobs, the presidential office said. 

All of the nominees have to undergo grilling by opposition lawmakers but can be approved unilaterally by the president. 

The reshuffle announcement comes after the ruling GNP was defeated in two of three contested by-elections for seats in parliament and before President Lee heads to Europe for a trip starting Sunday.

 Write to  Kanga Kong at kanga.kong@dowjones.com 