Some major retailers are making it easier to return holiday gifts, after years of tightening policies and generating complaints from consumers.

  Best Buy
BBY


0.64
%




 last month became the latest large chain to loosen its return policy when it eliminated a 15% "restocking fee" on electronics. That fee had stirred a storm of opposition from consumers on Twitter and Facebook.

  Macy's,
M


0.03
%




 Toys "R" Us and  OfficeMax, among others, also have relaxed return policies, says  Edgar Dworsky, founder of Consumerworld.org, which has conducted an annual survey of retail return policies for the past seven years.

OfficeMax did away with its ban on returning digital cameras, but charges a 15% restocking fee for returns. Toys "R" Us extended its return period for online sales to 90 days from 30. Macy's eliminated its already lenient return limit of 180 days and now accepts most merchandise at any time as long as the customer has a receipt.

Some research suggests that in the effort to crack down on consumers who make habitual returns, companies risk harming their reputations with other potential customers.

"Stores are deciding, 'If this is an impediment to sales, maybe we should loosen up a little bit,'[nbsp ]" Mr. Dworsky says. "These policies were getting worse for the consumer for many years," but more recently, "we are seeing the pendulum slowly swing in the other direction."

As shoppers grow comfortable spending again -- and flock to online merchants known for more-generous return policies -- chains are being forced to change their policies to remain competitive, says  Bill Angrick, chief executive of Liquidity Services.

"This could be the biggest returns season we've ever had," says Mr. Angrick, whose company helps retailers resell returned merchandise.

To be sure, not all retailers are loosening policies. The National Retail Federation found in a November survey that 84% of retailers were leaving policies unchanged. And some are getting tougher.

—Miguel Bustillo  The Wall Street Journal 

If you own a Roth individual retirement account, you may be under the impression that you'll never owe any federal income tax on withdrawals.

Not true. Here's what you need to know.

If you're age 59 1/2 or older and have had at least one Roth IRA open for more than five years, withdrawals from any of your Roth IRAs are called qualified withdrawals. As such, they are free of any federal income tax or withdrawal penalty. The five-year period for qualified withdrawals starts on Jan. 1 of the first tax year for which you make a Roth contribution. (You can always withdraw your contributions without tax or penalty tax.)

But the tax situation can get complicated if...

 ...You're under age 59 1/2. Any Roth withdrawal taken before age 59 1/2 is a nonqualified withdrawal. As such, it may be subject to federal income tax and a 10% penalty tax.

 ...You fail the five-year test. Any Roth withdrawal taken before passing the five-year mark also is a nonqualified withdrawal. And that means it may be subject to income tax and a 10% penalty tax.

 ...You qualify for the home-purchase exception. If you've passed the five-year test but you're under 59 1/2, a special exception allows tax-free and penalty-free Roth withdrawals in order to buy a principal residence.

However, there's a lifetime $10,000 limit on this deal, and you must use the money within 120 days of the withdrawal. The homebuyer can be you or certain relatives (including kids and grandkids). But the buyer must not have owned a principal residence within the two-year period ending on the purchase date.

—Bill Bischoff  SmartMoney.com 

Credit cards that give cash back prompt consumers to spend more and accrue more debt, according to researchers at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.

The initiation of a 1% cash-rewards program yielded, on average, a $25 reward each month -- and an increase in spending by $68 a month and in credit-card debt of $115 a month, economists say in a paper to be presented at the American Economic Association meetings this week.

Credit-card companies have long enticed users with an array of rewards programs, from airplane miles to hotel rooms and cash back. In many cases, rewards entice people whose cards were dormant to start spending, the study found. About 11% of those who hadn't used their credit cards in the previous three months made purchases of at least $50 in the first month of the program.

The three economists looked at 12,000 credit-card accounts at one financial institution (whose identity they don't disclose) over a two-year period ended June 2002. Some of the customers were offered cash-back rewards; others weren't.

That debts grew faster than spending among those offered cash rewards likely means people reduced their monthly payments more than they increased spending.

The extra debt could mean two things: People spent more overall or they shifted spending to their cash-back rewards card from some other card in their purse or wallet.

Sumit Agarwal, one of the paper's co-authors, says the study found both. That means that, for a lot of people, the benefit of a cash-back reward is negated by increased overall spending and debt.

—Conor Dougherty  The Wall Street Journal 

—The Aggregator features news and commentary from The Wall Street Journal and other publications. Email: cristina.lourosa@wsj.com 