CAMP SENDAI, Japan—Japan's nuclear crisis won't stop U.S. military efforts to supply aid to residents displaced by the earthquake and tsunami, the local U.S. military commander of a joint humanitarian mission with Japan said Thursday.

"My marching orders are that the mission continues," said Col. Greg Timberlake, forward commander of the III Marine Expeditionary Force at Camp Sendai in northern Japan. "It started out as, and still is, a humanitarian mission. That's what we came here to do."

The U.S. government on Wednesday instructed citizens and military personnel to evacuate from a zone extending 50 miles, or 80 kilometers, from the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear complex in northeastern Japan, where workers are fighting to keep nuclear material in the stricken plant from melting down. 

The hardest-hit areas where the joint aid mission is focused lie north of the 50-mile zone. Supply flights have also been routed to circle a no-fly zone around the damaged plant, Col. Timberlake said. He added the U.S. is monitoring levels of radiation at Camp Sendai, a Japanese military base, and other places.

The plight of evacuees from tsunami-devastated regions north of the crippled power plants has grown more dire as supplies run low at hundreds of ad hoc relief shelters. The logistical issues of any rescue effort—blocked roads to hard-hit areas, difficulties in assessing the areas of greatest need—are compounded in Japan by cold, continuing aftershocks and radiation fears.

Progress was slow Wednesday, when a joint team of U.S. Marines Corps and Japanese Self-Defense Forces arrived after nightfall to distribute water, food and blankets to relief centers in two hard-hit areas north of the city of Sendai. 

Snow fell thickly and roads were partially blocked by rocks dislodged by Friday's 9.0 magnitude earthquake or washed inland by tsunami waters. Highways were closed to all but military vehicles and private trucks bearing supplies. 

In the city of Kesennuma, local officials staffed a warehouse that was nearly barren before the joint U.S.-Japan military force unloaded four truckloads of supplies. The aid was to be distributed among 60 shelters in the area. Even with the extra supplies, the official overseeing the distribution center didn't have the 14,000 meals each day it needed to provide, and it needed critical items such as infant formula. 

"These supplies are a lifeline for thousands, but we have nowhere near enough," said Kunio Hatakeyama, 52 years old, a Kesennuma tax-department chief who is in charge of about a dozen colleagues at the facility. 

At another makeshift facility, about 80 evacuees milled around a single kerosene stove or wrapped themselves in multiple blankets. "It's very, very cold and we're running low on kerosene," said Takeshi Kumagai, 75, a lifelong resident of Rikuzentakata, a coastal community in southern Iwate prefecture also crushed by the tsunami.

On Thursday, as temperatures remained frigid and heavy snow fell around the city of Sendai, no aid deliveries were made, a Marine Corps spokesman said. Three other assistance teams had yet to be deployed from their staging area at a U.S. Navy base in Atsugi near Tokyo.

Col. Timberlake said the first of three forward refueling bases was now fully operational, allowing the U.S. to increase its distribution. "We expect to deliver more water, more blankets and more food sources once we get our hands on them," he said.

As of Thursday, about 588 Marines, sailors, and civilians from III MEF and Marine Corps Bases Japan were deployed in support of the joint humanitarian mission, called Operation Tomodachi, or "Friend," the Marines Corps said. 

The U.S. Navy has positioned a sizeable fleet off both the west and east coasts of Japan to aid in the relief efforts.Secretary of the Navy Ray Mabus said Wednesday in Washington that the service had 14 ships and more than 10,000 personnel in Japan or off the Japanese coast. U.S. officials have said that 15 Navy ships were expected there by Thursday.

"We're flying our helicopters, and we will soon have almost 70 helicopters in the region or in the area that was affected," he said. "We're moving Japanese first responders, Japanese troops by ship to the affected areas." 

Mr. Mabus said the marines would assist in radiological testing, humanitarian assistance and other disaster-relief planning. 

At Camp Sendai, Col. Timberlake, based out of Camp Courtney in Okinawa, said President Barack Obama has sent some of the "best minds" in the U.S. to Japan to help deal with the potentially deadly leak of radioactive materials. 

He added that the U.S. is particularly concerned about the Daiichi plant's No. 3 reactor, where stored spent-fuel rods are in danger of overheating as water has boiled off from the reactor's cooling pool.

U.S. military officials in parts of Japan have been conducting body scans on U.S. military personnel with hand-held monitors. They also have prepared body-protection suits with breathing hoods, and have stocks of potassium iodide tablets, which can protect the thyroid from radiation. These haven't been distributed yet, said Lt. Nick Eisenbeiser, a spokesman for the U.S. Marine Corps in Japan.

—Nathan Hodge and Neil King Jr. in Washington contributed to this article.