This is the moment of maximum danger for George Osborne. The U.K. Chancellor of the Exchequer must stand up to deliver his second budget Wednesday against a backdrop of a fourth-quarter slump in GDP, surging inflation, rising unemployment, falling house prices and declining bank lending —and all this before the spending cuts announced in his previous budget have even started to bite.

His friends tell him he desperately needs a growth agenda, his enemies say it is time to reach for Plan B. In truth, he needs neither. He simply needs to hold his nerve and brace himself for what is sure to be a tough year ahead.

Sure, growth is a worry for the U.K. economy. The Office for Budget Responsibility's previous estimate of 2.1% growth in the 2010/11 fiscal year now looks too optimistic—market forecasts are now closer to 1.5%. Another quarter or two of GDP contraction this year can't be ruled out, possibly even a slip into double- dip recession.

Rising inflation will also push up the costs of certain index-linked benefits putting further pressure on the government's deficit reduction targets. Recent events in the Middle East and Japan have highlighted the economy's vulnerability to external shocks.

Of course, there are various micro-economic initiatives Mr. Osborne could introduce to help boost growth and competitiveness at the margins—many of them eloquently set out by Sir Richard Lambert in his valedictory speech as Director General of the Confederation of British Industry. The chancellor could tinker with employment law to make it easier to hire and fire staff, relax planning law to encourage investment. Business would in theory welcome a simplification of the tax rules—the Office of Tax Simplification recently identified 47 tax allowances that should be abolished—although in practice, these exercises inevitably produce winners as well as losers. 

Mr. Osborne could even decide to resurrect the old Eighties gimmick of Enterprise Zones to address regional competitive weaknesses.

On a longer-term view, supply-side initiatives such as reforms to education and training and investment in infrastructure will be crucial to underscore future competitiveness. And it goes without saying that any serious growth agenda would haver to call time on the ludicrous banker-bashing that has dominated the U.K.'s political debate for far too long. 

There is not much Mr. Osborne can do now to put back in the bottle the genie he ill-advisedly uncorked when he set up the Independent Banking Commission after the general election. But when even the French finance minister says that "bank bashing is futile," it's a clear signal the U.K. assault on its most important export industry has gone too far.

But these initiatives pale into insignificance alongside the overwhelming importance of cutting the deficit—and doing so in the way that Mr. Osborne has laid out, primarily via cuts to public spending. That's partly because—as the chancellor likes to point out—a stable macro- economic environment is the most important service government can provide to business. 

In the World Economic Forum's 2011 competitiveness survey, the U.K. ranked 12th overall, but just 56th in the world for macro-economic stability. 

By taking aggressive action to cut the deficit, Mr. Osborne creates the conditions for the Bank of England to hold down interest rates, which in turn has kept sterling low. The benefits in terms of increased competitiveness, faster export growth and higher profits can already be seen in the remarkable surge in the U.K manufacturing sector. 

But there is another reason why cutting public spending is so important to the U.K.'s growth prospects that Mr. Osborne is understandably less willing to trumpet: there is now a body of academic evidence showing how cuts in public spending, particularly when achieved via cuts to the government wage bill, help reduce private sector wages, boosting corporate competitiveness and lead to much higher business investment— crucial to a recovery. 

For example, Harvard University's Alberto Alesina showed in a 2002 study of fiscal consolidations that every one percentage point increase in public spending as a percentage of GDP decreased business investment as a proportion of GDP by 0.48 percentage points after one year and a cumulative 2.56 percentage points after five years. 

That suggests Mr. Osborne's aim to cut public spending as a proportion of GDP by eight percentage points to 40.% over the next four years is exactly the right strategy. While it is tough on the estimated 600,000 public sector workers forecast to lose their jobs, the evidence suggests they will be reabsorbed into the work force as a result of rising business investment, albeit at lower wages. Indeed, the Bank of England is counting on downward pressure on wages to ensure the economy weathers the current inflation spike.

That should give Mr. Osborne some confidence that so long as he sticks to his course, he will succeed in eliminating the U.K.'s structural deficit by 2015 as planned. Indeed, the academic research suggests Mr. Osborne should even be going further. 

So far, most of the U.K. fiscal consolidation effort has been achieved via extra taxes, including a big increase in VAT, higher top rate tax thresholds, and the new 50% top rate. Yet the evidence shows that higher labor taxes also undermine competitiveness, reduce profits and lead to lower investment. If Mr. Osborne is really serious about delivering a growth agenda, he should commit to cutting this tax burden, even at the expense of further cuts to public spending.

The chancellor doesn't so much need a Plan B as a doubling up on his Plan A. 

 Write to  Simon Nixon at simon.nixon@wsj.com 