BRUSSELS—The European Commission proposed Wednesday a common system for calculating the tax base of businesses operating in the European Union, a plan that is opposed by Ireland and several other countries. 

In a bid to make doing business in the EU more attractive for foreigners and easier for local enterprises, the proposal aims to reduce the administrative burden and costs associated with complying with up to 27 different national systems. 

"Today's proposal is good for business and good for the EU's global competitiveness," said  Algirdas Semeta, commissioner for taxation, in a statement. 

However, some say this would shift tax revenue from smaller states to larger states. They claim it could also reduce sovereignty over a key economic driver. 

Ireland is fighting the most vocal battle, concerned about losing the headquarters of many companies that take advantage of Ireland's low 12.5% corporate tax rate. This threatens the likelihood of the proposal's success, as it will require unanimous approval by the European Council. The proposal must also go through the European Parliament. 

The proposed common corporate-tax base is a single set of rules that companies operating within the EU could use to calculate their taxable profit. It would allow businesses to file a single tax return with one administration and consolidate all profit and loss. 

After the tax base is established, all member states in which a company operates would be entitled to tax a certain portion of that base. Each country would maintain the right to tax at whatever rates the government chooses to set, but the base that can be taxed would be calculated from a formula that equally weighs assets, labor and sales. This would all be done through the tax authorities of the company's principal member state. 

A member state could also choose to apply a different tax rate for companies in the program if its own national base were to change and it wanted to maintain the same effective tax rate. 

Notably, companies would be able to choose whether to participate in the common system. Those that choose to opt in must stay in for a minimum of five years "to avoid them opting in and out for tax-planning purposes," said the commission. 

A February Ernst & Young study showed that almost 24,000 groups of taxpayers would face higher corporate income taxes under the proposal. This is expected to affect agriculture, mining, financial services, real estate and transportation industries most. 

"The principle is that costs should drop, but to comply with [the proposed system] there would be compliance costs to change your model," said  Declan Butler, a tax partner at Deloitte in Dublin, with U.S. multinational clients. In addition, companies might end up with a larger tax base in countries with higher taxes, he said. 

"Therefore my understanding is very few companies would want to opt in," Mr. Butler said. 

However, the commission estimates the current compliance costs could be reduced by 7% under this model. In addition, by allowing businesses to offset losses in one member state against profit elsewhere in the EU for tax purposes, the proposal could result in additional savings of €1.3 billion ($1.82 billion) for companies across the EU, according to the statement. 

This plan, though, has been met by skepticism from Ireland, the U.K., Estonia, Slovakia and the Czech Republic, at minimum. A form of this proposal has been bounced around the EU for years but never managed to reach consensus at the council level. 

The Ernst & Young study, which was commissioned by the Irish Department of Finance, found Denmark, the Netherlands, Ireland, Germany, and Finland would lose at least 5% of their revenue, while France would benefit from a 6% gain in revenue.

In addition, Belgium, Spain and France are expected to gain jobs, while Ireland, Luxembourg and Poland are seen experiencing job losses of at least 1%. 

"Going at it from the base is another way of arriving at the same destination," Irish Finance Minister  Michael Noonan said this week.

Essentially, there are concerns that the now-optional element for companies could become permanent. 

However, Mr. Butler of Deloitte said clients haven't come asking questions about this initiative yet. 

"We would think, and our clients do, that it really is just a publication of a proposal and it's really only the beginning of a very long process of discussion. Where it ends up could be many miles removed from where it starts," he said.