WASHINGTON--The Commerce Department, hoping to head off retaliation by the European Union, Japan, and other trading partners has proposed ending a controversial method of calculating penalties on trade dumping cases. 

The proposal, disclosed quietly last week in the Federal Register, could resolve a long-running fight between the U.S. and several of its largest trading partners. The dispute could spill out into a broader trade battle, with the EU and Japan threatening hundreds of millions of dollars in trade sanctions against U.S. goods in retaliation. 

The EU, Japan and other countries have successfully challenged the practice at the World Trade Organization. 

The dispute centers on the a method of calculating antidumping duties, a type of penalty in trade cases. This type of calculation, known as "zeroing," doesn't take into account imported goods that are priced higher than domestic goods. Other countries complain the method artificially lowers the average price of the imports. 

Since early 2007, the U.S. has stopped the practice in calculating new penalties, now weighing the dumped goods against high-priced imports from the same country. 

But the practice of zeroing has continued in reviews of whether to keep existing duties in place, despite several WTO rulings against the U.S. 

On Dec. 28, the Commerce Department issued for public comment a plan to extend the ban on zeroing to reviews and a limited number of new investigations that weren't already covered. The comment period runs through Jan. 27, but a final decision will come later, a senior Commerce Department official said. 

The official said the U.S. would continue to push for its right to use the criticized practice of "zeroing" when calculating duties on dumped goods during the ongoing Doha round of trade talks. 

"The U.S. proposal to come into compliance with the WTO rulings in no way signals a change in the U.S. position in the Doha Rules negotiations with regard to zeroing," the official said. 

The EU and Japan have delayed seeking retaliation through the WTO until the U.S. devised a plan to comply. While these critics welcomed the new U.S. plan, the EU is concerned the changes only are limited to future cases, an EU official said. 

  Walter Spak, partner and head of the international trade group at White & Case, said the proposal doesn't provide enough detail to know whether the changes would bring the U.S. into compliance with WTO rules. 

In addition, U.S. supporters of zeroing will likely "make every effort to attempt to limit its effects," said Mr. Spak, whose firm has represented foreign and U.S. firms in antidumping cases. 

  Gilbert Kaplan, a partner at King & Spalding who often represents U.S. firms seeking relief from dumping, warned that the proposals would be "very damaging" to domestic industry. He predicted that many of the public comments would object to the changes. 

"This probably would satisfy people who are concerned about zeroing," said Mr. Kaplan, a former Commerce Department official who also heads a trade group called the Committee to Support U.S. Trade Laws. "Unfortunately, from our point of view, it goes pretty far in terms of preventing the practice of zeroing." 

 Write to  Tom Barkley at tom.barkley@dowjones.com 