ABU DHABI—Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said an international campaign to slow Iran's suspected nuclear-weapons program was succeeding, the first time a senior Obama administration official has publicly made such a claim. 

Mrs. Clinton, speaking in the United Arab Emirates on Monday, cited in particular technical problems Tehran was allegedly experiencing in running its centrifuge machines, which produce nuclear fuel. 

She credited the growing international sanctions regime put in place against Iran in recent years for delays in Iran's work. 

"The most recent analysis is that the sanctions have been working. They have made it much more difficult for Iran to pursue its nuclear ambitions," Mrs. Clinton said during an appearance on the Emirati television show "Sweet Talk" in Abu Dhabi. 

"Their program, from our best estimate, has been slowed down," she said. "So we have time. But not a lot of time." 

Tehran has regularly stated that its nuclear program is only for civilian purposes. 

Mrs. Clinton's comments follow recent statements by senior Israeli officials that Tehran is at least four years away from being able to produce a nuclear weapon. 

This marked a significant dialing back, as a number of other Israeli officials had previously said that Tehran could have an atomic bomb by this year.

The outgoing head of Israel's intelligence service, Meir Dagan, last week credited sanctions and covert operations against Iran for slowing its nuclear work.

U.S. officials have recently been saying in private that they believe Iran was experiencing significant difficulties in acquiring the raw materials to upgrade the centrifuge machines it uses to enrich uranium. 

They particularly cited shortages of materials such as carbon-fiber and maraging steel—a high-strength, malleable form of the alloy—which are critical to building the rotor tubes used in centrifuges and the stabilizing systems that keep the machines from breaking part.

A computer worm, known as Stuxnet, has also attacked Iran's uranium-enrichment facility at Natanz in recent months, causing the centrifuge machines to be temporarily shut down, according to Western officials.

Many U.S. officials have been reluctant to speak publicly about these developments, due to fears such assessments could damp international resolve to follow through with tighter economic sanctions on Iran. 

Speaking to reporters en route to the U.A.E., Mrs. Clinton had played down the revised estimates, stressing the need to maintain international pressure on Tehran.

Mrs. Clinton has stressed that Iran's slower timeline for developing its nuclear technologies shouldn't weaken the international community's focus. 

"The real question is how do we convince Iran that pursuing nuclear weapons will not make it safer and stronger, but just the opposite," Mrs. Clinton told her audience in Abu Dhabi. "If Iran gets a nuclear weapon, won't you believe that you'll have to have a nuclear weapon, too?"

The head of the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency, Leon Panetta, last year estimated that Iran would need two years to produce nuclear weapons if it makes the political decision to do so. U.S. officials haven't commented in recent weeks if the CIA and other U.S. intelligence services were altering their judgments.

The five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, plus Germany, are scheduled to hold a second round of talks with Iran aimed at curbing its nuclear activities beginning on Jan. 20 in Istanbul. 

Mrs. Clinton also warned that Iran might seek to stoke conflict in various parts of the Middle East in order to divert attention from its nuclear program and internal political squabbles. She blamed Tehran for fueling tensions in Lebanon and the Palestinian territories by funding militant groups such as Hamas and Hezbollah. 

"If they can shift attention away from their own internal decisions about whether or not to pursue nuclear weapons, they will be very happy about that," she said. "We cannot let that attention get diverted and we cannot let any outside influence cause a conflict in the Middle East." 

Mrs. Clinton, who is visiting the U.A.E., Oman and Qatar this week, said she is aware of the "drumbeats" that risk sparking a regional war between Tehran and its allies on the one side, and the U.S. and Israel on the other. But she said the Obama administration would continue to pursue dialogue with Tehran, as well as between the Israelis and the Palestinians, to avert such a conflagration. 

"I think it's very important that we look at how disastrous such a war would be for everyone," Mrs. Clinton told the television audience. "And it still is a fact that there is no solution to the problems that beset the area through war. War will not resolve the longstanding concerns."

 Write to  Jay Solomon at jay.solomon@wsj.com 