 STEVE: In three weeks, Levi and I will be in northern Tanzania. Or on a cargo boat on Lake Victoria, or lost in a Ugandan village -- I'm not exactly sure.

Sound crazy? I think so. I blame the ex-Army guy who runs the military-surplus store in Berkeley.

Yes, we finally decided to take The Trip. We wrote last year about my fantasy of pulling Levi out of school for six months to seek the sites of our human roots in Africa and then trace the dawn of civilization by vagabonding overland along the Rift Valley, on down the Nile and into the Middle East.

The scheme made no sense. It didn't make financial sense to take a leave from my great job. It was imprudent for Levi's education. It wasn't logical to abandon our comfortable life, leave behind my wife, Karen, and spend money on a whimsical journey when so many others were less fortunate than we.

Which is why it took until last month for me to come around to agreeing to my own plan. Even then, it wasn't really my decision.

It was Karen's decision: "You need this," she urged me repeatedly. "Levi needs this."

It was Levi's decision: "OMG yes!!" he texted me when I asked for the 23rd time if he truly wanted to go. It was my sister Debby's and my brother Jay's decision. "Of course you should do it," she said. "And don't feel guilty," he said.

It was our mortgage broker's decision: She got us a lower rate and cash out, allaying my fears of a dwindling emergency fund.

It was our friend Randy's decision: "You'll never regret it if you do it," he said. It was our readers' decision. "Go," wrote scores of them.

It was the school counselor's decision: Levi can take classes online, she assured us. It was my boss's decision: "My only concern is that you might not want to come back to your job," he said.

I was running out of excuses not to buy tickets when Levi and I went shopping last month for travel clothes at the military-surplus store.

The proprietor, a stern-looking former soldier about 10 years older than I, stared me sharply in the eye, pondering what I'd just told him about my absurd travel proposition.

Finally, I thought, here is someone who will tell me what a bad idea this is!

He held my gaze. "Good," he said, nodding firmly. "That is the best thing you can do for your son right now. He'll learn far more than staying in school here. Good."

So I went home and bought tickets to Kampala, Uganda, with a return flight six months later from Istanbul. It was no use resisting. It wasn't a decision so much as a stripping away of all objections.

Our plan still makes no sense. We have contacts with friends and friends of friends along the way, but our route is vague, our timetable rough. Still, perhaps sometimes doing something that makes no sense makes the most sense of all.

I told Karen: "This is either the most brilliant idea I've come up with, or the most insane." That night on the kitchen table was a list she'd written of two dozen reasons to take The Trip. The heading: "Brilliant."

I'm still not so sure. Brilliant, perhaps; insane, more likely. It's our Insane Brilliant Thing, Levi's and mine.

 LEVI: Compared with Dad, I had considerably fewer challenges to face before I accepted that we had to do this trip.

The Trip started as a joke. Dad would ask me if I wanted to take six months off from school to go someplace new, to trace the roots of Western civilization. Then I saw a slideshow about my mom's family's six-month trip around the Mediterranean when she was a teenager, and it seemed a bit more possible to me. It has been done before; why couldn't we do it again?

It still just felt like a dream of Dad's. It was fun to think about it and plan for. But I never imagined that Dad was really serious about it.

Then once Dad started pestering me daily about it, I began to realize he was starting to think that this was more than just a game. That started to worry me. What about school? What about the family's finances? Would my life change for the better or worse?

But then my school counselor told me it was possible to take the required courses on the road. And besides, I told myself, it wasn't that big of a deal if I had to retake some courses -- or redo a whole year, for that matter. What's a year in the scheme of things, anyway?

And after Dad assured me the financial situation would be fine, I stopped worrying about money as well.

So I decided: I really wanted to do this.

That was about two months ago. Since then I've been working on Dad. I talked about when we go on the trip, not if. Whenever he expressed doubts, I'd correct him. "We are going," I'd say.

Even with my constant pressure, it still has taken most of those two months to bring Dad around. It wasn't until he bought tickets that I was sure he was on board.

Even now, he sometimes slips and says, "if we go on this trip," and he is still nervous about the whole thing. But the slips are becoming less frequent, and I figure the nervousness is natural.

Of course, I won't be sure until we're on the plane. And if Dad decides to drop out at the last minute, we already have the tickets so I'll just go by myself.

—Steve Yoder is chief of The Wall Street Journal's San Francisco bureau. His son Isaac is 19 years old and a college sophomore. His son Levi is 15 years old and a high-school sophomore. Email: yoder&son@wsj.com 