ATLANTA—For the first time since Carmelo Anthony joined the Knicks, the team learned something important about itself on Sunday night: They can win without him.

Anthony was held to 14 points and didn't play past the 10:14 mark of the fourth quarter as the Knicks beat the Hawks 92-79 in Atlanta. Amar'e Stoudemire scored 26 points with seven rebounds.

From the bench, Anthony watched an 11-0 run by the Knicks midway through the fourth, highlighted by a Roger Mason Jr. 3-pointer and capped off by Shawne Williams's third three of the night, which put the Knicks up 75-63 with 7:07 to go.

Anthony said he was dealing with a migraine for most of the game after a first-half eye poke from Al Horford. He took his headband off because the pressure against his head was too much to take. He said he has dealt with migraines before, but never for something like an eye poke. He met with an eye doctor in the locker room after the game, which Anthony said helped a little bit, though his vision is still blurry.

Anthony's play was disjointed for most of the game. He was held to six points on 2 of 8 shooting in the first half, though he contributed in other ways. He finished the game with seven rebounds and seven assists.

Chauncey Billups missed his third straight game with a bruised quadriceps, and Toney Douglas started at point guard. Bill Walker was also out with a sore knee and Ronny Turiaf missed the game with a knee injury.

Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni mined his little-used bench, playing Mason, a guard, in his first meaningful minutes since Jan. 12. Mason scored five points in 25 minutes of play. Jared Jeffries started at center and with Billups out, Anthony Carter spent 14 minutes at point guard and scored 10 points.

Six Knicks were in double figures, though Jeffries was held scoreless in his 26 minutes. Despite collecting only three rebounds and one assist, D'Antoni said that Jeffries's presence in the middle of the floor was key in holding the Hawks to their 79 points, with no Hawk scoring more than Josh Smith's 17. 

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 