MADRID—China supports Spain's economic reforms and will continue buying Spanish government debt, Chinese Vice Premier Li Keqiang wrote in a newspaper editorial, the latest sign of China's growing role in protecting the stability of the European Union, its largest export market. 

"We have confidence in the European financial market, and, in particular, the Spanish financial market, which has meant the purchase of its public debt, something which we will continue to do in the future," Mr. Li wrote in El País, Spain's largest-circulation general newspaper, on the eve of a visit to Spain that will start Tuesday.

Mr. Li will visit Spain from Jan. 4 to 6 and will meet with \leaders including King Juan Carlos, Prime Minister José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero, Finance Minister Elena Salgado and Foreign Minister Trinidad Jiménez. The large number of high-profile meetings, unusual for a foreign visitor who isn't a head of government or state, is evidence of the interest caused by the visit in Spain, which will again issue large amounts of debt this year. 

Spain has faced increasing difficulties in financing a yawning budget deficit after Greece's financial meltdown in early 2010 sparked concerns about the problems of other fiscally frail euro-zone countries. Spain responded with emergency budget cuts as well as politically difficult reforms designed to boost growth, but markets have been wary of the country's economic prospects. 

China has provided crucial support to volatile financial markets with its purchases of euro-zone sovereign debt. China is one of the biggest foreign owners of Spanish sovereign debt, with around 10% of the total foreign holdings.

"China supports the measures taken by Spain to achieve an economic and financial adjustment, in the firm belief that it will obtain a complete economic recovery," Mr. Li said in the editorial. "The Chinese side is willing to explore with its Spanish counterpart any positive and effective cooperation possibilities." 

Last month, Moody's Investors Service warned it might lower Spain's debt rating because of the country's relatively high refinancing needs this year and the possibility that it might have to inject fresh capital into its banks. 

A key concern is that many Spanish borrowers will be refinancing debts this year, at a time when investors are nervous about taking on any European risk. According to Moody's, Spain's central government must raise about €170 billion ($227 billion) in 2011, on top of €30 billion by the country's regional governments. 

This is a significant chunk of the euro zone's overall issuance—Natixis expects €824 billion of euro-zone government bonds to be auctioned in 2011, with 10% of the planned supply to come in January.

Fears that the country may need a bailout package similar to those received last year by Ireland and Greece have hit the euro. Spain is the fourth-largest euro-zone economy and any bailout would be big.

This is also a headache for China. Beijing is wary of the effect of a wider euro-zone crisis on export demand; a tumbling euro would make Chinese exports less competitive across Europe just as the country's booming economy is showing some signs of strain. 

The Spanish foreign ministry said Spain plans to sign a number of agreements with the Chinese in the banking, telecommunications, energy and transport sectors. 

After his visit to Spain, Mr. Li will travel to Germany from Jan. 6 to 9 and the U.K. from Jan. 9 to 12. 

 Write to  Jonathan House at jonathan.house@dowjones.com 