LONDON—Britain's Treasury Chief George Osborne delivered a largely business-friendly budget that aimed to dull the pain of belt-tightening and high inflation rates, after already having set the U.K. on a course of aggressive deficit cutting.

Mr. Osborne also announced Wednesday a series of measures to lift economic growth, which he said would be slower than expected when he began the deficit-reduction course—among the most aggressive of the major economies.

"The budget is roughly neutral and won't alter the economic outlook significantly, but I don't think he needed to do that, as fiscal plans were set a year ago," said  Michael Saunders, a U.K. economist at Citigroup. 

Still, the budget includes tax measures that will be unpopular with the country's oil and banking sectors.

The economic pain for Britons is about to increase, regardless of the budget Mr. Osborne unveiled. Billions of pounds of tax increases and spending cuts that he announced in last year's emergency budget will kick in beginning next month. The U.K. economic recovery is seen as fragile, with gross domestic product falling by a surprising 0.6% in the fourth quarter. 

Mr. Osborne told Parliament the Independent Office for Budget Responsibility has trimmed its growth forecast for 2011 to 1.7% from the 2.1% it estimated in November, bringing it more in line with the consensus. The forecast for 2012 was trimmed to 2.5% from 2.6%, and growth is forecast at 2.9% in 2013, 2.9% in 2014, and 2.8% in 2015. 

Ed Miliband, leader of the opposition Labour Party, leapt on the growth revisions, saying this "didn't happen by chance, it happened by choice" with the government going "too far and too fast" with cuts. 

With the economy growing at a slower rate, Mr. Osborne said the government would have to borrow £10 billion a year more than expected. Still, the OBR said the government would meet its fiscal target of eliminating the structural budget deficit by 2015 to 2016. 

Balancing Britain's books was at the heart of the £113 billion of spending cuts and tax increases—spread over five years—announced in October. 

The government argues the benefits of this can be seen in the fact that U.K. government debt has outperformed its peers in a reflection of investor confidence in Britain.

On Wednesday, Mr. Osborne outlined the sort of measures he hopes will help lift the economy. "Last year's emergency budget was about rescuing the nation's finances, and paying for the mistakes of the past," he told Parliament. "Today's budget is about reforming the nation's economy, so that we have enduring growth and jobs in the future."

Mr. Osborne announced a raft of measures to simplify Britain's notoriously complex tax system and to streamline regulation. Corporate tax will fall by two percentage points to 26% next month, rather than the previously announced decline of one percentage point, and will continue to fall by one percentage point in each of the following three years, taking the corporate tax rate down to 23%, the lowest such rate in the Group of Seven leading economies. 

The Treasury chief also announced measures to boost the sort of education and training he says will help tilt the U.K. economy away from financial services and toward manufacturing. 

The moves were welcomed by business associations. "The chancellor has made clear the U.K. is open for business," said John Cridland, director-general of the Confederation of British Industry. 

Not all businesses will be happy. The corporate-tax decrease won't apply to the banking sector. And the North Sea oil and gas producers will be hit with a £2 billion rise in taxes. Banking and oil industry players expressed dismay and said such targeting raises questions about whether the U.K. is an appropriate destination for their investments. 

The very rich also were hit with a variety of measures, including taxes on private jets and an increase in the nondomicile tax to £50,000 from £30,000 a year for people who live in the U.K. but claim their true home is elsewhere for tax purposes. 

Much of this extra taxation will fund popular measures aimed at capping any duties on soaring gas prices and at raising personal-tax allowances, or the level of income that can be earned before it is taxed, by £630 to £8,105.

—Ainsley Thomson, Guy Chazan and Paul Hannon contributedto this article.

 Write to  Alistair MacDonald at alistair.macdonald@wsj.com 