Jon Huntsman, the U.S. ambassador to China, sparked a wave of speculation this month when he hinted he might challenge his boss, President Barack Obama, in the 2012 presidential election.

Even after playing footsie with a presidential bid in an interview with Newsweek, the Republican former Utah governor was still able to score an invite to the president's state dinner Wednesday night at the White House for Chinese President Hu Jintao. 

But he played coy when he was asked about a possible presidential bid.

Asked as he entered the dinner whether he would run in 2012, Mr. Huntsman said, "We're loyal to our country and our president."

At the White House news conference earlier in the day, Mr. Obama was asked about the speculation Mr. Huntsman might be a 2012 rival. Mr. Obama praised Mr. Huntsman's skills, dedication and bipartisanship. "I couldn't be happier with the ambassador's service," Mr. Obama said, adding: "And I'm sure he will be very successful in whatever endeavors he chooses in the future. And I'm sure that him having worked so well with me will be a great asset in any Republican primary."

The predinner promenade of boldfaced names making their way into the White House didn't yield much more in the way of political news.

Movie star Jackie Chan, who was born in Hong Kong, said he didn't have any plans to perform the martial-arts stunts for which he's become famous. Former Secretary of Labor Elaine Chao showed up to the dinner with her father, not her husband, Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.). And New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie said he's "unique once again" for being one of the few Republicans in attendance.

Big business turned out in force, too, including Microsoft's Steven Ballmer and J.P. Morgan Chase's Jamie Dimon. Designer Vera Wang and Vogue's Anna Wintour also attended.

But the line of the night goes to Barbra Streisand. Asked why she was invited, Ms. Streisand deadpanned: "I worked in a Chinese restaurant." 

On a week full of carefully choreographed events to announce incremental progress on thorny political and economic issues in the U.S.-China relationship, one big diplomatic issue has been put to rest: The pandas can stay at the National Zoo.

Mei Xiang and Tian Tian have been at the National Zoo in Washington, D.C., for 10 years. And with Wednesday's agreement, they can stay for five more, Secretary-General of the China Wildlife Conservation Association Zang Chunlin announced.

The current agreement officially expired in December, but an extension of the pair's stay was expected. 

Chinese pandas and their offspring always belong to China and must be returned eventually. Mei Xiang and Tian Tian have a son, Tai Shan, who was returned to China last year.

Pandas have been an important symbol in U.S.-China relations since Chairman Mao Zedong gave President Richard Nixon two pandas to celebrate his visit to China in 1972.

—From Wall Street Journal and wire reports