NEW YORK—A former Guantanamo detainee's conviction will stand in a conspiracy to bomb two U.S. embassies in Africa more than a decade ago, a federal judge has ruled. 

Ahmed Khailfan Ghailani, 36 years old, was convicted in November of one conspiracy count in the 1998 bombings outside U.S. embassies in Tanzania and Kenya, but acquitted of 281 other counts. The attacks killed 224 people and injured thousands.

Mr. Ghailani's lawyers have argued in part that the verdict was inconsistent with his acquittal on the other counts. 

"Thus, if there was any injustice in the jury's verdict, the victims were the United States and those killed, injured and otherwise devastated by these barbaric acts of terror, not Ghailani," said U.S. District Judge Lewis A. Kaplan in Manhattan.

In an opinion issued Friday, the judge denied Mr. Ghailani's request for an acquittal or a new trial.

Mr. Ghailani was the first former detainee of the prison in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, to be tried in a U.S. civilian court and his case was seen as a key test for the Obama administration regarding civilian trials for major terrorism suspects.

At a news conference Thursday, U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder said that the administration's goal remains to close the prison at Guantanamo Bay because it has become a recruiting tool for al Qaeda and has driven a wedge between the U.S. and some of its allies. He said some detainees could be tried before military tribunals. 

Mr. Ghailani faces a sentence of 20 years to life on the conspiracy charge. Sentencing is set for Tuesday.

Mr. Ghailani's lawyers have sought leniency at sentencing, citing his mistreatment while in U.S. custody and that he provided the U.S. with information while being held by the Central Intelligence Agency and the U.S. Defense Department.

While in CIA custody, Mr. Ghailani was subject to so-called enhanced interrogation techniques, which his lawyers have said equated to torture. Mr. Ghailani has been in U.S. custody since July 2004 and held at Guantanamo since September 2006. He was held for a period of time at secret CIA "black sites."

Federal prosecutors in Manhattan have said he should receive a life sentence.

A lawyer for Mr. Ghailani didn't immediately return a phone call seeking comment Friday. 

 Write to  Chad Bray at chad.bray@wsj.com 