Developers of a towering new residential project are betting that young professionals will pay some of the city's highest rents for goodies like a dog spa that provides play dates with other pooches.



MiMA, as the block-long building on West 42nd Street is called for its mid-Manhattan location, is perhaps the most ambitious new development expected to open this year. With an $800 million price tag, the 63-story glass tower features a boutique hotel and restaurant, 151 condo units, and off-Broadway theater.

It also has 500 luxury rental apartments that the developer Related Cos. began showing to prospective renters on Wednesday. Tenants will have the use of 44,000 square feet of amenities, the largest such space at any New York City property, according to Related. 

"You can entertain friends at 10 different places in the building," says  Gregory Gushée, a Related senior vice president. 

The draws include an outdoor movie screening terrace, a game room with poker and billiards tables, barbeque facilities, and an Equinox fitness club open 24 hours and available only to people at MiMA. There's even DogCity, a spa that offers canine treadmills. 

Those privileges don't come cheap. Studio apartment rents start at $2,895 a month, while one-bedrooms begin at $3,495. Two-bedrooms are nearly $6,000 a month. And while the amenities are included as part of the common charges for condo owners, Related intends to hit renters with a yet-to-be-determined fee.

Like most projects launched in the boom period, the value of MiMA is well down from the market peak. A Goldman Sachs fund that owns 40% of the building's equity estimates its investment is worth about $46.9 million, down from $75 million in 2007, according to the fund's 2010 annual report reviewed by The Wall Street Journal. 

MiMA is part of a trend of luxury rental buildings that offer high-end furnishings—from Italian cabinets and cherry-wood floors to quartz countertops.

 Many of these the apartments are smaller than traditional rentals, "but space and layouts are used more efficiently," says Gary Malin, president of broker CitiHabitats, which shows apartments at high-end buildings like the Silver Towers, the Ashley and the Aldyn.

These buildings generally target 20- and 30-something bankers, lawyers and other professionals who are willing to pay top prices for access to luxurious common areas. 

While some of these luxury buildings still offer some financial incentives, like paying broker's fees, several are renting quickly. The Beatrice at 29th Street and Sixth Avenue is 95% leased, while the Ashley on the  West Side is about 90% rented, says CitiHabitats.

MiMA is located on the outskirts of the theater district, near  Lincoln Tunnel. The developers bought the land in 2004. After the property bubble burst, Related reconfigured the project to add 40 more rental units and—after polling residents in its other buildings about their preferences—added many of the new perks. 

In May, the 669-room Yotel New York hotel is expected to open and condo sales begin. Signature Center, a Frank Gehry-designed theater for the Signature Theatre company, is scheduled to open next year. 

 Write to  Craig Karmin at craig.karmin@wsj.com 