In the last Congress, Nancy Pelosi was hailed as one of the most powerful speakers of the House ever, and for good reason. It seemed that she could pass almost anything—from a public option for health care to a tax on greenhouse-gas emissions. Ms. Pelosi may not have realized it, but she owed much of her power to a man long since forgotten to history—the most influential speaker of the House most people have never heard of: Thomas B. Reed, Republican of Maine.

It is common to denounce the Senate as a place of obstruction—the place that killed the Treaty of Versailles, blocked civil-rights legislation and, recently, thwarted the left's most ambitious goals for President Barack Obama. But when Reed was first elected to Congress in 1876, the House made the Senate look like a model of efficiency. The speaker had a lofty title, big gavel and little power. 

In "Mr. Speaker!" James Grant chronicles the remarkable political career of Speaker Reed, a man who counted Teddy Roosevelt and Mark Twain among his friends and anybody called Democrat as his enemy. Reed makes for good copy. At 6-foot-2 and nearly 300 pounds, he was a strong-willed, imposing presence, but his greatest weapon was his wit. When one pompous colleague said that he'd rather be right than be president, Reed snapped back: "The gentleman needn't worry; he'll never be either." At the height of his power, Reed himself made a run for Republican presidential nomination, confiding to one colleague: "They could do worse, and they probably will." 

Mr. Grant calls Reed the "architect" of the modern American state, the Republican who made big government possible. That wasn't his goal—Czar Reed, as he came to be known—simply set out to fix an inept House paralyzed by its own rules. But the explosive growth in the size and power of the federal government would not have been possible without the changes that Reed single-handedly forced on Congress. "Reed did not knowingly set out to create Leviathan," Mr. Grant writes. "He wanted not a big government, but a functional one."

 By James Grant  (Simon & Schuster, 426 pages, $28)

There was nothing functional about the post-Civil War Congress. The 50th Congress, which elected Reed as minority leader in 1887, added 13 million words to the Congressional Record but accomplished little else. The rules almost mandated inaction, allowing the minority party to call for endless procedural votes and calls of the roll to prove a quorum was present. Without a quorum, the House could do nothing—not even pass a motion to adjourn. Like the Democrats in the Wisconsin state Senate who fled to Illinois to block Gov. Scott Walker's recent effort to change labor rules, the minority could block legislation simply by skipping votes. 

The speaker had the power to arrest delinquent members and drag them to the House floor, where each would be forced to give an excuse for his absence, but he did not have the power to force them to respond when the roll was called. If a member didn't answer, he would be marked absent even if the clerk could see him sitting in the chamber. "The chair knows of no way of making a horse drink, although you may lead him to water," lamented one pre-Reed speaker.

Reed thought that you should be able to make the horse drink. After Republicans captured control of the House in 1888, he ran for speaker vowing to get things done. He easily defeated Rep. William McKinley (who eight years later would beat out Reed for the GOP presidential nomination) and set out to upend decades of precedent, vesting in himself the power to disallow any actions he considered dilatory and ending the ridiculous practice of voting on bills in the order they were introduced, regardless of importance. Most boldly, he solved the problem of the quorum.

As Democrats sought to block yet another vote, Reed had the absentees arrested and dragged to House chamber. There was nothing new about that, but when it came time to call the roll, he counted every member in the chamber as present—even if they refused to respond when their names were called. Bedlam ensued; you would have thought Reed had made himself king. As he called and counted the names of the silent Democrats, one of them shouted out, "I deny your right, Mr. Speaker, to count me as present." Reed responded: "The chair is making a statement of fact that the gentleman from Kentucky is present. Does he deny it?" 

And on it went, as Reed bulldozed the old House rules amid howls of protest. "Shame!" shouted another member. "I denounce you as the worst tyrant that ever presided over a deliberative body." But Reed prevailed, and the results were clear. The 51st Congress passed far more bills than its predecessors and spent a staggering amount of money, earning it the epithet "the billion-dollar Congress." Reed didn't mind, declaring that the U.S. was, after all, a billion-dollar country. 

Democrats would soon take back control of the House and reverse Reed's rules, but not for long. They saw that a Republican minority could be just as annoying as a Democratic minority and soon adopted the very rules they had denounced as tyrannical. 

In 1878, when Reed was a mere freshman, he was asked to dedicate a statue of Gen. William King, Maine's first governor. "He has been dead scarce 25 years," Reed said of Gov. King, "yet all that can be found in biographies and histories is a few dates. . . . We all know too sadly well that oblivion begins to devour the mightiest when dead, and in all ages has been so greedy as to overtake some men while living." Mr. Grant has managed to rescue Reed himself from oblivion and to capture the raucous political atmosphere in which Reed did battle. Mr. Grant also shows how the procedural efficiency that Reed ushered in had unintended consequences—lasting long after the memory of Reed had faded.

 Mr. Karl is senior political correspondent for ABC News. 