The House ethics committee dropped an investigation into how six lawmakers spent federal travel funds while visiting foreign countries, citing a lack of evidence and confusing rules on the use of such money.

The ruling comes after the House's independent ethics board, the Office of Congressional Ethics, found enough evidence to refer the matter to the ethics committee following a Wall Street Journal article in March that said lawmakers had used daily cash stipends to cover expenses that appeared to be unauthorized by House rules.

The investigation focused on Reps. Robert Aderholt (R., Ala.), G.K. Butterfield (D., N.C.), Eliot Engel (D., N.Y.), Alcee Hastings (D., Fla.), Solomon Ortiz (D., Texas) and Joe Wilson (R., S.C.). 

A spokesman for Mr. Aderholt said Sunday, "The congressman was relieved the case was dismissed."

Mr. Wilson said he never doubted the matter would be dismissed, adding, "I have maintained throughout this process that I did not violate any rules, regulations, or laws."

Other lawmakers couldn't be reached for comment Sunday.

Legislators are given up to $250 a day when they travel overseas to cover expenses such as cabs and food.

The Wall Street Journal found that many such costs were picked up by foreign governments and U.S. embassies, often leaving leftover funds. Interviews with several current and former lawmakers found that leftover per-diem money was often used for shopping or to cover spouses' travel expenses. There is no system for lawmakers to return excess travel funds when they return to the U.S.

The ethics committee said in its report that there was no conclusive evidence that others were paying for these meals. "The Committee concludes that there is insufficient evidence to determine with any degree of certainty that any one of the Members were provided an amount of per diem that was not necessary for their respective trips," the report said.

The committee also said State Department and congressional rules didn't adequately spell out what spending was covered under official purposes. A May memo from outgoing House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D., Calif.), the report said, did not say that the money could be used "only for meals and incidental expenses for the traveler."

Mr. Wilson had said he used leftover funds to buy marble goblets for members of the military in Kabul. At the time, his spokeswoman said they cost less than $2 each. Mr. Wilson's counsel told the ethics committee that although he may have used his per-diem funds to cover the gifts, he made up for that by covering some meals with his own money.

 Write to  Danny Yadron at danny.yadron@wsj.com 