The owner of the Los Angeles Dodgers said Thursday the team is heading for a cash crisis. 

In his first lengthy interview since Major League Baseball seized control of the team last week, Dodgers owner  Frank McCourt said baseball's takeover, and its decision to block a lucrative deal for the franchise's media rights, will soon put the team in a state of distress. Mr. McCourt suggested the moves were part of a plan by MLB Commissioner  Bud Selig to force a sale to a preferred owner. "Baseball is trying to make it appear that the Dodgers are under financial duress, and it's not true," Mr. McCourt said. "What is true is baseball is trying to put the Dodgers into financial duress." 

The war of words—the latest broadsides in a rare public war between Major League Baseball and an owner of one of its most storied franchises—came a day after a contentious meeting at MLB headquarters in New York during which Mr. McCourt tried to sell his plan to stabilize the Dodgers.  The three-and-a-half-hour meeting broke off after Mr. Selig relayed the message by phone to his executives that he wouldn't approve Mr. McCourt's plan until the commissioner completed an investigation of the franchise. 

Mr. McCourt said he has been working since November with News Corp.'s Fox unit to raise money to solve the team's financial challenges and settle his ongoing divorce from his wife, Jamie. He said Mr. Selig has stymied the effort by withholding approval of four proposed deals, two of which were large loans. The latest, presented Wednesday, is a media-rights deal worth about $3 billion and includes a 35% stake for Mr. McCourt in the Southern California regional sports network Prime Ticket, according to people familiar with the details. News Corp. also owns The Wall Street Journal

  Rob Manfred, executive vice president of MLB, declined to discuss whether Mr. Selig wanted to replace Mr. McCourt. "No one has ever suggested to Mr. McCourt we want a different owner." He said Mr. McCourt has been telling baseball officials for six months he needed approval of a new media deal with Fox or he would run out of money within weeks. "There are so many things we've been told by Dodger representatives," Mr. Manfred said. "The commissioner wants to complete his financial investigation of the club before he deals with any transactions."

The deal with Fox that Mr. McCourt proposed would have given him $285 million immediately—all of which Mr. McCourt pledged to invest in the Dodgers. In addition to the 35% stake in Fox's Prime Ticket regional sports network, the deal includes a 150% increase in the annual media-rights fees that Fox pays the Dodgers to broadcast the games, to more than $80 million a year by 2014.

The deal, Mr. McCourt said, would allow the Dodgers to eliminate a significant portion of their roughly $450 million in debt and allow him to settle his divorce. Through seven years of ownership, Mr. McCourt and his soon-to be former wife paid themselves $50 million in salary from the team. Also, they used $50 million borrowed against the value of the land near the stadium to pay mortgages on their homes. 

Mr. McCourt has remained largely silent the past two years as he underwent embarrassing, high-profile divorce proceedings. The parties have been working toward a settlement that involves a payment of about $150 million to Jamie McCourt.

After taking control of the Dodgers last week, citing his broad powers to act "in the best interests of baseball," Mr. Selig appointed  Tom Schieffer, the former ambassador to Australia, to oversee the day-to-day operations of the team. Mr. Schieffer, a former minority owner of the Texas Rangers, arrived in Los Angeles Wednesday. He said he has final approval over all of the franchise's financial transactions.

The Dodgers turn about a $40 million profit annually, putting them in compliance with baseball's debt regulations. But Mr. Manfred said $500 million in debt was too muchdebt for a franchise valued at about $1 billion. Mr. McCourt said the debt will decrease as soon as he completes the media deal. 

 Write to  Matthew Futterman at matthew.futterman@wsj.com 