MUMBAI --Power Finance Corp.'s 46.6 billion rupees ($1 billion) public share sale was provisionally 4.28 times subscribed on the last day of its offering, fueled by robust bidding amongst institutional investors for the largest share sale so far in 2011.

The state-run company's sale of 229.55 million shares received bids for about 982.49 million shares as of 1130 GMT, provisional data on the National Stock Exchange showed.

Most bids were at the upper end of the indicative price band of 193 rupees to 203 rupees, demonstrating robust demand for the power sector lender despite rising interest rates that dent margins of such companies.

The firm's existing secondary stock finished the day at 215.85 rupees on the Bombay Stock Exchange.

The federal government seeks to raise 400 billion rupees this fiscal year by selling stakes in some of the companies it owns to help trim India's gaping fiscal deficit, and Power Finance's follow-on offering is the first of these this year that began on April 1.

The Indian power sector is a key investment target as the federal government ropes in private firms to help boost capacity in the sector to meet a projected shortfall.

The government reckons India's power sector may need investments worth as much as $300 billion to $400 billion between 2012 and 2017 to build generation capacity and transmission infrastructure as demand for electricity grows rapidly.

The government holds 89.78% of Power Finance and is selling a 5% stake, or 57.39 million shares, through this offering, while the company will sell new shares equal to 15% of its share capital--or 172.17 million shares.

The funds raised by the company will help boost its capital base as it wants to scale up lending to the rapidly growing Indian power sector even as rising interest rates force such companies to pay more on funds. Lenders to the power sector could even face dwindling loan demand as they attempt to pass rising costs to the power companies they lend to.

Still, analysts reckon that the issue offers an attractive valuation, and could lead to gains for investors over the medium term.

DSP Merrill Lynch Ltd., Goldman Sachs (India) Securities Pvt. Ltd., ICICI Securities Ltd. and JM Financial Consultants Pvt. Ltd. are managing the deal. 