NEWPORT, Ore.—Crab fishermen are enjoying unusually big catches of Dungeness crab, the "anchor species" of the local industry—and despite the abundant supply, prices are crawling higher.

The prices crabbers get at the dock topped $4 pound this season, up from a low of $1.60, amid an influx of new buyers competing for the harvest.

A perfect storm for fishermen hit Oregon this winter: High volumes and high prices for Dungeness crab, the local industry's "anchor species" and a keystone of the coastal economy. Photos 

Private buyers—many of whom sell live crab to Chinese restaurants or exporting to China, where rising incomes and a weak U.S. dollar have opened new markets for Oregon crab—have been driving straight to the docks to purchase the catch. 

Demand also is up in Europe after the Marine Stewardship Council last year made the Oregon Dungeness crab the first West Coast species to earn a "sustainable fisheries" certification from the council. That brought new orders from European buyers looking to stock store shelves and restaurant menus with so-called green offerings. 

"The market is really hot overseas," said Philip Sturdivant, a buyer for the Select Fishes unit of the Whole Foods chain. He said Oregon's reputation for green fishing spurred demand. 

For decades, Oregon crabbers have recorded total Dungeness harvests averaging just over 10 million pounds a year. But catches in recent years are up significantly from the 1980s and 1990s, when natural phenomena like El Ñino currents raised ocean temperatures, which aren't good for crabs.

"In four of the last 10 seasons, we've landed at least 20 million pounds," said Nick Furman, director of the Oregon Dungeness Crab Association. He expects 2011's catch to top 20 million pounds, short of 2005's record of nearly 34 million pounds, but still strong. 

The Dungeness crab industry employs about 1,000 people including crews and processing-plant workers, Mr. Furman said, and puts around $40 million into Oregon's economy.

Times are good for Corey Rock, captain of a vessel docked here, the Kylie Lynn. He said he had caught a quarter-million pounds of crab this season, bringing him a windfall of half a million dollars.

Like other independent crabbers, Mr. Rock generally pays employees a portion of his catch, usually between 8% and 13%. This season that means a minimum of $200 per crewman per day at sea. At peak times, when they are working 24/7, hands can make 20 times that.

Word of the Dungeness bounty spreads quickly. Skippers said experienced deckhands seeking work flocked to Newport from as far away as Alaska, Hawaii and the U.S. Gulf Coast. Migrants hunting spots on fishing vessels camped out at a nearby state park, or slept in their cars. 

The crabbing season runs from Dec. 1 to Aug. 1, but 80% of the catch is in by the end of February. Now, as the season winds down and boats begin to make the shift to shrimp, and then tuna and salmon later in the spring, a few diehards still tack names and contact numbers to the dock's bulletin board—and still get calls from crews looking for an extra hand.

"I got called about 12 times in two months," said Bob O'Brien, a transplanted New Yorker living in nearby Waldport, Ore. Nick Barone, another crabber seeking just-in-time work, said he pulled in $25,000 in 10 weeks, a boon for the 23-year-old local.

Skippers like Mr. Rock said that with a hefty haul and more buyers, local crabbers have more leverage in dealing with seafood processors, who are often the target of fishermen's scorn.

Last summer, two independent fishermen, Lloyd Whaley and his son, Todd, from Brookings, Ore., a lumber and fishing town near the California border, filed a lawsuit seeking class-action status against Pacific Seafood Group Inc., alleging antitrust violations. The suit's claims include price-fixing and a scheme to buy up coastal fish plants for the purpose of eliminating competition. Pacific Seafood, Clackamas, Ore., is the largest seafood processor on the West Coast, operating much of the processing capacity between Seattle and central California.

Requests for comment from Pacific Seafood weren't returned, but the company's attorney, Craig Urness, described the litigation as "without merit." Earlier this month in a preliminary ruling, a U.S. District Court said the plaintiffs failed to prove Pacific Seafood used its marketing clout to suppress prices. The court has yet to rule on motions to dismiss the case, or on whether to grant the plaintiffs class-action status.

"They definitely control things, and they hold down the price" said Sterling Morris, skipper of The Blazer. Mr. Rock of the Kylie Lynn agreed. "If you don't play by their rules, they have ways to keep you in line," he said. 

But even captains who chafe under the big processor concede that today's bigger hauls have drawn so many new players—and new markets—that their situation has improved.

 Write to  Joel Millman at joel.millman@wsj.com 