People who cover sports miss important moments all of the time. It happens. Big stuff, little stuff. Sometimes you look down to jot something on a notepad— or today, your Steve Jobs space pad—just as an extraordinary play occurs, and it vanishes forever. There was probably a guy who missed Jackie Robinson stealing home in the 1955 World Series because he glanced down to light a Chesterfield.

A confession: we missed a great sports moment during the BCS championship between Auburn and Oregon in Glendale, Ariz. And though we have an excuse, it fills us with regret.

Let's backtrack a moment. With five minutes to go in Monday's game, we were among the media horde released onto the field level for the end of the contest. The timing was perfect. The Ducks scored a thrilling touchdown, and followed it with a gutty two-point conversion to tie it 19-19. A few feet away, Oregon's Duck mascot, Puddles, dropped to the moist turf and did feathery push-ups.

Of course, the game wasn't over. Led by the Heisman sensation Cam Newton, Auburn rallied back, aided by a bizarre slow-mo sequence in which running back Michael Dyer appeared to believe he'd been tackled, paused, and then plunged deep into Duck territory. Auburn ran the clock down to two seconds left, and kicker Wes Byrum came on the field for a 19-yard attempt to win the BCS championship.

And then sports history happened. Somewhere upstairs, in the peculiar universe that is television, the veteran ESPN broadcaster Brent Musburger surveyed all that laid before him in the University of Phoenix Stadium and uttered six amazing words:

"This is for alllllll the Tostitos."

We missed it. We weren't near a TV, and besides, we couldn't hear a thing, especially after Mr. Byrum drilled the game-winner and the Auburn bench streaked across the field like a junior high let out for summer.

But we certainly heard about TIFATT later. Mr. Musburger's closing-seconds phrase immediately lit up the Internet. ESPN and Frito-Lay said they had nothing to do with the play-by-play man's product mention, though a Frito-Lay rep told USA Today the company was "delighted."

There was a predictable fury about Mr. Musburger's word choice, accusations that he sullied the drama of a game by naming a sponsor that was in every advertisement, every official product, the logo at midfield...and the jersey of every player on the field.

It may become Mr. Musburger's most famous Musburger-ism, and we were sad not to hear it live. Anyone who follows Mr. Musburger— one of the last true sports TV eccentrics, not someone who throws on a little quirky irony with his or her CK One—shouldn't be the least bit surprised. He's loopy (see his recent steroid rant?). And a pleaser. 

And though plenty of college fans dislike his style, he fundamentally gets it.

"This game has no lasting significant whatsoever, as far as I can tell," Mr. Musburger told GQ in 2006. "I don't see any great lessons. I live my own life—and nothing, none of that, came from sports. It's a great spectacle. I like to say, 'Pack up the tent and get out of here!' It's a circus."

It is a circus, and no more so than in college football, which has never met a corporation it didn't want to align with. TIFATT is just the crazy bus driven to its next logical stop. On Monday night, Wild Man Brent Musburger just served America what it came for. Pass the Tostitos.

 Write to  Jason Gay at jason.gay@wsj.com 