MANAMA, Bahrain—Gulf officials are planning an economic aid package for Bahrain and Oman, a Bahraini official said Thursday, in an effort to support the two countries in the oil-rich region that have seen the largest anti-government protests.

Member states of the Gulf Cooperation Council, or GCC, are holding discussions on the exact structure of the aid package, according to  Sheik Mohammed bin Essa Al Khalifa, the head of Bahrain's Economic Development Board.

"There are discussions...nothing has been agreed," Sheik Mohammed said in an interview. He said there's no indication of the size of the possible aid package. Sheik Mohammed is also a longstanding adviser to Bahrain's Crown Prince  Salman Bin Hamad Al-Khalifa. 

   

Track events day by day.

  Jawad Fairooz, a Bahraini opposition lawmaker, said the preliminary amount agreed on for Bahrain stood at 4 billion Bahraini dinars ($10.61 billion). 

The GCC groups together oil-rich Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates, as well as Bahrain and Oman, which are smaller oil exporters and less able to increase spending to calm anti-government protests.

GCC finance ministers meeting in Riyadh on Saturday are likely to discuss the aid package on the sidelines of their meeting, according to one person familiar with the situation.

Bahrain's crown prince visited the neighboring United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia on Wednesday, meeting with Abu Dhabi's crown prince and Saudi's interior minister. He left Riyadh early Thursday afternoon, according to the Saudi state news agency.

Bahrain's main opposition groups on Thursday officially submitted their demands to the ruling Al-Khalifa family, as street protests move into their third week, in what the groups said represented a formal response to the crown prince's call for national dialogue. 

The demands include the dissolution of the government and introduction of a constitutional monarchy. Opening direct talks, as called for by the government, would depend on the government's acceptance of their framework, the groups said at a press conference. 

"We've received the list of what one side wants, but there is another side, and we're hopefully going to receive within today or tomorrow what they want," Sheik Mohammed said. "We have to sit both sides down," he said.

Oman has been shaken by protests in recent days, with hundreds gathering in the northern industrial town of Sohar to protest about unemployment and to demand the resignation of government ministers.

 Write to  Nour Malas at nour.malas@dowjones.com and Joe Parkinson at joe.parkinson@dowjones.com 