TOKYO—U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates, in a speech to university students here, pushed for the Japanese to look beyond a recent controversy over a U.S. military base in Okinawa, arguing that a strong alliance between Tokyo and Washington is vital to Asian security.

Mr. Gates, speaking at Keio University on Friday, said a strong military alliance between the U.S. and Japan is important to deter North Korea and prevent China from behaving "more assertively" toward neighbors, according to a prepared version of his remarks.

U.S. officials worry that young people in Japan think of the American military more as a source of controversy over issues surrounding bases and don't necessarily have a larger appreciation of the alliance between Washington and Tokyo. U.S. and Japanese officials have voiced concerns about waning interest among young Japanese people to study and work in the U.S. and its negative ramifications for the bilateral relationship over the long term. 

Answering a question from a student about the possible weakening of China's civilian control over its military, Mr. Gates said over the past several years, there have been some signs of "disconnect" between the military and civilian leadership in the nation, citing examples of military incidents that apparently took place without the knowledge of the civilian leaders. Among them were a provocative approach of Chinese ships to a U.S. naval vessel, and the latest testing of the Chinese-made J-20 stealth fighter that took place during Mr. Gates' visit to China this week. 

These incidents could in part be explained by "bureaucratic mistakes" that sometimes occur in the U.S. as well, Mr. Gates said. "But on the whole, I do think this is something that is a worry."

Such disconnect is the reason why the U.S. is pushing China to launch a bilateral forum where military and civilian leaders from the two nations will discuss security issues, he said. 

At the same time, Mr. Gates tried to soften the criticism by stressing his confidence in the Chinese civilian leaders. "Although on some specific operations issues, we think there have been communication gaps, in a larger sense of who controls the Chinese military, there is no doubt in my mind it is President Hu Jintao and the civilian leadership of that government." 

The issue of the U.S. presence in Japan remains deeply controversial. Mr. Gates made a gentle pitch for a plan hammered out in 2006 that would move the U.S. base from Okinawa to less-populated areas, arguing it would result in Okinawans seeing "far fewer U.S. troops and aircraft." Some want the U.S. out altogether. Thursday, Mr. Gates had made clear the U.S. would follow Tokyo's lead, and not demand quick implementation of the plan.

While in Japan, Mr. Gates has appeared interested in pushing Japan's military to take a larger role in deterring Pyongyang, calling on the U.S. and Japan to update their contingency plans and pushing Seoul and Tokyo to work more closely together.

Although mindful of Japan's pacifist constitution, Mr. Gates in his public remarks has emphasized how Japan's self-defense forces have been broadly engaged in deterring aggression and keeping the peace. Citing Japan's peacekeeping work in the Golan Heights and East Timor, its navy's antipiracy work and its reconstruction work in Afghanistan and Japan, Mr. Gates said Japan has become an "exporter of security."

"By showing more willingness to send self-defense forces abroad under international auspices—consistent with your constitution—Japan is taking its rightful place alongside the world's other great democracies," Mr Gates said in the speech. 

But he urged Japan "to take on an even greater regional and global leadership role." The U.S., he said, will maintain its military strength in the region, but will need Japan to be "a committed and capable security partner." 

Maintaining the credibility of the U.S.-Japan alliance, particularly in the face of North Korea's weapons development, requires modernizing defense arrangements, Mr. Gates said.

He held up cooperation on missile defense between Tokyo and Washington as a model. The two countries are nearly done building a new advance interceptor that will improve the ability to thwart a North Korea missile attack and have built a missile-defense command that has proven of enormous value, he said. "This partnership—which relies on mutual support, cutting-edge technology, and information sharing—in many ways reflect our alliance at its best." 

 Write to  Yuka Hayashi at yuka.hayashi@wsj.com 