The U.S. Interior Department said Tuesday it would open up to mining land in Wyoming estimated to contain 758 million tons of low sulfur coal, in a move praised by the coal industry and condemned by environmental groups.

The Obama administration is under pressure from Republicans and coal state Democrats because of what they say are policies hostile to the use of coal in power generation, including recently proposed Environmental Protection Agency curbs on mercury emissions from power plants, and an EPA move to block a large coal-mining project in Appalachia.

But the Interior Department said it plans to expand mining in the Powder River basin area of Wyoming with more than a dozen lease sales over the next three years. The first four lease sales will be held in Cheyenne, Wyo., between May and August among companies already operating from existing Powder River Basin coal mines. They would open up large new areas for coal production in the state, which is already the dominant producer of coal in the U.S.

Interior's decision earned the administration rare praise from the coal industry and came in the face of legal challenges from conservation groups who say there are flaws in the department's analysis of the environmental impact of the leases.

"We are pleased [Interior Secretary Ken] Salazar has acted decisively in announcing the dates for these leases—demonstrating the agency's confidence in their analysis," National Mining Association President Hal Quinn said in a statement. 

Wyoming Gov. Matt Mead also applauded the decision. "The electricity our country needs to thrive has to come from somewhere and right now coal powers many of our cities and industries. This coal also keeps Wyoming men and women working," the Republican said in a statement. 

Antelope Coal LLC,  Peabody Energy Corp.
BTU


-6.79
%




 affiliate Caballo Coal Co., and Alpha Coal West, a subsidiary of  Alpha Natural Resources Inc.
ANR


-3.88
%




 have filed applications to open the lands for lease, the government said.

Environmental groups Tuesday said the Interior Department's review of the leases failed to fully account for their impact on carbon-dioxide emissions and on local air, land, and water resources. WildEarth Guardians, a conservation group, said it would appeal the decision with the Bureau of Land Management and follow with a lawsuit in federal court if necessary. 

"The amount of coal that [Mr. Salazar] proposed to yank our of the ground far overshadows any renewable energy that we are talking about developing," said Jeremy Nichols, the group's climate and energy program director. The Interior Department "could conceivably play a huge role in helping to advance cleaner energy. But they want to punt, they want to make it everybody else's job." 

The four tracts to be leased cover more than 7,400 acres and could fetch between $13.4 billion and $21.3 billion, with 52% of the proceeds going to the U.S. Treasury and the remainder going to Wyoming, according to a statement by the Interior Department. 

 Corrections and Amplifications: The National Mining Association's president is Hal Quinn. An earlier version of this story mistakenly said his name is Steve Quinn.

 Write to  Ryan Tracy at ryan.tracy@dowjones.com and Matt Whittaker at matt.whittaker@dowjones.com 