BEIRUT—A politician viewed as a potential kingmaker in choosing a new Lebanese prime minister sided with the Hezbollah-led opposition Friday but failed to clear a political impasse that began with the collapse of the country's Western-backed government last week.

Walid Jumblatt's independent bloc holds enough seats in parliament to sway the vote, but his statement, which didn't guarantee the full support of his bloc, fell short of delivering a victory to the opposition. 

Hezbollah, the Shiite militant political party backed by Syria and Iran, led the withdrawal of ministers that toppled Prime Minister Saad Hariri as the Sunni leader met with President Barack Obama on Jan. 12.

Mr. Jumblatt consulted with Syrian President Bashar Assad last weekend, but held out on his endorsement until Friday.

"I announce the suitable political stand to confront this phase, assuring my party's steadfastness alongside Syria and the Resistance," Mr. Jumblatt, referring to Hezbollah, said in a news conference from his residence in Beirut.

Mr. Jumblatt also lashed out against the United Nations-backed tribunal investigating the 2005 assassination of Mr. Hariri's father, former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri. Mr. Jumblatt called the court "politicized and a threat to national unity and security."

Hezbollah ministers drove the collapse of the government because of Saad Hariri's refusal to discredit the tribunal, which officials briefed on the investigation say will implicate Hezbollah members. Hezbollah has denied any involvement in the assassination.

The court's prosecutor issued a sealed indictment this week to a pretrial judge to decide if the case is strong enough to go to trial.

Mr. Jumblatt's political views—like those of many Lebanese politicians—have fluctuated over the past few years, from vehemently anti-Syrian and pro-U.S. to pledging full alliance with Syria and denouncing Western interests.

Analysts said his parliamentary bloc is divided, and that while he can command a strong following to back Hezbollah, it is likely that some members will back Mr. Hariri or abstain from voting.

In Lebanon's power-sharing arrangement, the prime minister must be appointed from the Sunni sect.

Mr. Hariri is heading a caretaker government until parliament elects a new prime minister, a process that could take months. In a live televised speech on Thursday, Mr. Hariri said he wouldn't withdraw his candidacy despite calls by Hezbollah and opposition leaders for him to step down.

In the 128-member parliament, 65 votes are required to form a government. Before the crisis, Mr. Hariri had support from 60 seats in parliament, while the opposition had 57 seats, putting the 11 members of Mr. Jumblatt's independent bloc in a position to decide who will form the new government.

 Write to  Farnaz Fassihi at farnaz.fassihi@wsj.com 