 Manufacturing accelerated in South Korea and Taiwan in December, highlighting continued strength in the region but also reinforcing inflation fears, even as expansion in China and India slowed.  

 The U.S. and euro-zone manufacturing sectors closed 2010 on a robust note, although U.S. price pressures continued to quicken.  

 Global stock markets made an impressive start to 2011: U.S. stocks rallied to fresh two-year highs, and South Korea's benchmark hit a record.  

 Facebook received investment of $500 million from Goldman and Russia's Digital Sky Technologies, giving the social-networking site a valuation of $50 billion, say people familiar with the matter.  

 Posco won environmental clearance to build a $12 billion steel plant in India's Orissa state, a significant step toward approval for the nation's biggest-ever foreign-investment proposal.  

 Hutchison Whampoa plans to spend $733.4 million to raise its controlling stakes in ports in Hong Kong and Shenzhen, showing optimism over an industry recovery in the container-shipping market.  

 A Hero Group senior executive has been arrested in a widening probe into alleged fraud at an Indian Citibank branch. Police alleged that Sanjay Gupta received part of more than $67 million believed to have been misappopriated.  

 Bank of America expects to take a provision of about $3 billion to cover potential losses as it buys back from Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac bad loans issued by its Countrywide Financial unit.  

 Vizio announced details on its new cellphone and new tablet computer, expanding the small California company's lineup from low-cost, flat-panel TVs.  

 Intel's latest chip line, which arrives this week, offers security technology allowing personal-computer users to view movies and TV shows in a top-quality video format for the first time.  

 U.S. union UAW said it is prepared to spend hundreds of millions of dollars in a bid to organize hourly factory workers at foreign-owned car plants in the U.S.  

 Indian units of Ford, GM and Toyota posted strong sales growth for last year amid model launches and robust consumer demand.  

 Rexchip will suspend shipments of memory chips to Powerchip, a Taiwan memory-chip maker that has been slow to pay some of its recent bills.  

 Hyundai is targeting 10% growth in global sales this year at its Hyundai Motor and Kia units as the South Korean company focuses on quality and safety. 16 

 Seoul will act sternly to prevent distortions in markets and ensure the stability of the financial system, said Kim Seok-dong, the new chairman of the South Korea's financial regulator.  

 Reliance Capital acquired a 26% stake in Indian Commodity Exchange from Indiabulls Financial, strengthening its presence in the country's growing commodity-trading sector.  

 Singapore ended a year of record economic growth with a 6.9% annualized expansion in the fourth quarter, which slightly trailed analysts' estimates but marked a rebound from a slump in the prior three months.  

 Pakistan's government appeared likely to survive the defection of a coalition partner, but faces new hurdles in passing economic overhauls.  

 Afghanistan's Supreme Court said it will investigate alleged fraud in the September parliamentary elections, a move that likely will affect the poll's results and could complicate the appointment of a new parliament.  

 Australia's military began rushing supplies to a town slowly being swamped by floodwaters as authorities warned floods in Queensland are set to worsen in some areas.  

 With the new U.S. Congress convening this week, the House will experience a generational shift as well as a partisan change.  

Chinese scientists mastered the technology for reprocessing nuclear fuel, potentially yielding additional power sources to keep the country's economy booming, state television reported.

As many as 80 African migrants, mostly Ethiopians, were feared drowned after two boats capsized off the coast of south Yemen.