AvalonBay Communities Inc. will break ground Wednesday on a New Jersey apartment project that aims to jump-start the transformation of a shuttered airplane-engine factory into an urban hub.

The complex is part of a 70-acre development in Wood-Ridge by Somerset Development slated to include hundreds of apartments, single-family homes, retail shops and recreational space. Still, the biggest selling point of the project, called Wesmont Station, is that it will include an NJ Transit train station offering roughly a 30-minute commute to Manhattan's Penn Station. The new station, located along the Bergen line, should be started this year and finished in 2012.

The project is getting restarted after being delayed by the financial crisis.

Wesmont is one of a number of mixed-used projects around the country that are trying to use train stations to lure residential and commercial tenants. Mockingbird Station in Dallas includes apartments, a multiplex movie theater and retailers along a light-rail line leading into downtown Dallas. The sprawling Secaucus Junction train station in New Jersey, which is less than 10 minutes from Penn Station, has seen nearby development for similar reasons.

Some local governments are encouraging such transit-oriented development as crowded suburbs look for ways to grow and renew themselves.

Wesmont "really takes advantage of its location and its proximity to public transportation to create a very walkable community," said  Peter Kasabach, executive director of New Jersey Future, a land-use policy organization. "There are many opportunities for this type of development in New Jersey."

Wesmont Station is located on a 150-acre factory site near Teterboro Airport where Curtiss-Wright Corp. built airplane engines for many years, including during World War II. Somerset, based in Lakewood, N.J., acquired the land in 2001 for $51 million and received approvals about three years later, said  Ralph Zucker, Somerset's president.

It took some work preparing the factory site for development. Somerset said it spent between $10 million and $12 million on work that included removing trace amounts of petroleum asbestos from the soil. It spent another $6 million on infrastructure, including sewer and water lines.

Then came the housing crash and the financial crisis. Somerset slowed site work in 2008 and immediately began revamping the project. Condos were scrapped and the supersized homes were scaled back, Mr. Zucker said.

"We were working furiously behind the scenes to reposition, redesign, re-purpose," he said.

The actual factory buildings remain nearby and aren't part of the current project. The factory site houses several light manufacturing and warehouse operations. Wesmont Station is being built on the factory's former parking lot.

Somerset says it has financing for the first phase that includes site work for AvalonBay's seven acres. The entire project is expected to cost $400 million and could take up to seven years.

 AvalonBay is constructing two buildings and plans to build two more next year. The first 266 units will cost $64.2 million, said  Ron Ladell, the company's vice president of development in charge of New Jersey. Rents will range from about $1,500 to $2,600 a month. 

AvalonBay was drawn to the project because of the train station and believes renters will be attracted to the site for the same reason, Mr. Ladell said. "We're pretty confident in the marketplace," he said. 

 Write to  Dawn Wotapka at dawn.wotapka@dowjones.com 