The largest U.S. pilots union has stepped up the campaign against people on the ground intentionally pointing lasers at airliners, by calling on lawmakers, regulators and industry officials to prevent such hazards.

The Air Line Pilots Association's proposal—unveiled one week after the government announced heightened dangers from lasers—includes calls for a sweeping public awareness effort and expansion of "laser-free zones" around airports.

The union, which represents nearly 53,000 commercial pilots in North America, also wants new air-traffic-control safeguards and pilot procedures when laser threats emerge.

Lasers can temporarily blind or incapacitate pilots, and even cause permanent eye damage in some cases. Tuesday's move is the first major public-safety drive under Lee Moak, the union's recently elected president

"A threat this serious requires decisive action from every legislative and regulatory angle, but we also need the public to get engaged," according to the union chief and  Delta Air Lines
DAL


-1.23
%




 pilot.

For the first time, union-backed legislation aimed at increasing the penalties for targeting aircraft with lasers appears to be gaining momentum on Capitol Hill.

There haven't been any reports of lasers causing aircraft accidents, but some of them are powerful enough to temporarily light up cockpits and make it difficult to see instruments. 

The issue is attracting more attention from government and industry, particularly because many of the events occur during landings or takeoffs, when pilots can least afford distractions or visual problems.

In its annual report on the issue last week, the Federal Aviation Administration said that potentially blinding laser incidents involving all types of planes across the U.S. almost doubled to 2,800 in 2010, versus the previous year. Such incidents have increased steadily from the 300 reported in 2005, when the FAA began formally collecting such data.

Some cities and states have enacted laws prohibiting laser use against aircraft, even as less expensive and more powerful hand-held lasers are becoming available on the Internet.

In 2010, Los Angeles International Airport and nearby airspace had the largest number of laser incidents, with 102 reported events. Chicago's O'Hare International Airport ranked second, while three additional airports in Western states accounted for the rest of the five fields most affected by lasers.

The union also called on the National Transportation Safety Board to highlight the dangers posed to both commercial and private pilots.

 Write to  Andy Pasztor at andy.pasztor@wsj.com 