NEW YORK—Oil futures ended below $100 a barrel for the first time since March amid a broad commodity selloff, weighed by worries about falling U.S. demand. 

Light, sweet crude for June settled down $9.44, or 8.6%, to $99.80 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange. That is the lowest settlement since March 16 and the biggest single-day percentage decline for the contract since April 20, 2009. 

Brent crude on the ICE futures exchange shed $10.39, or 8.6%, to $110.80 a barrel, also the lowest settlement since March 16. 

Oil prices tumbled amid a selloff in the commodities market. A disappointing reading on U.S. employment levels sparked the slide, amid worries about weaker fuel demand. The decline accelerated as the dollar soared after European Central Bank President  Jean-Claude Trichet didn't meet market expectations of signaling an ECB rate increase in June. 

Analysts said traders have received signals all week that oil demand in the U.S., the world's largest crude consumer, wasn't catching up with elevated supply levels, and they rushed to sell contracts as Thursday's decline built momentum. 

"We woke up today and realized that there was some downside risk, risk that we've been ignoring," said  Tim Evans, an energy analyst for Citi Futures Perspective in New York. "I think this was a train wreck waiting to happen." 

Gasoline and heating oil futures also dropped. Front-month June reformulated gasoline blendstock, or RBOB, fell 22.71 cents, or 6.8%, to settle at $3.0954 a gallon. June heating oil settled down 25.61 cents, or 8.2%, to $2.8869 a gallon. 

Crude's decline began early in the day after the Labor Department showed an unexpected increase in claims for jobless benefits for last week. Oil market participants have been closely watching U.S. employment levels and other economic indicators, and weak readings often mean less business activity and fewer motorists hitting the road. 

The Labor Department said initial unemployment claims surged 43,000 to a seasonally adjusted 474,000 during the week ended April 30. Economists surveyed by Dow Jones Newswires had expected the figure to fall. The prior-week figure was also revised upward. 

Crude's decline gathered momentum as the U.S. dollar surged following the Mr. Trichet's statement. 

"The perception was that the ECB was going to raise rates and [the U.S.] is going to keep rates at zero," said  Phil Flynn, an oil analyst at brokerage PFG Best in Chicago. "With this change of perception, that's going to take a lot of the heat off commodity prices." 

A stronger dollar tends to weigh on crude prices as the dollar-denominated commodity become more expensive to holders in other currencies. The ICE Dollar Index, which tracks the greenback against a basket of foreign currencies, rose 1.4% to 74.161 recently. 

 Write to Dan Strumpf at dan.strumpf@dowjones.com 