SYDNEY—Macquarie Group Ltd. Chairman  David Clarke resigned because of ill health and was succeeded by independent director  Kevin McCann. 

Mr. Clarke joined Hill Samuel Australia, the firm that would become Macquarie, 40 years ago. He was executive chairman from 1985, when Macquarie was created, to March 2007, when he became nonexecutive chairman. He took a leave from November 2008 to August 2009 for cancer treatments. Mr. McCann was acting chairman in his absence. 

—Cynthia Koons

Commodity Futures Trading Commission Chairman  Gary Gensler asked Congress to raise the agency's 2012 budget to $308 million, citing its new role as regulator of the over-the-counter derivatives market. 

The CFTC is operating at last year's levels of $168 million because Congress hasn't passed a 2011 budget. House Republicans have broached cutting federal agency budgets to 2008 levels, a move that would pare the CFTC's budget to $112 million. That would force layoffs of 60% to 70% of the staff, Mr. Gensler told the panel. The proposed 2012 budget would allow the agency to boost its staff 45% to 983, Mr. Gensler said. 

—Jessica Holzer

LONDON—Lloyds Banking Group PLC, 41% owned by the U.K. government, will cut 570 jobs as part of its integration with HBOS, the lender it bought at the height of the financial crisis. 

The job cuts will be from the bank's wholesale, retail, insurance, group operations and human-resource divisions. Lloyds had 104,000 staff globally at year end. 

The bank also said it will outsource some cheque and credit processing services to its existing third-party provider iPSL. The outsourcing involves 450 staff being transferred to iPSL this year. 

—Vladimir Guevarra

AMSTERDAM—ING Groep NV said Chief Executive  Jan Hommen earned a total of €2.6 million ($3.61 million) for 2010, more than twice what he received a year earlier, after steering the bailed-out Dutch bancassurer back to profit. 

ING said in its annual report that Mr. Hommen was paid a fixed salary of €1.35 million and a total bonus of €1.25 million in cash and deferred shares, or 92% of his base salary. Mr. Hommen received a €923,000 salary in 2009 and waived his bonus. 

ING last year reported a net profit of €3.22 billion, the first profitable year since the financial crisis. 

—Maarten van Tartwijk

LONDON—The U.K.'s financial regulator broke ranks with colleagues in Europe, urged banks to include the risk of sovereign-debt restructuring in the bloc of euro-using nations in their regular stress tests. 

The FSA was refering to the routine supervisory exercise it carries out on a rolling basis with U.K. banks. It has no relation to this year's round of European Union stress tests that were recently launched by the European Banking Authority, which probably will exclude a sovereign-debt restructuring. 

Mr. Turner noted that the U.K. banking sector's exposure to the financially-stressed members of the euro zone is "moderate" and manageable, especially its direct exposure to sovereign and bank debt. However, a lot of it is tied to both residential and commercial property markets, which remain depressed in both Spain and Ireland, where U.K. banks' exposure is highest. 

—Geoffrey T. Smith