NEW YORK—Yet more downbeat economic data led investors to further question the pace of economic growth, sending them into the comparative safety of U.S. government bonds as they fled an array of riskier assets including stocks. 

A recent drumbeat of dreary economic indicators—which is expected to continue with Friday's key April jobs report—has driven Treasury yields toward new lows for the year. 

Anxiety about the outlook sparked an exodus from stock markets and high-flying commodities on Thursday, adding to the interest in safe-haven debt. 

"The U.S. economy is still facing a lot of headwinds," said  Robert Tipp, chief investment strategist at Prudential Fixed Income. "The odds are pretty strong that the economy's going to have a pretty hard time maintaining an above-trend growth" that investors were expecting when they sent 10-year yields above 3.5% in early April. 

A surprising surge in new claims for jobless benefits reported Thursday reflected a still-weak U.S. labor market. 

That report, along with the weakest showing for the Institute for Supply Management's nonmanufacturing report since August, had market participants betting on a disappointing U.S. nonfarm payrolls report on Friday. 

Even abroad, hints of countries hitting a soft economic patch are emerging, including an unexpected decline in factory orders in Germany, generally considered one of Europe's stronger economies. The European Central Bank kept its policy rate unchanged Thursday, while ECB President Jean Claude-Trichet's postmeeting comments suggested that the next rate increase won't come until July. 

Souring sentiment about the global recovery comes in stark contrast to the heated inflation fears that had consumed investors' attention just a month earlier. Longer-dated bonds, which are especially vulnerable to inflationary outlooks, have benefited the most recently. 

The 30-year bond hit a new 2011 low early on Thursday, and by late-afternoon trading, it was up 27/32 in price to yield 4.281%—the lowest since early December. Bond prices and yields move inversely. 

The yield on benchmark 10-year notes also broke below the key 3.20% level, with traders watching for a further slide to 3.0%. Late Thursday, the note was up 14/32 to yield 3.172%, closer to this year's 3.138% low. 

Prudential Fixed Income's Mr. Tipp said that more disappointing economic data and a likely accord among lawmakers to trim the U.S. budget deficit could send benchmark yields below 3%. 

  Jacob Oubina, U.S. rates strategist at RBC, said light volumes in recent weeks have only exaggerated declining yields. 

"A rate below 3.20% on 10-years just doesn't make sense," Mr. Oubina said. "The low liquidity is exacerbating this move, creating lowers yields than what fundamentals would suggest." Based on fundamentals, Mr. Oubina said benchmark yields should be around 3.40% to 3.50%. 

Indeed, with Treasurys posting a sixth consecutive day of gains, some traders are anticipating a selloff. 

"We're concerned that the straight-line shot from 3.60% to 3.20% in 10-years is overdone," said analysts at RBS, "and that an overbought correction lurks somewhere in the very near future." 