BUDAPEST—Hungary rejected mounting calls from foreign politicians and media to limit its role during its six months at the helm of the European Union's rotating presidency. 

"The government of the Republic of Hungary is steadfastly committed to carrying out the program of the EU rotating presidency and, at the same time, firmly rejects any suggestions that raise doubts about the Hungarian EU presidency's ability to act and suggestions of limiting the responsibilities of the presidency," the foreign ministry said in a statement Wednesday. 





The ministry was reacting to remarks made Tuesday by Werner Hoyer, Germany's deputy foreign minister. Germany is opposed to Hungary negotiating as the EU Council President on media issues with eastern partner countries such as Belarus and Ukraine, Mr. Hoyer told German news agency DPA. 

"Hungary is not necessarily the most credible party when it comes to questions of press freedom," said Mr. Hoyer. 

The new media law aims to control all media directed at or originating from Hungary, including the Internet, in an effort to ensure "balanced" reporting and the protection of "human dignity" and "public morality," while failing to define those standards. It also requires reporters to disclose their sources to the media authority. 

Major Western European media outlets as well as the European Commission have expressed concerns about Hungary's new media law, which came into effect Jan. 1, the same day Hungary took over the EU's presidency. 

European Commission chief Jose Manuel Barroso will meet Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orban later this week to kick off Hungary's presidency. Barroso requested earlier Wednesday more clarity from Hungary on the new media law, which the Hungarian government claims was misrepresented to Brussels. 

"What I'd like to have from the Hungarian authorities is a clarification and if possible a lifting of the doubts," said Mr. Barroso. 

Hungary published the official English translation of the law Tuesday. Deputy Prime Minister Tibor Navracsics has forwarded the text of the law to European Union Commissioner Neelie Kroes, asking in an accompanying letter for the position of the commission on the media law and expressing his clear intention to cooperate further. 

Hungary, however, has made it clear that it regards the law as a "good piece of legislation," as Mr. Navracsics, who also is justice minister, told Hungarian national daily Magyar Hirlap Tuesday. Thus the possibility of any major change to the law look slim. 





"It didn't come up in any way at the government's meeting early this week that the media law should be changed; the members of the cabinet confirmed that the legislation is a true European law to its last letter," government spokesman Peter Szijjarto told reporters Wednesday, state news agency MTI said. 

Turmoil surrounding Hungary's media law and the country's sector-specific extraordinary taxes, which the European Union will also investigate, has severely hampered investor sentiment toward Hungary already, Erste Bank said. 

Hungary's credit default swap spreads--which indicate how investors view the possibility of a given country's default on its debt--rose sharply Wednesday. The spreads hit 400 basis points for the first time since June 2010, according to data provider Markit. Hungary's CDS spreads jumped in June last year as a leading politician of the ruling party compared Hungary's budget situation to that of Greece. 

—Riva Froymovich in Brussels contributed to this article.

 Write to  Riva Froymovich at riva.froymovich@dowjones.com 