Arab emigre communities in the U.S. waved flags, brandished signs and chanted for the ouster of Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak.

Closely monitoring the events unfolding in Egypt on Friday, they organized rallies in reaction to a government crackdown in the country against protesters calling for democratic change. In one, more than 100 people rallied outside the White House Friday afternoon.

"We are here to give a message to President Obama that your real allies are the Egyptian citizens," said Amr Abdelghany, 27 years old, a North Carolina college student who moved to the U.S. from Egypt less than two years ago.

Many used social media to call for peaceful rallies from Bellevue, Wash., to Houston to Jersey City, N.J. About 75 demonstrators crowded onto a snowy sidewalk in New York City's borough of Queens, some wearing Egyptian flags on their backs, hoisted signs and chanted messages in both Arabic and in English. One sign read: "30 Years of Pain." A chant rang out in Arabic: "Liberty, Democracy! We want a change in the regime!"

Many who gathered said they were hopeful the Cairo protests would be enough to force the president's hand. Holding an Egyptian flag, Tamer Abdelhady, a 32-year-old who works for a food supplier, said a change in regime would allow scores of people like him—youths who moved to America to help support impoverished family back in Egypt—to return home. 

"If [Mr. Mubarak] left, I'd go back right now," said Mr. Abdelhady, who came to the U.S. in 1999 and said he sends money back home every month. "There'd be immediate change."

Some said they had been in contact with their families on Friday for updates on the situation back in Cairo, even as Internet and cellphone communication there had been stifled by the government. "I've gotten calls from a ton of family all day—they're calling from the landlines," said Sahar Naim, a 47-year-old from Queens. 

After Friday prayers at the American Moslem Society mosque in Dearborn, Mich., Yemeni-Americans voiced their support for the demonstrations sweeping the Middle East. 

"We want the governments in the Middle East to listen to the people," said Khalid Alwagdi, 39, a maintenance worker, after Friday prayers at the Dearborn mosque. "They need freedom, jobs and democracy. They need to see better things in their future."

Eitedal Basyouni, 69, a psychologist in Macomb Township, Mich., returned earlier in the month from a visit to her hometown of Alexandria, Egypt. She was struck by the disparity of wealth between the rich and the poor. "Everybody now becomes rich or very, very poor, and in between there is no middle anymore," Dr. Basyouni said. The local governments no longer maintain the public facilities, she said. "They don't care anymore. The country will be like a garbage can."

She is worried for her family—and concerned about a power vacuum. "The problem is, who is going to come in? We don't want extremists to take over. This is very dangerous now." 

Many in the Arab emigre community "just don't know enough" about the protesters, said James Zogby, president of the Arab American Institute, a Washington-based group that often polls Arab public opinion.

"They know the people in leadership roles in Lebanon … and they know the government party in Egypt, and they have dealt with the embassies here," Mr. Zogby said. "But they don't know the groups who are in opposition, and they don't know what direction they want to move in."

 Write to  Jennifer Levitz at jennifer.levitz@wsj.com, Kate Linebaugh at kate.linebaugh@wsj.com and Chris Herring at chris.herring@wsj.com 