Top senators in both parties said Sunday that Republicans could push their way to a Senate vote on repealing the health overhaul, setting up another clash over the Democrats' landmark legislative achievement.

Both sides agreed the Democratic-led Senate won't pass the same type of repeal measure the Republican-led House approved last week, and in any case President Barack Obama would be expected to veto it. But having it come to the floor would force centrist Democrats who are up for re-election in 2012 into an uncomfortable vote.

Both sides agreed Republicans have the leverage to bring such a bill to a vote using one of several procedural tactics, including inserting it as an amendment to another piece of legislation. 

"I assure you we'll have a vote on repeal," Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, a Kentucky Republican, said on "Fox News Sunday." The No. 2 Senate Democrat, Sen. Richard Durbin of Illinois, said in a later appearance on the program that it was indeed possible Republicans could force a vote on the repeal measure, despite the fact that Majority Leader Harry Reid (D., Nev.) has indicated he doesn't plan to bring it up.

Senate Democrats are preparing to paint Republicans as trying to take away benefits the law gives Americans. Sen. Charles Schumer (D., N.Y.) said in an appearance on CBS's "Face the Nation" that Democrats would respond to Republican repeal efforts by forcing votes on provisions of the health care law that are popular, such as a provision allowing children to stay on their parents' health policies until their 26th birthday.

The result would be that the Republicans' repeal bill would be "full of holes" that made it look like "Swiss cheese," he said.

Public support for the law has remained divided since it cleared Congress in March 2010.Last week's Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll showed that 46% of Americans opposed repealing the law while 45% favored doing so.

When the Senate passed the law in late 2009, every Democrat in the chamber, plus the two independents who caucus with them, voted for the bill. Some senators who were most on the fence about that vote have either lost their seats, like former Democratic Senator Blanche Lincoln of Arkansas, or have announced they won't seek re-election in 2012, like Sen. Joe Lieberman, a Connecticut independent. 

But other Democrats up for re-election in 2012 could feel pressure from such a vote, including Sens. Ben Nelson of Nebraska and Claire McCaskill of Missouri. In the past, they have indicated they don't favor repeal, but have said they are willing to consider alternatives to some aspects of the overhaul, including the individual mandate that requires people to purchase insurance

Republicans also face a risk—health care becoming a distraction from the economy, which remains a higher concern of Americans. The GOP leveled that complaint against Democrats in the midterm elections.

Given that a vote to repeal the law outright is all but certain to fail in the Senate, Republicans say they'll press ahead with other strategies to neuter the legislation, including choking off its funding. Mr. McConnell pointed out that, in the short-term federal spending measure passed in December, Republicans left out funding to hire workers to implement the health overhaul. The administration has said it has the authority to find money to hire those workers elsewhere in the federal budget.

House leaders have told committees to come up with new health proposals to replace the Democrats' law, though those also face long odds in the Senate. The only plan endorsed by House Republican leadership so far is the party's 2009 alternative to the Democrats health law. That was projected to expand insurance to 3 million Americans compared with an estimated 32 million under the Democrats' law.

House Republicans say their new proposals for fixing the health system will be more incremental and focus on items such as curbing medical malpractice lawsuits and making it easier for insurers to sell policies across state lines. "We're going to focus, first and foremost, (on) bringing down costs and adding to people's choices," House Majority Leader Eric Cantor (R., Va.) said Sunday, speaking on NBC's "Meet the Press."

 Write to  Janet Adamy at janet.adamy@wsj.com and Josh Mitchell at joshua.mitchell@dowjones.com 