 Los Angeles 

Had cable news been around in the autumn of 1818, the crawl at the bottom of the screen might have read: "Wandering fox leads soldiers to Apollo statue's missing appendages near ancient Pompeii's northern periphery." And though it's not clear how widespread the news of the find actually was back then, the excavation reports at the time demonstrated the archaeologists' clear interest in making their discovery known to King Ferdinand, recently returned from exile.

The Getty Villa

Through Sept. 12

Several months earlier, in June 1817, the bulk of the sculpture had been unearthed just north of the Forum—the first big bronze to come out of the city devastated by the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in A.D. 79. How pieces of the statue ended up so far away from their original location in the Temple of Apollo remains a mystery. Some theorize they were moved for safekeeping, though 19th-century guidebooks suggest vandals attempted to abscond with the precious metal fragments only to succumb to the volcanic ash and lava.

These are just a few of the stories highlighted in "Apollo From Pompeii: Investigating an Ancient Bronze," at the Getty Villa. Yet as exquisite a specimen as "Apollo Saettante" (the Archer) may be to contemplate on its own, the show also offers a rare behind-the-scenes look at the first full-scale investigation of this venerable work. On loan from Naples' Museo Archeologico Nazionale, the piece, never-before shown in this country, represents a 2007 cultural- exchange agreement between the J. Paul Getty Museum and the Italian Ministry of Culture.

But it's the 18-month collaboration between the Getty's assistant curator David Saunders and assistant conservator Erik Risser that will be most immediately appreciated by visitors. Consider, for example, the statue's missing arms and right foot that were ultimately restored in the 19th century. While Mr. Saunders devoted countless hours to combing through archival material, Mr. Risser employed a variety of techniques—including ultraviolet photography, X-radiography and endoscopy—to validate the physical evidence of Apollo's many transformations. "It's quite a beautiful thing when these two elements come together," Mr. Risser says. "One informs the other, which allows us to make a more complete and robust decision about how to proceed."

The show details the statue's history and recovery, its 19th-century restoration, and recent measures to conserve the piece.

Not that such a comprehensive presentation was the plan from the start, even though Apollo was clearly in need of conservation. "He had a failed join at the right ankle," Mr. Risser says. "The drapery fragments, which are now displayed on the wall, were causing some instability. But as the project developed, we saw ample material to devote an entire gallery to Apollo's story." 

After the initial naked-eye assessment, Mr. Risser began drawing on different imaging methods to analyze the piece. This involved snaking a flexible endoscope through the holes of the feet. In case you were wondering, Apollo is hollow—he weighs only about 80 pounds—which provided access to the interior and thus the techniques not only of the original makers but the 19th-century restorers. Mr. Risser says it became evident that Apollo was first created in 16 pieces. Radiographs and endoscopic photos also revealed one of the statue's more puzzling features, a large hole in the lower back covered by sculpted drapery. What's unusual, Mr. Risser says, is that the hole was intentional and may have been an attempt to reduce the amount of metal used.

"We can't fully explain why that would be done. I think if it had been up to me, I'd have created a nude, then put a drapery on it. Or I'd create a piece where the drapery was already integrated. But I wouldn't cut out that back section, which in turn creates stability issues further down the line," Mr. Risser explains.

He says that when the 4-foot-10-inch statue first arrived at the Getty, the drapery's sculptural details didn't look quite right. In fact, radiographs showed the drapery was manufactured using the modern sand-casting process, unlike the figure itself, which had been fabricated with the ancient lost-wax process. This involved fashioning a working model in wax, then casting it in bronze in several pieces.

A note on the statue's dark-green color. Says Mr. Saunders: "There's a very big misnomer about how bronzes should look. Everyone likes to see them as these beautiful brown and corroded objects. But that's not how they were displayed in antiquity." In fact, an analysis of Apollo's surface revealed that more than 9% of the metal alloy is tin mixed with copper and lead, which would have yielded a golden bronze. Long before the statue was unearthed, the natural process of patination had caused the formation of the red cuprite, blue azurite and green malachite commonly found in ancient bronzes. According to one of the information panels, "As was typical of the time, the [19th-century] restorers went to great lengths to imitate an ancient patina, giving the original bronze and its new repairs a coherent coloring."

Which brings us to the issue of restoration versus conservation. After the discovery in 1817, attempts were made to restore the statue to its original form. This is not the case here. The main goal of Mr. Risser and the Naples museum was to ensure that the statue is preserved for the future, rather than to obscure the fact that the work has been altered. For example, a close inspection of Apollo's left thigh reveals a hole, which had been patched up in the 19th century. "From a distance it's not visible, but from up close it's actually discernible. And that's the idea. It creates a greater dialogue with the piece for the viewer," Mr. Risser says.

No doubt visitors will be talking about a much more obvious flaw—in the statue of Artemis, Apollo's twin sister, which Messrs. Risser and Saunders included in the exhibit. Her still- intact eyes offer a dramatic contrast to the blank stare of her brother, placed just 10 feet away. But most notable is the gaping hole in place of her missing left hand, "one of the good things about her," says Mr. Saunders. He's referring to the evidence of excess wax that can be seen at the join, proving that her hand was cast as a separate unit using the ancient production approach.

Not so with Apollo, who is all closed up now. However, as Mr. Saunders notes: "Normally it would be very difficult to learn about the questions we ask, methods we use and answers we obtain, since those details are usually confined to a technical journal. What's special here is that our insights are displayed on the walls."

 Mr. Cooper is a freelance writer based in Santa Barbara, Calif.  