BANGALORE -- Indian outsourcing companies are on an acquisition spree, driven by an increasing need to both deepen and broaden their capabilities in their quest for growth and scale.

A key driver of this activity is a little-noticed trend that should become more obvious as the years roll by: Business-process outsourcing, or BPO, is expected to grow faster than information technology services outsourcing.

Aegis Ltd. has notched up 18 acquisitions in the past few years, spending a total of $300 million to $400 million, while Genpact acquired Headstrong for $550 million earlier this year.

On Tuesday, EXL Service Holdings Inc., listed and based in the U.S., said it had agreed to acquire another U.S.-based company Outsource Partners International, which provides finance and accounting services, for $91 million.

Another BPO firm, Firstsource Solutions Ltd., announced a joint venture with Sri Lanka's flagship telecom service provider, Dialog Axiata PLC.

Gaurav Gupta, managing partner at consulting firm Everest Group, points out that unlike information-technology services, the BPO sector was not hit as hard by the global downturn of 2008-2009.

"[Infortmation-technology] services has bounced back strongly and is growing much faster than BPO," he said, but noted that this was a short-term trend. "In the long-term, however, especially given that the [infotech] services market is very well penetrated, it is BPO which will outpace growth."

Rohit Kapoor, president and chief executive of EXL Service, agrees. 

"A data point that we have considered suggests that worldwide IT outsourcing spend is growing at 4% while BPO is growing or will grow at 6-8%," he said. "Look at the actual IT spend of companies. That is growing at only around 2%, reflecting their actual growth."

Mr. Kapoor added that on an average, for every $1 billion spent on information technology, a company would spend $4 billion to $5 billion on business-processing services.

"[BPO] is a much larger market and it is not that well-penetrated, so the long-term road ahead is clear," he said.

Clients are looking at these services as a way to handle business processes and to reduce costs. Business processing firms realize that they need a deeper knowhow as well as global capability — the other key factors driving acquisition activity in the space.

Take EXL's acquisition. The company has a finance and accounting practice that contributes about 15% to its total revenue of about $250 million. The company it acquired, Outsource Partners, also has a strong finance and accounting unit, and post acquisition, EXL will see contribution from this division jump to 35% of its projected $347 million to $350 million annual revenue. 

Genpact's acquisition of Headstrong was a different deal. 

It was about a BPO company making a play for information technology services. While Genpact clearly sees value in adding to its top line, a larger question is whether there is a trend towards integrated services.

Firstsource's CEO and Managing Director Matthew Vallance, however, sees information technology as a platform and says it's not about offering those services to clients.

Aparup Sengupta, global chief executive and managing director of Aegis, part of the Essar Group, said in the BPO space, distinctions such as between voice and data, information technology outsourcing and BPO, and integrated and stand-alone players, often blur.

"It is about the complete transaction rating, the closeness to the customer, and the total customer experience," Mr. Sengupta said.