As the new year gets under way, collectors around the world are sizing up their art. What do they want? More.

The auction market gained momentum throughout 2010, as art buyers began shrugging off their recession fears and wealthy newcomers from Asia joined the global competition for status-symbol art. 

Collectors' renewed confidence helped Sotheby's auction off $4.3 billion in art last year, up 87% from $2.3 billion in 2009. Rival Christie's said it auctioned and privately sold $5 billion in art last year, up 51.5% from $3.3 billion the year before.

This season, expect collectors to spend heavily on art made since 1950, a primary-colored pantheon of Pop, abstract and contemporary artists led by Andy Warhol. Last year, 1,256 Warhols sold at auction for a combined $367 million, up from 983 of his works for $125 million a year earlier, database Artnet says. (Only Pablo Picasso pops up more often at auction these days.)

Others who could benefit from the wider appeal for colorful postwar art include Jean-Michel Basquiat, whose chaotic paintings evoke 1980s New York, and Cologne, Germany-based Gerhard Richter, with his images of candles and sailors and splattery abstracts. Moscow art analyst Sergey Skaterschikov says both artists have seen recent price spikes. 

"Collectors used to chase value, but now they want to ride the wave," says Michael Moses, co-founder of the Mei Moses All Art Index, which tracks returns on thousands of objects sold more than once in major auctions.

Freshly minted millionaires from mainland China continue to join the bidding for high-end art, an influx that recently helped Hong Kong eclipse Geneva as the pre-eminent marketplace for jewelry and watches, according to Christie's Americas Chairman Marc Porter. 

Chinese ceramics and contemporary art should sell well in the coming year, though market-watchers say collectors are also beginning to look more closely at Chinese paintings created by artists still little known in the West in the decades before the cultural revolution began in 1966. 

One of these artists is Zhang Daqian (1899-1983), known for applying techniques traditionally used in Chinese ink and scroll paintings to his own stormy abstractions. 

Last year, collectors bought over $152.7 million of his art at auction, up from $17 million the year before. Demand is also taking off for Qi Baishi, a Beijing painter who lived from 1864 to 1957 and is known for his whimsical renderings of animals. Last spring, Sotheby's got $4.1 million for his 1950 "Tiger," up from its $3.6 million high estimate.

Another little-known segment of the Chinese market poised to grow this year is the trade in collectible Chinese coins. Dallas-based auctioneer Heritage Auctions says its sales of Chinese currency "exploded" last year, particularly pieces minted in the past decade that bear the lucky number eight. 

In April, Heritage got $138,000 for a 10,000-yuan gold coin from 2002 commemorating the Year of the Horse. Heritage President Greg Rohan says prices for collectible foreign coins range from $5,000 to $500,000.

For collectors craving something larger, prices for sculpture—from ancient busts to Alexander Calder—should also remain strong in 2011, experts say. 

 Write to  Kelly Crow at kelly.crow@wsj.com 