 London: Along with the Vasari Corridor of the Uffizi, Florence has another, almost secret, rarely seen collection. Alberto Della Ragione (1892-1973), a naval engineer, created the collection, which includes many of Italy's most celebrated artists of the 20th century. He gave it to the city of Florence in 1969. It was last exhibited in 2006, since when the paintings and sculptures have been in storage, awaiting a new home.

Islington's Estorick Collection is now showing 40 of these, under the title "From Morandi to Guttuso." Two quiet, contemplative still-life paintings by Giorgio Morandi begin the show. They were painted about 10 years apart—the first in 1926. At least one or two of the objects in the apparently random sequence of vases, candlesticks and bowls seem to be repeated, while the colors of the later picture are a little more raw and the handling of the paint a little freer; but the complexity of the feelings these paintings evoke remains mysterious and difficult to describe, let alone explain.

It is worth the journey from central London simply to see them, but there are several other strange, wonderful things in this show, such as Giorgio de Chirico's baffling "Les bains mystérieux" (circa 1934-36). Three men with towels around their waists—two of them appearing to be joined at the shoulder—enter a pair of doorways whose spatial relationship to each other is disturbing. An antique scene of gentle Surrealism, it contrasts vividly with the simmering violence of Renato Guttuso's almost Cubist "Ashtray" (1958), where you feel the jumble of cigarette butts would have amused Picasso or Braque. 

The emphatic pinks of Guttuso's boldly painted "Scantily-clad Women" (circa 1940), with its contrapposto shadowy nude, an apparent afterthought on the left of the canvas, have something in common with Bruno Cassinari's in-your-face "Butchered Calf" (1941), a large, gaudy, somehow decorative, pink-streaked carcass, with the pretty white fringe of its pelt, and the addendum of the tiny pool of blood in the lower left corner. 

Della Ragione engaged with Modernism early on, but by the end of the 1930s, he was determined to help the younger generation of artists who were having a tough time under Fascism. He did something unusual for the time, and made contracts to pay then-Communist Guttuso and a couple of other artists monthly stipends in exchange for first refusal of their work. From 1942-44, he had his own gallery. Della Ragione resembled Eric Estorick in that his own tastes were pronounced, and both preferred figurative art. They both liked Futurism, but Della Ragione made his real mark by supporting the artists of the socially conscious, expressionist-realist Corrente movement, such as Guttuso and Cassinari, and which influenced Italian postwar cinema and literature as well.

Also in north London, in the magnificent, relatively new King's Place arts space, Pangolin has a big show, "Lynn Chadwick: The Couple," of an artist inexplicably omitted from next week's Royal Academy show of British sculpture. 

Lynn Chadwick (1914-2003) would have been surprised, when I first met him in 1969, to be described as sympathetic to the leftist Corrente movement. But in fact, he emerged after the war in 1952 in a British Council show at the Venice Biennale, with other sculptors including Henry Moore and Reg Butler, characterized by the critic Sir Herbert Read as exemplifying "the geometry of fear." Chadwick next came to prominence as one of the semifinalists for the "Unknown Political Prisoner" international sculpture competition (1953), and at the 1956 Venice Biennale, he beat Alberto Giacometti for the International Sculpture Prize.

Chadwick achieved all this by workmanlike dedication to his craft. He looked to industry to teach him welding and mastered the techniques by doing a course at British Oxygen. Whereas the older generation of Moore and Barbara Hepworth preached "truth to materials" and carved or modeled, Chadwick constructed his sculpture. He welded linear, skeleton-like armatures and applied a "skin," building up the surface until it became a solid form to be cast in bronze. He thus captured what you could call sculptural "attitude," the stance of each particular figure and the massy relationship of one near-abstract figure to another; but his work favors the precision of line, crispness of texture and subtle color differences made possible by the mastery of technique he pioneered.

Evident in the theme of the couple, which he used throughout his career, there are examples of pairs at nearly every stage of this exhibition. Among the exceptions are his solitary, dog/hyena-like "beasts," which I admit I most covet. Like many of his fans, I prefer his earlier, less-polished work (literally—the triangular male and square female faces of some late bronzes are actually shiny). The joy of this show is that it goes from gigantic examples to tiny, toy-soldier-sized pieces, a few cast, heart-stoppingly, in solid silver. 

 From Morandi to Guttuso until April 3;  www.estorickcollection.com 

 Lynn Chadwick: The Couple until Feb. 26;  www.pangolinlondon.com  

 Write to  Paul Levy at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 