WASHINGTON—Lawmakers from both parties called on their colleagues and the Obama administration Thursday to agree to a long-term strategy this year to tackle the country's fiscal problems.

Sens. Kent Conrad (D., N.D.) and Mike Crapo (R., Idaho) said a firm plan must be in place before the end of the year to show the financial markets and international creditors that Congress can grasp the magnitude of the nation's fiscal trouble.

Sen. Jon Cornyn (R., Texas) echoed these calls but said there is a window of six to nine months to reach a budget accord before momentum in Washington dissipates. 

The senators spoke at a Senate Budget Committee hearing that featured the testimony of Doug Elmendorf, the Congressional Budget Office director.

On Wednesday, the CBO said the federal government was on track to record a budget deficit of $1.5 trillion in the current fiscal year. If realized, that mark would be the second-highest as a proportion of gross domestic product since World War II. 

The CBO's forecast came a day before ratings agency Standard & Poor's downgraded Japanese-government bonds. The ratings agency cited a lack of faith in the government's ability to solve its economic and budget challenges. Lawmakers want to avoid a similar drop in confidence by the markets in the U.S. debt.

Mr. Conrad, the Senate Budget Committee chairman, and Mr. Crapo were among the members of the deficit commission established by the White House last year to vote in favor of that body's final report. 

The lawmakers said Thursday that while there must be a plan to rein in federal spending, the belt tightening shouldn't necessarily begin this year. Otherwise, the fledgling economic recovery could be jeopardized. 

Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben Bernanke made similar comments earlier this month, saying deficit cutting should begin gradually and accelerate over time. 

The deficit commission also said in its final report that many of the austerity measures it recommended shouldn't start until it was evident the economy had recovered from the recession. 

But this stance puts the lawmakers and the Fed chief at odds with House Republicans who have vowed to pare federal spending this year. House GOP leadership is currently working on a budgetary measure that would roll back federal spending to fiscal-2008 levels. 

Mr. Crapo said any such agreement must include an overhaul of the corporate-tax code, as recommended by the deficit commission.

Messrs. Conrad and Crapo and Sens. Richard Durbin (D., Ill.) and Tom Coburn (R., Okla.) have begun discussions about crafting a package to resolve the country's long-run financial issues. 

 Write to  Corey Boles at corey.boles@dowjones.com 