Yossi Milo Gallery  525 W. 25th St., (212) 414-0370  Through Feb. 12

Ezra Stoller's black-and-white architectural photographs are the definitive images of the buildings that are their subjects. So firmly are the structures associated with his pictures of them that Mr. Stoller is considered to have been a major influence on mid-20th-century building design. His clients constituted an honor roll of the great American modernists: Marcel Breuer, Walter Gropius, Philip Johnson, Mies van der Rohe, Paul Rudolph, Eero Saarinen, Frank Lloyd Wright, the firm of Skidmore, Owings & Merrrill. In those days there were giants in the land. 

Mr. Stoller (1915-2004) began taking pictures of buildings even before he got his B.F.A. from NYU in 1938. He insisted on seeing the blueprints of a building before he photographed it, so he understood it as the architect had conceived it. He studied his subjects in different lighting conditions, and frequently had all the occupants leave while he was working. The buildings in his renderings are pristine.

Milo is showing eight pictures of the Seagram Building, 12 of the TWA Terminal at Idlewild—now JFK—Airport (see how Stoller included wings, engine nacelles and fuselages to show the source of Mr. Saarinen's design), and six each of Fallingwater and the Guggenheim Museum. There are three pictures of the Manufacturer's Trust Co. at Fifth Avenue and 43rd Street, including one taken on a rainy night with the building lit up and reflected in puddles on the street. Several private houses, among them Johnson's Glass House, are shown in one or two images. Whether of interiors or exteriors, Stoller's photos explicate the ideas the physical structures manifest.

Bruce Silverstein  535 W. 25th St., (212) 627-3930  Through Feb. 12

The buildings in Todd Hido's chromogenic prints are anything but pristine. They are mostly rural or suburban houses, many of them manufactured and set down on foundations, that he shoots at night in bad weather. Mr. Hido (b. 1968) is interested in them for what they intimate about the people inside. The house in "7373" (2009) has a light on in a second-floor window; an outside light shows aluminum siding, tire tracks in the scrim of snow in the parking area, a four-door sedan, and an empty snack-food bag on the ground. There is only one light on in "2871-a" (2001), but it is in the front window of a small ranch house, and the five cars parked outside in the snow hint at a cozy social time inside.

There are several atmospheric pictures of country roads shot through the rain-smeared windshield of a car, and 11 pictures of women. These aren't so much nudes, as usually conceived, as portraits of people wearing little or no clothes. They appear to have been shot in a motel with light from a single bulb, which produces a deep chiaroscuro effect. Many look at the camera with dubious expressions that complicate our relations to them. There is also a single picture of a large white cat with green eyes.

Higher Pictures  764 Madison Ave., (212) 249-6100  Through Jan. 29

When Pierre Yves Petit (1886-1969) was 12, he bought a camera with 100 francs he "borrowed" from his father without his permission. Pierre was reprimanded, but allowed to keep the camera. In the period after World War I, there was a big increase in French tourism—and a corresponding increase in the demand for postcards to memorialize one's visits. Mr. Petit, using the pseudonym Yvon, took exquisite postcard photographs of Paris that he had run off in England on a gravure press in lots of 10,000. Editions d'Art Yvon was a one-man operation, with Mr. Petit taking pictures, ordering postcards and selling them to souvenir shops and newsstands.

Petit's city is a place of civility and romantic beauty; of booksellers by the Seine and flower sellers outside the parks and on the bridges; of river barges, palaces, churches, fountains, monuments and cathedrals. He photographed at sunrise and sunset when there would be dramatic shadows, or when clouds and mist gave the city a sense of atmosphere. 

He shot from atop Notre Dame with gargoyles in the foreground and Paris's rooftops fading away in the distance. He juxtaposed silhouetted statues with the Eiffel Tower. He took pictures of women in broad-brimmed hats boating in the Bois de Boulogne. It is every cliché of Paris, but real, the way you want it to be.

—Mr. Meyers writes on photography for The Wall Street Journal. See his work at williammeyersphotography.com. 