It's not just the crime, it's the cover-up.

That is what prosecutors essentially alleged Monday, presenting evidence detailing how Galleon Group founder  Raj Rajaratnam sought to cover his tracks after he received inside information about a possible technology takeover from a former McKinsey & Co. partner.

In a taped phone call, Mr. Rajaratnam told two former Galleon employees to create an email "trail" that would make it seem as though a purchase of stock was based on price rather than information received from  Anil Kumar, the former McKinsey consultant and a star witness for the government.

The alleged cover-up involves the purchase of shares of a company spun off by chip maker  Advanced Micro Devices Inc.
AMD


-2.93
%




 called  Spansion. 

"You just have to be careful, right?" Mr. Rajaratnam told the former Galleon employees, adding that he would send an email asking about a stock "so that we just protect ourselves." 

"We just have a[n] e-mail trail, right, that uh … I brought it up," he said, after telling them about the deal described to him by Mr. Kumar. 

"That's good," an employee on the call said.

Mr. Kumar testified Monday that he gave "super confidential" information about McKinsey client AMD and other companies, to Mr. Rajaratnam in exchange for payments totaling $2 million that were made through offshore accounts to an account in his housekeeper's name. 

Mr. Rajaratnam, who is facing 14 counts of conspiracy and securities fraud, has denied wrongdoing, and his lawyer said in his opening statement he didn't solicit or trade on inside information or attempt to cover anything up. 

Mr. Kumar, who pleaded guilty to conspiracy and securities fraud in January 2010, is the second witness at his trial and hasn't been cross-examined yet. 

In other recordings of wiretap calls played Monday, Mr. Rajaratnam urged a former hedge-fund manager,  Danielle Chiesi, to remain quiet about information she was receiving from him and her own sources, former AMD Chief Executive  Hector Ruiz and former International Business Machines executive  Robert Moffat. Mr. Moffat pleaded guilty in the case last year.

"We've got to keep this radio silent," Mr. Rajaratnam told her on the call. "Not even to your little boyfriends." 

"Believe me, I don't have any friends," Ms. Chiesi replied.

Before Mr. Rajaratnam and Ms. Chiesi hung up, she said, "Love you."

Ms. Chiesi pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit securities fraud in January. She hasn't been sentenced. Mr. Ruiz hasn't been charged in the case but is on the witness list for the trial. A spokesman for Mr. Ruiz declined to comment on allegations he gave tips to Ms. Chiesi. 

The effort by the government to home in on the alleged cover-up highlights the difficulties of proving criminal insider-trading cases. 

Mr. Rajaratnam had been under investigation since 2007, but regulators said in earlier hearings in the case that they had difficulty bringing charges. This was because Galleon would trade both into and out of stocks after receiving what seemed to be a tip, presumably to disguise the reason for buying.

Mr. Rajaratnam allegedly gave Ms. Chiesi a tutorial, in another taped call played for the jury, about purchasing stock based on inside information. She had confided, in the Sept. 30, 2008, conversation, that she was "a little nervous because you know people are going to investigate me." 

"What I would do is, I would buy a million shares and sell 500,000," Mr. Rajaratnam advised her. "If you want to buy 500, I would buy a million and sell on Friday 500,000, you know?"

They didn't appear to suspect the FBI was listening. "I'm glad that we talk on a secure line," Ms. Chiesi said. "Right. I never call you on my cellphone," Mr. Rajaratnam responded. 

The cover-up allegations also illustrate how prosecutors are trying to counter the expected defense by Mr. Rajaratnam's lawyer,  John Dowd. Mr. Dowd asserted that Mr. Rajaratnam's purchases were based on legitimate research and a "mosaic" of data rather than inside information. 

In his opening statement last week, Mr. Dowd said Mr. Kumar was "honestly and openly paid" for consulting services he provided Galleon but hid those fees from McKinsey and failed to report the fees to U.S. tax authorities.

"Now he is trying to pass the blame to Raj in order to get a free pass from the government," Mr. Dowd said in his statement. A McKinsey spokeswoman said Mr. Kumar had violated the firm's "culture, values and policies." 

Early in the day, Mr. Kumar told jurors about how he leaked details to Mr. Rajaratnam of "super confidential" negotiations in 2006 between AMD and another technology company—and that the hedge-fund titan responded by heaping praise and money on him.

The potential acquisition of ATI Technologies Inc., a Canadian graphics company, by AMD was so secret that the project was at first code-named "Supernova," and then "Go Big," testified Mr. Kumar, who advised AMD on the deal. 

"I told him that this was red hot and just should not be discussed with anyone," Mr. Kumar said. 

Confidential information that Mr. Rajaratnam allegedly received from Mr. Kumar and others about the AMD-ATI deal is likely to be a major part of the government's case. With advance notice, Assistant U.S. Attorney Jonathan Streeter said in his opening statement last week, Mr. Rajaratnam bought 50 million shares of ATI stock in the months before the deal, helping his fund generate more than $20 million in profit.

Mr. Kumar told jurors Mr. Rajaratnam was taken aback when Mr. Kumar told him AMD was willing to pay more than $20 a share, several dollars higher than ATI's stock price before the deal was announced. 

"Mr. Rajaratnam just said, 'This is completely ridiculous. It makes no sense. … Are you absolutely sure?"' Mr. Kumar testified Monday. "I said, 'yes.' He said, 'Wow, this is really useful.'"

After the deal was announced, Mr. Kumar said, Mr. Rajaratnam told him, "We're all cheering you right now. … He said something like: 'You're a star, or you're a hero.' " 

At the end of 2006, Mr. Kumar testified, Mr. Rajaratnam said he was so pleased with Mr. Kumar's work that he would pay him $1 million for the year. 

When he heard that, Mr. Kumar said: "I almost fell off my chair." 

—Chad Bray and Don Clark contributed to this article.

 Write to  Michael Rothfeld at michael.rothfeld@wsj.com and Susan Pulliam at susan.pulliam@wsj.com 