TAMPA—Who knew bargain-bin shopping could offer this many possibilities?

With opening day less than two weeks away, the questionable foursome of Ivan Nova, Bartolo Colon, Freddy Garcia and Sergio Mitre have thrown so well that the battle for the fourth and fifth starter's spots may actually be muddier than when camp began. The four pitchers have thus far combined for a 2.30 ERA in 35 innings, making a tough decision even tougher for manager Joe Girardi.

"You don't know what's going to happen the last two weeks as we start to stretch people out. They're making my decision really difficult," Girardi said.

When spring training opened, Garcia and Nova were the front-runners for the two spots. But Bartolo Colon has been so surprisingly sharp that he for a time took the lead in the race. Then Wednesday night, Nova made a resounding statement with six no-hit innings where he toyed with the Baltimore Orioles. Girardi called it the "best pitching performance we've had in spring training."

There are permutations aplenty for how the pitching could shake out, including some possibilities that have Colon altering his deal to stick in the minor leagues, or Garcia agreeing to pitch in the bullpen. But here are the most likely possibilities for figuring out this lucky mess:

IN: Nova and Colon; BULLPEN: Mitre; RELEASED: Garcia.

If it were all based on performance, this is the way to go. Nova has potential for the future, and showed a surprisingly good slider Wednesday—perhaps giving him the strikeout pitch that could take him to the next level.

"My slider's like a new toy—you've got to keep playing with it," Nova said. "I feel really good. I hope I can keep pitching like that, keep trying to make the team."

Colon, meanwhile, is a completely different pitcher than the former Cy Young winner who used to blow high-90s fastballs by opponents. He has been clocked as high as 94, but what really excites the Yankees is the movement on his sinker and slider.

"I've been pleasantly surprised," Girardi said. "I had no idea what he had left in his arm. Bartolo has some years on him and a lot of innings on him, but he seemed to bounce back."

IN: Nova and Garcia; BULLPEN: Colon; RELEASED: Mitre.

The Yankees aren't looking only at performance, however—they're looking at stuff, guile, and longevity. Garcia proved last season that he still has the ability to get major league hitters out, winning 12 games with his high-80s fastballs and five-pitch mix. Colon hasn't pitched in the majors since 2009, and there's some concern that because he pitched in winter ball, his early success is due to being more prepared than the hitters he's facing. 

IN: Colon and Garcia; BULLPEN: Mitre; MINORS: Nova.

This was emerging as the dark-horse possibility—until Nova's statement game on Wednesday. With Colon and Garcia both pitching well, and the Yankees unable to send Mitre to the minors, this is the only way they could keep all four players in camp. It allows them to play with house money—ride Colon or Garcia as long as possible, and when one of them falters, bring up Nova and cut the struggling veteran.

The fact that Nova is the only player with a minor-league option remaining is certainly a factor, Girardi acknowledged. But if Nova pitches well enough to separate himself from the group, the Yankees won't hesitate to add him to the team.

"That's something we'll have to talk about," Girardi said. "Obviously, you want to take what you feel is the best team north. That's what we do here."

VERDICT: Here's betting Nova and Colon will join the rotation, Mitre will find a spot in the bullpen, and Freddy Garcia will be looking for work. And that no matter who wins these spots, this Yankee team will look very different on August 1 than it does on April 1.