SAN'A, Yemen—Yemen's Parliament, at the behest of embattled President Ali Abdullah Saleh, passed sweeping new emergency laws that suspend the constitution and enable his remaining loyal security forces to arrest and detain his opponents, a move that political-opposition forces say heightens the threat of civil war.

The move is the latest attempt by Mr. Saleh to remain in power even as a towering array of forces—including more than half of the country's top military commanders and powerful tribal and religious leaders—demands his ouster. With tanks from both pro- and anti-Saleh forces facing one another in the streets of the capital, it was unclear how Mr. Saleh could use the new powers, or which security officers would obey a command to clear the streets teaming with antigovernment demonstrators.

During his 32 years in power. Mr. Saleh's security forces have routinely arrested political opponents without cause, so the passing of the new emergency laws is largely symbolic. But it puts the opposition on notice that Mr. Saleh is still willing to use force to stay in power and shut them down.

A wave of military defections earlier this week left Mr. Saleh with only the loyalty of elite forces commanded by his son and nephews, many of them trained and equipped by the U.S. to fight terrorism. The standoff has put the U.S. in the uncomfortable position of seeing American-trained forces loyal to a controversial ally face off against troops on the side of a pro-democracy movement.

On Wednesday, U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates said it was too soon to tell the outcome of the unrest in Yemen.

"I think things are evidently very unsettled," Mr. Gates, a former director of the Central Intelligence Agency, told reporters during a visit to Cairo. "We've had a good working relationship with President Saleh. He has been an important ally in the counterterrorism arena. But clearly there is a lot of unhappiness inside Yemen."

The renewed threat of violence against what protest organizers have maintained is a peaceful call for a political transition emboldened Yemeni opposition leaders and swelled their ranks again. On Tuesday, vast numbers of government workers stayed away from their jobs in the capital as a silent protest against the president's continued rule, according to workers and residents. The numbers of anti-Saleh protesters have grown dramatically since a brutal crackdown on Friday by security forces against an antigovernment demonstration.

The umbrella group of political-opposition parties, which boycotted the parliamentary vote earlier Wednesday, called for mass demonstrations on Friday with the intention of forcing the president's immediate resignation. "This regime is gasping its last breath and the law will not save Saleh from falling. He will fall like the other dictators in the Arab world," said Hassan Zaid, the secretary general of the opposition Haq Party and a member of the umbrella organization.

Ahead of the protests Friday, Britain said it was temporarily withdrawing part of its embassy team from San'a, "in light of the rapid deterioration in the security situation," Reuters reported. 

The adoption of the state of emergency was largely a formality, as Mr. Saleh's ruling party dominates the 301-seat legislature—a facet of the political landscape that opposition parties are demanding be changed. The scene before the voting was chaotic, as parliamentary leaders scrambled to find the legal quorum of legislators needed for the vote. Opposition parliamentarians say the ruling party didn't muster the minimum numbers necessary for the vote to have been taken. The state news agency said that Parliament "approved" the 30-day state of emergency, but it didn't detail the breakdown of the vote.

As of late Wednesday, it was unclear what developments had been made in back-channel talks between Mr. Saleh, the country's leading commander Gen. Ali Mohsen al-Ahmar—who defected to the protesters earlier in the week—and Saudi officials, who are Mr. Saleh's leading benefactors and have traditionally viewed Yemen as their country's strategic backyard.

Gen. Ahmar spent part of the day Wednesday with the youth activists and pro-democracy demonstrators who have been camping out in Change Square, in downtown San'a. In a rousing speech in which he appeared to bolster his own checkered democracy credentials, he told the crowds to keep their protests peaceful and vowed to use his military forces to defend them and their "basic rights." Plainclothes security officials opened fire on the crowd last Friday, killing approximately 50 protesters and injuring dozens more.

Track events day by day.

"Saleh's advisers are convincing him that he is powerful enough to continue ruling Yemen, and I call on him to use his logic and see the changes in the political arena today," Gen. Ahmar told the crowd. "People will not take steps backwards and will only accept a regime fall."

U.S. officials and many Yemenis view Gen. Ahmar as a strongman with a reputation compromised by allegations of corruption, which have been aired in U.S. cables and by Yemeni officials. His ties with Saudi Arabia, which is helping to broker the crisis, and support from troops and his tribe make him among those most likely to lead a transitional government should Mr. Saleh quit.

Mr. Saleh maintained a high-profile schedule Wednesday, meeting with tribal leaders in efforts to recapture some political momentum.

He sought to blame the current crisis on his political opposition and said that calls to unseat him would result in a partition of the country like Somalia. "Yemen will be divided into three countries if the opposition takes control of the country," Mr. Saleh told the tribal sheiks. "They do not have a national agenda."

Americans and Saudis have watched with alarm in recent years as Yemen, under President Saleh, has devolved into a failed state with shrinking oil revenue, an exploding population and conflicts with secessionists in the south, rebels in the north and an al Qaeda affiliate in the rugged tribal regions.

President Saleh, who has been in power since 1979, has long been viewed by America and the Saudis as a bulwark against the possible threat of Yemen's splintering and a force who could hobble the influence of al Qaeda networks that have based themselves in Yemen and launched international terror attacks from their havens there.

Opposition and government officials said Saudi Arabia was weighing which political solution would be best for its own national interests. Saudi officials couldn't be reached to comment.

—Adam Entous contributed  to this article.

 Write to  Margaret Coker at margaret.coker@wsj.com 