MOSCOW—Russian President Dmitry Medvedev fired a senior transport police commander for failure to prevent Monday's suicide bombing at the country's busiest airport. He gave officials two weeks to devise new plans to prevent such attacks against airports, trains, subways and buses.

Mr. Medvedev's action Wednesday, hours before his speech at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, was meant to reinforce assurances to leaders of international business that Russia is a safe bet for their investment.

The bombing at Moscow's Domodedovo Airport killed 35 people, including eight foreign citizens. There has been no claim of responsibility, and investigators have named no suspects or presented a clear account of the attack in a lightly patrolled area of the airport's international arrivals hall.

Officials have said they believe the attack was the work of Islamist insurgents based in the Caucasus region of southern Russia. On Wednesday, Prime Minister Vladimir Putin said the attack "isn't related to the Chechen republic," one of several southern republics where the insurgency is active. He didn't elaborate.

The Kremlin's initial diagnosis of the security lapse at Domodedovo spawned confusion and finger-pointing. Mr. Medvedev at first criticized airport management for failing to secure the hall, prompting an unusual public response by airport officials, who cast blame on the transport police.

Mr. Medvedev eventually called the transport police to account, dismissing Maj. Gen. Andrei Alexeyev, the commanding officer in the region that includes Moscow. In addition, Russia's interior minister fired the chief of the transport-police division at Domodedovo and two subordinates.

"Those who did not work properly must be punished," Mr. Medvedev told a meeting on security matters at his residence outside Moscow. He said transport police had taken "an absolutely passive position" and "must be brought to their senses."

"We'll have to change the rules," he added, saying inspections at airports and on public transport must be "intrusive" and include some kind of terror alert system.

Moscow observed an official day of mourning Wednesday for the bombing victims. 

Major television channels suspended entertainment programming, and people lined up to donate blood to help treat the 116 wounded who remain hospitalized.

 Write to  Richard Boudreaux at richard.boudreaux@wsj.com 