Where have all of Japan's shoppers gone? Down market.

Perhaps best highlighted by the slow decline of the nation's famous department stores, at which sales have declined for 14 consecutive years, this is a phenomenon that has spread to everything from electronics to food.

It's fueled by two developments. While Japan has a high per-capita income, an increasing number of jobs—one-third of the work force now—are for non-permanent, part-time or contract workers. With less income and security come less spending. Moreover, by a broad definition—when pay is equal to half or less of median income—poverty is on the rise in Japan and among the worst in the industrialized world, the OECD says.

It's not all bad news, though. There are more than a few Japanese companies well positioned to profit from the trend.

Because of the high cost of owning a car in Japan, and the nation's shrinking population, auto sales have been in a secular decline. One segment catering to frugality—cars with engine displacements below 660 cubic centimeters—is faring better. These autos carry lower taxes, run cheaply and can cost less than $10,000, and these minicars now account for 30% of the car market by volume, up from 20% in 1995, according to the Japan Automobile Manufacturers' Association.

On this front,  Daihatsu Motor
7262


-1.14
%




 and  Suzuki Motor
7269


-0.02
%




 are standouts. Both companies are manufacturing minicars under their own brands, as well as for other auto makers. Orders from  Toyota Motor and Subaru, for example, will add nearly 23% to Daihatsu's mini production volume over the next two years, letting the company enjoy some economies of scale, Macquarie Research says. 

It isn't just autos. Builders of low-price homes are another group that are well placed. Hajime Construction, which is gaining market share in Japan, sells detached houses for an average of $308,000, less than its rivals and just over half the average price in the Tokyo metropolitan area, Macquarie says.

Frugality by Japanese consumers doesn't have to mean sparing returns for investors.

 Write to  James Simms at james.simms@dowjones.com 