Most people who buy life insurance do so from an agent working for a life-insurance company, or from a broker who receives a commission. But a lot of financial advisers are suggesting a different approach for their clients: Find a fee-only life-insurance consultant.

Read the complete  Wealth Adviser report .

The reason is pretty simple, they say: Most consumers don't realize that the agent or broker is under no legal obligation to put the client's best interests first. What's more, the agent often has a financial incentive to sell a more expensive policy.

Fee-only insurance consultants are more likely to offer unbiased advice on which life-insurance policy is best for the client, some advisers say, and whether there's a way to beef up the protection and save money on a policy that has recently been purchased.

Loretta Nolan, a fee-only financial planner in Old Greenwich, Conn., says she always evaluates her clients' insurance situation and can handle most cases. "But occasionally, I'll run into something that's more complex, so I'll work with a consultant." She recently asked a client who was considering a substantial insurance purchase to work with Glenn Daily, a fee-only insurance consultant in New York, who helped the client structure a policy with lower sales charges, she says.

"I have a pretty good knowledge of insurance, but he works in it exclusively and he's not tied to any one company," says Ms. Nolan.

Insurance agents often have tempting incentives to sell more expensive policies. On cash-value policies—those designed to provide long-term coverage, like universal, variable and whole life—they typically make at least 50% of the first year's premium and can make as much as 100% of that premium, says Robert Hunter, director of insurance at the Consumer Federation of America, a consumer advocacy group in Washington, D.C. Commissions are significantly lower for term insurance, he says.

Terry Headley, president of the National Association of Insurance and Financial Advisers, in Falls Church, Va., says its members use both fee- and commission-based models, and that all follow its code of conduct and ethics and design policies with clients' best interests in mind. 

Policies should be customized to each client's needs, and there might be a number of policy variations being recommended, he says. "Usually, if somebody is paying more, there's probably a good reason," Mr. Headley says.

Fee-only consultants, some of whom are former insurance agents, financial planners or actuaries, are independent experts who receive referrals from financial advisers, attorneys and other clients. They may review a current insurance policy or annuity, evaluate a recommendation from an agent, or make their own recommendation.

Unlike insurance agents, they don't receive commissions or any payments from insurance companies, agents or brokers. They generally charge their clients a set rate per hour, from $250 to $350. Mr. Daily, for one, charges $300 an hour with a cap on the number of hours.

All states require licenses for anyone who negotiates, sells or solicits insurance contracts. Some also require separate consultants' or advisers' licenses for those who charge fees for providing insurance advice or consulting services.

Mr. Hunter, the consumer activist, says the vast majority of consumers need only term life insurance, which provides coverage with fixed payments for a limited period of time and carries low commissions.

Most investors can evaluate a straightforward $100,000 term policy without help from a consultant, says Ms. Nolan, the financial planner. Mr. Hunter recommends looking at the competitive pricing and other information on websites like Term4Sale.com, a site owned by Compulife Software Inc., a Nicholas, Ky.-based seller of comparison software to life-insurance agents.

Sometimes, however, fee-only consultants can help clients save money and avoid mistakes. Cheryl Holland, president of Abacus Planning Group Inc. in Columbia, S.C., says she will hire one when a potential policy represents a significant outlay for a client, or when a more thoughtful approach is required—when a policy is inherited and should be reviewed, for example.

Consultants can also help by restructuring a policy. Though they prefer to work with clients when the clients first begin considering insurance, there is usually a 10- to 30-day window after delivery of a whole-life policy during which the terms can be reviewed and restructured, if desired. Consultants say they may be able to reduce the agent's commission and raise the value of the policy without reducing the investor's benefits or adding any cost to the policy, if they are brought in early enough.

The way a consultant usually does this is by changing the components of the whole-life policy, by using a blend of term and investment-based life-insurance, for example.

Mr. Daily says a couple recently came to him—too late, he adds—after paying too much for their first-year premium. There was more flexibility in the policy's premium payments than they first realized, he says. If they had paid the minimum premium called for in the first year, he says, they could have kept more money to invest on their own. Instead, Mr. Daily says, they just ended up increasing the agent's commission.

 Ms. Maxey is a reporter for Dow Jones Newswires in New York. She can be reached at daisy.maxey@dowjones.com.  