 Saab Automobile's future was again in doubt after Dutch owner Spyker Cars said a €150 million ($213 million) investment agreement with a Chinese auto maker had fallen apart.  

Saab's plant in Trollhattan, Sweden, has been idle since production was halted six weeks ago after suppliers stopped delivering parts because they hadn't been paid.



 Nissan said it returned to the black in the fiscal fourth quarter, posting a ¥30.8 billion ($380.1 million) net profit in the three months ended March, reversing a net loss of ¥11.6 billion in the same quarter a year earlier, as sales in North America, China and Europe offset the yen's strength and production disruptions after the March 11 earthquake. 



 British Airways and trade union Unite reached an agreement aimed at ending their long-running industrial dispute, lifting the threat of further strike action at the airline.  



Banks will likely have too much cash by 2019 as a result of the Basel III global banking rules, UBS Chief Executive Oswald Grübel said to a business audience at a conference in Switzerland. 



French bank Natixis, majority owned by French mutual lender Groupe BPCE, reported a 12% drop in first-quarter net profit to €412 million ($585.1 million), helped by a rebound in its capital markets business and a sharp drop in provisions for bad loans. 



Belgian bank KBC Group said first-quarter net profit rose 86% to €821 million ($1.17 billion) on higher revenue from its financial instruments segment and lower impairments on its loan book. 



Italy's UniCredit said first-quarter net profit rose 56% to €810 million ($1.15 billion) because of higher fees, commissions and trading profit. 



Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena posted a first-quarter net profit of €140 million ($199 million), compared with a €142 million profit for the period a year earlier, on fewer loan write-downs. 



A group of minority shareholders in BP's Russian joint venture TNK-BP Holding said they have filed court papers in preparation for a lawsuit against the U.K. oil major and TNK-BP. 



 High oil prices are curbing demand growth, particularly in the U.S., but prolonged supply disruptions mean the market will remain tight in the second half of 2011 and the "bull run" in prices may continue, the International Energy Agency—which represents the interests of the major energy-consuming countries—said in its monthly report.  



A consortium led by Temasek Holdings and including South Korea's sovereign-wealth fund paid about $3.5 billion for the 70% stake it bought in U.S. energy company Frac Tech Holdings, people close to the deal said.

Frac Tech, which provides pressure-pumping equipment for the U.S. oil-and-natural-gas industry, announced the sale in mid-April, but didn't disclose the value of the deal and named only two of the investors involved.



Woodside Petroleum selected Peter Coleman, a 27-year veteran with ExxonMobil, as its new chief executive, showing how energy companies increasingly prize expertise in major natural-gas developments. 



Italian clothing retailer Benetton Group reported a 5% drop in first-quarter net profit to €19 million ($27 million) due to rising raw material costs and falling sales in traditional markets.



Allianz, Europe's largest insurer by gross premiums and market capitalization, reported a 45% decline in net profit for the first quarter to €857 million ($1.22 billion), mainly reflecting high costs for natural disaster claims, lower realized capital gains and a higher tax rate. 

Dutch insurer Aegon reported a 12% drop in first-quarter net profit to €327 million ($464.4 million), partly due to charges related to higher life expectancy rates in the Netherlands, which is pressuring margins. 



 Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley are both launching private-equity funds denominated in China's currency, the latest moves by foreign financial firms to expand their presence in China. 



Chinese sovereign-wealth fund China Investment Corp. is making progress toward getting fresh funds, one of its top officials said, addressing uncertainty about the future of the fund, which faces scrutiny over its performance after investing all of its initial $200 billion.



The chief executive of German stock exchange operator Deutsche Börse, Reto Francioni, used the company's annual shareholders' meeting to urge support for the merger between Deutsche Börse and NYSE Euronext. 



Vivendi said first-quarter net profit nearly tripled to €1.73 billion ($2.46 billion), boosted by a €1.26 billion settlement from the end of a legal battle in Poland, even as competition and a recent tax change weighed on telecom operator SFR.



 Takeda Pharmaceuticals' aggressive bid to acquire Swiss rival Nycomed in a deal that could be worth as much as $14 billion shows the firepower Japan's corporate titans still wield. 



The buyout duo of Bridgepoint and Eurazeo said they had entered into exclusive talks to buy Foncia, the real-estate unit being sold by French lender Groupe BPCE.



 Facebook recently hired a public relations firm to push stories critical of Google's privacy policies, amid an escalation of the rivalry between the two Internet companies. 

 Alibaba Group clarified its decision to transfer ownership of its online-payment unit to a company controlled by group founder Jack Ma, saying the move was a response to rules that could bar foreigners from owning controlling stakes in Chinese Internet payment services. 



BT Group increased its final dividend by 9% as it reported that fiscal fourth-quarter net profit more than doubled to £472 million ($771.6 million) and said it expects to continue to grow profit and free cashflow. 



Sweden's TeliaSonera lowered data roaming charges for its customers traveling within the Nordic and Baltic countries by 90%, a move that the company's chief executive said is likely to hurt profit in the short run. 



German utility RWE said first-quarter operating profit fell 5% to €2.83 billion ($4.02 billion) as earnings improvements at its U.K. unit and an oil price-driven increase at its oil and gas production business helped to somewhat offset the poor performance of trading and gas wholesale operations. 



Électricité de France, the state-controlled power group, reported a 0.8% drop in first-quarter revenue to €19.6 billion ($27.8 billion), weighed down on year by the sale of its U.K. power networks.