One thing a royal wedding makes obvious: princess culture is alive and well among the Queen's youngest subjects. 

Countless young girls on Friday lined the procession route for Britain's royal wedding decked out in tiaras, white dresses and clutching princess dolls along the procession route.

"I want to see Kate. I really want to see her dress," said 7-year-old  Lottie Houghton, from southwest London, whose face was painted with a Union Jack who was holding a bear in a wedding dress named Kate.

Eleven-year-old  Ava Atkinson, from Macclesfield, flapped a Kate and William flag as she awaited a glimpse of the royal dress. "I think it will be plain, that will suit her - not sequins and things," she speculated. 

Many young girls go through the so-called "princess phase"—an obsession with pink, tiaras and prettiness which critics say is fueled by Disney movies and merchandise. 

But Disney was left in the dust on Friday ahead of glimpsing the real-life royals.

"I want to see Kate because she's a commoner like me, that means I could marry  Prince Harry," said  Catherine Price, a 9-year-old from Essex, who was waiting close the barricades along the Mall.

Girls as young as four had been anticipating the nuptials for weeks.

"I think she thinks she has gotten a personal invitation," said  Nicky Kentisbeer, also of London, of her 4-year-old daughter Lily. Lily had wanted to wear a white "wedding" dress for the event and was perched on her father's shoulders for a better view.

Parents, too, seem enamored with the girl-next-door-turned-princess theme.

"We've trying to explain to her that the big thing is that [Kate] will be a normal young girl when she goes up to the Abbey and a princess on her way back," said  Zac Withers, who was waiting in the crowd with his 6-year-old daughter, Emma.

"It's every girl's dream to be a princess, isn't it?" said Emma's mother,  Keely Withers, of London.

Anti-royalists can rest assured there are at least a few girls who haven't been swept away by the princess hype.

  Tabitha Vanderlande, 11, of Sussex, clad in a blue windbreaker, said watching the royal wedding "was a good opportunity" but when asked if she'd like to be a princess someday, her answer was swift. 

"No. There would be too many people following you all the time."

 Write to  Sara Schaefer Muñoz at Sara.Schaefer-Munoz@wsj.com 