 Roseland Ballroom  239 W. 52nd St., (212) 247-0200  Wednesday

The future of R&B lies in the past. Or at least in parts of the past as re-imagined and recontextualized by the likes of singers Bruno Mars and Janelle Monáe. The pair hearken back, in different ways, to an era when "show biz" could be invoked without quotation marks, and each has a propensity for refracting such history in ways that prove more antic and exciting—not to mention progressive—than much of the futuristic pop pumped out recently. Mr. Mars and Ms. Monáe teamed up for their "Hooligans in Wondaland" tour after a triumphant performance together at the Grammys, and the union bodes well for fans of blaring horns and bouffant hair.

 Highline Ballroom  431 W. 16th St., (212) 414-5994  Friday

There are many reasons to like Stevie Nicks, singer of countless Fleetwood Mac classics and wearer of scarves that flow as if woven with a spirit material from another realm. Each will be in high supply at the 21st annual edition of this unusual tribute to Ms. Nicks. The singer herself was scheduled to perform in New York on Wednesday but cancelled due to illness. Fret not: "Night of a Thousand Stevies" will carry on with performances by numerous impersonators and enchantresses from the outer corners of cabaret. Expect spirited covers of many of Ms. Nicks's masterpieces, as well as at least a few oddities including an act billed as "all-drag Canadian Stevie/Fleet-wood Mac illusionists." It's also an occasion to mark the release of "In Your Dreams," Ms. Nicks's first new solo album in 10 years.

 Music Hall of Williamsburg  66 N. 6th St., Brooklyn; (718) 486-5400  Wednesday

Gang Gang Dance grew out of the same New York scene as celebrated art-rock bands like Animal Collective, with whom they navigated the early 2000s toward all manner of strange sounds. The results suggested a kind of "world music" from a country—or a planet—that doesn't exist, and the style has only grown more convincing as it has evolved. The group's latest mark of progress comes by way of "Eye Contact," an excellent album on which Gang Gang Dance plays with wily rhythms and finds an intriguing meeting point between rainsticks and lasers. Funky foundations make Gang Gang Dance songs warm and danceable, and singer Lizzi Bougatsos pries them open with a distinctive voice as angelic and deranged as that of romantic goth goddess Kate Bush. 

 Bowery Ballroom  6 Delancey St., (212) 533-2111  Saturday

This young English band roared up out of nowhere a couple months ago with a sound that made aging indie-rockers nostalgic and gave younger fans a reference point for allusions to lionized bands like Dinosaur Jr., Pavement and Yo La Tengo. The group made a racket in March at the South by Southwest festival, where such rackets can be made to linger. And there's enough lurking within the high-swung guitars and lo-fi murk of the band's self-titled debut album to indicate a legacy that could grow beyond the bounds of imitation. 

 Bell House  149 Seventh St., Brooklyn, (718) 643-6510  May 10-11

The three chummy lifers in Yo La Tengo make up the archetypal indie-rock band, from the tops of their shaggy heads to the bottoms of their Chuck Taylor sneakers. From their home in Hoboken, N.J.—all the closer to the eclectic listener-supported radio station WFMU—they have made good for nearly 30 years on the promise of primed guitars and studiously accrued record collections. Meanwhile, they have amassed a sturdy and impressive songbook of their own, drawing on a mix of gnarled noise and sweet harmonies. Here, for a series they've dubbed the "Wheel Spin Show," the trio will spin a wheel and devote an opening set to whatever it commands, with options including songs starting with the letter "S" and a scenario in which the band and its crew act out a classic TV sitcom of their choosing. 