DUBLIN—The leaders of Ireland's Fine Gael and Labour parties agreed Sunday on a program for coalition government, as they prepare to govern during the country's worst-ever debt crisis. 

Fine Gael leader Enda Kenny, who will almost certainly be voted prime minister when the Irish parliament meets Wednesday, and Labour leader Eamon Gilmore said they reached agreement on outstanding contentious issues, including squaring their differences on a timetable for introducing more austerity budgets over the next four years. 

The parties have been in talks since Monday following elections that were dominated by debate on Ireland's sovereign- and bank-bond debt and jobs crises. Both parties also pledged to renegotiate the terms of the international bailout deal Ireland struck last November. 

Mr. Kenny's center-right Fine Gael won most seats in the Parliament but still fell short of securing an overall majority and started talks with the center-left Labour party, which had won the second largest number of seats. 

Compromising on the speed of introducing harsher deficit cuts, the parties have settled on reducing the country's budget deficit to 3% of gross domestic product by the end of 2015. That is the same deadline given by the European Union and International Monetary Fund under the terms of the 67.5 billion euro ($94.3 billion) loans deal for Ireland. 

"We are constrained by the EU and the IMF," Mr. Kenny told journalists Sunday. "Given the constraints of the deal that has been done, Fine Gael and Labour are putting forward the document we believe will put our economy in the right direction."

And signalling a pragmatic course on bank-bond debts, Kenny said that if burden sharing was "off the agenda" that his coalition would want to see whether there were "other flexibilities" in looming key negotiations with EU leaders. 

In the elections, Fine Gael proposed cutting the Irish deficit to 3% of GDP by the end of 2014, while Labour said the deadline should be extended to 2016 to avoid inflicting more damage on Ireland's crisis economy. 

The coalition deal says a remaining nine billion euros of deficit reductions required by the EU/IMF through 2015 will be skewed toward spending cuts rather than tax rises, a campaign pledge of Fine Gael. 

Labour has secured some of its key election pledges, including no further cuts in child-welfare payments, while blocking the immediate re-introduction of third-level education fees. 

Analysts say the new coalition agreement is notable for its pragmatism and absence of campaign rhetoric on burning bank-bond holders. 

Philip Lane, professor of economics at Trinity College Dublin, said the main message was that the new coalition intended to apply the terms of the EU/IMF austerity deal struck by the previous government.

"Both parties have signed up to nine billion euros in additional budget-reduction cuts. Such is the level of the sovereign debt that it had no other option. That's important for ensuring no short-term uncertainty," Mr. Lane said. 

The coalition plan also includes a fund to boost lending to small business enterprises, and government ministries, including the finance ministry, will be reformed and restructured. 

Both parties want to negotiate a lower interest rate on the near 6% interest rate Ireland is paying on its international bailout loans and have pressed their European political counterparts to provide easier terms. 

Mr. Kenny returned from a meeting in Helsinki on Friday of the European People's Party, while Gilmore returned from Athens where he attended a meeting of European Socialist parties. 

Ireland's sovereign-debt crisis has its roots in the reckless lending undertaken by its banks to commercial property lenders during a short period between 2002 and 2007. When property prices crashed, the Irish government injected the banks with 46.3 billion euros in capital, amounting to approximately 30% of Irish GDP. 

The EU/IMF aid program, which said the banks will need an immediate further injection of 10 billion euros, also identified a possible 25-billion-euro "contingency fund" for the broken lenders. Cut off from bond markets since last October, analysts say Ireland's debt could rise to as much as 130% of GDP by 2015. 

On Sunday, Mr. Kenny repeated comments that he will await the outcome of a new round of stress tests before assessing the coalition's banking policy. 