The Philippines' armed forces sent two military aircraft to the disputed waters of the South China Sea after a Philippine oil-exploration vessel said it was confronted by two Chinese patrol boats, Philippine officials said Thursday.

The run-in, which took place Wednesday, is the latest incident to complicate the delicate balance of power in the waters, which are claimed in whole or part by China, the Philippines, Vietnam, Malaysia, Brunei and Taiwan.

Last year, relations between Vietnam and China deteriorated badly after Vietnamese fishing vessels were apprehended by Chinese vessels in waters which China claims as its own. Beijing, meanwhile, was angered last year when U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton told a regional security forum in Hanoi that a peaceful, multilateral resolution of the competing territorial claims in the South China Sea was in America's interest. 

The waters straddle some of the world's busiest shipping lanes and rich fish stocks. In addition, they are also believed to lie atop substantial oil and natural gas reserves.

The latest incident involving China and the Philippines underscores the sensitivity of the resource-rich area, especially as the Philippines in recent months has been trying to improve relations with China.

In December, Philippine President Benigno Aquino III chose not to send a representative to the ceremony awarding the Nobel Peace Prize to Chinese dissident  Liu Xiaobo. Mr. Aquino said at the time his decision was part of a diplomatic effort to save the lives of three Filipinos facing the death penalty in China for allegedly trafficking drugs. Their executions, scheduled for February, were postponed.

Philippine Lt. Gen.  Juancho Sabban, though, told the Associated Press Thursday that if the Philippines felt its territory was being violated, it would push back. "It's clearly our territory," Lt. Gen. Sabban said. "If they bully us, well, even children will fight back."

A news office official at China's Foreign Ministry declined immediate comment. 

Lt. Gen. Sabban said Wednesday's incident occurred on the Reed Bank near the Spratly Islands, which both the Philippines and China claim along with other countries. Officials from the Philippines say the Reed Bank is well within Philippine territory, but when an oil exploration vessel began preparation to probe the geological potential of the area, it was warned off by two Chinese patrol boats.

Lt. Gen. Sabban then said he dispatched an OV-10 light-bomber plane and Islander light aircraft to scan the area, but Chinese vessels had left the area by the time the Philippine planes arrived.

 Write to  James Hookway at james.hookway@wsj.com 