For small businesses, collateral is taking center stage when it comes to grabbing the attention of banks as they begin to loosen their purse strings. 

Companies that hold tangible assets like buildings or other types of property are getting a first look by banks, even when their cash flow and creditworthiness aren't as strong as businesses with less collateral. 

BoeFly.com, which connects lenders to borrowers, says many of the 570 institutions that use its service are favoring loan applications from restaurants, hotels, manufacturers, retailers and real-estate companies, all of which are typically asset-heavy. "That doesn't mean they're getting the loans, but they are getting a look," says BoeFly Chief Executive  Bobby Tannenhauser. 

He says companies with less collateral—such as those in the information, technology or professional-services fields—are coming up short.

Banks agree that collateral is increasingly giving some small businesses an edge. Prior to the recession, banks were issuing "a great deal" of unsecured loans but they rarely do today, says  Craig Calafati, senior vice president and national sales manager of Celtic Bank in Salt Lake City.

Underwriting metrics, such as collateral, cash flow and credit scores, are being monitored both by the bank managers and federal regulators, he says. So getting a foot in the door at a bank is "much more difficult" without collateral, says Mr. Calafati. 

  Andrew Fox, founder and CEO of Track Entertainment Inc., learned this the hard way. Late last year, he reluctantly sold portions of his New York-based media and entertainment company to private-equity groups and a former customer. He says it was his only choice after he failed to obtain a $10 million working-capital credit line.

Mr. Fox says the company had $29 million in revenue with about $5 million in investor debt in 2010, and it was profitable and growing, with $1.8 million in income. But he says he was turned down by 20 banks because the company doesn't own any tangible assets that could be used as loan collateral.

"I thought I'd played exactly by the book," he says. "It was very frustrating."

Many small businesses report similar trouble with lenders. Half of small businesses surveyed say it is harder to secure credit today compared with this time last year, according to Greenwich Associates, a research and advisory company that collects data for the financial-services industry. Only 15% of small businesses say the credit conditions have improved.

But businesses with collateral are also getting turned down. Some of the most asset-heavy companies are also the most bankruptcy prone, including hotels, auto dealers and construction-related companies, according to Sageworks Inc., an economic-research firm in Raleigh, N.C., that collects data on closely held companies. 

  Sherwin Patidar, a vice president at First Capital Bank in Chicago,  says many small businesses that hold properties are still struggling in the lagging economy.

"What I see coming through, three to four times a day, is requests for gas station loans and I'm not touching them," Mr. Patidar says. "People have cut back and are not traveling as much. People are not doing the impulse buys inside the stores as much."

Some businesses that typically lack collateral are otherwise well-positioned to meet debt obligations. Based on BoeFly data, professional, scientific and technical services companies, along with management and consulting firms, all received below-average lender requests on the BoeFly site. But they also appear in the top-10 list of industries most likely to repay debts, according to Sageworks.

Such firms may have their own offices and equipment, but more importantly, they are considered recession-proof.  Jana Rouble, vice president of Community South Bank in Knoxville, Tenn., says professional services, including doctors and dentists, are having success getting loans at her bank because they "will always be around and be needed."

The best-positioned companies for getting loans, however, appear to be those with collateral that are also posting robust sales, or are part of a well-established franchise.

For instance,  Ted Ferkenhoff closed a $300,000 loan for an AlphaGraphics store in Flagstaff, Ariz., in August, after connecting with SunRise Bank of Arizona through BoeFly. AlphaGraphics, a printing shop that caters to businesses, is an international franchise with 260 locations in the U.S. 

Mr. Ferkenhoff says the loan is secured by the print shop's equipment, plus he put up personal assets, including his home.

Now, he is building out his lease space and planning to open at the end of February. "It's fantastic, watching the business take shape," he says. 

 Write to  Emily Maltby at emily.maltby@wsj.com 