BRUSSELS—The European Commission recommended that European Union countries defer controversial changes to rules on airport screening of duty-free liquids, bowing to opposition from EU governments that said the move would weaken aviation security. 

The last-minute reversal by the commission, the EU's executive arm, came Friday, the day the changes were due to come into force. The law would allow passengers traveling from outside the EU with approved packages of duty-free liquids in hand baggage to carry them onto connecting flights at EU transfer airports. 

Many airports and governments have said that advanced new scanning machines aren't yet up to the task. 

"In recent days, a growing number of member states decided to maintain the ban on carrying duty-free liquids purchased in third countries," the commission said in a statement. 

The commission said it changed its decision "in order to avoid a situation which would not have facilitated travel but rather caused confusion for passengers." 

EU Transport Commissioner  Siim Kallas will over coming months review the situation "together with member states and consult with the United States as one of the key destinations of flights from the EU," the commission said. 

Opposition was led by EU member countries with some of the biggest airports for transfer passengers, which would have been most affected by the relaxation of the ban. France, the U.K., the Netherlands and Spain were among the most outspoken opponents of the change, according to people close to the debate. 

Another factor in Mr. Kallas's decision was resistance from the U.S., which is the biggest non-EU market for European air traffic. Roughly 20% of EU traffic outside the bloc is to and from the U.S. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security hasn't publicly stated its position on the EU's plan, and was widely believed within the aviation industry to have viewed it unfavorably due to security concerns similar to those raised by opponents within the EU.

The plan to start relaxing the ban had been envisioned as a way to reduce the "hassle factor" for air passengers, but in the end, differences over the move promised to make life more confusing for travelers. 

Mr. Kallas's statement said his goal was "to make life easier for air travelers," and the plan wasn't going to accomplish that. He added that "it is clear that a situation at European airports which leads to confusion for air passengers as to whether they can travel or not with 'duty-free liquids,' in particular for connecting flights to the United States, should be avoided."

The deferral means EU rules on liquids will remain identical to those in the U.S. and other major markets. That concurrence is more in line with the current trend to align aviation security policies. The U.S. and EU, for example, are working closely to tighten standards for air-cargo screening, in the wake of recent attempts by terrorists to detonate explosives in packages onboard commercial aircraft.

Attention will now shift to April 29, 2013, when the EU plans to eliminate completely the ban on liquids, aerosols and gels in airplane cabin baggage.

 Write to  Daniel Michaels at daniel.michaels@wsj.com 