 New York 

Good or bad, every work of art is a time capsule, and sometimes it's the worst ones that contain the most information about what the world was like when they were new. In the 1970s American playgoers rushed to embrace Jason Miller's "That Championship Season" as a masterpiece of hard-hitting truth-telling. It ran for 944 performances, won a Pulitzer and was turned into a movie that starred Robert Mitchum. Today "That Championship Season," which is now being revived on Broadway for the first time, looks like what it is, a quasipolitical cartoon whose smugness stinks like dime-store perfume. Even so, I doubt that any other play that opened on Broadway in 1972 has more to tell us about the self-satisfied attitudes of the generation that made it.

Miller, an actor-turned-playwright who is remembered (if at all) for having played the priest in "The Exorcist," apparently wrote "That Championship Season" to exorcise what he regarded as the collective sins of those Americans who, like him, grew up in the benighted Age of Eisenhower. The play's five characters are residents of a city indistinguishable from Scranton, the medium-sized Pennsylvania town where Miller grew up. In youth, four of them played together on a high-school basketball team whose coach (Brian Cox) is hosting a reunion dinner at his home. The men seem friendly, but appearances are deceiving, for Phil (Chris Noth) has had an affair with the wife of George (Jim Gaffigan), the mayor of the town where the play is set, and is secretly planning to throw his financial support behind another candidate in the next election. James (Kiefer Sutherland), George's mousy but ambitious campaign manager, tells George of Phil's double-barreled treachery, and all hell breaks loose. Meanwhile, Tom (Jason Patric), a bright, bitter alcoholic, sits around insulting his old friends. Eventually, though, they realize that they're stuck with one another, and pose for a drunken group portrait taken by the coach. Curtain.

Bernard B. Jacobs Theatre

Through May 29

I won't say that a better playwright might not have been able to make something watchable out of this clichéd scenario, but what Miller made out of it in 1972 was pretty much what you'd have expected from a second-rate writer born in 1939 who had drunk deep from the well of the '60s and now proposed to inform his audiences that their parents' values were comprehensively corrupt. Hence the coach, a boorish, ill-educated stage-Irish blowhard who proudly displays pictures of Teddy Roosevelt, John Kennedy and Fightin' Joe McCarthy on his mantelpiece and salts his small talk with good old-fashioned ethnic slurs of the highest possible voltage, thereby alerting the audience to his lack of enlightenment. Hence, too, his "boys," all of whom are louts save for Tom, who clearly speaks for the author (and who is played in this revival by the author's son).

Were there really people like the coach? Certainly, and plenty of them, too—but the ludicrous lack of subtlety with which Miller portrays this one kills "That Championship Season" stone dead. Every five pages or so, the action, such as it is, comes to a halt so that he can deliver a sermonette crammed full of his personal prejudices: "Communists are at work today. Worse! Students burning down colleges. They're bringing a defeated army home, kill you in the womb today, in the womb. Worse than the '30s. Niggers shooting the police. Government gone bad. And there's no McCarthy to protect us." He might as well be wearing a black hat and twirling his mustache, and his Jew-hating boys aren't much better. Did no one ever bother to tell Miller that a villain is infinitely more convincing when he's portrayed with a pinch of sympathy?

Gregory Mosher, who directed last year's flawless Broadway revival of Arthur Miller's "A View From the Bridge," has done his best to transfuse this moldy theatrical corpse with the blood of plausibility. Likewise the members of his very good cast, two of whom, Mr. Noth and Mr. Patric, are giving performances of Tony- worthy penetration (though not Mr. Cox, an outstanding actor who settles this time around for playing an obvious role in an obvious way). Michael Yeargan's ultranaturalistic living-room set is convincing in every detail but one: I can't imagine that the coach would have hung a print as artful-looking as John Singer Sargent's 1903 portrait of Theodore Roosevelt over his fireplace. He would surely have preferred something more vulgar—perhaps even as vulgar as "That Championship Season."

 Mr. Teachout, the Journal's drama critic, blogs about theater and the other arts at www.terryteachout.com. Write to him at tteachout@wsj.com. 