BEIJING—Chinese Internet giant Alibaba Group said it is investing as much as $4.6 billion to build a network of warehouses across China, as it looks to feed the country's boom in online shopping.

The move will directly benefit Taobao, an Alibaba unit that is China's biggest shopping website by transaction volume, and comes at a time when Alibaba says China's logistics industry has insufficient capacity to meet the needs of the country's expanding electronic-commerce sector. 

Alibaba will commit an initial 10 billion yuan ($1.52 billion) to the warehouse project and, joined by financing partners, more than 30 billion yuan over three to five years, said  Zeng Ming, Alibaba's chief strategy officer.

The company is making the investment to help speed delivery of products to consumers. "In 10 years, we hope that anywhere in China you can buy a product online, and, at the slowest, it will get to your home in eight hours," Alibaba Chairman  Jack Ma said at a news briefing Wednesday.

Chinese couriers ship many of the goods bought online in China, and can often deliver items the day after an order for a fairly low price—the equivalent of a few dollars or less. But e-commerce executives complain that the existing infrastructure is often fragmented and inefficient.



The regions Alibaba has chosen for initial warehouse construction include the areas around the northern cities of Beijing and Tianjin, the Yangtze River Delta in east China and the Pearl River Delta in southern China since each is a major population center, the company said. 

Alibaba, which is 40% owned by  Yahoo Inc.,
YHOO


0.06
%




 currently plans warehouse facilities in those three regions with total floor space around three million square meters, or the size of 560 football fields, Alibaba said. Logistics partners, Taobao sellers and other business-to-consumer websites will all be able to use Alibaba's warehouses, it said. 

The company said Alibaba.com Ltd., its business-to-business commerce platform, will also offer warehousing services to small Chinese exporters.

Online retail transactions in China reached 134.17 billion yuan ($20.4 billion) in the third quarter, double year-ago levels, and Taobao accounted for 75% of the market, according to Beijing research firm Analysys International.

Taobao operates a consumer auction website similar to  eBay.com Inc.,
EBAY


0.58
%




 but its Taobao Mall retail portal, where merchants can set up online storefronts, is more similar to  Amazon.com Inc.
AMZN


-0.92
%




 

Transactions on Taobao reached almost 400 billion yuan in 2010, Mr. Zeng said, up from 208.3 billion yuan in 2009. Alibaba Group said in 2008 that Taobao broke even, but the closely held company doesn't disclose its financials.

While several Chinese Internet firms, including smaller e-commerce rival  E-Commerce China Dangdang Inc.,
DANG


-0.02
%




 made strong trading debuts in New York last year, Taobao Chief Financial Officer  Daniel Zhang said Taobao has no current plans to seek an initial public offering.

Alibaba's move comes in an increasingly competitive market, with online transactions expected to grow to roughly 7% of China's overall retail market by 2013 from about 2% last year, according to Deutsche Bank analyst Alan Hellawell.