 Hobart, Australia 

MONA looks suspiciously like the lair of a Bond-movie villain. Tasmania's brand-new Museum of Old and New Art occupies a privately owned peninsula, reachable by a dedicated high-speed catamaran service. Its galleries are cut up to 17 meters deep into khaki-colored sandstone, and the only entrance is via a circular glass elevator hidden inside a mansion.

And like all Bond lairs, the museum has a fabulously rich yet oddly reclusive owner, but Hobart's resident Dr. Evil, multimillionaire gambler David Walsh, is nowhere to be found. He's "over" talking to the press about his newest venture, according to his spokeswoman, "Research Curator" Delia Nicholls. But she's happy to take a visiting journalist on a tour, as long as I don't stray into the restricted areas.

Mr. Walsh spent $80 million building this underground labyrinth, filled it with $100 million worth of antiquities and modern art, and threw it open to the public for free. In Paris or London this might attract attention, but to do it on a sparsely populated island even many Australians regard as a backwater certainly raises questions. 

"I'll meet you by the car crash," Ms Nicholls tells me before I arrive. Above ground, a car has been driven at speed down a ramp between two concrete walls that gradually narrow to less than the width of the vehicle. Its mangled nose now protrudes from the gap like toothpaste squeezed from a tube.

This is art: Roman Signer's "Engpass," or "Bottleneck." But one visitor has driven down the ramp to park directly behind the crumpled vehicle. Once inside the museum, he may find much else he fails to recognize as art, if he can find the museum in the first place. There's a clichéd abhorrence of signage, and the museum is surrounded by Mr. Walsh's other businesses. These include the Moorilla Vineyard and eight art-filled stand-alone residential pavilions, as well as function rooms, restaurants, bars, and a microbrewery. 

Perhaps the art is just a loss-leading promotion for Moorilla wines and Moo Brew beer. The elevator doors open on neo-classical seating and a counter well-stocked with bottles. Instead of exiting through the gift shop, visitors enter through a wine bar. 

Still, Ms. Nicholls denies any profit motive: "He's invested about $200 million, and he says when he's 2,000 he might make some money back." 

Mr. Walsh may not want to talk to the press, but once inside he is not shy about hitting the visitor with his shtick about art. From the catalogue to the exhibition guide, you can't get either him or his acolytes to shut up.

The message is that art criticism is all too often a form of self-stimulation. So he provides essays of schoolboy sophistication full of cheap wordplay and a behind-the-bike-sheds enthusiasm for masturbation, beginning with the title of the museum's first show, "Monanisms," which runs through July 19.

The hands-on entertainment includes Rafael Lozano-Hemmer's "Pulse Room." Grasp two sensors and your pulse rate is reproduced in waves of light from dozens of overhead incandescent bulbs. Children frolic in the spray from Julius Popp's "bit.fall"—a row of ceiling-mounted nozzles that briefly reproduce popular Internet search terms as curtains of falling water. In the artist's own words this is "a metaphor for the incessant flood of information we are exposed to."

It might also apply to the show's free guide, a modified iPod touch called the "O," refreshingly light compared to the $80, 2.6 kg catalogue. Press a button and the device works out where you are and lists nearby works. 

Choose an artwork to get a screen of basic information, and a row of buttons is offered for further details. These are labelled "Artwank" and "Gonzo," as in journalism, mostly commissioned from a writer deliberately ignorant of art. Much of it is self-referential rambling that reads like any of the million blogs that have now made gonzo writing more common than the real thing.

Mr. Walsh has dubbed his museum "a subversive adult Disneyland," and there's certainly a freak-show atmosphere. But there's little subversive about the clichéd antiestablishment pose, and the attempts to shock through displays of profanity and pudenda are positively old-fashioned.

There's something here to offend everyone: Stephen Shanabrook's remains of a suicide bomber cast in chocolate, Julia deVille's self-explanatory "Kitten Trophy Rug," Chris Ophili's famous elephant-dung-splattered "Holy Virgin Mary," Greg Taylor's row of 150 different cast-from-life vaginas (inevitably the work's title uses a less printable term), and Mr. Walsh's display of the urn of his late father's ashes. "David wants to offer everything you can get in a church," says Ms. Nicholls. "So you can also have your ashes interred here for $75,000."

About 70% of the collection is antiquities rather than ephemera, and there's much of lasting beauty, including a small Roman bronze of Leda and the Swan and a Ptolemaic statue of a falcon in carved basalt. Many of these can only be seen by peering in through small windows in two 22-meter rippling walls covered in 7,000 leaves of hammered gold.

Mr. Walsh is incensed by what he calls retro-fit. He hates artists who make art and then make up an explanation, curators who invent themes, critics who see meaning in coincidence, and the pressure on himself to invent pleasing responses to questions about the purpose of the whole enterprise.

This first show is simply his own selection of 460 favorite pieces from his 2,210-strong collection, which ranges from a 6,000-year-old clay jar to works only six months old. Far from claiming connoisseur status, he's happy to have his own comments appear in the gonzo category. His position is the ultimate culture cliché: "I don't know much about art, but I know what I like."

The catalogue closes with a photograph of Mr. Walsh by Andres Serrano of "Piss Christ" fame. It would be more shocking if he wasn't nude.

In an afterword, Mr. Walsh speculates on the reader's response to the show. "Most likely it just re-affirmed your notion that all this art stuff is just pap from pseudo-intellectual tossers who chase their cock-tails around in circles," he muses. "If so, that'll do." Regardless, MONA's bunker architecture, its charming location, and its juxtaposition of the stimulating, the sublime, and the simply specious makes it arguably the planet's most thoroughly entertaining art museum.

 Mr. Neville-Hadley is a Vancouver-based author. 