So many investment banks raced so quickly to win a piece of the booming IPO business in Asia this year that the casual observer might not realize one fact: Fees from such deals aren't that great.

But companies in the region are offering a sweetener: incentive fees that encourage bankers to put their all into the job.

In total, of course, the business of initial public offerings in Asia has been a big money maker for investment banks. Last year, Hong Kong led the global pack by raising a total of $52.9 billion in new stock offerings, while New York, at No. 2, raised $34.6 billion. As a result, IPOs are one of the most lucrative businesses for investment banks in Asia, accounting for a third of overall investment-banking revenue.

"Asia has had a fantastic year and will continue to gain prominence globally as a fund-raising destination," said  Jonathan Penkin, co-head of equity capital markets for Asia, excluding Japan, at Goldman Sachs, which was a lead banker on the IPOs for AIA Group Ltd. and Agricultural Bank of China Ltd. Goldman ranked first among equity fund-raising deals in the Asian-Pacific region last year, advising on 88 transactions that raised $31.47 billion, according to data provider Dealogic.

Yet as a percentage of the money raised, fees in Asia tend to lag behind those elsewhere. In Hong Kong, China and Southeast Asia, underwriting bankers get between 2.4% and 3.5% of the deal value, while in Japan they get 3%. In India and South Korea, fees generally are about 1%, or even lower for government deals, investment bankers say. That contrasts with about 3% in the U.K. and a cushy 7% in the U.S.

Still, companies know they need a way to make it worth an investment bank's while to do a deal.

Enter incentive fees, which are awarded to the leading or star banks in a deal deemed to have done a good job. Bankers say that while such incentives have been around for some time, the number of deals offering them last year picked up noticeably. Dealogic data bear that out: 40 IPOs that raised a total of $45.2 billion offered incentive fees in Hong Kong last year, compared with 27 deals offering $14.4 billion in 2009, according to the data provider. In the Asian-Pacific region, 55 IPOs had incentive fees, compared with 31 in 2009. In Europe last year, 20 IPOs had incentive fees. By contrast, North America had just one, and that was a London listing: Seattle clean-water technology company Halo Source Inc., which raised $80 million in an initial public offering on London's Alternative Investment Market.

The decision to pay an incentive fee is up to the company, but in a year when so many deals, and complex and big ones at that, were jostling for investors' attention, most of the companies paid out, bankers said. In a deal that the company feels didn't do well, the incentive fee, which favors global coordinators, could be cut or withheld.

Agricultural Bank of China, or AgBank, the last of the Big Four lenders in China to list, set aside 0.5% of the deal for incentive fees, according to its prospectus, although the final amount awarded was less, according to people familiar with the matter. An incentive fee might have helped bankers try harder to sell a deal that otherwise had its challenges, thanks to AgBank's rural focus and legacy of bad loans.

"The total fee for AgBank's IPO underwriters was roughly 1.5%, made of basic fees and incentive fees," said  Pan Gongsheng, executive vice president of Agricultural Bank of China and formerly a top executive at Industrial & Commercial Bank of China Ltd., China 's largest bank by assets. "We did include incentive fees for bankers during ICBC's IPO, but the [AgBank] IPO had higher incentive fees. We wanted to encourage bankers to work hard on the deal," said Mr. Pan. ICBC's 2006 IPO raised $21.9 billion.

AIA Group, which had veered over the past couple of years between a full sale and an IPO, gave 0.25% in incentive fees.

Southeast Asian companies were among the most notable for rewarding bankers. Malaysia's $4.8 billion Petronas Chemicals Group Bhd. IPO in November offered 0.5% in incentive fees. Incentive fees of 0.75% were offered for the $3 billion IPO of Global Logistics Properties Ltd. and the $718 million IPO of Mapletree Industrial Trust Ltd., both in Singapore. It wasn't clear how much of the fees were paid out.

While bankers agree that this won't be a year of megadeals in the vein of AgBank or AIA, there is a long list of IPOs in the pipeline ranging between $1 billion and $2 billion. It is a good bet many of the companies going public will be paying that little bit extra to get their deals done.

—Fiona Law contributed to this article.

 Write to  Nisha Gopalan at nisha.gopalan@dowjones.com 