  Marc Benioff, chief executive of business-software company  Salesforce.com Inc.,
CRM


-0.17
%




 recently inked a $278 million commitment to San Francisco.

Salesforce.com agreed to pay that amount for 14 acres of undeveloped land in the Mission Bay neighborhood, the costliest land purchase in the city in years, according to local real-estate experts. Salesforce.com will use the land to build a nearly two-million-square-foot campus, up from the roughly 700,000 square feet it currently occupies across four buildings in downtown San Francisco. Mr. Benioff, who founded Salesforce.com in 1999 after 13 years at  Oracle Corp.
ORCL


0.02
%




, also pledged $100 million last year to help build a new children's hospital in Mission Bay.

Mr. Benioff, 46 years old and a fourth-generation San Franciscan, recently discussed why Salesforce.com decided to stay in the city and the pros and cons of running a technology company there versus Silicon Valley.

 WSJ: Why did you decide to remain headquartered in San Francisco?

 Mr. Benioff: More than half of our employees actually live in San Francisco proper. The next [biggest group] are in the East Bay and the North Bay. Only a fraction of our employees are from the South Bay. 

That's very different than other high-technology companies. The decision to be based in San Francisco has served us very well because San Francisco is an underserved market in terms of talent. It's got a tremendous amount of very highly educated, very technically savvy people, and we're able to draw on that and build the company very rapidly.



 WSJ: Did you consider locations in Silicon Valley or the East Bay for your new corporate headquarters?

 Mr. Benioff: We did. I got very close to making the decision to go to Oakland. There is a tremendous office building that we were looking at in Oakland right on the BART stop. But at the end of the day, our employees made it very clear to us they wanted to stay in San Francisco.

Then we had to decide between two options: Would we move into the new Transbay [Transit] Tower, which is going to be over the [former] Transbay Terminal, or would we build a campus? Those were really our only two options because we need essentially two million square feet. A lot of employees said that they had worked in a campus environment before and really liked that. What really put it over the edge was when we [decided] to have a water-taxi system directly from the campus to the East Bay. 



 WSJ: You've said that you've spoken with city officials about beefing up the transportation options in Mission Bay. Have any of those conversations borne fruit?

 Mr. Benioff: I don't think that there's anything that we have that we're ready to announce at this point. We're really just at the beginning of a very long project.



 WSJ: Corporate history has many examples of expansion plans that were overly ambitions, that left companies with too much space on their hands. How do you know your plans aren't too grand?

 Mr. Benioff: Our growth on the top line speaks for itself. Our absolute growth on the bottom line also speaks for itself [as does] our core growth in our customer numbers, market share and employee count. For us to continue to grow—whether it's the top line or the bottom line or the employees—we need to have a platform to be able to do that. The key platform is really the campus. 

And also the opportunity is so unusual. How many times do you have an opportunity to buy [14] acres on the bay to build your campus, on a Muni line?



 WSJ: What are the benefits of running a tech company here versus Silicon Valley?

 Mr. Benioff: The No. 1 reason to run a tech company here is that you have a population that isn't being tapped by the Silicon Valley companies and really can't be. [A lack of public-transit options means] Silicon Valley companies haven't been able to draw from San Francisco or many of the East Bay counties. We benefit from that.

I honestly think it's so much better. I worked in Silicon Valley for 13 years. There are no restaurants, there is no shopping, there is no energy. 



 WSJ: What are the drawbacks to running a company in San Francisco?

 Mr. Benioff: San Francisco is more expensive. Of course it's cheaper to go to Oakland. It's cheaper to go to Redwood City or San Mateo. But you just don't get what you get in San Francisco.



 WSJ: How has the San Francisco tech scene evolved since you started Salesforce.com?

 Mr. Benioff: There always has been a good tech environment [with] lots of little companies getting born and dying [in the] South of Market [neighborhood]. But there is much more fever today in San Francisco. The hottest companies like Twitter and Zynga and many other small companies are all right here. 

Now that we have basically acquired all of the remaining land in Mission Bay, it's going to be an accelerator for technology [companies] to move south to Candlestick Point [and for] extending the Muni lines and transportation systems there. I think that that will be the next step. You're going to see development now move from where we are towards the Candlestick Point area, which is a huge opportunity for companies.

 Write to  Cari Tuna at cari.tuna@wsj.com 