SEOUL—South Korean President Lee Myung-bak used his New Year's message to warn North Korea to halt its "military adventurism," underscoring the greater priority that heightened regional tension has demanded, though much of his address dealt with economic issues.

A year ago, Mr. Lee hardly mentioned North Korea in his New Year's message. But after the North's two military attacks against the South in 2010, Mr. Lee spent the first five minutes of the 25-minute speech on what he called its "grave challenges."

"The North must come to the realization that nothing can be gained through military adventurism," Mr. Lee said. "They cannot speak of peace and solidarity among Korean people while shelling civilians and threatening compatriots with nuclear attacks."

On Nov. 23, North Korea attacked the South's Yeonpyeong Island with artillery fire that killed two South Korean soldiers and two civilians, destroyed about 30 homes and damaged most other buildings in a village where about 1,400 people lived.

Since then, Mr. Lee's government and the South's military have repeatedly expressed in strong language that South Korea will strike back at any more attacks from the North. 

On Monday, Mr. Lee compared the South's reaction to the Nov. 23 attack to what happened in the U.S. after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attack, noting that Washington used that event to re-evaluate its security and intelligence strategies.

"The shelling of Yeonpyeong Island also served as an opportunity for us to reflect on our security readiness and overhaul our defense posture," Mr. Lee said. "As the safety and security of the Korean people is absolute, there cannot be any delay in establishing security measures."

North Korea's annual New Year's message followed its usual pattern of offering an olive branch to Seoul, then warning South Korea that it is ready to fight and outlining a list of things the South should do, including ending its military alliance with the U.S., to smooth inter-Korean relations.

Mr. Lee said he remains open to dialogue with North Korea but only if it doesn't lead to bluster from Pyongyang. "If the North exhibits sincerity, we have both the will and the plan to drastically enhance economic cooperation," he said.

In the 2010 speech, Mr. Lee made a similar offer in his brief mention of the North. He urged Pyongyang to return to the six-nation nuclear disarmament talks, set up a new organization for inter-Korean dialogue and look for the remains of casualties from the Korean War of the 1950s. "I hope that North Korea will engage in genuine dialogue," he said at the time.

Most of Mr. Lee's speech focused on economic matters, such as expansion of the nation's welfare program and efforts to create more jobs for young adults just out of college or military service. He reiterated previously stated goals of 5% gross domestic product growth in 2011 and inflation under 3%.

 Write to  Evan Ramstad at evan.ramstad@wsj.com 