STATS: A 19,963-square-foot, nine-bedroom home with eight full baths and four half-baths on 13 acres. The owners are auctioning the property without a reserve on June 16 through Concierge Auctions. Property taxes in 2010 were $115,713, according to the owners. 

DETAILS: The owner spent 10 years building this castle, modeling it after one that he'd seen in Spain. Completed in 2003, the house features 22-foot-tall doors from Paris, a pub, a billiards room and an indoor basketball court. Two craftsmen from Greece made the moldings (it took them 3½ years). The home theater has a ticket booth, a bar and a hand-carved fireplace. A room hidden behind the paneling in the Napoleon room (all the rooms have names) was designed as a panic room. There is a separate apartment over the four-car garage for the staff. On the grounds are a boathouse, a stone fountain carved in Florence and a racetrack. 

SELLERS: Steve and Ashley Grindstaff. The couple work together running five car dealerships that they own in Tennessee.

THE NEIGHBORHOOD: This is bluegrass country and each year the city hosts the Little Chicago Blues Festival as well as the Blue Plum Festival. 

WHAT WE PAID: The owners estimate that they have put $28.5 million into the land and the house.

WHAT DREW US TO THE HOUSE ORIGINALLY: "Steve came from a very humble family and always dreamed of being a knight and one day living in a castle," says Mrs. Grindstaff. 



WHY WE'RE SELLING: The couple is moving on to other things, including the impending birth of twins. Mrs. Grindstaff would like to build a home in the style of a Southern plantation. The castle has been on and off the market for several years. When their broker suggested an auction, they agreed that it would get them the best price.

WHAT WE'LL MISS: "We'll miss the privacy and the spaciousness," says Mrs. Grindstaff. She adds that people especially like the racetrack and the four Italian race cars (they come with the castle). 

WHAT WE WON'T: The yelling, says Mrs. Grindstaff. There is no intercom system. 

OTHERS SAY: Stephanie Conner, managing broker at Crye-Leike Real Estate Services, says she has never seen anything like it in her 16 years in the real-estate business. "To be in a house in our area with a grand hall is pretty unique in itself," says Ms. Conner. She adds that the large amount of acreage and the privacy also make the property stand out. The original asking price for the castle was $28.5 million. "For the sellers it would be great if they could get that, but it's up in the air what it will bring," she says. 