So the former New York Giants running back Tiki Barber is attempting a football comeback.

 No one seems to think this is a very good idea, except for Tiki, and a few people close to Tiki, as well as the current New York Giants, who would very much like to play against Tiki. 

Are you a pro athlete considering a comeback? Please take our quiz:

 1. Why are you coming back? 

A. To send a message that people 35 and over can still make embarrassing decisions. (7 points) 

B. Signing autographs at forklift trade shows has lost its glamour. (5 points)

C. Slovenian edition of Dancing With the Stars keeps sending my tape back. (2 points)

D. I'm Favre. Where's my private plane? (0 points)

 2. Was there a moment that inspired you to come back? 

A. Scoring 120 points against my son's fifth-grade basketball team. (7 points)

B. Michael Jordan's NBA titles with the Washington Wizards. (5 points)

C. The Who's surprisingly energetic halftime show. (2 points)

D. The most recent electricity bill. (0 points)

 3. What sort of preparation are you doing to get ready for your comeback? 

A. Running uphill sprints dragging a sled full of middle-aged ennui. (7 points)

B. Each night, donning a cape and mask and fighting neighborhood crime, then doing a triathlon. (5 points)

C. Cutting down to one pack a day (2 points)

D. Preparation? (0 points)

 4. How will you do things differently when you return to pro sports? 

A. Savor every moment and treat at least 30% of people with respect. (7 points)

B. Stop blowing money on frivolous things like son's math tutor. (5 points)

C. Refuse to stop cranking Oak Ridge Boys in the locker room. (2 points)

D. Shower. (0 points)

 5. What do you have to say to  your critics who claim you can't successfully come back? 

A. You may be on to something! (7 points)

B. Did you have the guts to say that to a 45-year-old Jim Palmer, trying to make it as a pitcher for the 1991 Baltimore Orioles? (5 points)

C. You tell Roger Ebert I want my money back for "Hot Tub Time Machine." (2 points) 

D. I pay people good money to make me unaware of any critics. (0 points)

 6. What questions do you have about the way the game is played today? 

A. Do I need to wear a helmet? (7 points)

B. Does everyone still enjoy road games versus the New Orleans Jazz? (5 points)

C. Why are the goalposts at the back of the end zone? (2 points) 

D. Where's Cosell? (0 points) 

 7. What is left for you to accomplish in sports? 

A. A double hip replacement (7 points)

B. Having my grandchildren see me play garbage time against Cleveland. (5 points) 

C. Getting cut from the Arena Football League. (2 points) 

D. My first text message controversy! (0 points) 

 8. What will you do if the comeback doesn't work out? 

A. Find new fame and glory as a talk show host, action movie star, bestselling author and senator. Same plan as the last time. (7 points)

B. Eat my face off. (5 points)

C. Finland Dancing With the Stars (2 points)

D. Next year, baby! (0 points)

 Score:  

40-56: Welcome back and see you on Jim Rome! 

24-39: Do you have a local YMCA you can play at instead? 

11-24: Why not just remodel your kitchen? 

0-10: This is going to be very fun to watch. 