NEW DELHI – India's April merchandise exports growth pace slowed from the previous month as global uncertainties subdued consumer sentiments, raising the risk that Asia's third-largest economy could miss its shipment estimate for this fiscal year. 

"Prospects for 2011 are not good," Commerce Secretary  Rahul Khullar said at a news conference after April exports grew 34.5% from a year earlier to $23.9 billion. 

India's merchandise exports in March had risen 43.8% from a year earlier to $29.1 billion, which helped lift the full-year shipments to $245.9 billion, exceeding the government's forecast of $220 billion-$225 billion. 

The better-than-expected performance in the just-ended fiscal year has prompted the government to aim higher this year, even as major economies struggle to recover from the economic downturn. 

Commerce and Industry Minister  Anand Sharma expects exports to touch $300 billion this fiscal year that started April 1--a target that many, including Mr. Khullar, say will be difficult to achieve. The government, which aims to grow exports to $500 billion by March 2014, hasn't yet set a specific target for this fiscal year's shipments. 

India, which mostly relies on local consumption to spur its brisk growth, is focusing on new markets to boost shipments as demand in traditionally strong Western markets remains muted. 

But many emerging markets are also grappling with severe pricing pressures that are hurting consumer and business sentiment, Mr. Khullar said. 

"As inflation increases it will compel emerging markets to tighten monetary policy, that will have an impact on growth and investment," he added. 

The uncertainty over how the European debt crisis will play out globally also threatens to cloud India's export prospects, Mr. Khullar said. 

The Federation of Indian Export Organisations estimates full-year shipments to touch $275 billion. 

 Write to  Mukesh Jagota at mukesh.jagota@dowjones.com and Abhrajit Gangopadhyay at Abhrajit.gangopadhyay@dowjones.com 