DENVER—Step out of the present for a moment and look ahead to the Mets' future. Some, if not all of the players the Mets consider to be their core right now could well be gone.

But barring the improbable, Jason Bay will still be here. In a time of transition, Bay could outlast just about all of his current teammates. And if that doesn't frighten the Mets, it must concern them to some degree. 

Sixteen months after they signed Bay to a four-year, $66 million deal— which includes a $17 million vesting option for 2014—the Mets are still waiting for him to resemble the star slugger he was before.

The left fielder is batting just .213 after 16 games. He is hitless in his last 14 at-bats. Earlier this week, he was bumped from fifth to sixth in the batting order, though he will likely move up again until Ike Davis returns from a leg injury.

Such a small sample isn't an accurate predictor of what Bay will do over a full season. But because Bay struggled through much of 2010, his slump raises more concern than it probably should.

"Obviously with what transpired last year, you don't have that luxury now of saying, 'Hey, you'll get going,'" Bay said. "I understand that. But from my point of view, it's just kind of a slow start, and hopefully more at-bats will help."

The lack of a consistent workload hasn't helped. After missing the last two months of 2010 because of a concussion, Bay missed the first three weeks of this season because of an injured rib cage muscle. And he missed two games last week because of the birth of his son.

On Monday night, Bay narrowly missed a game-tying home run, flying out to the warning track in center field. "That's just the way things are going for me right now," Bay said.

His batting average on balls in play is .293, 33 points below his career mark. But for the most part, Bay simply hasn't been hitting the ball with authority.

Inside Edge, a private scouting company, keeps a statistic called well-hit average. It measures the percentage of a hitter's at-bats that end with what a scout classifies as a well-hit ball.

Through 61 at-bats, Bay has a relatively anemic well-hit average of .098. Among Mets hitters, only weak-hitting utility infielder Chin-lung Hu has a lower mark (.056).

"I'm doing the same things I was doing last year, still fighting the same things," Bay said. That may not sound like reason for encouragement, but to Bay, it is.

"I kind of feel like I've done it," he said. "I'm better-equipped to handle it, if that makes sense.''