TUNIS—Tunisia's prime minister named three independent ministers to key posts in the country's new interim cabinet in a bid to calm street protests against politicians linked to the ousted president.

Prime Minister Mohamed Ghannouchi, who has served under former President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali, will remain in the new cabinet despite demonstrators' calls for his ouster.

Mr. Ben Ali, who had ruled Tunisia for 23 years, was driven from power by the antigovernment protesters on Jan. 14 and fled to Saudi Arabia. The developments in Tunisia have sent ripples throughout the region, sparking similar protests calling for change in countries such as Egypt and Yemen.

While the interim government has tried to distance itself from the ousted regime—it has issued an international arrest warrant for Mr. Ben Ali—the daily street protests show continued frustration with the pace of change.

Speaking on state television, Mr. Ghannouchi said he was naming new independent officials to head key interior, foreign and defense posts, hoping to appease angry citizens over the continued presence of ministers from the former ruling Constitutional Democratic Rally party.

"This is a temporary government with a clear mission, to allow a transition to democracy," Mr. Ghannouchi said on state television Thursday. "Its mission is to organize elections." 

In a blow to Mr. Ghannouchi's efforts to form the second national unity government in 10 days, Tunisia's powerful UGTT labor union has refused to join the new transition government.

Five ministers dropped out of the current cabinet soon after it was formed, including three UGTT members, to protest the continued presence of ministers from the former ruling party. But the union later backed Mr. Ghannouchi and two other ministers from the former regime to stay.

Foreign Minister Kamel Morjane announced his resignation earlier Thursday. Mr. Morjane, a former defense minister under Mr. Ben Ali, was quoted by the official news agency TAP as saying he was resigning "in the interest of Tunisia" to help ensure that its "popular revolution" could lead to greater freedom. 

Mr. Morjane was replaced as foreign minister by Ahmed Ounais, a Paris-educated career diplomat and former ambassador to Moscow and New Delhi.