  Q: I am considering the purchase of a 1998 Porsche 993 reported to have less than 2,000 miles. One concern is about the condition of seals in the car's components, especially the engine and transmission. Is my concern legitimate?   

—Jim Cermenaro, Upper Saint Clair, Pa.

A: This is a case in which you should find a good Porsche mechanic and develop a relationship before buying the car. While the low-mileage model you are looking at may be in great cosmetic shape, it is bound to be suffering from atrophy after sitting for so long with so few miles. It will need to be re-commissioned with new fluids, seals and other parts that may have degraded with disuse. 

Since the 993 was the last of the Porsches with air-cooled engines, it may get funny looks from mechanics at dealerships. But you may be able to find an older dealership that is sympathetic toward aging models, or an independent mechanic who specializes in air-cooled Porsches.

  Q: What mpg can we realistically expect from the 2011 Honda Odyssey with a 248 horsepower V6 engine at 65 mph?  

—Ron Warner, Chesterfield, Mo.

A: I recently test-drove the new Odyssey and was impressed with its fuel economy. On the highway, you should be able to flirt with its 27-mpg EPA fuel-economy rating, though you may have to slow to 60 mph to do it. I think 25 mpg should be easy to achieve even if you speed occasionally. However, the Odyssey and other large, heavy vehicles can be disappointing if you do a lot of driving in town or in stop-and-go conditions. After all, it takes a lot of fuel to get their mass moving.

  Q: I have a 2010 Range Rover Sport Supercharged and recently had the snow tires replaced with the original tires. The vehicle has since run very roughly and loudly. Upon inspection, I was told the tires had "cupped" due to poor alignment and need to be replaced. Could you explain "cupping" and its cause?  

—Sandy Family, Ballston Lake, N.Y.

A: Cupping wear appears as a wavy pattern of wear on the edge of a tire and results from improper alignment. 

Powerful SUVs like the Range Rover often come with performance tires with extra grip to improve handling. The downside is their softer rubber is delicate and can wear quickly under the combination of a heavy vehicle and poor wheel alignment. Be sure to get a thorough alignment when you buy tires.

  Q: I thought I was doing a good deed when I stopped at a pullout and picked up trash that littered the area and put a large bag of it in my trunk. The bag leaked in the carpeted trunk of my 2010 Mercedes E350. The odor is beyond putrid. I took out the removable portion of the carpet, thoroughly shampooed it and scrubbed other carpeted areas. I have also tried baking soda and have sprayed vinegar several times. The odor remains, and has permeated the cabin.   

—Lewis Cantrell, Highland, Calif.

A: I recently received similar notes from people who had run-ins with spilled milk and rotting fish in the trunk. While there are a lot of good cleaners and deodorants out there, the biggest problem is finding and cleaning up all of the mess. I bet some of the liquid from the trash bag seeped into and under your trunk liner. You probably won't solve the problem until you remove the lining of the trunk and any padding or other absorbent material. Yes, it's going to be a pain and potentially expensive. You may even be better off calling a shop that specializes in replacing auto interiors. 

— Email mecar@wsj.com 