ABU DHABI—As allied strikes continued Tuesday against Col. Moammar Gadhafi's government, the wavering commitment to the campaign by several Western-leaning Arab states has further muddied international resolve.

A key pillar in cobbling together international legitimacy for the mission was support from the Arab League. But after bombing runs commenced, Arab League President Amr Moussa on Sunday appeared to criticize the coalition strikes as beyond the scope of the United Nations mandate. He softened that criticism Monday, saying he meant only to voice concern over protection of civilians.

Still, the apparent about-face caused "major headache" among allies involved in the airstrikes, according to one Arab diplomat, who said he was fielding calls all Tuesday to clarify the League's continued support for the no-fly zone.

Meanwhile, the Gulf Cooperation Council, a group of six Arab Persian Gulf states, has voiced unwavering political support for the strikes. The bloc was the first among Arab states to urge the U.N. to consider a no-fly zone at a meeting early in the month. But apart from Qatar, which is sending jets, GCC members have stopped short of sending military aid. 

Any military intervention in Libya is complicated by the GCC's own military role in Bahrain, where the country's mostly Shiite-led opposition has staged a series of demonstrations against its Sunni rulers. The GCC's member states—Saudi Arabia, Oman, Qatar, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain— are all ruled by Sunnis. The GCC sent troops last week to member-state Bahrain, including 1,000 Saudi soldiers. Days later, Bahrain launched a bloody crackdown on protesters.

The U.S. lobbied against sending Saudi troops into Bahrain. The U.S. and European response to growing anti-government demonstrations in Bahrain "did not satisfy the Gulf states," said retired Maj. Gen. Khalid al Buainnain, a former commander in chief of the United Arab Emirates air force, and now an independent analyst.

Track the latest events in Libya.

Gen. Buainnain, said the U.A.E. had prepared jets to deploy to help in Libya, but then balked because of the stance of American and European officials on Bahrain. He said the U.S. and Europe had failed to appreciate the extent of the interference of Shiite-majority Iran in the Gulf countries, and had misread the protests in Bahrain as a spillover of calls for democratic change sweeping through the region. Late Tuesday, the U.A.E. reaffirmed its support for the Libya mission in a statement, saying it "remains committed to the importance of action in support of UN resolution 1973."

If the Arab League or GCC makes its support clearer, it could strengthen Western resolve. Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, a former secretary general of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, said in Abu Dhabi on Tuesday that Arab countries should take a more active role in the Libyan campaign.

"Active Arab participation in the enforcement of this resolution should follow," Mr. De Hoop Scheffer said. "It is particularly important for the political relationship between this region and the West that the nations of the GCC show military support as well as political support," he said. 

 Write to  Nour Malas at nour.malas@dowjones.com and Chip Cummins at chip.cummins@wsj.com 