The Angolan government on Thursday released a U.S.-registered ship carrying food aid and bullets to Africa, after detaining the vessel and 23 crewmen for more than two weeks.

The incident has strained ties between the U.S. government and Africa's second-largest crude-oil producer.

It came as tensions flared over antigovernment protests in the country.

The Constellation, owned by Norfolk, Va.-based Maersk Line Ltd., was bound for several African nations with 33 million pounds of beans and other food aid provided by the U.S. government. 

On Feb. 28, Angolan customs authorities stopped the ship from proceeding after crewmen had unloaded part of the food cargo in the port of Lobito. 

Also on board were four containers of bullets destined for Kenya. 

  Kevin Speers, a Maersk spokesman, said authorities wanted to investigate the paperwork for the ammunition.

The Kenyan government has confirmed it purchased the ammunition.

Mr. Speers said the ammunition carried a U.S. export license arranged by its manufacturer, which the State Department later confirmed as  General Dynamics Corp.
GD


0.34
%




 

He added that "claims that Maersk Constellation was illegally carrying containers of ammunition are baseless."

  Robert Doolittle, a spokesman for General Dynamics, said "the ammunition sale was conducted with the full approval of the State Department." 

On Thursday, Maersk said its American and Polish crew had departed "the port of Lobito and are proceeding on its voyage," adding, "All the cargoes are onboard and will be delivered as originally planned."

A spokeswoman for the Angolan Embassy in Washington declined to comment on the ship's detention or release.

Angolan state media initially characterized the cargo as a cache of undeclared antiaircraft ammunition.

Rui Falcão, the secretary for Angola's ruling party, the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola, or MPLA, had denounced "the intention of some domestic groups with the aid of the international community to bring about hostile acts against Angola."

The U.S. supported the losing side during Angola's 27-year-long civil war, which left an estimated 1.5 million people dead and ended in 2002 with MPLA's victory.

The cargo seizure came at a politically sensitive time. Twenty Angolan activists were briefly detained earlier this month for planning a protest inspired by those in North Africa and the Middle East.

The U.S. and Angola have a rocky recent history. Last year, Bank of America Corp. closed the Angolan Embassy's U.S. accounts, as big U.S. banks moved to sever their business with embassies in the wake of a Senate report on compliance with anticorruption laws.