It may be Akris that has created that iconic look for fall 2011. 

Designer  Albert Kriemler, whose second-love is architecture, has used a photograph by Jürgen Schreiter of the Wedding Tower in Darmstadt, Germany, reproducing it on clothing with such precision that it's a tribute to digital-printmaking.

With the tower, and trees, and a railroad trestle in the foreground, it looks mesmerizing—unlike the digital printing that produces those canvas bags emblazoned with photos of people's children. 

On these clothes, trees spread across the torso of a dress, and the tower appears on a sleeve. The only risk to these dresses is that they're too memorable to wear frequently. 

The Akris customer is less interested in the latest flavor and she's more power-hungry. She is seriously interested in commanding the room.

Mr. Kriemler is the grandson of Akris's founders, and he has toiled at the family-owned Swiss company for more than 20 years. 

Retailers and shoppers were quicker to "get" Akris than the fashion community. The brand has been the top-selling designer ready-to-wear maker at many U.S. department stores for years, outselling Armani, which usually hovers around No. 2. Last year, Akris expanded into handbags. Shoes will probably come next. (The shows' shoes are made each season by  Walter Steiger, a friend of the Kriemler family.)

The Akris look this season is sleek, linear and cool: slim pants, a dress with a leather bodice and wool skirt, a fur shrug worn over a woolen coat. Jackets featured a front that appeared to detach and fall away near the waist in front, leaving an extra geometric plane to catch the eye. 

  Phoebe Philo's collections for Celine have become curtain-raisers for coming fashions. Her minimalist, easy-to-wear ethos has swept the fashion world, and her name is generally accompanied by oohs and ahhs from the fashion crowd. 

More applause will be coming from the collection she showed on Sunday in Paris. It had all the trendy elements of the season—such as leather clothes, fur coats, structured handbags with frames. Ms. Philo assembled them for an active, outdoorsy woman—one coat would be in tempo in the Australian outback. She even put the outdoors on some clothes. One series reproduced the look of wood paneling on the fabric, a la Rodarte last season.

Paging through the book of inspiration photographs that Ms. Philo provides each season, it emerges that Ms. Philo was immersed in the abandon of the late '60s and early '70s—not just the clothes, but the intimate, free moments. That's fun. But some of her inspiration photos were disturbing, such as a shot of a child in a Darth Vader mask placed side by side with a semi-erotic photo of two men. 

Ms. Philo seems to believe that the clothes have to work for the woman, not the other way around. Nothing is contorted—it all looks like you could sit comfortably in these clothes, while looking fearlessly stylish and rich. 

  Jean Paul Gaultierwas assuredly winking at us—as always—with his Fall 2011 collection shown on Saturday evening. His models strumpeted down the runway and tossed items of their clothing—gloves, jackets, scarves—in a pile that grew rather large directly in front of the pit of photographers, who hooted and howled as though they were at a girly show.

 The designer opened and closed his show with French actress-screenwriter-director Valérie Lemercier, who is past 45 and was the sexiest person on the runway. Upon opening the show, Ms. Lemercier handed her black umbrella to front-row guest Nicole Richie, then tossed some clothing at the photographers and trounced back down the runway to deserved applause. 

 Among the truly laudable items in this collection:

 • A perfectly cut gray business suit that looked conservative enough for Barclays, yet was both posh and sexy. That was accomplished without embellishment—just with cut and clean lines.

• A trench coat that swirled and flapped around the model's body because of its luscious fabric and sharp cut. You think you've seen every trench coat, and then you see this one.

 • An evening dress of black shimmering sparkles that is so elegant it can only be worn to, well, to nowhere, because nobody dresses up that lusciously these days. 

 Write to  Christina Binkley at christina.binkley@wsj.com 