NEW YORK—U.S. stocks rose sharply to open trading Monday and oil prices fell after news that al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden, the man who masterminded the largest terrorist attack in American history, was killed Sunday. 

While markets may catch something of a relief rally, investors must weigh new risks. Does Mr. bin Laden's death, almost 10 years after he organized the 9/11 attacks, mean the world is a bit safer from the threat of terrorism? Some traders are wondering if the world needs to brace for the possibility of retaliatory attacks by radical elements. 

"The man is dead. That is good news for the day," said  James Newman, head of U.S. government and agency trading in New York at Keefe, Bruyette & Woods Inc. "The organization and the network are still out there. The fight against terrorism is not over." 

"It is an emotional trade for stocks. But we need to see whether the rally in stocks can be sustainable" he added. 

Some traders said the market reaction will likely be short-lived. The death of al Qaeda's leader marked an important step for the U.S. fight against terrorism. But in the crude markets, for example, oil-production losses due to unrest in Libya and other areas are expected to persist. 

"We don't have a resolution coming out of Libya, there's no other good news in the Middle East. This is good news for the U.S. and Europe, but the problems are still there," said  Gene McGillian, a broker with Tradition Energy. 

Oil has risen sharply in recent months because of violence in places like Libya and Egypt, where civil protests against ruling regimes have turned violent and some leaders have been overthrown. 

The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose about 60 points to 12870 at a time when investors have been focused on first-quarter earnings reports. Results reported Monday remained mostly upbeat, with  Humana
HUM


0.54
%




 and  Armstrong World Industries
AWI


-0.55
%




 topping earnings and revenue forecasts. Chrysler, although not a public company, added to the positive mood by swinging to a profit in the first quarter.

Oil fell 41 cents to $113.52 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange, after dropping as low as $110.82 a barrel earlier in the session. 

The initial market reaction to Mr. bin Laden's death mirrors the reaction seen when Saddam Hussein was captured in December 2003. On that day, stocks opened near their highs for the day before pulling back to end nearly flat on the session. The dollar also initially jumped before retreating. 

After initially rallying immediately after news that Mr. bin Laden had been killed by U.S. military forces overnight, the dollar and Treasurys have pared their gains. 

The dollar was mixed against other major currencies. Lingering concerns about the Federal Reserve's loose monetary policy kept the dollar in check. 

"I don't think bin Laden is huge news for currency markets ... the drivers are interest rates and the policy divergence between major central banks," said  Mark McCormick, currency strategist at Brown Brothers Harriman. 

The euro rose to $1.4849 from $1.4810 late Friday. It traded as low at $1.4762 earlier in the global session. 

The dollar rose against perceived safe havens like Japan's yen and the Swiss franc. The dollar was at ¥81.37 from ¥81.12 and at 0.8668 Swiss francs from 0.8651 francs. The U.K. was closed for a bank holiday, making volume light heading into New York's trading day. 

"The small losses in the Treasury market tells you that the market focuses on the economic data and other developments in the world such as Japan," said Keefe, Bruyette & Woods' Mr. Newman. 

The benchmark 10-year Treasury note was 1/32 lower, pushing its yield, which moves opposite its price, higher to 3.299%. The yield earlier rose as high as 3.323%. 

"I think some of the terror premium in bonds may be lowering as stocks rally on the news," said Michael Franzese, head of Treasury trading at Wunderlich Securities in New York. "If this news was seven years earlier it would have had a bigger impact, but as time passes the reactions become smaller." 

—Javier David, Min Zeng, Tomi Kilgore and Jerry A. DiColo contributed to this article. 