WASHINGTON—Securities and Exchange Commission members are struggling to reach agreement on a study examining whether the regulator should outsource oversight of investment advisers to an industry body, people familiar with the matter said. 

Depending on its conclusions, the study could lay the groundwork for merging the supervision of thousands of SEC-registered advisers into the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, the private agency that already polices brokers. 

Investment advisers, including hedge-fund managers, are battling to ensure that doesn't happen, even offering to pay fees to the SEC so the regulator can step up adviser inspections. 

Finra, meanwhile, says oversight would be improved under a private agency and has hinted strongly it wants the job. 

The study, which was mandated by the Dodd-Frank financial law passed in July, must be completed by next week. Commissioner  Elisse Walter, who served as a Finra executive before coming to the SEC in 2008, wants the SEC to recommend that Congress let it tap an outside body to supervise advisers, people familiar with the matter said. 

  Luis Aguilar, who like Ms. Walter was appointed by a Democrat, is staunchly opposed to such a move. In a 2009 speech, he said it would amount to outsourcing the SEC's regulatory mission and would be more costly than increasing the SEC's resources to oversee advisers. 

The SEC's challenge is drafting a study that can garner the votes of at least three commissioners so it can be released to Congress, as mandated by the Dodd-Frank law. Chairman  Mary Schapiro, who headed Finra before taking over the SEC, has recused herself from the vote. 

The study comes as the SEC is facing severe budget strains. The agency was assigned wider responsibilities by the Dodd-Frank law, including new powers to oversee derivatives dealers and hedge-fund advisers. But Congress hasn't increased its budget. Republicans, now in control of the House, may be keener to lighten the SEC's regulatory load than to increase its funding. 

Groups representing investment advisers, hedge-fund managers, accountants, mutual-fund companies and state securities regulators in letters to the SEC have weighed in against shifting adviser oversight to a private agency. They say the model of industry self-policing is plagued by conflicts and lacks accountability to the public.

Rather than one recommendation, the SEC may present a series of options to Congress for beefing up adviser oversight, people involved in the negotiations said. The options might include handing the job to a private agency or allowing the SEC to charge advisers fees to regulate the industry, they said. Another option would be to tap a private agency to police firms registered as both brokers and advisers, leaving all other advisers to the SEC. But that would leave the SEC with no firsthand knowledge of some of the biggest Wall Street players, one SEC official argued. 

The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants suggested Finra has a perfunctory approach to enforcement and might display bias against investment advisers during exams. Finra Chief Executive  Richard Ketchum said in an interview that Finra was qualified to perform oversight of investment advisers. He disputed that the agency was conflicted, saying it operates "walled off" from the securities industry. A majority of its board members have no affiliation with the industry, he said.

Both the SEC and Finra have been faulted for missing Bernard Madoff's giant Ponzi scheme. The Madoff firm was registered with the SEC and Finra. 

Finra is unlikely to be named in the SEC study, people familiar with the matter said. But the agency, which oversees more than 4,500 brokerage firms, is seen as the only outside body with the money and structure in place to step into an adviser-oversight role. 

Finra, in a Nov. 2 letter to the SEC, argued the SEC doesn't have the resources to increase its examinations of advisers, given its new duties under Dodd-Frank. It said 55% of brokers are inspected each year by the SEC and Finra, while just 9% of advisers are examined annually by the SEC.