NEW YORK—Stocks declined as materials shares lagged in the wake of disappointing economic data, but successful bond auctions in Spain and Italy helped shore up sentiment.

The Dow Jones Industrial Average closed down 23.43 points, or 0.20%, at 11731.90.

Merck was the measure's worst performer, taking 19 points off the Dow. The drug maker sank 6.6% after its researchers halted one of two major studies of its experimental anticlotting drug vorapaxar and made significant changes to the other, throwing into doubt the future of one of the most important medicines in its product pipeline. 

The Nasdaq Composite edged down 2.04, or 0.07%, to 2735.29. The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index fell 2.20, or 0.17%, to 1283.76.

Materials lagged as metals prices weakened following U.S. economic data that largely missed investors' expectations.  Alcoa shed 3% and  Newmont Mining fell 1.7%.  Freeport-McMoRan Copper & Gold dropped 3.1% after unionized workers at copper mining company Sociedad Minera Cerro Verde SAA, which is controlled by Freeport-McMoRan, prepared to begin striking Friday. 

In U.S. economic data, the Labor Department reported that the number of workers filing initial jobless claims unexpectedly increased by 35,000 to 445,000 in the week ended Jan. 8. Economists surveyed by Dow Jones Newswires had expected a drop of 2,000 to 407,000.

Investors said that the data could have been affected by the recent snowstorms. "Claims are going in the right direction, they just aren't going fast enough," said  Jerry Harris, president of asset management at Sterne Agee.

Separately, U.S. producer prices jumped in December, rising a seasonally adjusted 1.1% in December from November. However, stripping out volatile food and energy items, producer prices increased 0.2%. Economists polled by Dow Jones Newswires were expecting a 0.8% increase in the overall figure. The core index of producer prices came in line with forecasts.

The U.S. trade deficit unexpectedly narrowed for the third straight month in November, though the gap with China rebounded.

Investors are also waiting to see the results of chip giant  Intel's fourth-quarter earnings report, which will be released after the market's close.

"They make some very useful comments that will give us some insight into what current [information technology] spending demands are," said  Tom Wilson, managing director at Brinker Capital. Intel closed down 0.1%.

Successful auctions of euro-zone debt continued to calm some of investors' worries over the precarious state of the region's fiscal stability. The Spanish government sold 3 billion euros ($3.9 billion) in five-year bonds at yields below those in the secondary market, though its borrowing costs rose compared to a November auction. Italy also successfully conducted a bond sale.

Both the Bank of England and the European Central Bank left benchmark interest rates unchanged. ECB president  Jean-Claude Trichet said that the inflationary pressures in the euro area appeared to be short term.

The dollar weakened against both the euro and the yen. The euro hit a one-week high against the dollar, trading recently at $1.3354, up from $1.3133 late Wednesday in New York. The U.S. Dollar Index, which represents the currency against a basket of others, sank 1.1%.

Demand for Treasurys rose, pushing yield on the 10-year note down to 3.30%. Crude-oil prices settled below $92 a barrel, while gold futures declined.

Among stocks in focus,  Marathon Oil rallied 6% after the company's board approved advancing plans to spin off the company's refining and sales operations. The split will see the creation of Marathon Petroleum Corp., expected to be the fifth largest U.S. refiner.

Printed circuit board maker  TTM Technologies gained 21% after raising its fourth-quarter forecast, saying an increase in demand for its high technology products boosted its prospects.

  Whole Foods Market rose 4.6% after Jefferies reiterated a buy rating for the upscale grocer and boosted its price target to $60 from $47. Jefferies said its post-holiday checks were "quite strong."

 Write to  Kristina Peterson at Kristina.peterson@dowjones.com 