ISTANBUL—Several Turkish banks lent too much credit in the first two months of the year and the sector, or individual banks, could face additional measures to crimp lending if the situation continues, Turkey's Economy Minister Ali Babacan said Wednesday. 

Policy makers are watching credit growth closely as recent data show the Turkish economy is continuing to quickly expand, sucking in imports that are exacerbating what the central bank and economists see as a key vulnerability—the country's soaring current-account deficit.

"Many banks' credit volumes were reasonable in the first two months. Three to four banks have raised the average and we hope that their moves are temporary. Otherwise the state has every kind of tool…Additional measures might come both for the whole sector and for specific banks," Mr. Babacan said in an interview with local CNBC-e television. 

Mr. Babacan said recent rises in oil prices, stemming from unrest in the Middle East and North Africa, also present potential difficulties for Turkey, which imports the vast majority of its energy needs. 

"Every $10 increase in oil prices adds nearly $4 billion to our current account deficit and around 0.5% to inflation…In October when we prepared our government's Medium Term Economic Program our average-oil-price assumption for 2011 was $80," Mr. Babacan said, adding that this meant the current-account deficit was likely to exceed government forecasts this year. On Wednesday, Brent crude oil was trading at around $115 dollar a barrel.

Official data released Monday showed that Turkey's January trade deficit jumped 89.4% year-to-year to $7.3 billion, well above the consensus forecast of $4.6 billion, fueled mainly a surge in imports.

Concerns over the scale of this trade gap, and the role of rising oil prices could play in expanding it further and forcing the central bank into tougher action have hit Turkish asset prices over the past month.

The main IMKB-100 index on Istanbul's stock exchange lost around 7.5% over the past month, while the country's benchmark 22-month bond yield rose to 8.98% on Wednesday, up from 7.9% at the start of February when protests in the Middle East accelerated.

"There were concerns over Tunisia and Egypt, but after Libya now it is a bottomless well…If oil prices are rising, then a sell-Turkey-buy-Russia scenario would work," said Guldem Atabay, chief economist at Istanbul-based brokerage Ekspres Invest.

In an effort to curb domestic credit growth, Turkey's central bank raised reserve requirements for commercial banks in November, December and January. At the same time, the bank cut interest rates twice in an effort to discourage inflows of potentially volatile short-term investments, known as hot money. 

Turkish Central Bank Governor  Durmus Yilmaz has stressed repeatedly that the net impact of his two-pronged strategy—cutting interest rates while raising reserve requirements for banks—has been to tighten monetary policy overall. 

On Wednesday, Mr. Babacan stressed again the need to improve the quality of the investment inflows that are financing the current account deficit—the risk inherent in short-term "hot money" is that it can be withdrawn quickly if risk appetites change, economists and policy makers say. 

"I am saying that stability will be very important for us in 2011, not growth or inflation. We will do whatever is needed to achieve this," Mr. Babacan said.