CHICAGO – The rocky post-Brett Favre era in Green Bay officially ended on a frigid afternoon about 175 miles due south on Lake Michigan Sunday.

The Packers beat their eternal rivals, the Chicago Bears, 21-14 in the NFC Championship to earn their first Super Bowl berth since 1998. In the process they cemented a spot in team lore for Aaron Rodgers, the young quarterback they bet on at the expense of Mr. Favre when the future Hall of Famer unretired with expectations of returning to Green Bay in 2008.

The Packers will face the Pittsburgh Steelers in Super Bowl XLV Feb. 6 in Arlington, Texas.

Mr. Rodgers did not play his best game, tossing a pair of interceptions. But he finished with 244 yards on 17-for-30 passing and a rushing touchdown. He also persevered despite repeated punishing hits from Chicago's stout defense.

Asked about how he views the win in light of all he has had to go through, including playing in Mr. Favre's shadow, Mr. Rodgers said he hopes to discuss that when he's "won a few of these games."

"The journey is the sweetest part," he said.

Packers head coach Mike McCarthy said what made his team great in the playoffs, which also included road wins over Philadelphia and Atlanta, was Green Bay's tough regular season, which left the Packers the sixth seed in the playoffs. "It's challenged our character. I think we've really grown up through it. Our players truly believe that we will be successful in Dallas," he said. 

The Packers dominated the first half of the game, going up 14-0 early in the second quarter and making the Bears offense look like one of the most inept ever to come within a game of the Super Bowl. Things looked even worse when the Bears starting quarterback, Jay Cutler, went out with a knee injury in the third quarter, and his backup, Todd Collins, departed after two subsequent series.

Bears coach Lovie Smith said after the game Mr. Cutler tried to come back into the game, but that he couldn't, and that the decision was ultimately made by trainers and doctors, not the quarterback. After a barrage of questions, Mr. Smith said he would not expand further on that topic.

Bears linebacker Brian Urlacher scolded the NFL players who reportedly speculated online about Jay Cutler's early exit during the game. "Nothing like jealous people at home watching," Mr. Urlacher said. "Jay was hurt. I don't question his toughness." 

That left Chicago's fate in the hands of unknown third stringer Caleb Hanie, whom the Bears signed as an undrafted free agent in 2008 out of Colorado State.

But the Bears defense was brilliant, holding the Packers scoreless after a four-yard James Starks run for a touchdown 3:47 into the second quarter. The Packers maintained a two-score lead until Mr. Hanie worked up some late magic, leading his team down the field for a one-yard score on the ground by Chester Taylor with 12:02 left.

Just when the fans of Chicago thought they might witness a Disneyfied ending, Mr. Hanie offered up an interception to massive Packers lineman B.J. Raji for an 18-yard touchdown to put the visitors up 21-7 with 6:04 to go in the game. 

But the game remained in the Bears' reach. Mr. Hanie kept his composure, and just 1:21 later threw a 35-yard touchdown pass to Earl Bennett to bring the game within seven points. 

After the Bears defense again stopped the Packers to force a punt, Mr. Hanie, who entered the game with 14 career pass attempts, found himself short of a third miracle. The quarterback again drove Chicago down the field, converting on one fourth down, to the Packers' 29 yard line. But on fourth-and-5, Mr. Hanie tried to force a completion and threw an interception to Sam Shields to kill the Bears' final threat.

Packers linebacker Clay Mathews pointed to the fact that despite Mr. Rodgers's high-caliber arm, "it seems defense has put these last three games away."

"We had our backs against the wall a little bit, but we made the play to win the game," he said. "That's ultimately what matters."

Meanwhile, Mr. Hanie shrugged at the post-game congratulations he received for a nearly miraculous rally, saying the only time a player gets kudos after throwing two interceptions is when "nobody is expecting you to do anything."

Mr. Rodgers lamented the blown opportunities to put the game away early, like the interception he threw to Bears linebacker Brian Urlacher. He said he watched on the sidelines while the Bears' third-string quarterback drove down the field "trusting that someone was going to make a play."

 Write to  Reed Albergotti at Reed.Albergotti@wsj.com 