CAIRO—Egyptian authorities on Sunday rounded up people for questioning in connection with a weekend bombing that killed 21 outside a church in the northern port city of Alexandria. 

The attack struck Christian worshippers as they were leaving midnight Mass early Saturday morning at the Church of Two Saints in Alexandria. Nearly 100 were injured.

On Sunday, government officials said they were still unsure whether the attack was a car bombing or was carried out by a suicide bomber with hand-carried explosives. It was the worst incident of sectarian violence in the country since 21 Christians were killed in a gunfight in the village of Al Kosheh in 2000.

The government blamed "foreign elements" for the attack, according to the interior ministry's website Saturday. 

It wasn't clear how many were arrested. Reuters, quoting people in the security services, said seven had been held for questioning, and 10 others were briefly detained and released. The Associated Press said security officials said 25 people have been detained for questioning, but none was thought to be linked to the attack. 

An Iraqi affiliate of al Qaeda has targeted Christians in Iraq and has called for attacks on Egypt's Coptic Christian community.

Sectarian tensions between Muslims and Egypt's Christian community, which represents about 10% of the population, aren't uncommon. But deadly attacks are still relatively rare. That could make Saturday's bombing—especially if it's determined to have been planned or inspired by al Qaeda—a significant new challenge for President Hosni Mubarak, who faces a presidential race this fall.

Mr. Mubarak, 82 years old, cracked down hard on political opposition ahead of parliamentary polls that took place in November and December. The president's National Democratic Party won nearly 90% of seats in those elections.

Saturday's attack, which comes amid a recent uptick in sectarian tensions, could tarnish the NDP's reputation for maintaining domestic stability, an accomplishment the president often touts as a hallmark of his 29-year rule.

The attack triggered angry demonstrations by Christians, who at one point stormed a mosque across the street from the church, according to an Associated Press photographer at the scene. Saturday afternoon, angry Christian youths faced off at the site with Egyptian security forces, who responded with tear gas and rubber bullets. 

"Today's attack is another reminder that this so-called stability that [Mubarak] achieved is extremely fragile, and that even this part of his legacy is not to be taken for granted," said  Hossam Bahgat, general director of the Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights, a Cairo-based advocacy organization.

Ruling-party officials played down the fallout from the attack. "In the immediate aftermath, some angry young Christian youth were angry and made some complaints," said Ali El Din Helal, information secretary for the NDP. "This is natural."

Following the Saturday morning attack, hundreds of protesters turned out to demonstrate in the largely Christian neighborhood of Shubra, outside the capital, Cairo. Another Christian demonstration was held Sunday afternoon in Moqattam, a suburb perched on the limestone bluffs outside Cairo. More protests are planned for this week.

In a show of defiance Sunday, hundreds of Christians returned to pray in the Church of Two Saints in Alexandria.

Some critics have accused the government of standing by as actions by hard-line Salafi Islamists, representing a conservative strain of Islam practiced in Saudi Arabia, have strained Muslim-Christian ties. Throughout the fall and winter, Salafis have gathered for weekly demonstrations in front of churches in Alexandria, demanding that Coptic authorities release two women the Salafis accuse the church of holding against their will. Islamists say the church is holding the women because they sought to convert to Islam—an accusation the Coptic church denies.

In September, a high-ranking Coptic bishop heightened tensions after he told a church gathering that Muslims were "guests" in Egypt, because the Christian presence in the country predates Islam by several hundred years.

In late October, an al Qaeda-affiliated terrorist group in Iraq attacked a Christian church in Baghdad, killing dozens. Members of the militant group, the Islamic State of Iraq, held churchgoers hostage for several hours while demanding that Egypt's Coptic church release the two women allegedly held against their will. The Iraqi group called on faithful Muslims to attack any Christians, who it said were "legitimate targets."

Some critics blame the Egyptian government for the recent tension by allowing discrimination against Christians to go unchecked. They accuse government-run schools of teaching Islamic chauvinism and say state-owned newspapers propagate unfounded accusations against Christians. They have also said the government has been slow or ineffective in tracking down assailants in previous attacks on Christians.

"They are continuing to adopt these policies, which are dealing with non-Muslims as infidels," said  Emad Gad, a Christian and a political analyst at the state-funded Al Ahram Center for Political and Strategic Studies in Cairo.

Salem Abdel Galil, Egypt's deputy minister of Awqaf, or religious endowments, rejected accusations that the government cultivates or tolerates anti-Christian feelings among Egyptians.

"Undoubtedly, there is extremist sentiment, but this is very weak, and everyone is against it," he said.

Nearly a year ago, three gunmen opened fire on parishioners as they left a mass for Coptic Christmas, which is celebrated in early January, at a church in the southern Egyptian city of Nag Hammadi. The drive-by shooting killed six Christians and a Muslim security guard. A ruling in the case against the three men has been delayed for more than a year, though the ruling is expected later this month.

In November, Christians rioted in a Cairo suburb after police intervened to stop construction of a new church building, citing a lack of proper permission. Two Copts were killed in the violence and state security authorities arrested 152 Coptic protesters. 