 Maraschinos for Grownups 

Most Americans know the maraschino cherry as a mealy, neon-red Shirley Temple garnish. The real deal is a sour Morello cherry, the marasca, that has been candied and then preserved in a booze-infused cherry syrup. Luxardo, Paduan maker of the original Maraschino—the liqueur derived from those same cherries—is responsible for this jar and its juicy, delicately textured contents. You can reach for it, as Gina de Palma, pastry chef of New York's Babbo, does to garnish a dessert of chocolate salami and pistachio custard. It's also good for topping a simple scoop of gelato. $18, amazon.com  

 Three Primo Imports 

Michael Tusk, chef and co-owner of San Francisco restaurant Quince, and its new, Italian-inflected neighbor Cotogna, lives to sample imports from the boot-shaped nation. He shared three of his favorite recent finds with us: There's the deep yellow Verrigni dried pasta ($20, Le Sanctuaire, 415-992-6855), which is extruded using a gold die as opposed to its more common bronze counterparts. Mr. Tusk uses the spaghetti for preparations that include potent amplifiers like razor clams, white wine and green garlic. Then, for a smoky, briny note he sprinkles Cassina Rosso's bottarga salt ($20, theshopagora.com ) on a fish tartare, into a breadcrumb crust for seafood or atop a Bloody Mary. He drizzles Pariani's Olio di Pinolo di S. Rossore ($200 per 100 ml bottle, cubemarketplace.com ), a cold-pressed pine-nut oil from San Rossore, over salads and blends it into pestos or vinaigrettes for fish. 

 The Biscotti Bible 

Italia is responsible for one of coffee-drinkers' favorite things, and no, we're not talking about a frothy cappuccino. Translating literally to "twice cooked," the word biscotti refers to the crunchy, twice-baked logs that lend themselves so well to dipping in espresso, a warm latte or even wine. But the term can also be a generic one that refers to cookies at large, and that's what this gem of a book, by former Chez Panisse chef Mona Talbott and pastry chef Mirella Misenti, is about. The first in a new series of volumes from the American Academy in Rome's Sustainable Food Project, "Biscotti" is small but comprehensive, comprising 50 mostly traditional recipes for the treats best loved by the Academy's friends, students and workers (the authors are both employed there). Start with almond-cornmeal and work you way through to chocolate-hazelnut. $13  

—Charlotte Druckman