In 1974, the future Chinese premier Deng Xiaoping led a large delegation to the United Nations in New York. Chinese officials discovered, as they prepared for the expensive trip, that the could muster only $38,000 in foreign cash. In those days there were no banks in China except the People's Bank of China, then a department of the Ministry of Finance. Today China's foreign-exchange reserves are fast approaching $3 trillion, and its banks are among the world's most valuable companies. This remarkable success story has occurred against a background of more or less continuous worries about the stability of China's financial system. Lately those concerns have been greater than ever.

The Chinese banking system is different from anything to be found in the West. Although the Big Four banks are publicly listed and audited by international accountants, their main purpose is not to maximize shareholder returns. Rather, the banks are an arm of the state. Most bank lending in China is directed, at favorable rates, toward businesses controlled by the state. According to Fraser Howie and Carl Walter in "Red Capitalism," an unsettling portrait of a fragile economic behemoth, the Communist Party "treats its banks as basic utilities that provide unlimited capital to the cherished state-owned enterprises." The result is a banking system that is allowed to carry huge amounts of nonperforming loans and to delay the day of reckoning.

The recent history of China's banks, as recounted by Messrs. Howie and Walter, is one of piecemeal reform combined with Beijing's magical ability to spirit away bad loans. In the late 1980s, a bank-lending binge at the behest of local governments resulted in soaring inflation and a real-estate bust. A decade later, a vast pile of nonperforming loans to state-owned companies had accumulated in the banking system. Bad debts among the Big Four banks amounted to roughly 40% of their total lending. Western observers wrung their hands in despair and predicted that problems with China's banking system would cause severe problems to the economy. They turned out to be wrong.

Beijing came to the rescue. The reform-minded premier Zhu Rhongi brought in Western financial institutions as partners for the beleaguered Chinese banks. Wall Street was hired to introduce modern risk-management techniques to China. More important, the banks were relieved of their bad loans by what Messrs. Howie and Walter accurately describe as "accounting legerdemain."

 By Carl E. Walter and Fraser J.T. Howie  Wiley, 234 pages, $29.95

In 1998, the People's Bank of China—the state's central bank—reduced the Big Four's reserve requirement. This freed up reserves for the banks to acquire a special-purpose treasury bond issued by the Ministry of Finance. The loan proceeds were then used to recapitalize the banks. Beijing also created asset-management companies to buy the nonperforming loans from the banks at face value. In exchange, these repositories of toxic credit issued notes to the banks. (When these notes became due in 2009, they were extended for another decade.) 

For the financial magicians' next trick, in 2005, other nonperforming loans were put into a "co-managed account" with the Ministry of Finance, which in return issued IOUs to the banks that were to be repaid through a combination of loan recoveries, bank dividends, sale of bank shares and tax receipts from the banks. To make matters even more convoluted, in 2009 the banks started acquiring large stakes in the asset-management companies that were still sitting on nonperforming loans from the previous decade.

By such accounting boot-strapping, China's banks have so far escaped the consequence of their reckless lending at no apparent cost to society. Since Beijing fixes a wide spread between their borrowing costs and what they charge for lending, the banks even appear highly profitable. Yet the true cost has been borne by the Chinese people, who receive artificially low rates on their deposits. The technical name for this policy is "financial repression," which in China is estimated at around 4% of gross domestic product. The decline in the consumption share of GDP over the past decade coincided with the period when household deposits were being used to refinance the banking system. 

This is a complicated tale, one that Messrs. Howie and Walter don't make any easier with their tendency to refer to every official entity by its abbreviation. The authors will test readers' patience with lines like this one: "Among these rivals were the NDRC, the CSRC, the CBRC and, most particularly, the MOF." The book also suffers from its dual authorship—Mr. Howie wrote some sections, Mr. Walter others, and then the sections are awkwardly hammered together. Nevertheless, "Red Capitalism" is timely and contains much interesting information.

In China, the practice of hiding bad loans has become endemic, a practice that has only been possible because capital controls prevent depositors from moving their money off-shore. China's strong economic growth has also allowed the country to dodge the effects of poor capital allocation. Since 2008 China's growth has been driven by rising fixed-asset investment, sponsored by the state and funded by banks. A slew of trophy projects, including the world's largest high-speed rail network and dozens of new airports, threaten yet another mountain of nonperforming loans.

The authors pull their punches when they conclude that Beijing's Enronesque manipulation of its banking system poses no threat to the public finances or future economic growth. China may have evaded a painful banking crisis a decade ago. Can the world's second largest economy can pull off the same trick twice?

 Mr. Chancellor is the author of "Devil Take the Hindmost: A History of Financial Speculation." 