Midway through a pleasant Sydney afternoon, with the scoreboard showing Australia 46-0, trailing by a mammoth 318 but having made a decent start to their second innings nonetheless, came the clearest indication of the depths to which their cricket team have fallen. It was a perfect example of how losing teams find ways of getting themselves into trouble, even from the most apparently innocuous of situations.

Graeme Swann was the bowler, Phillip Hughes the batsman and Shane Watson, going well with 38 from 40 balls, was standing at the non-striker's end, wondering no doubt about how he was going to finally convert a start into something substantial and meaningful. Moments later he was walking back to the pavilion, a bemused and sorrowful expression on his face, wondering how it had all come to this.

"This" was a run-out that was so utterly bizarre as to warrant description in full: Mr. Hughes, who had played soundly to this point, turned an innocuous delivery into a gap at mid-wicket, whereupon both batsmen set off at the kind of pace you might find amongst the stragglers of the London marathon. Kevin Pietersen, the nearest fielder, set off in pursuit of the ball at full sprint.

Suddenly it dawned on the dozy duo that there might be a second run. Mr. Hughes, now at the non-striker's end, started, then stopped suddenly in his tracks, thought about a second for a moment again, and then stopped for good. Mr. Watson, having seen his mate begin a second, cranked his lumbering frame into action to join him, watching the ball's path, rather than Mr. Hughes, as he did so.

He continued to watch the ball as Mr. Pietersen slid, picked up and returned the throw and when he finally looked up to engage his partner in eye contact he did so from about two yards away rather than twenty-two. With both batsmen now at the same end, Mr. Pietersen's throw did not need to be accurate, but was, and wicketkeeper Matt Prior did the rest. Mr. Watson trudged off at an even slower pace than he had run between the wickets.

It was a comical moment, unless you happened to be Mr. Watson, Mr. Hughes or an Australian cricket supporter, but the comedy masked a more serious point. Australia have played much of this series in the field at half-pace, England at break-neck speed, with the consequence that England have created and exploited half-chances, whereas Australia have not. The run-out count stands at Australia four, England nil.

It was a run-out that started the rot on the first morning at Adelaide when Simon Katich was felled by a direct hit by Jonathan Trott with an easy single on the cards. It was a run-out that started the slide in the second innings at Melbourne, Mr. Hughes that time the victim. After that, Mr. Watson admitted that he'd much prefer it were him to have been wronged—well he got his wish alright here, although he may ponder that he has been the common link in all three moments.

The shame was that Mr. Watson had played beautifully until that moment, the savagery of his driving and pulling a reminder of how well England have done in this series to bottle him up, especially considering the starts he has given himself. With his partner's passing, Mr. Hughes continued to battle himself, his technique and England's bowlers until Tim Bresnan ran one across his edge six overs after the mix-up. His return has been an unqualified failure.

England had their breakthrough now, and with Mr. Swann operating from one end, and the ball starting to suffer abrasions so that the seamers began to find some reverse swing from the other, life was tough for a middle order that has found itself fire-fighting for most of the summer.

Mr. Swann teased Usman Khawaja from the Randwick End with his variations of pace and differing degrees of turn. The left-hander played him beautifully in defence but looked less certain against the this-way-that-way swing of Jimmy Anderson, who bowled a superb seven-over spell after tea from the Paddington End. Mr. Khawaja would have been disappointed with the shot that brought his dismissal, since the delivery was wide and unthreatening, but it had to be put within the context of the pressure England had applied. A batsman is rarely dismissed by just one ball but by many.

The dam was bursting now: Michael Clarke played jauntily but was drawn into a beautiful late outswinger by Mr. Anderson to complete a series in which he had made only one double-figure score in the first innings of each Test, and only one half-century. The early-series exertions have taken their toll on Mike Hussey, and he cut wearily to gully where Mr. Pietersen took a sharp catch

Brad Haddin might have run Steven Smith out without facing had Alastair Cook's throw been on target—another example of Australia's sloppiness, or England's alertness in the field, depending on your point of view—and might have holed out twice himself; once at deepish mid-on, once at short extra cover, both off Mr. Swann as he played more loosely than the situation warranted. Mr. Haddin is No 6 now, of course, and maybe that has changed his mind-set; more likely he was feeling the pinch after spending another 177 overs behind the stumps. Wicketkeeping is a tiring business.

Australia have done a lot of fielding lately, and they did a lot more here, as England moved past 600 in the morning session for the second time in the series. England were purposeful, Australia ragged, as Mr. Prior carved his way to his first Ashes hundred in only 109 balls, receiving good support from Tim Bresnan and Mr. Swann along the way and benefiting from some brainless bowling and absent-minded captaincy. In the process, Australia were forced to take a third new ball: if they keep this attack together, Kookaburra's executives will be in clover.

England moved in for the kill now: Mr. Haddin could only top-edge a vicious lifter from Chris Tremlett straight up into the air; Mitchell Johnson was beaten neck and crop first ball, but Peter Siddle survived the hat-trick, just. Had he succumbed it would have completed the turn-around from Brisbane where he was the hero of the hour. Andrew Strauss claimed the extra half-hour, urged on by his bowlers and by the Barmy Army who wanted to bring forward their celebrations by a day, but Mr. Siddle and Mr. Smith held out gamely.

Once again England had removed almost the entire Australian batting line-up without any mainline batsman reaching 50, and this on the same pitch that England went to their highest score in Australia. England have been superior throughout, but the gap has grown and grown as the series has progressed and the pressure of a five-match series has taken its toll; the run out between Mr. Hughes and Mr. Watson was an illustration of just how far.