MUMBAI – India isn't overly concerned about the inflow of volatile foreign capital, attracted by higher interest rates, as the country needs that to bridge its current account deficit, the head of its central bank said Tuesday. 

The U.S. Federal Reserve's loose monetary policy has prompted a large increase in capital flows to emerging economies such as India, threatening their domestic price and financial stability. The pace of capital flows increased as emerging economies raised their interest rates to counter inflation. 

While accelerating inflation demands a tighter monetary policy, central banks have found themselves in a policy bind as higher interest rates only intensify volatile capital inflows and exert more pressure on exchange rates, Reserve Bank of India Governor Duvvuri Subbarao said in Zurich. 

A transcript of his speech at a conference organized by the Swiss National Bank and the International Monetary Fund on the international monetary system was posted on the RBI's website. 

"In India's case, the concerns on this account [capital inflows] currently are less acute since capital inflows are needed to finance our current account deficit," he said. 

India runs a wide current account gap as well as a fiscal deficit, making it dependent on capital inflows to bridge its current account deficit. 

"Yet, even for us, the composition of the inflows remains an issue," as about three-quarters of the current account deficit since 2009 has been financed by volatile capital inflows, he added. 

The RBI has voiced concerns that foreign direct investment inflows have moderated while those from foreign institutional investors--or portfolio inflows--were higher and often volatile. 

Still, the U.S. Fed's program of buying $600 billion worth of Treasury bonds by June has benefited India, he said. 

On the Indian rupee, he said its exchange rate has been flexible over the past two years, as the central bank hasn't intervened in the currency market. 

The RBI's policy of foreign exchange management has allowed the exchange rate to serve as a buffer--depreciating to help the economy when it was weak and appreciating to reduce excess demand when it was strong, he said. 

"The policy has also minimized the danger that foreign inflows would be attracted by 'one-way bets' on appreciation, or that domestic firms would borrow excessively from abroad without hedging their exposure," Mr. Subbarao said. 

But, at the same time, the policy also exposes the economy to pressures from countries that maintain undervalued exchange rates. This undermines India's competitiveness in foreign markets and efforts to contain the current account deficit, he added. 

 Write to  Abhrajit Gangopadhyay at Abhrajit.gangopadhyay@dowjones.com 