The Trans Alaska pipeline, which carries some 630,000 barrels of oil a day from Alaska's North Slope, temporarily restarted late Tuesday at a lower-than-normal rate.

Most Alaska oil production had been shut in since Saturday as Alyeska Pipeline Service Co., the operator of the pipeline, has scrambled to replace a section of damaged pipe. 

Alyeska said the pipeline will operate "at a reduced rate for several days while a bypass segment is staged for installation." The pipeline system will have to be shut down again while the replacement pipe is installed and tested. 

Oil prices have risen nearly 5% since the pipeline shutdown was announced Saturday. Benchmark crude on Wednesday was up $1.01, or 1.1%, to $92.12 a barrel.

Alyeska President  Tom Barrett said in a statement that "tough work remains in the days ahead."

A quick restart is needed to restore one of the biggest sources of oil for the U.S. West Coast. The pipeline normally transports about 11% of U.S. production, from the state's North Slope to the southern port city of Valdez, where the oil is shipped to customers. 

After finding oil leaking from an intake pipe into the basement of a primary pumping station early Saturday, Alyeska stopped the flow of oil to the 800-mile Trans Alaska Pipeline system and told companies extracting oil from Alaska's North Slope to slash output by 95%, or almost 600,000 barrels a day. 

The pipeline is owned by  BP PLC,  ConocoPhillips,
COP


1.02
%




 ExxonMobil Corp.
XOM


0.84
%




,  Chevron Corp.
CVX


1.00
%




 and Koch Alaska Pipeline Co. LLC. 

"We are ready and able to produce whatever they can take," said a spokesman for BP, which was transporting around 180,000 barrels of oil a day through the pipeline before the shutdown. He wasn't able to say how much oil BP would be able to transport through the pipeline as it operates at the reduced rate. 

A major concern is that the current shut-down, the proposed temporary restart, a subsequent shut-down to install a new section of pipe and an eventual restart could cause pipeline or equipment failures that could cause an oil spill, said Larry Hartig, commissioner of the state Department of Environmental Conservation and the state's top environmental official. 

"As more time goes on, the level of our concern keeps going up, both on impacts from the cold weather and potential freezing, and on operations at Prudhoe Bay itself," Mr. Hartig said in an interview. 

Mr. Hartig said he expects the temporary restart to last "a couple of days," during which his agency will oversee recovery of oil that is expected to leak out of the still-leaking pipe. Federal and state agencies—which must sign off on the temporary restart—would also work with Alyeska to closely monitor key points along the pipeline for any sign of a new oil leak, he said. 

Mr. Hartig said he also was concerned about the Prudhoe Bay oilfield. If the pipeline system is down so long that storage facilities fill up, oil companies could be forced to shut in production completely, which could cause oil wells to freeze, creating new problems, he said. 

"It's a big deal to shut in that field in the wintertime," Mr. Hartig said. "We're talking about hundreds of wells and 100,000 miles of pipeline." 

Temperatures in Deadhorse, Alaska, near the Prudhoe Bay oilfields, were below freezing Tuesday, and were forecast to drop as low as minus 20 degrees Fahrenheit by Thursday, according to the National Weather Service. 

People familiar with the matter have said oil could permanently start flowing again through the system by Friday. 

About 100 people are working in Fairbanks to fabricate 157 feet of steel pipeline, 24 inches in diameter, that will be shipped by aircraft to Prudhoe Bay in nine separate pieces, Alyeska said late Monday. The new pipe will be reassembled and installed underground to replace a section of damaged pipe that is a critical feeder of oil into the system's Pump Station 1, the first of a series of stations with mechanical pumps that propel the oil through the pipeline. 



—James Herron contributed to this article. 



 Write to  Cassandra Sweet at cassandra.sweet@dowjones.com 