The U.S. Justice Department obtained a court order asking Twitter Inc. to turn over information about WikiLeaks-related accounts, the latest twist in a broad investigation of the document-leaking website. 

Key releases, legal battles and other significant moments in the history of the website and its founder, Julian Assange.

Read quotes from some of the leaked documents.

The U.S. government is scrutinizing WikiLeaks in the wake of the website's release of classified U.S. diplomatic cables. A U.S. district court in Alexandria, Va., granted the order on Dec. 14, asking Twitter to disclose information connected to four WikiLeaks-related accounts. They include WikiLeaks' official account and the personal accounts of three WikiLeaks supporters:  Birgitta Jonsdottir, an Icelandic member of parliament, and computer volunteers  Rop Gonggrijp and  Jacob Appelbaum. 

The court order also asks Twitter for any information it may have regarding  Julian Assange, WikiLeaks' founder, and Pfc. Bradley Manning, who is being held by the U.S. in connection with a leak. Mr. Assange uses WikiLeaks' official account; Pfc. Manning isn't known to have a Twitter account. Neither Mr. Assange, Mr. Appelbaum nor Pfc. Manning's lawyer responded to requests for comment.

Mr. Gonggrijp said in an email that he couldn't comment on his future actions because the possibilities were still being debated. In a post on his blog, he said, "[I] am talking to lawyers, trying to better understand what is going on and am weighing my options."

He also said on his blog that there wasn't much that could be gleaned from his Twitter account information. 

He added that he assumed the court order was issued regarding his account because he traveled to Iceland to assist with WikiLeaks preparations for the April 2010 release of a video depicting a U.S. helicopter opening fire on a group of men in Baghdad that included a Reuters photographer. 

The court order—initially secret— was unsealed at the request of Twitter on Jan. 5. In it, the Justice Department seeks data related to the four Twitter accounts, including billing information, session logs and IP addresses. Issued by U.S. Judge Theresa C. Buchanan, the order says the Justice Department provided "specific and articulable facts" to show the records were "relevant and material to an ongoing criminal investigation."

Although the Department of Justice has been investigating WikiLeaks for weeks, little is known about the dimensions of the probe. Attorney General Eric Holder, who has condemned WikiLeaks for putting U.S. national security at risk, has confirmed the existence of an "active, ongoing criminal investigation," but hasn't given details of its direction. The Justice Department didn't comment on the order.

WikiLeaks said on its Twitter feed on Friday that it assumes  Google Inc. and Facebook Inc. received secret U.S. government orders related to WikiLeaks as well. Facebook didn't comment. Google didn't immediatelyrespond to a request for comment.

The existence of the court order came to light after Twitter contacted Ms. Jonsdottir on Friday, leading her to mention the order on her Twitter feed. After petitioning to get the court order unsealed, the San Francisco-based microblogging site sent a copy of the court order to Ms. Jonsdottir to make her aware of the order and told her that she had 10 days to take legal action. 

"Please be advised that Twitter will respond to this request in 10 days from the date of this notice unless we receive notice from you that a motion to quash the legal process has been filed or that this matter has been otherwise resolved," Twitter's legal department wrote in an e-mail to Ms. Jonsdottir on Jan. 7. Mr. Gonggrijp received an identical e-mail from Twitter, according to his website.

In the e-mail, Twitter suggested the users contact the Electronic Frontier Foundation or the American Civil Liberties Union if they needed legal advice. 

A Twitter spokesman said: "We're not going to comment on specific requests, but, to help users protect their rights, it's our policy to notify users about law enforcement and governmental requests for their information, unless we are prevented by law from doing so. We outline this policy in our law enforcement guidelines." 

Ms. Jonsdottir said she is consulting with lawyers in the U.S. to proceed with contesting the court order. "I find it to be completely outrageous," she said in an interview on Sunday. She said she is concerned that the Justice Department has also contacted Facebook to access information about her, but she says she hasn't yet contacted Facebook about it. 

—Amir Efrati and Geoffrey A. Fowler contributed to this article.

 Write to  Paul Sonne at paul.sonne@wsj.com 