MUMBAI – India has started making overdue payments to Iran for crude oil imports after more than two months of negotiations to resolve the payment deadlock, India's oil minister said Thursday. 

The two countries have been in discussions since December, when India's central bank placed restrictions on transactions with Iran through a financial clearing house that Washington believes Tehran has been using to bypass international sanctions. 

"Pending dues of National Iranian Oil Co. are now being cleared and as of March 1, payment of €1.5 billion ($2.1 billion) has been made to the Central Bank of Iran," S.  Jaipal Reddy told lawmakers in a written reply in the lower house of parliament. Mr. Reddy didn't say how the payments were made. 

Finance Minister  Pranab Mukherjee said last month that India was trying to expedite settlement of the Iran oil payment issue by transferring funds through the German central bank Deutche Bundesbank. 

Government officials said the mechanism called for payments through State Bank of India Ltd. which will make payments in euros through the Hamburg-based European-Iranian Trade Bank AG. 

It is unclear whether the payments being made are through EIH Bank, which isn't subject to sanctions by the U.N. or the E.U., but is barred by the U.S. Treasury from conducting any business inside the U.S. The U.S. has also frozen any assets held by it in the U.S. financial system. 

While the minister's written statement says payments to Iran are to clear pending dues, it is unclear whether a mechanism for future crude payments has been finalized. 

Iran is the second-largest crude supplier to India after Saudi Arabia and accounts for about 14% of the country's oil import bill. 

Indian oil companies importing crude from Iran include Indian Oil Corp., Hindustan Petroleum Corp. Ltd., Bharat Petroleum Corp. Ltd., Mangalore Refinery & Petrochemicals Ltd. and Essar Oil Ltd. 

Until 2009-10, Reliance Industries Ltd. used to import crude from Iran, but it has since discontinued its purchases. 

Indian oil companies imported 8.9 million tons of crude from Iran in the six months ended September 2010. They imported 21.2 million tons in the last financial year, according to government data. 

All payments to Iran for import of crude oil have to be settled in any permitted currency outside the Asian Clearing Union Mechanism, Mr. Reddy said in his reply. 

 Write to  Eric Yep at eric.yep@dowjones.com 