Midway through the fourth quarter, the relieved fans inside Madison Square Garden broke out their two favorite chants. The tension had lifted like a fog and their 10-point lead over the Cleveland Cavaliers put them in a singing mood. 

First, they heaped adulation on their newest superstar, Carmelo Anthony, by bellowing his name. Then, for good measure, they lavished an "M-V-P" chant on their slightly older superstar, Amar'e Stoudemire. But once Ramon Sessions tied the game at 106 with 3 minutes and 27 seconds left on the clock, everything went quiet. 

Suddenly, losing to the woeful Cavaliers for a third time this season became a serious possibility. A three-pointer from Baron Davis with 10 seconds left made it a reality. The Knicks (31-29) trudged off the court defeated, 119-115. The chanting was nowhere to be heard while the fans funneled out.

Even after Davis's smooth three, however, the Knicks seemed poised to have a final opportunity to save face. Stoudemire answered with a 26-foot jumper to pull the Knicks within one. But Sessions hit back by converting one of his two free throws. And crucially, Anthony was then called for charging on the Knicks' last full possession.

After the whistle, he sat in the orange paint for a few moments with his legs out, his expression a picture of disbelief. The Knicks were heading for their third loss in six games since a blockbuster trade had brought him to New York.

It was the end of yet another uneven night for Anthony. Though he had 29 points in his 42 minutes on the court, he also committed six turnovers. Stoudemire was far more effective, matching his largest haul for the Knicks with 41 points, shooting 16 of 32.

The result meant that the Knicks continue to share a dubious distinction with the Los Angeles Clippers. They are the only teams in the league to face the Cavaliers and fail to beat them in any of their meetings this season. Everyone else who has played Cleveland has come away with a victory at least once.

The Knicks' overtime defeat at home in December was the Cavaliers' lone success in a run of 37 miserable games. And last Friday's 115-109 loss in Cleveland left the Knicks regretting their disjointed performance. They had promised to return the favor.

"We shouldn't have had to owe them one," head coach Mike D'Antoni said before the game. 

The Knicks also lacked the production of Toney Douglas, who had filled in so admirably for Chauncey Billups in their rout of the New Orleans Hornets on Wednesday night. With Billups still nursing a bruised thigh—although D'Antoni said he would have started if it were a playoff game—Douglas made his second straight start at point guard. 

He posted 11 points, but all of them came in the first half. Back then, the Knicks were actually hinting at a blowout as they raced to a 12-point lead. But once the defense started to buckle under pressure, shades of last week returned. The Cavaliers exploited the home side's glaring lack of a physical presence under the glass and finished the first quarter tied, 32-32. 

They pulled away with what should have been comfortable margins on at least three more occasions before the evening was over. But they were repeatedly exposed on defense, even in the absence of Antawn Jamison, who had tormented them with 28 points in Cleveleand. On Friday night, it was J.J. Hickson's turn. He led the Cavaliers with 23 points. 

As for the Knicks' promise to end their run of frustration against the league's worst team, it will have to wait until next month when the Cavaliers return to the Garden. 