CAIRO—A referendum Saturday on constitutional amendments is shaping up as a test of what many reformers here see as a rushed and problematic timeline for establishing democracy.

After decades of single-party rule under former President Hosni Mubarak, almost all of Egypt's nascent political parties are still in the process of forming. The new parties, which include higher numbers of secular politicians, are urging supporters to vote "no," saying that if the amendments are approved, it will start the clock on a race they are unprepared to run.

That would leave the field open to Egypt's only two established parties: the former ruling National Democratic Party and the Muslim Brotherhood, a once-illegal Islamist group that operated unofficially for decades before launching its own political party last month. The parties are nearly alone in their support of the 10 proposed amendments.

The proposed amendments limit the president to two, four-year terms, restore the role of Egypt's relatively independent judiciary in overseeing elections, lower barriers for independent candidates to run for president and limit the president's ability to call a state of emergency, among other reforms.

They were devised by a panel of judges and lawyers that was convened by the military shortly after Mr. Mubarak stepped down and the constitution—which concentrated power in the hands of the president alone—was suspended.

Those opposed to the amendments say they don't believe the proposed changes go far enough in doing away with the expansive presidential powers enacted under Mr. Mubarak and his predecessors.

There's been a robust public debate ahead of the referendum—political parties have run full-page newspaper advertisements, rival political leaders have made daily speeches and talking heads seem to be endlessly debating the issues on television news shows—providing a glimpse of how the prospect of truly free and fair elections have energized Egyptians.

Even state-run television has abandoned its pro-regime cheer-leading of the Mubarak days and has run relatively informative debates on the coming referendum.

"The demands [of the revolution] were not just to get rid of President Mubarak but to get rid of the old regime, a regime that gave most of its authority to one person, the president," said Shadi Taha of the Al Ghad, or Tomorrow, party. "We believe that this constitution is null, it's void and by law it was void on the 11th of February, the day of the stepping down of President Mubarak."

The amendments also set guidelines for a new parliament to nominate members of a 100-person constitutional congress who would be charged with drafting a new, permanent constitution.

Most of the new parties argue that a "yes" vote Saturday would set the stage for a summer parliamentary vote, as Egypt's military appears intent on holding parliamentary elections within four months. Whoever dominates that election—many of the new parties fear it will be the Muslim Brotherhood, as do some Western officials— will then be able to place an indelible mark on the country's political future.

Though there is little reliable polling to suggest which side is likely to win Saturday's vote, many fear the Brotherhood's and NDP's powerful grass-roots presence throughout Egypt means the proposition is likely to pass.

Still, many of the leading figures behind the revolution that swept Mr. Mubarak from power are vocally opposed to the proposed amendments and have been stumping around Egypt to encourage voters to vote no. Among those opposed, are two of Egypt's leading presidential candidates, opposition leader Mohammed ElBaradei, and Amr Moussa, the Secretary General of the Arab League.

The brotherhood and the NDP counter that a "no" vote would extend Egypt's post-revolutionary uncertainty by prolonging military rule and discouraging a much-needed economic recovery.

"The longer the transitional period is, the worse the economic conditions become. We want to give a chance for stability and life to get back to normal," said Mohammed Ragab, the new head of Egypt's NDP.

Complicating the debate is the military's reluctance to announce an alternative should voters reject the amendments. A senior judge charged with overseeing the vote said the military will issue a "constitutional decree" to govern the country through coming presidential and parliamentary elections, but the military council has so far been quiet on the issue.

Instead, Egypt's Supreme Council of the Armed Forces, which assumed power from former president Mr. Mubarak, issued a statement on Wednesday night urging media not to discuss the amendments starting on Friday so as not to "affect public opinion positively or negatively" before Saturday's vote.

 Write to  Matthew Rosenberg at matthew.rosenberg@wsj.com 