WASHINGTON—Consider the sad fate of the RBI.

Once it was a pillar of baseball statistics, a number cited in everything from awards voting to free-agent signings. Now, it's like a typewriter. Or that clunky cellphone you owned in 1995. It's obsolete. It's outdated. We have better ways to evaluate hitters.

But there are still moments when the RBI is a useful measure. And in the case of Mets first baseman Ike Davis, it may be one of the strongest indicators that the team has a healthy offense. 

Nearly one month into his second major-league season, Davis entered Thursday with 18 RBI, which led the Mets and ranked seventh in the National League. That put him on pace to drive in 121 runs this season, three shy of the Mets' single-season record.

A lot would have to go right for Davis to break the record, which was set by Mike Piazza in 1999 and tied by David Wright in 2008. But the fact that it's even conceivable that he could do it is an indicator of both Davis's evolution as a hitter and the depth of the team's lineup.

With Davis batting in the No. 6 spot, a high RBI total means two important things: The heart of the order is getting on base at a high rate, and Davis is driving the ball with authority. Both have been true lately, which is no small part of why the Mets entered Thursday's game against the Washington Nationals riding a six-game winning streak. 

During those six games, Davis drove in six runs, hit three home runs and batted .500, helping the Mets outscore opponents 39-17. "He's a big reason why we're doing what we're doing," Mets hitting coach Dave Hudgens said. "You can get a lot of RBIs in the No. 6 spot because all your best hitters are in the middle of the order and you can get on base a lot. It's a good spot for him."

When Davis hits the way he has lately, the Mets essentially have a cleanup hitter batting two spots below the cleanup hole. No other team has gotten as much production from the No. 6 spot. When batting sixth, Davis entered Thursday with a 1.333 on-base plus slugging percentage, the highest in the majors from that spot in the order.

Could he drive in 125 runs? His high batting average on balls in play (.403 entering Thursday) suggests he'll cool down somewhat. And if the Mets trade Jose Reyes and Carlos Beltran in July, it will hurt his chances. But for now, the Mets can dream.

"That would be nice," Hudgens said. "We'd be happy about that. RBIs to me are a team stat, so it's hard to project that. If Jose Reyes gets on at a .350 clip and Jason [Bay], David [Wright], all those guys are getting on base, then he's going to get a bunch of RBIs, because he figures out ways to get hits. He takes his walks, too."

If nothing else, Davis will have more than his share of chances to drive in runs. Entering Thursday, he had a team-high 25 at-bats with runners in scoring position and a team-high 42 at-bats with runners on base. "When you hit behind guys like David Wright and Beltran and Jason Bay, they're going to be on base," Davis said. "They're also going to hit extra-base hits, so I'll get a lot of chances to hit with guys on second base."

The number of times he drives them in may not be the ultimate measure of Davis's production, nor of the Mets' offense. But it's a decent way to gauge the success of both.

Here's how Ike Davis would rate among the Mets' single-season RBI leaders, based on his pace entering Thursday's games: