The topic for the evening's talk—"Empire City: Will New York Remain the Capital of the World in the 21st Century?"—would have been relevant to anyone who considers himself a New Yorker, but it seemed especially so given the well-heeled crowd.

The person assigned to answer the question was Kenneth T. Jackson, a former president of the New-York Historical Society and the Jacques Barzun Professor in History and the Social Sciences at Columbia University. And the 40 or so people who were eager to get the answer, including Howard Levi, an attorney and the friend who invited me, were members of the Columbia history department's Board of Visitors, mostly successful business people and lawyers who contribute $5,000 a year (though there's obviously nothing preventing them from giving more) to support the department's activities and to enjoy the privilege, several times a semester, of having some of the university's top history stars—among them Alan Brinkley, Fritz Stern and Mr. Jackson—come to their homes to chat about their fields of expertise and their latest books. 

"I read a lot of history," said Jonathan Freedman ('78), who, with his wife Aimee, had surrendered their Upper East Side duplex for the evening's gathering. "I love having these people talk about their new books and what's going on in the world of history. It's very hard" to keep up, "unless you're reading the scholarly journals."

Mark Mazower, the current chairman of the Columbia history department, said he got the impression that fund raising at the department rather than the university level was unusual. "We listen to these guys about who they'd like to hear speak," he explained. "It's been a great boon for us."

After mingling over coconut shrimp served by uniformed waiters and recalling their undergraduate days, the attendees climbed the stairs to the apartment's library. There, banquet chairs had been arranged in rows, each one with a navy folder bearing the university's crest. Inside was Mr. Jackson's impressive bio—"Although he has been welcomed to Windsor Castle by Queen Elizabeth II…Professor Jackson is most at home in the subways, back streets, and gritty neighborhoods of New York City…"—and a contribution form, thoughtfully including a self-addressed and stamped Columbia history department envelope. 

It would have been hard to resist the university's solicitation, and not just because of the sumptuous surroundings and open bar—guests didn't seem at all bashful about bringing their beverages upstairs; neither was the professor, who kept a well-stocked glass of red wine by his side as he spoke. One's contribution, whether forthcoming or already going to things such as summer research funds or history prizes, brings with it a copy of the magisterial, 1,373-page "Encyclopedia of New York City," edited by Mr. Jackson—at minimum a $40 value.

One history-major alum confided that for several years he contributed less than $5,000—the amount is only "suggested"—but had more recently given well in excess of that. He denied it was the liquor speaking, or simply unrequited love for his alma mater. "I felt guilty about abandoning the profession," he explained.

As Mr. Jackson launched into his lecture—actually, it seemed more a conversation—with the Freedmans' well-lacquered, history-book-laden shelves as a backdrop, it was easy to appreciate why Playboy magazine had named him in 1993 one of the nation's most popular professors. His knowledge of the subject matter seemed both consummate and casual, less learned than absorbed and organic, as he tossed out facts and figures, addressing the question of what makes New York a "world capital."

He noted that the city's wealthiest ZIP Codes—Fifth Avenue, Park, Central Park West—are in its geographic center rather than along its edges, which he described as "unusual. We live in a very un-American way."

Apparently the relevance of this, and it bodes well for our future (though I'm more than willing to stand corrected, my historic lack of both written and oral comprehension precluding a career in academia), is that the reason we're drawn here in the first place is that, complain though we may about the price of apartments and the unsalubriousness of the subway system, we're social animals, attracted by the excitement, the congestion, the delirious pancaking of humanity. 

Mr. Jackson noted that unlike Cleveland or Detroit, whose populations and housing prices have plummeted since the 1950s, New York continues to buck the trend. He attributed that to the city's diverse and tolerant personality dating back to the Dutch. "Anne Hutchinson got kicked out of Boston," he said, referring to the dissident Puritan leader who moved here after she was banished from the Massachusetts Bay Colony. "That's why we have the Hutchinson River Parkway." 

If you're of the intolerant sort, he said, taking a sip of his wine, "you need to move to Vermont," not that he had any particular animus toward the Green Mountain State. "You're going to live an unhappy life."

In case we felt we were living in perilous and unprecedented times, the professor pointed out we'd survived much worse: the years directly following the American revolution, when the city's loyalist leadership left with the British, never to return; the Civil War draft riots—the largest civil insurrection in American history other than the Civil War itself; and the city's flirtation with bankruptcy during the 1970s. Yet we've bounced back, Mr. Jackson said, offering a couple of metrics as proof—crime is way down and competition for places in the city's selective private kindergartens more furious than ever. 

But what about the future? What about technology that allows people to work remotely, came a question from one audience member. What about our ability to keep crime at record-low levels, asked another. What about the Chinese, demanded a third. 

Mr. Jackson admitted we face daunting challenges, particularly to our infrastructure. "We once built the Brooklyn Bridge," he observed. "Now it's difficult to paint it." But he was sanguine about the city's future, based on its resilience in the past, its heterogeneous DNA and its unparalleled opportunities for socializing. "Its history suggests it will remain a very important place during your lifetime," he said.

We trekked back downstairs to refresh our wine glasses and, heartened by the professor's prognosis, to snack on the reassuring chocolate-dipped strawberries now being served. 

 ralph.gardner@wsj.com 