 (Best of the tube this weekend: We're discussing the dispute over public-sector unions and the Westboro Baptist Church decision on "The Journal Editorial Report," Saturday at 2 and 11 p.m. ET on Fox News Channel.) 

"U.S. Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood announced Friday that $2.4 billion in high-speed rail funding intended for Florida will be sent to other states after the state Supreme Court upheld Gov. Rick Scott's decision to reject the money," the Associated Press reports from Tallahassee:

Why was the federal government trying to force this boondoggle on the Sunshine State? If Florida doesn't want the money, why not return it to the Treasury rather than throw it at boondoggles in other states? Who is John Galt?

 George Will addressed the first two questions in a recent column:

As for John Galt, he is a shadowy presence in the forthcoming movie "Atlas Shrugged: Part I," which opens in 11 cities April 15. We attended a screening last night sponsored by the Atlas Society, and we feel obliged to warn that this column may contain spoilers, though only if you haven't read Ayn Rand's 1957 novel on which the film is based.

"Atlas Shrugged" is a lengthy parable about individualism and freedom. Set in the not-too-distant future, it depicts an America whose economy is falling apart under the weight of an overweening government run entirely by people with approximately the integrity, cognitive ability and humility of a New York Times editorialist.

It is also, in part, a story about trains. Dagny Taggart, heroine of "Atlas Shrugged," is a hard-driving executive at Taggart Transcontinental Railroad. She teams up with Hank Rearden, a steel magnate who has developed a new supermetal, to build the John Galt Line, a high-speed track through Colorado. They encounter political obstacles every step of the way.

Meanwhile, great industrialists are mysteriously disappearing. John Galt, whoever he is, seems to have something to do with it, but precisely what is left for the sequels to explain. Also unexplained in Part I is the significance of an abandoned motor that Dagny and Hank find in an abandoned Wisconsin factory. It is amazingly innovative, an engine that literally runs on air.

There is one big difference between the book and the movie: While the former is set in a vague "day after tomorrow," the latter has a specific timeline: Part I begins in September 2016 and runs through the summer of 2017. Which is an odd setting for a drama about railroads, "a technology that was the future two centuries ago," as Will observes.

With road and air travel getting cheaper and better, the passenger rail industry had already been in decline for decades by the time Rand published "Atlas Shrugged" in 1957. In the 1960s, the U.S. Post Office stopped moving mail by train, depriving the railroads of an important revenue source. In 1971 nearly every remaining private passenger railroad was absorbed into the federally owned corporation Amtrak, which today runs almost all its lines at a loss. (Freight railroads are still private, although the ones in the Northeast were nationalized in 1976 and reprivatized in 1987.)

The technological disjunction between reality in 2011 and "Atlas Shrugged" set in 2016 did not escape the screenwriters, who incorporated a backstory to explain the sudden resurgence in the popularity of train travel. Unspecified chaos in the Middle East has led to a cutoff in oil imports, giving rail travel, which is less petroleum-intensive, a comparative advantage over automobiles and airplanes.

So wait--dependence on Mideast oil leads to economic disaster, in response to which innovative entrepreneurs develop a new high-speed rail system and seek out alternative energy sources? The film's credits do not list Thomas Friedman as a consultant, but we suppose it's possible that the writers got a wake-up call from his volcano telling them to move their house.

The ideological disjunction between reality and the movie tested our capacity to suspend disbelief. The rail projects President Obama is pushing today, which we hereby christen Bamtrak, do not make economic sense. If they did, they would not have to rely for capital on politicians with access to other people's money.

George Will is quite correct to say that the impulse behind these projects is a collectivist one: Obama and his men want you on trains because they think it's selfish to drive cars. It is safe to surmise that Ayn Rand would not approve.

  These Jackboots Were Made for Walker   Here's something that may lead you to think anew about the current dispute between states and public-sector unions: Sen. Sherrod Brown of Ohio--no relation to Eva, as far as we know--offered this novel argument on the Senate floor yesterday:

But wasn't Stalin head of the Soviet Union? OK, that was dumb, but Brown has set a low bar. Politico notes that he went on to say: "I'm not comparing what's happened to the workers in Madison or in Columbus to Hitler and Stalin." Glad he cleared that up.

  Once I Ran for You (I Ran), Now I'll Run From You   The Washington Post reports that those Wisconsin and Indiana lawmakers hiding out in Illinois are part of a trend:

Maybe they should form a union and demand a contract that ensures their no-show jobs.

  It's the Eponymy, Stupid   From the Wisconsin State Journal--no, not the WSJ but a Madison daily--comes this report on Gov. Scott Walker's proposal to end state-mandated recycling:

We wonder if there are enough Yiddish speakers in Madison to appreciate the humor in having a recycling coordinator named Dreckmann.

  Leave Common Cause Alone   "Several Republican members of Congress are calling on Attorney General Eric Holder to investigate possible 'threats' against conservative Supreme Court justices, claiming the advocacy group Common Cause is providing a platform for inflammatory rhetoric," Fox News reports. 

In the draft letter, the representatives, including Iowa's Steve King and Texas' Louie Gohmert, allege that rallies held by the organization appear to 'incite violence and encourage racial slurs.' " The Fox report cites our Feb. 3 column, in which we transcribed parts of Christian Hartsock's video showing Common Cause protesters calling for the lynching of Chief Justice John Roberts, Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas, Thomas's wife and Fox News head Roger Ailes.

"Asked whether one woman in the videos who said she wanted to hang Thomas really posed a threat, Gohmert told Fox News he couldn't dismiss it," the report continues:

We're certainly happy when our work gets attention, but this effort is misguided. Common Cause is a 501(c)4 corporation, meaning that it is tax-exempt but donations to it are not. Such corporations are permitted to engage in lobbying. Common Cause has made clear, hypocritically but accurately, that the hateful protesters do not speak on behalf of the corporation. And the comments, while repugnant, are protected by the First Amendment. They were far too idle to be construed as true threats or incitement.

As for "no one watching" the purported watchdog, we resent that remark! The congressmen wouldn't have known about enough to write the letter had no one been watching.

Meanwhile, the Washington Post's Richard Cohen had a funny line the other day in a column about Arab anti-Semitism: "I have read the assurances of scholars and journalists alike that the Muslim Brotherhood has mutated into the Common Cause of Egypt (Jordan, too) and that its anti-Semitism is merely an odd and archaic quirk." He is skeptical of those assurances. But even if they're true, "the Common Cause of Egypt" sounds pretty darn nasty to us.

  He's Got the Hole World in His Hands  "The economic news has been better lately," writes Paul Krugman, star columnist of the New York Times:

Hmm, where have we heard that before? Oh yeah, from Thomas Friedman, the other star columnist of the New York Times:

Krugman must be in an especially deep hole if, having forgotten the second rule, he's resorted to borrowing metaphors from Thomas Friedman.

  'How Do You Ask a Man to Be the Last Man to Die for a Mistake?'   "Search off Kerry Shore for Man's Body"--headline, Raidió Teilifís Éireann website (Ireland), March 3

  HALP US JOHN CARRY--WE R STUCK HEAR N IRAK   "Fitzy Chicks Call on Kerry for Support"--headline, Kerryman (Tralee, Ireland), March 2

  Sorry, Who?   "Pelosi Refuses to Get Specific on Spending Cuts"--headline, RollCall.com, March 3

  Himmler Had Something Similar   "Tweed Undercuts Principals by Grabbing Half Their Nuts"--headline, NYCivic.org, March 3

 Sex Tape Is Really Hard to Clean 

  Generalissimo Francisco Franco Is Still Dead   "Dan Rather, Still in Denial: I Was Asked to Leave CBS for Telling 'Uncomfortable Truth' About Bush"--headline, NewsBusters.org, March 3 

  Police Suspect Fowl Play   "Man Arrested With Chicken in His Pants"--headline, Atlanta Business Chronicle, March 4

  So Much for the War on Drugs   "Student Groups Take Hit"--headline, Kaimin (University of Montana), March 2

  We'll Drink to That!   "Bottoms Up Antarctic Ice Growth Discovered"--headline, Associated Press, March 3

 Life Imitates 'The Office' (U.S. Version) 

  'Wymer! This Is for Your Benefit. Would You Kindly Wake Up?'   "College Condemns Classroom Sex Show"--headline, The Wall Street Journal, March 4

  Be Kind to Gilbert, He's Had a Rough Time Recently   "Naked Man Rescued From Sewer Pipe in Gilbert"--headline, KTVK-TV website (Phoenix), March 3

  Sounds Like Benign Prostate Hyperplasia   "Issuers Spooked: Four Leaks in Four Months"--headline, BusinessInsider.com, March 4

  At Their Age, Who Needs Them?   "Cougars Fend Off Trojans"--headline, AmericanChronicle.com, March 4

  Hey, Kids! What Time Is It?   "It's Time for Labor Secretary Solis to Go"--headline, Washington Examiner, March 4

  Spyders Lead to Monza Recall--Now That Would Be News   "Spiders Lead to Mazda Recall"--headline, CNN.com, March 3

  It's Always in the Last Place You Look   "Fecal Matter Found on 72 Percent of Grocery Carts"--headline, FoxNews.com, March 3

  Too Much Information   "An Amazing Deal on Manpacks"--headline, TechnologyReview.com, March 3

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  VAS's Valley   "We are now going on strike," declares Bill Lasarow, publisher and co-editor of VisualArtSource.com:

Ask yourself, Arianna, what would happen if the producers disappeared--if the "men of the mind," tired of carrying your weight on their shoulders, went "on strike" and vanished from the Puffington Host.

And now we know who John Galt is.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Rod Pennington, Hillel Markowitz, T. Young, David Gerstman, David Farkas, Ethel Fenig, Michael Davis, Aaron Hall, John Sanders, John Williamson, Stuart Sullivan, Michele Schiesser, David Weiss, John Bobek, Steven James, Clifford Crouch, Doug Thomson, Robert Earley, Larry Hau, Raphael Bouskila, Nick Kasoff, Bruce Goldman, Eric Nilsson, Dave Nemzek and Zack Russ. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)