The Environmental Protection Agency, in an unusual move, revoked a key permit for one of the largest proposed mountaintop-removal coal-mining projects in Appalachia, drawing cheers from environmentalists and protests from business groups worried their projects could be next. 

The decision to revoke the permit for  Arch Coal Inc.
ACI


4.96
%




's Spruce Mine No. 1 in West Virginia's rural Logan County marks the first time the EPA has withdrawn a water permit for a mining project that had previously been issued. 

It's also only the second time in the 39-year history of the federal Clean Water Act that the agency has canceled a water permit for a project of any kind after it was issued, according to the agency. 

The EPA said Thursday it revoked the permit, issued by the Army Corps of Engineers in 2007, because it concluded new scientific research on mountaintop-removal mining since then indicated the potential harm to streams and watershed areas surrounding the Spruce project could be significant. 

A spokeswoman for Arch said the company was "shocked and dismayed" by the agency's decision, which it said would block an additional $250 million investment that would create 250 jobs. The company said it would appeal to the courts.

The EPA "deserves enormous credit for changing policies to protect Appalachia's health, land and water," said  Mr. Michael Brune, executive director of the Sierra Club.

As the EPA stressed that the permit decision had no implications beyond the Spruce mine, business groups outside the coal industry said the government's action raised questions about whether permits previously issued for other businesses could also be revoked, potentially stranding investments and costing jobs even as the economy continues to heal.



Earlier this week, nearly two dozen industry groups—including the National Realtors Association, the American Road and Transportation Builders Association, and the National Cattlemen's Beef Association—urged the White House in a joint letter to stop the EPA from yanking the Spruce mine's water permit. The groups noted that clean-water permits such as the one issued to Arch by the Army Corps of Engineers support roughly $220 billion in economic activity each year. 

"This is exactly the kind of practice that will keep capital on the sidelines and slow our economic recovery," said Karen Harbert, CEO of the Chamber's Institute for 21st Century Energy. "The negative impact…will be felt not only by West Virginians and the energy industry, but across all sectors of our economy."

The decision comes as Republicans in the House of Representatives—along with some coal state Democrats—are considering legislation to curtail the powers of the EPA.

"At a time when West Virginia families desperately need new jobs, the Obama EPA is proactively destroying high-paying family wage jobs by retroactively withdrawing permits," said Rep. Doc Hastings (R., Wash.), chairman of the House Natural Resources Committee.

"With this decision, the administration is going back in time to shutdown jobs already approved and underway," he said.

Sharp response came from West Virginia political figures on both sides of the aisle.

"Today's EPA decision is not just fundamentally wrong, it is an unprecedented act by the federal government that will cost our state and our nation even more jobs during the worst recession in this country's history," Sen.  Joe Manchin (D., W.Va.) said.

Mr. Manchin won his seat in last fall's midterm elections after running television commercials showing him firing a rifle at proposed climate legislation backed by President Barack Obama. Mr. Manchin is up for re-election next year.

As criticisms mounted, the EPA emphasized the rarity of its decision. 

"The history of EPA's use of our…authority demonstrates clearly that permits are not vulnerable to being revoked," an EPA spokeswoman said. "The Corps authorizes approximately 100,000 projects in the nation's waters every year, which translates to millions of permits during the past 39 years" of the Clean Water Act.

Mountaintop mining is a common practice in Appalachia that involves blasting off the tops of mountains to expose seams of coal and dumping tons of rock and dirt in nearby valleys. Roughly 145 million tons of coal a year, or 11% of total U.S. production, come from surface mines in the region, according to the National Mining Association. Some 27,000 people work in surface mining, mostly in West Virginia and Kentucky, the association said.

Environmentalists and scientists are worried by new research that water running through the debris from the mining operation often picks up metals and minerals, increasing streams' salinity. That could harm fish and plant life. Last year, the EPA announced tighter water-quality standards that for the first time set limits on streams' salinity. 

A paper released in January 2010 in the journal Science called for the government to stop issuing new permits. "The science is so overwhelming that the only conclusion that one can reach is that mountaintop mining needs to be stopped," said  Margaret Palmer, a professor at the University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences and the study's lead author.

Environmentalists expressed hope that the EPA would take a similarly tough position against other mountaintop mines. 

"It's our view that many of these projects are going to suffer from the same deficiencies that the Spruce permit did," said Jon Devine, an attorney with the Natural Resources Defense Council. Many environmental groups are looking to Congress to ban mountaintop mining altogether.

In revoking the Arch Coal permit, the EPA cited more than 100 studies that have been published or completed since the 2007 Army Corps decision that the agency says provide "a far better understanding of the impacts from the project." 

It also said, "The determination on the proposed Spruce No. 1 mine is limited to the particular circumstances of this mine."

Those impacts would include disposing of 110 million cubic yards of coal-mining waste, burying more than 35,000 feet of streams that would eliminate fish, salamanders and other wildlife. In announcing its decision, the EPA said the 2,278-acre mine would do "irreversible damage" to the region.

The EPA is reviewing applications for about 80 other mining operations and has allowed some mountaintop projects to go forward. The agency also noted in a statement that it worked with a different mining company to reduce by half the impacts its operations would have on nearby streams.In January, 2010,  Patriot Coal Corp. received a permit for an expansion of a mine in West Virginia. The EPA had held up that permit for evaluation on whether surface mining operations pollute local water.

The EPA, in its announcement of the Arch decision, also expressed support for coal. "Coal and coal mining are part of our nation's energy future and EPA has worked with companies to design mining operations that adequately protect our nation's waters," EPA Assistant Administrator for Water  Peter S. Silva said in a written statement.

 Write to  Stephen Power at stephen.power@wsj.com and Kris Maher at kris.maher@wsj.com 