DUBAI—Egypt's stock market racked up heavy losses when it reopened Wednesday for the first trading session of the post-Mubarak era, with foreign investors leading a selloff prompted by the country's uncertain political and economic outlook. 

"The system was flooded with sell orders, led by the foreign investors," said a Cairo trader at the brokerage house Beltone Financial. 

Selling by foreigners in turn put pressure on local retail investors, who faced margin calls owing to the severity of the drop. 

Egypt's benchmark EGX 30 Index closed at 5142.71, down 8.9% but off the day's lows and a shallower decline than some predicted. Trading was halted for about 30 minutes soon after the opening, as circuit-breakers intended to cushion market falls were triggered. 

The Egyptian government on Monday said its decision to open the stock market, which had been shuttered since Jan. 27, was made after the "necessary procedures" were taken to guarantee a secure opening and smooth trading. The exchange had last traded at a time when mass protests were taking place against the rule of former Egyptian President  Hosni Mubarak, who stepped down Feb. 11. Since then, the Egyptian economy has continued to suffer from the loss of tourism revenue and disruptions caused by strikes. 

Foreign investors also were spooked by the market's prolonged closure and by fears Egypt could be ejected from an widely followed index of emerging-market benchmarks. 

Until the crisis broke, Egypt was considered one of the hottest emerging markets around, drawing foreign investment that helped push the benchmark EGX 30 Index 15% higher in 2010. Analysts estimate that foreign investors own $9 billion to $10 billion in Egyptian stocks—roughly 15% of the total market capitalization—concentrated in the such blue-chip names as  Orascom Construction Industries SAE,  EFG Hermes Holding SAE and  Telecom Egypt SAE. Those three shares each fell 10% Wednesday—the maximum daily limit. 

By reopening its stock market, Egypt may have narrowly avoided exclusion from the MSCI Emerging Market Index, a barometer of the more liquid developing world's markets. Egypt is the only stock market in the Middle East and North Africa to be included in that index and its removal would likely trigger more selling by foreign investors. 

Under MSCI rules, consultations to have a country removed from its indexes can be instigated if an exchange remains shut for more than 40 consecutive working days. Wednesday was the 38th business day since the Egyptian Exchange shut its doors. 

Some analysts said MSCI still could exclude Egypt if it decides that the use of circuit breakers puts too great a limit on international investors' access to the market. The Egyptian bourse decided last month it will suspend trading every time the broad EGX 100 index moves more than 5% in either direction. 

"The key criteria for the MSCI is one of 'investability,'" said  Emad Mostaque, a Middle East North Africa strategist at Religare Capital Markets in London. "Given the prolonged closure and lack of trading activity today, further limit-down action tomorrow may make them [MSCI] initiate discussions for index removal with emerging market investors."

MSCI said it is monitoring the situation "and will communicate its findings and views to all clients at once." 

 Write to  Tim Falconer at tim.falconer@dowjones.com and Nikhil Lohade at Nikhil.Lohade@dowjones.com 