 The architect, furniture designer and gallery curator talks to the Wall Street Journal Europe about how he starts his weekend. 

French-Lebanese designer Rabih Hage has dedicated his London gallery to showcase works of contemporary furniture, with exhibitions ranging from Andy Warhol's Rain Machine to objects by Parisian designer Didier Blardat. Over the years, his business in South Kensington has become one of the English capital's trendiest destinations for interior design lovers.

His current projects include a pool house in a private mansion near Oxford and a new hotel and apartments in Berlin. When he isn't trying to figure out what works for the living room, Mr. Hage enjoys eating out with his family and a quiet coffee while reading the papers. 

  What's the first thing you do to unwind when your weekend starts?  

I always follow a routine. I walk out of the office and smoke a cigar when it's not raining. On the way back home from Chelsea to Sloane Square, I manage to smoke the cigar, as it lasts more or less the distance to the house.

  His man Friday   

On a nice day, I go out with my wife for a drink to a friend's house or go out for dinner at Lucio on Fulham Road. It's my Friday restaurant...Lucio, who left the city of San Lorenzo seven years ago to set up his restaurant here, knows his products and how to welcome his customers. This is a relaxed, homely place and, on top of that, the food is excellent. Lucio has a very good chef. I like it because it is not a place that's trying hard to be pompous.

  What's your Saturday routine?   

Rain or shine, I take my children and my wife to Bibendum coffee bar, one of the first Terence Conran restaurant ventures. We arrive at a quarter to 10. There is an oyster bar on the first floor where we have lunch....They serve nice croissants with a very good coffee. I like it because you are protected from rain. If it's cold, they have heaters. It is a nice relaxing, beautiful building. We have systematically been going there over the last 10 years...I call it the Breakfast Club because there is always the same type of people reading the same paper or magazine. There is a property investor, for example, who is always reading the Estates Gazette, there is always a nice couple with the children and grandchildren. Local people go there for the routine of a Saturday morning. It's like a painting.

  Early morning pleasures    

Now that our children our older and interested in electronic games, my wife and I sit down and barely talk while we are having coffee and reading the papers. We couldn't do this when our children were younger because there were screams and shouts. You get disturbed in your reading and then the attention goes to the children. Over the years that we have going there, the first thing we do is say hello to Simon [Thomas], the manager. We ask him about the latest news, whether he is going on holidays or what he is up to. This place is excellent in choosing the croissants and the little tarts. They have nice, small sandwiches. The bread is soft and they come with little icing on top made with milk. We usually have them for lunch on Saturdays.

  The weekend embrace   

After lunch, we split up. My wife and children go back home and I go to my design studio to check on paperwork, write and review things I left undone on Friday afternoon. I only stay for a maximum of half an hour. Around 11 a.m., I go to the Queens Club with my son who plays tennis. Then we start the weekend embrace, which involves taking the children from one activity to the other. I find it quite horrible and competitive. But keep them busy, otherwise they won't let you rest.

  Do you have any moments alone?   

When I smoke my cigar on Friday and when I go back to the office to double check that I didn't miss anything. My other time alone is on a Sunday morning when I take my son to play football.

  With so much going on during the weekend, it seems you unwind mostly by eating.   

Of course. This is a survival mode, but it is also a pleasure. This is the only activity that you share with other members of the family—eating and reading, which is a very individualistic activity.

 Write to  Javier Espinoza at javier.espinoza@wsj.com 