EISENACH, Germany—When Polish harpsichordist Wanda Landowska (1879-1959) met the cellist Pablo Casals, she famously told him, "You play Bach your way and I'll play Bach his way." While her dogmatic assertion might seem a little quaint today, a new exhibition at the Bach House, (the composer's birthplace) makes clear just how influential Landowska has been in the way we think about and appreciate Bach's music.

Her name might not exactly ring bells these days outside musical and scholarly circles, but Landowska was a tireless advocate for an instrument that, at the time, was considered an inferior predecessor to the piano, as well as a pioneer of what is now called authentic performance practice. 

The exhibition "Memories of Wanda Landowska" marks the 100th anniversary of a "musical battle" between the piano and the harpsichord held November 1911 in Eisenach. The harpsichord won. 

Spread over two rooms in the Bach House, numerous objects, photos and musical examples are used to explain the life and work of this musical pioneer. They show her featured alongside famous artists or reposing in the tranquility of her "Temple de la Musique Ancienne" in Saint-Leu-la-Forêt, near Paris, where she lived from 1925 until driven out by the Nazis because of her Jewish origins. Some of Landowska's belongings lend a shrine-like aspect, including the shoes that she wore while playing concerts (she wore long dresses that kept her pedal work a secret). 

The exhibition's centerpiece is an original 1927 harpsichord by Pleyel, the French make favored by Landowska, that is demonstrated every hour. At nearby listening stations, you can hear her playing Bach's Goldberg Variations and Well-Tempered Clavier. For the uninitiated, these virtuosic renditions will come as a revelation. They reveal Landowska's conviction that Bach should not be played with stiff reverence. As she wrote, "In their day, these works were accused of being too passionate. If we are incapable of evoking the same feelings, then our tradition is wrong."

 Until Nov. 13 

  www.english.bachhaus.de  