Like all March Madness fans, former Harvard basketball star Arne Duncan has strong opinions about which teams will and won't advance in the NCAA tourney.

But as U.S. secretary of education, he thinks some would-be champions don't belong in the playoffs at all. Third-seeded Syracuse University? Boot it out, says Mr. Duncan. Ditto for sixth-seeded Kansas State University. 

Both schools failed to keep at least half their players on track toward graduation, Mr. Duncan said Thursday. They were among 10 schools in the 68-team National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament that Mr. Duncan said ought to be disqualified for what he called unacceptable academic performances.

By an NCAA metric known as APR—for Academic Progress Rate index—those 10 teams have a score of 925 or below, indicating that fewer than half of their basketball players are progressing toward graduation, Mr. Duncan said at a news conference. He didn't name all 10 teams.

A Kansas State spokesman said the school's APR partly reflects the performance of teams that predated head coach Frank Martin, who took over in 2007. During Mr. Martin's tenure, the score has averaged well above 925, the spokesman said, adding that seven of eight seniors on the roster in recent years either graduated or will this spring.

At Syracuse, "this past year was an anomaly," said Kevin C. Quinn, senior vice president for public affairs. He said Syracuse had achieved acceptable APR scores in the past and would do so in the future. "We will exceed the APR standard when the next report is issued."

Mr. Duncan was an Academic All-American guard on Harvard College's team, leading the squad in scoring his senior year and graduating magna cum laude. 

He said coaches of academically rigorous teams had encouraged him to campaign for stricter academic accountability. While declining to name those coaches, Mr. Duncan said academic under-performance has become a relative rarity among collegiate men's football and women's basketball players.

But he said a culture of permissiveness with regard to lax academics persists in men's college basketball. He said if the NCAA prohibited under-performing teams from postseason play, "very rapidly you would see these renegade programs get in line."

NCAA spokesman Bob Williams said, "We agree we want better academic performance, especially for teams playing in the postseason."

But Mr. Williams also suggested the problem would benefit from improvements in elementary and secondary schools, such as the system Mr. Duncan previously ran in Chicago.

Suggesting students should be better prepared when they arrive on campus, he said, "We hope to collaborate with the Department of Education to improve college preparation for all students, including those who may become student-athletes."

The nonprofit Knight Commission, formed in 1989 in part to promote academic integrity in college sports, issued a report in conjunction with Mr. Duncan's news conference concluding that teams with an APR below 925 had earned $179 million of the $409 million the NCAA had awarded to conferences in the past five "March Madness" tournaments.

The NCAA said the report overstated the amount going to teams with a projected graduation rate below 50%, saying it was less than half the $179 million cited.

 Write to  Kevin Helliker at kevin.helliker@wsj.com 