SINGAPORE—The deputy chairman of Government of Singapore Investment Corp. warned that a major financial and economic crisis could erupt if the U.S. loses its triple-A credit rating in a disorderly manner..

"We face the possibility of another major financial and economic crisis if the world's risk-free asset, hitherto U.S. bonds, loses its triple-A credit rating in a disorderly manner,"  Tony Tan, who is also GIC's executive director, said in a speech at a conference organized by the sovereign-wealth fund. GIC manages the city-state's foreign-exchange reserves.

Credit-rating firm Standard & Poor's last month cut its long-term outlook on U.S. sovereign debt to "negative" from "stable" while keeping its top triple-A rating, citing political gridlock in Washington that it said is hampering plans to rein in U.S. government deficits. 

S&P's move, which included warnings that there is at least a 33% chance the firm will cut its U.S. debt rating within two years, spooked markets. Moody's and Fitch Ratings have kept a stable outlook on their triple-A ratings for U.S. debt. 

Speaking at the same conference, Singapore Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong said the U.S. needs to deal with its deficit problems, otherwise the ability of "the Americans to continue financing their debt and ultimately the value of the U.S. dollar" will be hurt. 

Mr. Lee, another deputy chairman of GIC, said this would be a problem for the world because it wouldn't be clear what currency could be the new anchor for the global economy, "or how we can evolve from the U.S. dollar to a radically different global order." 

"[The] best bet is to move progressively toward a multiple-currency world for stability," Mr. Lee said, though he added that even that could be arguable. 

Mr. Tan warned that the future economic and investment environment "appears unusually uncertain," although many nations are recovering from the global financial crisis and the economic outlook for 2011 is "more robust" than in previous years. 

Emerging economies, he noted, still face risks of inflation and asset-price bubbles. Other risks are a sovereign-debt crisis in the euro zone as well as structural problems including high debt levels in major economies, global imbalances, and high unemployment in the U.S. and Europe, he said. 

Apart from these, Mr. Tan said the "unprecedented rise" of the emerging world led by China and India will create more complex relationships and competition globally both economically and geopolitically, "raising the need for unprecedented international policy coordination." 

"Geopolitical risks and the possibility of potential policy missteps are now higher than at any other time since the end of the Cold War," he said. 

 Write to  Chun Han Wong at chunhan.wong@dowjones.com 