LONDON—Factory-gate prices in the euro zone posted their sharpest annual gain for two-and-a-half years in March, keeping pressure on the European Central Bank to tighten monetary policy further. 

But the prospect of higher interest rates came as other official data released Tuesday show disposable income fell in the currency area in the final three months of last year, highlighting the weakness of consumer spending in the economic recovery. 

The European Union's Eurostat agency said industrial producer prices excluding construction rose 0.7% from February and were 6.7% higher than in March of last year—the steepest annual increase since September 2008. The data were slightly stronger than expected after February's increase of 0.8% from the previous month and 6.6% from a year earlier.

  Martin van Vliet, an economist at ING, said the risk of high consumer-price inflation spilling over into wages will keep the ECB in a tightening frame of mind. "We expect a 25-basis-point rate hike in July, with the risks skewed towards an earlier move in June," he said. 

The ECB, which aims to keep inflation just below 2% over the medium term, raised interest rates by a quarter of a percentage point to 1.25% on April 7, the first increase since mid-2008, to prevent rising consumer prices from leading to broad-based inflation. 

Economists don't expect the ECB to raise interest rates after its next policy meeting Thursday, but will be scrutinizing what ECB President  Jean-Claude Trichet says for any hint of the outlook. The central bank could raise rates another two or perhaps three times this year, they say. 

The Eurostat figures show rising energy costs continue to fuel factory-gate inflation. Producer prices for energy on the domestic market rose 1.9% from February and were 13% higher than in March last year, the sharpest annual gain since October 2008. 

Stripping out energy, however, the increase in factory gate prices still matched the sharpest year-on-year gain since October 1995, Eurostat said. Producer prices excluding construction and energy rose 0.2% in monthly terms and 4.5% on an annual basis.

  Marco Valli, an economist at UniCredit in Milan, said the ECB is justified in continuing to withdraw monetary stimulus because business surveys suggest above-trend growth, the inflation outlook has deteriorated further and demand for loans is showing increasing signs of strengthening. 

"However, the debt crisis has recently seen a sudden worsening, with the market sending yields on Greek, Portuguese and Irish bonds to new record-high levels," he said in a note. 

  Vitor Constancio, the ECB's vice president, kept up the hawkish rhetoric Monday when he told the European Parliament that it was essential that recent price developments don't give rise to broad-based inflationary pressures over the medium term through second-round effects. 

Tuesday's other Eurostat release suggested domestic demand is producing little inflationary pressure. Real disposable incomes fell by 0.1% in the fourth quarter of last year, having risen by 0.1% in the third quarter and fallen in the first half of 2010, it said. 

Euro-zone consumers responded to the decline in their incomes by drawing on their savings, with the savings rate falling to 13.4% of gross disposable income from 13.6% in the third quarter. That was the lowest level since the first quarter of 2006, a measure of how tightly consumers are being squeezed by a combination of rapidly rising energy and food prices, and sluggish wages. 

Meanwhile, large parts of the U.K. economy showed signs of flagging in April, an early indication that the economy may struggle to grow in the second quarter. 

Surveys on Tuesday pointing to weakness among retailers and manufacturers in coming months also diminished the chances of a near-term rise in the Bank of England's key interest rate. 

"The indicators out today underline it will continue to be a very tough path for the [U.K.] economy in the coming quarters," said David Tinsley, economist at National Australia Bank. 

Sterling fell to its lowest level against the euro in more than a year after Markit Economics and the Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply, or CIPS, said manufacturing growth slowed to a seven-month low in April. A sharp slowdown in new orders contributed to the index's drop to 54.6 from a downwardly revised 56.7 in March. A reading above 50 indicates expansion. 

Separately, the latest Markit survey of manufacturers in Ireland showed that although consumers there have been hit by painful austerity budgets, rising unemployment and a property-sector crash, inflationary pressures remain strong. 

That is likely to play into the hands of the more hawkish members of the ECB when considering the impact further interest-rate rises could have on the countries at the heart of the euro zone's debt crisis—such as Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Spain. 

The seasonally adjusted NCB Irish manufacturing purchasing-managers index—an indicator of activity in the sector based on a survey of 300 firms—rose to 56 in April from 55.7 in March. It is the seventh reading above the neutral 50 level that indicates the sector is expanding. 

The survey showed production grew at a substantial pace, new business rose and manufacturing employment increased, but input cost inflation remained elevated because of higher oil-related and commodity costs and companies increased their output charges for the fourth month running. 

"The manufacturing sector is largely driven by exports and the euro's continued rise against sterling and dollar will be of concern, but to date demand is outweighing this impact," NCB Stockbrokers said. 

—Alex Brittain in London and Eamon Quinn in Dublin contributed to this article.