An arbitrator has ruled in favor of  Toyota Motor Corp. in a case involving a former Toyota attorney who made headlines by accusing the auto maker of improperly withholding evidence in product-liability cases. 

The attorney, Dimitrios Biller, has wrangled with Toyota since he left the company in 2007 after working for four years defending it from litigation tied to cases that claimed rollover accidents were caused by faulty manufacturing of Toyota vehicles. 

Mr. Biller had accused Toyota of inappropriately withholding evidence in the cases. To prove his point, he distributed some privileged documents he obtained while working for Toyota to plaintiffs' attorneys and confidential information through his business website. 

In the ruling issued Tuesday, arbitrator  Gary L. Taylor dismissed Mr. Biller's claims, which included defamation, and ordered him to pay $2.6 million for confidentiality breaches and other matters and to return to Toyota all confidential documents he has in his possession. The arbitrator also said he violated his $3.7 million severance agreement with Toyota. Arbitration rulings are typically confidential but Mr. Taylor allowed Toyota disseminate his ruling.

In an emailed statement, Toyota said it was pleased with the award, which it said proves the integrity of its legal team and "reaffirms the critical importance of attorney-client privilege as a cornerstone of our legal system."

Mr. Biller, who runs a litigation-consulting business in Pacific Palisades, Calif., didn't return requests for comment. 

Mr. Taylor, a retired federal judge, also issued a permanent injunction barring Mr. Biller from disseminating the material. 

"A lawyer acting as a 'whistleblower' cannot simply decide to reveal a client's confidential information," he wrote in his ruling.

The ruling comes as corporations worry about provisions in the sweeping Dodd-Frank financial-overhaul law, which offers monetary rewards to whistleblowers who expose fraud at their firms. While Mr. Biller's case came before the law was enacted, legal experts say the ruling may serve as a warning to members of a corporate counsel's office looking to reap rewards. 

According to the ruling, Mr. Biller had listed on his website "specific facts and figures concerning Toyota settlements, litigation costs, settlement policies and tactics and conversations with the client." He also sent thousands of confidential documents to a Texas court without being asked to and made inappropriate disclosures to the media, the ruling said.

Toyota had pursued the litigation involving Mr. Biller with particular vigor, challenging his credibility by sending the media copies of legal filings that included negative job reviews about him at a former employer and highlighted his mental-health issues including depression. Mr. Biller has said that depression is a common illness.

Tuesday's ruling may affect Mr. Biller's testimony in at least one rollover case in Texas where plaintiffs' attorneys are trying to hold the company accountable for personal injuries suffered. 

 Write to  Dionne Searcey at dionne.searcey@wsj.com 