NEW DELHI—A highly anticipated report on a southern region's demands to create a new Indian state offered a range of possible solutions but seemed unlikely to dim the controversy that has surrounded the issue.

The report, released by the federal Home Ministry in New Delhi on Thursday, offered six choices on how to deal with demands for the creation of a new state called Telangana from what is currently Andhra Pradesh, in southern India. 

The Telangana region includes the state capital, Hyderabad, but supporters of statehood have complained for 50 years that they are disadvantaged by the Andhra government. The national government agreed a year ago to create a new state, after violent demonstrations in Andhra Pradesh, but didn't provide a timeline, and the ruling Congress party's stance on the issue since then has been ambiguous.

The options suggested in the report included retaining a unified state with constitutional measures for the empowerment of the Telangana region, and the bifurcation of the state with Hyderabad, a center for India's information technology industry, as a federal district. 

Soon after the report was made public, Home Minister P. Chidambaram appealed to all political parties and groups in Andhra Pradesh to study the report with an "open mind" and give "impartial consideration" to its recommendations.

"I'm sure the people and political parties of Andhra Pradesh would make valuable suggestions that will show the way forward," he said.

Mr. Chidambaram said the home ministry will meet political parties from the state this month to decide on how to take the issue forward. 

More than 300 cases of suicide by Telangana sympathizers have been reported since protests began in November 2009. Several legislators later quit their posts in support of Telangana statehood. 

The five-member panel on Telangana statehood issue, headed by B.N. Srikrishna, a former Supreme Court judge, submitted its report to Mr. Chidambaram on Dec. 30. The findings of the panel's report were made public Thursday after the home minister held discussions with major political parties in Andhra Pradesh. The meeting was boycotted by leaders of the Telangana Rashtra Samithi — a political party spearheading the statehood cause -- and other parties, including the main opposition Bharatiya Janata Party.

Telangana supporters expressed their displeasure at the report's recommendations.

"No other option except formation of a separate Telangana state with Hyderabad as its capital is acceptable to us," said K.T. Rama Rao, a senior legislator of Telangana Rashtra Samithi.

Another Telangana activist, Konatham Dileep, said: "The Telangana agitation will intensify now and we will not rest until a statehood bill is passed in parliament." Mr. Dileep said any effort by the government to suppress the movement "will prove catastrophic."

Political analyst Chintamani Mahapatra at New Delhi's Jawaharlal Nehru University called the report a "political bomb that can explode into unintended consequences."

The government had put in place extra security measures following Thursday's meeting. Almost 5,000 police and paramilitary personnel were deployed in all regions of the state.

The Telangana region is spread over 10 of the 23 districts that make up Andhra Pradesh. Statehood proponents from the region say Telangana suffers from high poverty and its economic development has been neglected by current state leaders in favor of the richer and more powerful Andhra region, and that a new state is the only solution.

The Home Ministry, however, appeared to conclude otherwise. "The committee did not find any real evidence of any major neglect by the state government in matters of overall economic development," the report released Thursday said.

 Write to  Vibhuti Agarwal at vibhuti.agarwal@wsj.com 