LAS VEGAS—It wasn't exactly a sweet night for  Sugar Shane Mosley. He was pummeled for 12 rounds and lost a one-sided decision to WBO welterweight champion, Manny Pacquiao. On the other hand, it wasn't the best of evenings for the immensely popular PacMan. He was unable to accomplish the goal that both his fervent fans and trainer,  Freddie Roach, had set for him, namely, to become the first to knockout Mosley, a certain future Hall of Famer. 

Pacquiao pitched a virtual shutout, winning every round on two of the judge's scorecards. Moreover, he dropped the challenger in the third round with a thundering left hand, but Mosley, a brave and crafty former champion, was often able to avoid the worst damage from Pacquiao's onslaught. Pacquiao's bouts are almost always action packed, but not this contest. That was, in part, because Mosley was on the retreat and never mounted a serious offense, even though he was credited with a knockdown on what looked like a push in the tenth round. 

When it was all over, some complained that Mosley should have taken more chances but a badly bruised Mosley credited Pacquiao with being the most explosive puncher he had ever faced and admitted, "I was not about to take those risks." 

The combatants tapped gloves before every round and many times throughout the bout. At the start of the 12th and final stanza, Pacquiao and Mosley embraced. Following the final bell, there was a murmur that Pacquiao didn't press enough for a knockout. But both Pacquiao and his trainer denied that the respectful feelings between the two boxers dampened Pacquiao's aggression. 

The 32-year-old Filipino explained that his legs cramped early in the fight and, as a result, he couldn't attack with the dizzying speed that he is accustomed to. Still, unlike Pacquiao's other foes, Mosley was able to slip Pacquiao's right hooks and lead lefts. He just couldn't bring anything in return. 

Though it wasn't exactly the thriller the fans expected, it was a completely dominating performance by the left-handed power puncher who is widely regarded as the best pound-for-pound fighter on the planet. Pacquiao has destroyed the last four fighters put in front of him. For a couple of years now the world has been eagerly awaiting a showdown between Pacquiao and the undefeated  Floyd Mayweather Jr. Unfortunately, one obstacle after another has loomed up to prevent that dream matchup. 

Pacquiao insists that he would love to meet Mayweather but is quick to add, "I am not going to lose any sleep if it does not happen. I am completely satisfied with my career." 

The most famous fighter in the world leaves decisions about future opponents in the hands of Freddie Roach and his promoter,  Bob Arum. At the post-fight press conference, Arum listed three candidates for possible ring duty. 

First choice would be  Juan Manuel Márquez, who lost a controversial split decision to Pacquiao in 2008, but also owns a draw over him (2004). Next to a meeting with Mayweather, the Mexican star is the choice of most boxing aficionados. 

If that fight hits the deck,  Timothy Bradley and  Zab Judah are also possible foes. But with the physically taxing 12-round battle behind him, the multi-talented Pacquiao wasn't thinking so much about his fistic future as the concert that he and his band were on their way to performing.