If small-stock funds falter as expected, there's one type that may do just fine: microcaps, or funds that invest in the tiniest of stocks.

Read the full  Investing in Funds report .

Stocks with a market capitalization of $500 million or less are too small to be ruled by broad economic trends. Most are niche businesses and tend to move independently even from the broader small-cap category, defined by some as companies with market caps of $2 billion or less.

But even if they don't behave as a group—and that seems pretty clear—their collective performance over the long term stands out, as suggested by data compiled by the Center for Research in Security Prices at the University of Chicago's Booth School of Business. The center divided stocks that trade on the New York Stock Exchange into four sizes: micro, small, mid and large caps. From 1926 to 2010, the average annual return for microcaps was 12.8%, compared with 12.2% for small caps, 11.4% for midcaps and 9.4% for large caps.

The implication is somewhat surprising, considering the relatively meager attention microcaps get as a class from investors and news media.

Fund managers who invest in this area—and there aren't many—generally don't look at microcaps as a group either. Indeed, a rising tide most definitely does not lift all microcap boats. On the contrary, the experimental quality of the smallest stocks makes some managers approach them with the selectivity of venture capitalists, picking only those with the best growth prospects.

  "It's a less-efficient area of the market," says  Dan Chace, portfolio manager of  Wasatch Micro Cap, a fund that has about $340 million in assets and buys stocks of $50 million to $1 billion in market cap.

Still, Mr. Chace argues that 2011 could be a good year for microcaps, for the same reason that 2003 turned out that way: As a bull market matures, investors dig deeper for overlooked gems, many of which turn out to be microcaps. The Russell Microcap Index surged 66% in 2003, compared with a 47% return for the Russell 2000 small-cap index and a 30% return for the Russell 1000 large-cap index. So far in this recovery, returns on the small caps and microcaps have been very similar, even though the microcaps had a bigger fall in 2008.

  Craig Hodges manages the multicap  Hodges Fund and  Hodges Small Cap, both of which can invest in microcaps. Like Mr. Chace, he argues that microcaps are a good place to hunt for explosive growth. "It's easier to take a company from $20 million to $40 million in sales than it is to take a company from $200 million to $400 million," says Mr. Hodges.

One of Mr. Hodges's microcap picks is  Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory,
RMCF


-0.46
%




 a growing company that pays a dividend.

Dividends are increasingly common at the small end of the stock market. J.D. Joyce, senior vice president of investments for UBS Financial Services in Houston, was surprised by some microcap balance sheets recently. "It's not only large companies that seem to be sitting on a great deal of cash," he says.

But Mr. Hodges warns that microcaps are so thinly traded that their prices can swing wildly and unpredictably. He says he has seen microcaps plunge in quiet market sessions and skyrocket in negative sessions.

They tend not to behave in patterns dictated by the broader market, says Mr. Hodges. "They trade on their own merits, and by their own appointment."

 Mr. Curran, a writer in Denton, Texas, can be reached at rob.curran@dowjones.com. 