MUMBAI -- Renault S.A. plans to use its partner  Nissan Motor Co.'s Micra car platform to develop its first small car in India as it prepares to enter the country's most popular vehicle segment, said a senior executive at the French auto maker's local unit.

Renault is likely to introduce the hatchback model in early 2012,  Ashish Sinharoy, vice president-communications and corporate affairs at Renault India Pvt. Ltd., told Dow Jones Newswires recently. He declined to give details about the small car.

Indian consumers largely prefer small cars as they are cheaper and more fuel-efficient than sedans. They comprise two-third of car sales in India, one of the fastest growing automotive markets in the world.

Maruti Suzuki India Ltd. and the Indian unit of Hyundai Motor Co. currently dominate the hatchback segment in India, while others such as  General Motors Co.
GM


0.28
%




,  Ford Motor Co.
F


1.16
%




,  Volkswagen AG
VLKAY


-1.30
%




 and Nissan have also expanded into the space.

Renault currently doesn't sell a single car in the South Asian country, but has plans to launch five models until 2012, Mr. Sinharoy said.

"Our Fluence sedan will come by the middle of 2011, while the Koleos sport utility vehicle will be launched in October," he said, adding the rest would be launched in 2012, starting with the small car.

Mr. Sinharoy said the small car will be manufactured at the Renault-Nissan factory in the south Indian city of Chennai, while the Fluence and Koleos will be initially assembled there from completely knocked-down units.

"We will eventually fully manufacture all our five models in the Chennai factory as volumes build," he added.

Renault, along with Japan's Nissan, is investing 45 billion rupees ($991.1 million) to build the Chennai facility. The factory is equally owned by the partners and started production in March last year with an initial annual capacity of 200,000 cars. Nissan produces its Micra small car at the factory.

Renault last year ended its five-year alliance with India's biggest SUV maker, Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd., to make and sell the Logan sedan in the country. Following the split, Mahindra is solely responsible for manufacturing and marketing the Logan in India, while Renault continues to supply key parts, including the engine and transmission.

"We continue to source parts from Indian vendors for selling the Logan in Europe," Mr. Sinharoy said. "These are the same vendors who will also contribute to our new models, once we increase the localization on those".

 Write to  Anirban Chowdhury at anirban.chowdhury@dowjones.com 