To: Mr. Jeff Hathaway, Athletic Director, UConn

From: Me

Dear Jeff,

In recent days I have become aware of reports that a major financial donor is seeking to end his relationship with your athletic program. 

Reportedly, this wealthy individual sent an angry letter expressing his dissatisfaction with your leadership and not being solicited for advice about UConn's next football coach. Now this donor is asking for $3 million back.

I don't have $3 million cash on hand. I don't even have $2 million cash on hand. However, this morning I went online and donated a sum of $10 to UConn. That's right: ten dollars. It was a choice between seeing the new Ashton Kutcher comedy or saving your football program. I chose you. 

But there are strings attached to this contribution, and I want to be crystal clear:

1. I want to coach the UConn football team for one game next season.

 It doesn't have to be a big game like West Virginia. How about that September road game versus the University at Buffalo? I can totally handle that. I've watched so much football on TV. I've played Madden on my iPad. On the weekends, I am a substitute on my brother's co-ed touch football team for public school parents. I caught an interception last week, all by myself!

2. I would like to be acknowledged at all UConn football games. 

Nothing fancy, but here's an idea: When a UConn player scores a touchdown, I would like the player to stop in the end zone and point to me in the stands. I will stand up and take a bow, and then you can launch a cascade of fireworks behind me. If I am not at the football game, I would like any scoring player to make a secret hand signal that I can admire on television. But I'd honestly prefer if they only scored when I was there.

3. I would like you to consider the termination of the men's and women's basketball programs. When was the last time UConn won anything in college basketball? Especially the women, who are 1-97 in their last 98 games. Or maybe it's the other way around. Let me check.

4. If you are unwilling to terminate basketball, I would like to run my hand through Geno Auriemma's amazing hair, just once, to see if it's the real deal. I'm almost certain it's real. I just want to be sure.

5. How are you feeling about the whole dog mascot thing? Is a Husky a really Connecticut dog? The reason we ask is that my wife's cousin, Tiel, has this dog named Buttercup and he is so awesome. We're not exactly sure what breed Buttercup is. Has a little Basenji, might be part pit bull? But still: a great dog. What about the UConn Buttercups? You love the name, right? Of course you do.

If you come through on your end of the deal, I am prepared to double my offer. That's right, Mr. Hathaway: twenty dollars. Try to control your excitement. You can already start to see the potential of what we can build together.

However, if I do not get what I want, there will be repercussions. I will take back my $10, walk straight across the street, and buy a slice of pizza. And a soda. And some AAA batteries.

Do not cross me, because I will move my wealth to another college football team. I've been reading the sports page. Apparently, there are plenty of big-time colleges that know how to take care of football donors.

Sincerely,

Me

 Write to  Jason Gay at jason.gay@wsj.com 