NEW DELHI -- Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd. is still studying the possibility of assembling two sports utility vehicle models of South Korea's Ssangyong Motor Co. in India in the next financial year through March 2012, a senior executive at India's biggest SUV maker by sales said Tuesday.

Mahindra, which owns 70.03% of Ssangyong, plans to assemble the Rexton and Korando C SUVs at its factory at Chakan, in western India's Maharashtra state,  Pawan Goenka, president in charge of Mahindra's automotive and farm equipment business, told Dow Jones Newswires via phone from Seoul.

"The two vehicles are in India right now...we are doing market research," Mr. Goenka said. "Right now, all we have is a statement of intent and the statement of intent will become a business plan only after we do the market research in reference to the numbers, to make sure that the launch in India will be also financially viable."

Mr. Goenka said exact dates for the introduction of the two SUVs will likely be announced in two to three months.

He also said Mahindra, maker of the Scorpio and Xylo vehicle models, will later consider introducing its own brand of vehicles in South Korea, but added that the primary focus is on increasing sales of Ssangyong vehicles there.

Mr. Goenka said Ssangyong is expected to make its investment of more than KRW200 billion on developing new products this year via cash flow and working capital management.

"We are expecting that we will have enough internal accruals this year that we will not have to raise funds for this investment, because right now Ssangyong has a clean balance sheet," he said. "All the old debt has been paid off and we are starting almost on a fresh sheet, and therefore we don't expect new borrowing".

On jointly developing vehicles with Ssangyong, he said: "We certainly will look at product development synergies between the two companies, without again compromising with the brand identities of the two."

He said, however, that there are unlikely to be immediate synergies between Mahindra and Ssangyong.

 Write to  Santanu Choudhury at santanu.choudhury@dowjones.com 