In the two weeks since Carmelo Anthony became a Knick, there has been plenty of discussion about the pairing of he and Knicks star Amar'e Stoudemire. How would they fit? What roles would each play? On Monday night, it was finally decided: They would just score points. Lots of them. 

Anthony scored 34 and Stoudemire 31 as the Knicks beat the Utah Jazz 131-109 at the Garden. Point guard Toney Douglas added 20 points and handed out six assists.

It was the first time that Stoudemire and Anthony both scored at least 30 points and the second time this season two Knicks have done it—Stoudemire and the now-departed Danilo Gallinari did it against the Clippers in November. The 131 points the Knicks scored was their highest offensive output since Anthony became a Knick.

 Anthony's most impressive statistic wasn't his point total but how he got them: He made 12 of his 16 shot attempts. Anthony's 3-point shooting was the most noticeable improvement. He hit four of his five attempts after shooting 30% in his previous seven games as a Knick. Douglas was just as hot, hitting five of his seven 3-point attempts. 

For the fourth straight game, star point guard Chauncey Billups did not play because of a bruised left quadriceps. Center Ronny Turiaf and swingman Bill Walker also were out with knee injuries.

 D'Antoni was noncommittal on Billups's return. In his absence, Douglas starred and Anthony Carter had five assists in 20 minutes.

The Knicks started the game hot and never cooled down. They made 68% of their shots in the first quarter, as Anthony and Stoudemire were a combined 9 of 11. In the first half, Stoudemire, Anthony and Douglas combined for 55 points—the rest of the Knicks combined for 11. Defensive specialist Jared Jeffries, meanwhile, was held scoreless for the second straight game. 

With the new-look Knicks still unsettled, there was more rotation shuffling on Monday night. Roger Mason Jr. saw action for the second straight game, scoring nine points in 25 minutes. Shelden Williams scored 13 points at center in 25 minutes, and with the blowout complete, Derrick Brown scored six points at power forward. 

The overwhelmed Jazz lost quite a bit of their luster in the last month, as legendary coach Jerry Sloan resigned and the team traded star point guard Deron Williams to the Nets for Derrick Favors and Devin Harris. Favors scored 16 points in 23 minutes before fouling out. Harris struggled, with four points in 23 minutes.

Andy Rautins was the last Knick to enter the game with 5:23 remaining and he scored a basket with 2:38 to go.

On a night like Monday, it didn't seem to matter who else the Knicks put on the court. Stoudemire and Anthony were more than enough to secure the win by themselves.