Billionaire software entrepreneur Tom Siebel has sold his 62,000-acre Montana cattle ranch, for which he was asking $45 million. The sales price couldn't be learned.

Mr. Siebel, a former Oracle executive who founded Siebel Systems, bought the N Bar Ranch, about 90 miles north of Billings, about 10 years ago. The new buyer was a Texas domestic limited partnership principally owned by brothers  Dan and Farris Wilks, who founded Frac Tech, a Cisco, Texas-based oil-field drilling-services firm. A spokeswoman said in an email that they own other ranches and "have a long-time love for the land...and intend to continue the ranch's current operations."

The ranch supports 1,500 head of cattle and includes about 51,400 deeded acres and about 10,600 acres of leased lands. Its headquarters is listed in the National Register of Historic Places.  Joel Leadbetter of Hall & Hall had the listing. 

Metro Networks founder  David I. Saperstein has cut the price on his roughly 125-acre equestrian estate in Southern California by 34%, to $49.5 million. Mr. Saperstein had been asking $75 million for the unlisted property since 2007.

Mr. Saperstein's agent  Drew Mandile said the new price was intended to spur interest in the property, known as Hummingbird Nest Ranch and located in Simi Valley, about 40 miles northwest of Los Angeles. Mr. Saperstein and his then-wife, Suzanne, built a roughly 15,000-square-foot, Mission-style house, plus several guest and staff houses. There's a 20,000-square-foot barn with individually heated stalls, three arenas, parking for 500 cars and a helipad. Mr. Mandile, of Sotheby's International Realty, shares the listing with his colleague  Brooke Knapp. 

Talent manager Sandy Gallin, who has represented artists like Michael Jackson and Barbra Streisand, is contracted to sell his Bridgehampton, N.Y., estate for close to its asking price, according to sources familiar with the matter. 

Mr. Gallin, who is known for his home restoration projects, originally listed the Hamptons estate, above, for $32 million in 2009; it was most recently listed for $20 million. Mr. Gallin assembled the 14-acre property out of three adjacent lots, which includes a 1½-acre pond with several live swans and a rectangular swimming pool that's situated partially inside the pond. There's also a 6,500-square-foot shingled house with seven bedrooms and a one-bedroom cedar-plank guest cottage. Mr. Gallin couldn't be reached for comment. 

  Linda Haugevik of Saunders Associates has the listing, along with  Susan Breitenbach and  Matthew Breitenbach of Corcoran. 

—Juliet Chung and Candace Jackson

—Email privateproperties@wsj.com 