Bay Area water managers are already preparing for the next drought, even though the region will likely manage to avoid shortages this year. 

Although January has proven unusually dry, so much rain and snow has already fallen since the wet season started on Oct. 1 that most local reservoirs are either full or as full as water managers allow them to be, minus room to take in spring runoff from the Sierra Nevada snowpack. It is the second year in a row that the Bay Area and much of California has had ample rainfall, following a three-year drought that prompted many water agencies to institute measures such as voluntary conservation and mandatory rationing.

Even as many of those agencies have relaxed the cutbacks, they are taking steps to help stretch water capacity for when the next drought hits. Local water districts including the Contra Costa Water District and the East Bay Municipal Utilities District have been repairing and improving aging pipelines, canals and other infrastructure, and building new projects that can help bring in more water.

All of the upgrades are likely to have a downside, however: higher water rates, since ratepayers typically foot the bill for any improvements in the water systems. In the San Francisco Public Utilities Commission, the Bay Area's largest water district with 2.5 million customers, average monthly bills are more than tripling from $15 in 2002 when voters approved a $4.6 billion system overhaul to $52 in 2015, says  Ed Harrington, general manager of the district.

The district has about $2 billion of projects under construction now, including seismic retrofitting of small reservoirs in San Francisco and building new tunnels to help transfer water from the district's main supply source, the Hetch Hetchy Reservoir in Yosemite National Park, Mr. Harrington says.

But critics accuse some of the agencies of dragging their feet in making upgrades. "It's expensive to provide water and delayed maintenance means you have artificially low rates for years," said Jennifer Clary, a policy analyst with Clean Water Action, an environmental group based in Washington.

Water districts say such upgrades are necessary. "We try to do long-term planning and not sit back and let things happen," says Jerry Brown, general manager of the Contra Costa Water District, which in July 2010 completed a $100 million project to add another intake station in the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta where it draws almost all its water under contract with the federal government. 

The district—which supplies towns such as Concord and Antioch with water—has two other major intake points, but Mr. Brown says the recently completed station gives more flexibility in diverting water because it is situated in an upstream part of the delta that has generally higher water quality, and so can be used more quickly than water further downstream that has to undergo more treatment.

Last March, the Contra Costa district, which serves about 550,000 customers, approved a $120 million project to expand the capacity of its Los Vaqueros Reservoir from 100,000 acre-feet of water to 160,000 acre-feet. An acre foot equals 326,000 gallons, or roughly the amount of water a family of five uses in a year.

A more ambitious endeavor is the Freeport Regional Water Project, a $920 million facility on the Sacramento River that is designed to significantly boost water supplies in dry years for the East Bay Municipal Utility District. Under construction for the past three years, the newly completed plant, which will divert water from the Sacramento River to the district's network of reservoirs, canals and aqueducts, is set next month to conduct its first test .

The district, which supplies towns such as Oakland and Berkeley, built the plant in conjunction with the Sacramento County Water Agency to serve as a key safeguard against drought, says  Dennis Diemer, the East Bay water district's general manager. When fully operational next year, he says the Freeport plant would provide 40% of the district's water supply during a dry year, or about 100 million gallons a day, from the Sacramento River. 

For the district's 1.1 million customers, the new intake means rationing will be less likely in the future, Mr. Diemer says. For example, a mandatory 15% rationing program the district imposed on customers from 2008 until 2009 wouldn't be necessary now, he adds.

Officials at the Santa Clara Valley Water District, meanwhile, say they might consider a rate increase for its member agencies after holding rates steady the past three years. Even as it has had to cut expenses over that period, the district with 1.7 million users has spent money making its system safer from drought. In October, the district broke ground on a $52 million water treatment plant that will deliver eight million gallons a day of recycled water for nonpotable uses when it comes on line in late 2012, says Beau Goldie, the district's chief executive. 

He says part of his job in the next few months will be convincing customers they need to pay more. "It's getting people to understand the value of water and what it takes to deliver the water," Mr. Goldie says. "Most people, as long as the water comes out of the tap, they're happy."

 Write to  Jim Carlton at jim.carlton@wsj.com 