Syracuse University alumnus David B. Falk is hoping to make his alma mater the premier place for sports-management education in the country.

The university's College of Human Ecology will be renamed the David B. Falk College of Sport and Human Dynamics. Mr. Falk and his wife, Rhonda, have committed $15 million to support the college's expanded mission and to house the school in one centralized location. Currently, the College of Human Ecology is housed in eight buildings across Syracuse's sprawling campus.

The gift is one of the largest ever to Syracuse University and is expected to raise the College of Human Ecology beyond its state and regional profile. It will also help unite the college's seven areas of study: sport management, hospitality, child and family studies, social work, health and wellness, nutrition and marriage and family therapy.

"The Falk name is national and international," says Diane Lyden Murphy, dean of the College of Human Ecology. "It is recognized that Falk has put his legacy and wealth and career into this and it's beyond sport and to these other areas, too."

Mr. Falk majored in economics and graduated from Syracuse in 1972; his wife majored in psychology and graduated in 1974. The couple met as students and now reside in Rockville, Md. Mr. Falk is the CEO of Falk Associates Management Enterprises and is known in the sports world as a "super-agent," representing and creating brands for a roster of athletes that includes Michael Jordan, Patrick Ewing and Alonzo Mourning, among others. 

In 2008, the Falks contributed $5 million and established an interdisciplinary research center in sports management at the College of Human Ecology. That contribution was the "beginning not the end," says Mr. Falk. 

"For me, the greatest gift is not the check that I write, it's my involvement with students," he says. "This is not like building a building and walking away. This is something I think about every day."

Strengthening the brand of the College of Human Ecology is a key effort for Mr. Falk. "My job is to manage brands. I thought that the mixture of sports and human ecology wasn't a great fit," he says. Rebranding the school, he says, allows it to take advantage of significant overlaps between sports management and nutrition and hospitality, for example. "The food department is a really big part of sports, but it may not be the glamorous part," he says.

Mr. Falk hopes the college will become a "strong pillar" of the university. "So when people are looking to apply to colleges, they will look not only at the name value of the university but also look at the specialized strength of this college," says Mr. Falk.