At the Mark Morris Dance Center in Brooklyn through Sunday, the Mark Morris Dance Group is presenting a triple bill of the choreographer's most recent dances in the center's 140-seat James and Martha Duffy Performance Space. The engagement, whose concluding performances are Thursday through Sunday, feels like a soiree of music and dance in a parlor, admittedly a rather wide one.

With the musicians tucked in front of the left-side seating, and the wing spaces of the curtained-off performance area open to view from any number of side seats, performers and audience are in close quarters. That intimacy works better at some times than at others.

 James and Martha Duffy Performance Space  3 Lafayette Ave., Brooklyn  (718) 624-8400, through Sunday

"The Muir," Mr. Morris's three-woman and three-man dance to eight Scottish and Irish folk songs arranged by Beethoven, makes for the least easy audience-performer relationship. First shown last summer in the bucolic semioutdoor setting of Boston's Tanglewood Music Center, the approximately 20-minute dance becomes something of a challenge to experience within the Duffy's studio-like space. The world of the beguiling and often moving songs, artfully sung by three vocalists (baritone Jorell Williams is a standout) with accompaniment by a piano-and-strings trio, proves tricky to focus on from the seats farthest from the music-making.

Elizabeth Kurtzman's heavy-feeling costumes, especially the women's tulle-skirted dresses, make the cast look oddly overdressed for the casual surroundings. Mr. Morris's sometime mimetic touches, addressing the songs' texts, bring wit and drama to his distinctive choreography, but the overall effect at such close range is more of individual details than of related pictures.

"Petrichor," set to Heitor Villa-Lobos's String Quartet No. 2, first shown on tour in the fall, fares better. The title, in typical Morris fashion, is a colorful word the choreographer learned watching "Jeopardy!" It means the scent that fills the air when rain comes after a long, warm dry spell. It's a poetic name for this first all-woman dance in Mr. Morris's canon, with suggestions, perhaps, of the famed rain forests of Mr. Villa-Lobos's Brazilian heritage.

Prettily and sexily costumed by Ms. Kurtzman in brief baby-doll tunics in a range of cerise and gray hues sparingly appliquéd with tiny roses and paired with pearlescent trunks, Mr. Morris's octet of women form a gamboling sisterhood—think classical nymphs rendered by Isadora Duncan. Michael Chybowski's roseate lighting strays into the wings to suggest foliage, while the women gather, interact and breeze through the dance like so many daughters of Zephyr. The penultimate andante movement is especially memorable for its haunting lineups and groupings, which interconnect and configure the eight women as far more than a sum of their parts.

Most delightful is the program's closer, "Festival Dance," the run's world premiere, which is astutely fashioned to fit the space. The six-couple work, with two duos particularly prominent, is set to Johann Nepomuk Hummel's Piano Trio No. 5, in which Mr. Morris finds inspiration aplenty for his inimitable reworking of Middle European folk dancing into full-bodied modern-dance theater.

Martin Pakledinaz's costumes—casual slacks for the men and circle skirts for the women, all matched with T-shirt-style tops—look dull, but maybe that's his sly point. With their matte texture in grayed earth tones, these clothes bring to mind Hummel figurines. There is no dullness anywhere, however, in the dances and the dancing to the Austrian composer's early-19th-century composition.

Sometimes with linked hands and crossed arms, as distinct couples, and otherwise connected in fleet and bobbing chain formations, the 12 dancers seem as if they are about to take the audience by the hand and weave it into their illuminating trip through Hummel's catchy waltz, march and polka.

As the more central of the two featured couples, Laurel Lynch and, especially, William Smith III, highlight the dance with free-spirited freshness. Alongside their fellow dancers, they take Mr. Morris's bewitching dance arrangements and thread them all around a room that is not only their own but also that of the audience they draw in.