The California utility company  PG&E Corp.
PEG


0.15
%




 says it has no records of pressure tests for about 150 miles of pipeline similar in vintage and type to one that exploded last fall, killing eight people and destroying 38 houses. 

In a report filed late Tuesday with the California Public Utilities Commission, the utility said it didn't have documentation showing the pipelines had been subjected to water-pressure tests, which are used to determine the maximum pressure at which pipelines can safely transport natural gas.

The company said it would conduct pressure tests on those pipelines—which are in populated areas—and in some cases replace the lines. PG&E said that the work would start immediately. 

State regulators had ordered PG&E to furnish records on all of its pipelines in populated areas after federal investigators found the utility relied on an inaccurate record of the pipe that ruptured Sept. 9 and leveled part of a San Bruno, Calif., neighborhood. 

PG&E's records said the San Bruno pipe had no seam; investigators found that the piece was made with seam-welded pipe. 

Regulators might have required a different inspection method had they known.

In a related development, the public utilities commission Wednesday accused PG&E of "deliberate noncompliance" with its order by using historical records to determine the maximum pressure for operating its gas pipelines, instead of comparing installed pipe with drawings. The commission requested additional records and said its staff may recommend fines against PG&E. 

On Wednesday, PG&E spokesman Joe Molica said, "While we have made good progress on our records validation, we are not satisfied with the results to date and know we have more work to do"

On Tuesday, the utility had analyzed 1.25 million records and reached out to 37,000 current and former employees since January, 

"We will continue to review our files for additional pressure-test records," said Chris Johns, the utility's CEO, in a video statement posted to the company's website

PG&E found documentation on more than 90% of 1,800 miles of pipe but found records of pressure tests on only two-thirds of those lines. 

Those lacking pressure tests include another 435 miles of aging pipelines that are of a different type than the San Bruno line but which PG&E said it also now would test.

The company also found no pressure-test or historical pressure records at all for about 8% of its pipelines traversing populated areas. 

Pressure tests were not required in California before 1961, and utilities did not have to maintain such records until 1970. 

While not a cure-all, experts believe that pressure tests expose faulty welds and flaws.

The National Transportation Safety Board and California regulators have not determined what caused the San Bruno blast. But investigators have pointed to a bad weld as an important factor. PG&E's records wrongly reflected that the blown pipe in San Bruno was seamless, so the utility may have thought the pipeline could handle a pressure level that it could not, investigators say

U.S. Rep. Jackie Speier, a Democrat whose district includes San Bruno, criticized PG&E's record-keeping as "shoddy." But Rep. Speier, who has introduced pipeline-safety legislation this year, said in an interview Wednesday she was reassured by PG&E's commitment to test or replace the 150 miles of pipe in populated areas.

Still unclear is the cost of PG&E's safety efforts following the San Bruno disaster, and who will pay for it.

An administrative-law judge at the Public Utilities Commission on Tuesday recommended a rate settlement that would increase monthly costs by 0.7% for a typical PG&E residential customer. 

PG&E reached the proposed settlement with customers weeks before the San Bruno explosion, and it does not include costs the utility will incur for its stepped-up testing regimen.

PG&E officials said Wednesday they had no estimate for the cost of testing and replacing its pipelines.

Mindy Spatt, of San Francisco-based consumer-advocacy group Utility Reform Network, said the additional cost should come out of the utility's profits, not rate increases.

"All indications thus far show that PG&E is responsible for what happened in San Bruno," Ms. Spatt said. "It's high time for regulators to hold them accountable."

—Cassandra Sweet contributed to this article.