 Indian security agencies are making "astonishing" demands for increased powers to monitor email and other data traffic, a top executive of BlackBerry-maker RIM said. Robert Crow said India's Home Ministry wants the ability to intercept in real time any communication on any Indian network and get it in readable format.  

 Stock market investors are so concerned about problems around the world because they aren't sure the U.S. economy is strong enough to grow on its own, without significant government help.  

 The U.S. investigation into the Lehman collapse has hit hurdles that could result in no civil or criminal charges ever being filed against former executives.  

 China won an important victory at the WTO, which ruled the U.S. illegally imposed both antidumping and antisubsidy duties on some Chinese exports in 2007.  

 Expectations grew for higher Chinese interest rates after data showed consumer prices continued to increase at a rapid pace. 

 Most economists surveyed by The Wall Street Journal think the Chinese yuan will strengthen over the next three years and the euro will weaken, but they are split on the U.S. dollar's direction.  

 European leaders agreed on a program of long-term economic overhauls to the euro zone and authorized a beefing-up of the bloc's bailout fund.  

 Apple's iPad 2 landed in the hands of customers Friday, capping a day of excitement that saw lines form across the U.S. 

 H-P chief Leo Apotheker is expected to reveal his strategic plan for the company Monday.  

 BP blocked an attempt by its Russian partners to join its planned partnership with Russian state oil giant Rosneft, deepening a conflict that could become a major setback for BP.  

 French police arrested two employees from Renault's security department who were overseeing the car maker's internal corporate-espionage probe.  

 BYD's profit fell 34% in 2010 as the Chinese battery and car maker contended with fierce competition and a reduction in government incentives for auto purchases.  

 China Hongqiao secured $350 million in cornerstone investments from four investors for its planned Hong Kong IPO.  

 Hutchison Port set an indicative price for its IPO well below the top end of its initial range.  

Police firing tear gas and rubber bullets were unable to disperse thousands of mainly Shiite antigovernment protesters in Bahrain's capital. 

Police fired live bullets and tear gas at protesters in Yemen, injuring more than 100 people.

Oman's ruler granted lawmaking powers to officials outside the royal family.

Israel said it approved hundreds of settler homes after five members of an Israeli family were killed in a West Bank settlement.