ELMHURST, Ill.—Halfway down Gladys Avenue in this Chicago suburb is where the sidewalk ends.

That's because residents couldn't agree on whether there should be one at all. When the issue was put to vote last summer, 15 residents voted for and 15 against. The Elmhurst city council's compromise was half a sidewalk, one that ends in the middle of the block, at 589 Gladys. On the other side of the street, there is no sidewalk at all.

Claude Pagacz, a retired carpenter and longtime resident, successfully opposed sidewalks on his side of the street. "What concrete adds to the value of my house," he says, "I have no idea."

Neighbor Brian Cahill, meanwhile, can count the ways: Sidewalks make it possible for his children to walk to school, ride their bikes, make friends with other kids. "There have been more young families moving in," says Mr. Cahill, a father of three. "We are the future of the community."

Sidewalks are dividing neighbors in a number of places across the country. The tension has grown more acute in recent years as young families in suburbs seek to make their communities more walkable, perhaps even reminiscent of the cities they fled. Town planners largely welcome the trend, but amid shrinking municipal budgets, localities and their residents squabble over who should pay—developers, communities or homeowners themselves.

And then there's the more entrenched opposition from longtime residents: the foot soldiers against footpaths. 

"I'm not politically active. I stay within my own world. But since we started fighting over sidewalks, it's become a movement," says Joseph Saunders, a 63-year-old retired construction worker. He lives on King Road in Rocky Point, N.Y., where a local politician introduced a plan to install sidewalks late last year. "Cement companies—are they the ones pushing for this? They are the only ones who truly benefit," says Mr. Saunders. "Nobody walks on King Road. Everybody drives."

Planners' counterargument, of course, is: Build it—and they will walk. In 2008, Salisbury, N.C., began requiring builders to include sidewalks in all newly constructed communities; a developer can instead opt to pay the city at a fee of $22 per linear foot. Salisbury also devised a "sidewalk priority index" to evaluate which areas most needed better connectivity, such as those close to schools, parks and transit. "We see a community with 'full-service streets' in which cars and pedestrians, bicyclists and buses are equally at home," says a report on the future of the city. "We see well-planned neighborhoods, designed to encourage walking from home to work, from home to the corner store…"

The city has been paying up to one-third of the cost of sidewalk installation but urban designer Lynn Raker says few homeowners request the assistance. "They realize it makes their neighborhood more attractive and pedestrian-friendly," she says. 

That was hardly the reception of residents in Janesville, Wis., when its planners unveiled a proposal to install sidewalks in places that had been exempted from them. "It's just been a circus," said Walden Thiede, an 80-year-old retired automotive engineer. "Nobody wants to pay for anything." Ultimately, homeowners will have to pay for about 50 miles of sidewalk over the next seven years, about $2,000 to $2,500 for the average lot.

Pulte Homes, one of the nation's largest builders, says sidewalks aren't a given in all communities, although it has seen an uptick in localities requiring them to be. Active communities for the over-55 set and "move-up" buyers, meaning growing families, will very likely get sidewalks, says Pulte spokeswoman Valerie Dolenga. "Where you won't see it is in multifamily and entry-level buyers," she says. 

Some residents think that their property line extends all the way to the road, but most municipalities actually retain rights over several feet of a typical front yard, says David Senden, principal at architecture firm KTGY Group. Others, such as Mr. Saunders of Rocky Point, say they worry about losing trees to make way for pavement and that they won't be able to park their cars on the street anymore. 

The issue also grows emotional because many communities, such as Elmhurst, grapple with old versus new, both in the ages of residents and their housing stock. Gladys Avenue is a mix of split-level homes built in the 1960s and 1970s and newer construction that dwarfs the old houses. 

"You have a lot of tension between people who have lived here forever and folks who have not," says Susan Rose, who has been an Elmhurst alderman for 20 years. "It's being fought block by block—and on Gladys by half a block."

Indeed, even once-sparring residents agreed that half a sidewalk looks weird. 

"It seems stupid to me," says Mr. Pagacz. "Was this the most practical thing to do?"

On this, while Mr. Cahill agrees, he says he doesn't want to start another fight—"the usual Chicago politics"—to have the sidewalk go all the way around the block. "It was the best we could do," he says. "Half is better than none."