WASHINGTON—The U.S. nuclear-power industry is questioning the "scientific basis" of the Obama administration's decision to evacuate U.S. citizens and military personnel within a 50-mile radius of the Fukushima Daiichi power plant in Japan. 

The Obama administration's 50-mile evacuation policy made headlines Wednesday because it went beyond Japan's decision to impose a 12-mile evacuation zone, suggesting the U.S. did not agree with Japan's assessment of risks in the area. 

In an interview with Dow Jones Newswires, Nuclear Energy Institute spokesman Steve Kerekes said the U.S. nuclear industry has "questions about the scientific basis" of the administration's actions. 

Japan's 12-mile evacuation policy appears "sufficient to minimize public-health impacts," based on available data concerning radiation and dispersal, Mr. Kerekes said. 

Mr. Kerekes said he did not know whether the NEI, a policy group representing nuclear-power plant operators, had informed the White House or other agencies of its views. 

A spokesman for the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, which oversees the U.S. nuclear industry, was not available for comment. 

NEI recently informed at least one member of Congress of its views: Rep. Joe Barton (R., Texas), a nuclear-power advocate who used to chair the powerful House Energy and Commerce Committee. 

"While they could understand, to some degree, why [the administration] would do that," Mr. Barton told Dow Jones Newswires, NEI staff said the 50-mile evacuation zone "was much more than was necessary." 

As Japanese officials struggle to contain the crisis at the Fukushima nuclear complex, the U.S. nuclear-power industry and its Capitol Hill allies have been forced to defend the safety record of nuclear plants in this country. 

Nuclear Regulatory Commission Chair Gregory Jaczko said Wednesday that the U.S. decided to clear a wider evacuation radius than Japan had imposed in part because of concerns over spent fuel pools in a fourth reactor at Fukushima. 

Mr. Jaczko said the water in that spent fuel pool had evaporated, increasing the risks of radiation exposure and ignition. 

Mr. Jaczko also said the water in another pool, at a third reactor, could leak out because of a crack. 

Rep. Ed Whitfield (R., Ky.), chair of the House Energy and Power Subcommittee, told Dow Jones Newswires that "Japan had the expertise to deal with this issue and they had the scientists who understood nuclear energy," but added that the U.S. has "a right to be involved to protect American citizens and do what we want to do." 

The Union of Concerned Scientists also criticized the NRC for its 50-mile recommendation, but for different reasons. It questioned how the U.S. could recommend a 50-mile evacuation zone when the U.S. standard for emergency evacuation plans is 10 miles. 

"How could they justify not recommending the 50-mile radius in the U.S.?" asked David Lochbaum, a nuclear expert with UCS, referring to the NRC. "We've been advocating for quite some time that they need to look at expanded emergency evacuation zones." 

UCS also seized on the unfolding situation in Japan to call for improvements to the safety at U.S. nuclear plants and more proactive regulation from the NRC. The group released a report Wednesday outlining 14 safety-equipment failures, security problems, and other "near misses" at nuclear plants in the U.S. in 2010. 

None of the 14 "would have happened had prior warning flags been heeded rather than discounted and ignored," Mr. Lochbaum said. 

 Write to  Tennille Tracy at tennille.tracy@dowjones.com 