More than 25 burlesque performers disrobed for charity at the Wild Project in the East Village in a benefit for the AIDS Walk New York City. Audience members paid $50 to enter and were each given a take-home pair of handmade, multicolored pasties with tassels attached for twirling. 

"And pasties are hard to find," said audience member Karen Eckhoff. "It's one of those things, you look for them, and you can't find them." 

With 15 minutes to curtains up, two dressing rooms were crammed with artists in various states of undress applying eyelashes and negotiating their tech needs with performer/producer Rita MenWeep, the benefit's chief organizer. 

"Mr. Gorgeous," she asked. "Does your partner have a name?" 

"You can call him Jason," he said. "Or the Midnight Casanova."

They decided to go with the latter. Ms. MenWeep got the idea for the benefit four years ago when the company she worked for—she won't say which—offered to match funds. When her co-workers came up with rather weak ideas for raising money, she thought, "Wait a minute, I'm a burlesque producer. I have something to offer."

When asked if burlesque had become more mainstream in recent years, consensus in the dressing room was that it had. But a mention of the recent Cher/Christina Aguilera film provoked a collective groan. "Where was the nudity?" asked a performer called Cherry Pitz. 

And then it was show time. "Give yourself a round of applause for taking time out of your busy schedule to do something positive and look at naked people," the host World Famous BOB, a self-described "female-female impersonator," said to the audience.

A dazzling array of performers followed with names like Veruca Honeyscotch, Bambi Galore, Creamy Stevens and Go Go Harder. Each shook, shimmied and stripped. One even did a St. Patrick's Day-inspired Irish step dance that involved pulling a potato and a tiny bottle of liqueur from beneath her traditional folk dress. The total earned: $2,008, which cosmetics company MAC matched. 