 New York 

In two exquisite sepia drawings from around 1805-06 of the view from his studio on the river Elbe in Dresden, the German painter Caspar David Friedrich (1774-1840) inaugurated a motif that would become a signature subject in his art. Neither pure landscapes nor prosaic, painted interiors, they set the stage for the theme in Northern European art that is traced in the Metropolitan Museum of Art's small, spare and elegant exhibition "Rooms with a View: The Open Window in the 19th Century." 



Sabine Rewald, the Gelman Curator of 19th-Century, Modern and Contemporary Art at the Met, organized the show, which includes not only Friedrich but Romantic and Realist painters who took up his theme. While only a handful of these artists measure up to their visionary Romantic forebear, and many are unfamiliar to Americans, their paintings allow us a fascinating, evolutionary glimpse into one of the more evocative themes in 19th-century art. At its most profound, and especially in Friedrich's work, the motif of a view through an open window celebrated the utter subjectivity of the painter's vision at the very threshold that divided his world and the realm of art from nature.

The austerity and economy of Friedrich's sepia drawings allowed him to pair in perfect balance the darkened studio with the illuminated sky and swath of river below, espied in one version from an angle and in the other straight on. Meticulously framed by windows that echo the rectangular shape of his canvas, Friedrich's subject became not so much the landscape as his unique experience of it, and his freedom to capture his view of nature as he chose. In the drawing of the rightmost window, a tiny mirror reflecting the artist's eyes and furrowed brow underscores his theme. When he returns to the motif in his small but magnificent "Woman at the Window" (1822), Friedrich's uncanny new take on the age-old equation of a painting as a window reveals his image to be a sophisticated essay about the nature of perception. 

Metropolitan Museum of Art

Through July 4

While it is probably a depiction of his young wife, Carolyn Bommer, peering out from his spartan studio, the painting is also a subtle study in the poetics of Friedrich's imagery. The strict symmetry that had ordered so many of his northern landscapes is transferred now to his interior, with the huge casement window, floor boards and squared paneled walls framing the central vertical of her delicate, rounded figure and its circle of soft shadow. The figure—turned away from us and leaning slightly into a landscape we can barely see—and the painting as well have elicited countless interpretations: as a metaphor of longing to escape the confinement of home or earth, or of the unbridgeable divide between art and nature. As beautifully described by the art historian Joseph Leo Koerner, Friedrich dramatizes the act of viewing in a canvas that compels us to look at, but rarely beyond, the window and the room.

Given the theme's redolent place in the painter's oeuvre, it is hardly surprising that Friedrich's colleagues took it up in their own work. His close friend and disciple Georg Friedrich Kersting (1785-1847), for example, chose the same format for three portraits of Friedrich at work in his studio, part of a series of painted interiors for which Kersting is best known and several of which are here on view. Though not as brilliant a summation of Friedrich's genius as the 1812 version (National Gallery, West Berlin) in which the Cossack-bearded artist stares intently at a canvas turned from our view, Kersting's "Caspar David Friedrich in His Studio" of 1811 still captures the originality of the artist's vision. In a silent, cell-like space where a half-shuttered window blocks our view of the landscape and admits above the cool, Northern light, Friedrich works at his easel with only his imagination to guide him. Kersting's paintings, little known in this country and rarely lent even within Germany, are a quiet revelation of the show. 

German painters took the motif of the windowed studio with them when they traveled, grand-tour style, to the south. Young French painters, living at the Académie de France in Rome, adopted it to frame sketchlike prospects of the sunlit Italian campagna, as seen in Léon Cogniet's "The Artist in His Room at the Villa Medici, Rome" (1817). 

Before he settled in Dresden, Friedrich had studied in Copenhagen, and painters of the Danish golden age, too, incorporated the motif in their luminous, pristine interiors. In Wilhelm Bendz's splendid, informal family portrait "Interior from Amaliegade with the Artist's Brothers" (c. 1829), sunlight streams through windows into a room marked by crisply painted walls, barren wood floors, the requisite reflecting mirror and, at its edges, a clutter of anecdotal details. And in the following generation, the German Realist painter Adolph Menzel adopted the motif in a small series of tasteful, intimate interiors that are perfectly suited to hang in the graceful domestic spaces they depict. Though beautiful and often filled with evanescent light, few such later works offer more than a decorous shell of all that Friedrich's painting had held. His penetrating essays on the nature of perception and the motif of the room with a view would linger largely unchallenged for almost a century until Henri Matisse, in paintings such as "Open Window" (1905), transformed his subject into a threshold for 20th-century modernism. 

 Ms. Lewis teaches art history at Trinity College, Hartford. 