 Q: I want to make an offer on a house that costs $437,000. My real estate agent says that I should put down 30% to show that I am serious. I can do it, but it will be a big stretch. I planned to put down only 20%. 

Since the sellers get a check for the entire amount at closing, why should they care what I put down?

 --Atlanta 

 A: I question your agent's advice. When evaluating offers, sellers do care that buyers are serious, meaning that they are not likely to back out on the deal. So the more money you put down early in the selling process, the more you show that you plan to complete the transaction. Since sellers must take their homes off the market for up to two months once they've signed a contract and are waiting for the deal to close, it's understandable that they care about your financial firepower.

But since buyers generally aren't engaging in bidding wars in your market, it seems to me that an earnest money deposit of 20% is sufficient to show that your intentions are, well, earnest. Moreover, I am concerned that you will find a bigger down payment "a big stretch." In today's shaky economy, it's important for everyone to put away at least six months' worth of living expenses as a reserve should the unthinkable happen, such as a job loss or medical emergency. Given that you will also incur extra expenses to move, buy new furniture and spruce up your new home, you should add a few thousand dollars to that cushion.

However, it's possible that your agent wants you to put up a larger down payment for a different reason. These days, houses sometimes appraise for less than their selling price. If this is the case, the lender will calculate the amount of money it will lend using the appraisal. 

To illustrate, say that the lender calculates the loan using an 80% loan-to-value ratio. If the house appraises at $437,000, they will loan you $349,600. However, if it only appraises at $420,000, the maximum mortgage you'd be allowed would be $336,000. Unless the sellers lower their price, you'll have to make up the difference.

If you put down a larger down payment, it indicates that you have the wherewithal to cover any such shortfalls, which means there's a greater likelihood that the deal will go through.

Agents do, of course, have a stake in the transaction's completion, since they don't get paid otherwise. But you have to do what's best for you.

Before you make an offer on this house, I suggest that you talk to a lender to get a pre-approval letter for financing. Don't let anyone talk you into taking on more debt than you can handle comfortably.

Meanwhile, if you can make your offer more attractive in other ways, such as being flexible on move-in dates, make sure your agent explains that to the sellers. They may be motivated by more than just the bottom line.

 Write to  June Fletcher at fletcher.june@gmail.com 