A federal judge in Kansas on Friday ruled against a group of suburban parents who sought to put a property-tax increase on the ballot in order to raise funds for their public schools.

Kansas, like a handful of other states, caps the amount of money that local school districts can raise from property taxes, in an effort to enforce a rough parity in spending across the state. Parents in the Shawnee Mission School District, which serves mostly affluent suburbs of Kansas City, sued to lift that cap. They were opposed in court by Gov. Sam Brownback's administration and a coalition of superintendents representing mostly poor and rural districts.

U.S. District Judge John W. Lungstrum dismissed the case on the grounds that the cap was a crucial and integral part of the state's complex formula for distributing education funds in a manner meant to ensure that wealthy school districts don't pull far ahead of poorer districts. "If the plaintiffs were to prevail on their claim that the cap is unconstitutional, the entire [school funding] scheme would be struck down," Judge Lungstrum wrote.

Tristan Duncan, an attorney representing the Shawnee Mission parents, said they planned a swift appeal to the 10th Circuit Court of Appeals.

"In a nation founded on freedom and local initiative, it's inconceivable that any state would prohibit a community from voluntarily raising taxes to improve their children's education, especially when education funding is in crisis," Ms. Duncan said. "It's almost mean-spirited."

The Shawnee Mission School District has cut programs including sports teams, library service, foreign-language classes and support for gifted students in recent years as state education funding has dwindled. According to district administrators, a mill levy of roughly $260 a year on a typical $250,000 home in the district would make up for all recent and proposed funding cuts. Voters in the district have approved several such ballot measures in recent years.

 Write to  Stephanie Simon at stephanie.simon@wsj.com 