Considering the new Hyundai Equus? Forget the driver's license. Let me see your anesthesiologist's diploma. The Equus is the Korean giant's first fully credentialed premium luxury sedan, weighing in against the likes of the Mercedes-Benz S-class and BMW 7-series, and it is the softest, fluffiest, numbest, most impassive saloon it's been my pleasure to drive, if hearing little and caring less are indeed pleasures. This is heavy machinery that itself makes you drowsy to operate.



And it's all so familiar. I've actually felt this kind of opiated refinement before, in the original Lexus LS400 that debuted in 1989. Like that car, the Equus is a statement vehicle, and the statement is: "We're coming." Hyundai Auto Group (with subsidiary Kia) is now the fifth-largest automaker in the world and fastest-growing in the U.S. The company has seemed to be able to churn out winners like the Genesis Sedan/Coupe and the mega-hit Sonata at will. The flagship Equus (which has sold briskly in the Korean home market and other parts of the world for more than a year) is a required step in the company's bid for world domination.

The original LS400 turned the U.S. luxury car market on its head and helped establish Lexus—a separate brand set up by Toyota for the U.S. market—as the country's best-selling luxury brand. In all the ways that matter, the Equus is following the LS400 template (note that even the words "Equus" and "Lexus" rhyme). First, you have the very look and size of the thing: a patently big and bulky V8-powered, rear-drive sedan—roughly the size of a 7-series only lacking, one might say, the famous German sense of whimsy. There are hints of Audi, Infiniti and Lexus in there, too, and the whole thing is fronted by a rather large, strangely generic German grille. In trying to oblige all the rhetoric of luxury-sedan styling, the Equus comes off as slightly ridiculous—more collage than design—but people said the same about the old LS400 and it didn't seem to slow it down. Actually, in all fairness, the Equus is not that bad to look at.

Then there's the vibe of the car: overstuffed, gentle, frictionless, floaty. Very much in the tradition of the first LS sedan. Only more so. And in that, the Equus is a damn peculiar creation. Typically, premium car makers agonize over the right balance between isolation—the degree of abatement of tire, wind and engine noise, powertrain vibration and other kinds of harshness, NVH for short—and driver feedback, the haptic and auditory cues that tell you you're actually driving a car and not sitting in the dentist's chair waiting for the novocaine to kick in. The thinking runs like this: Customers pay big money for whatever bratty V8 is under the hood, and when they crush the throttle, they deserve to hear it. Driving character is part of the premium experience, too.

With the Equus, Hyundai has skipped such deliberations and just stuffed cotton in the car's ears like it was a French artilleryman. In addition to loads of high-strength steel, gobs of structural adhesives and massive bushings, the car's chassis is wadded with all manner of noise-sealing and vibration-damping materials; the windshield and windows are triple-laminated acoustic glass; and the whole smash rides on a levitating, four-wheel air suspension. Add to that a fairly aerodynamic shape (coefficient of drag of 0.27) with few obvious acoustic hotspots, and the result is a plush, wintery ambience, rather mausoleum-like, the thrum of the afterlife. You may like that. After all, vampires are big these days.

But to me, it registers as a kind of freshman insecurity manifested in the engineering. Rather than go after the segment incumbents from Mercedes, BMW and Audi on the basis of performance and Autobahn character, Hyundai's product planners simply hit the NVH mute button. The result is a very quiet and polished car that's magnificently uninteresting to drive. The steering feel is light, gliding, with no real gathering of feedback when you wheel this pachyderm into a corner. The powertrain—a 4.6-liter, 385-horsepower V8 backed up by a six-speed automatic transmission—feels like it has cashmere gears, but there's not much in the way of enthusiasm on board. The accelerator pedal detent is very pronounced so that, in order to bring the V8's spleen up, you really have to hammer the throttle. Hyundai would prefer that you not. 

The car exhibits reasonable body and pitch control—the adaptive air suspension with continuous damping helps—but the Equus nonetheless feels large in corners and increasingly unhappy as the g-forces increase, tending toward a pretty insistent understeer, despite its 19-inch sport tires. There are Sport settings for both powertrain and suspension, but try to keep a straight face, won't you?

In Latin, Equus means "horse." Clydesdale, I'd say.

The original LS400 was nobody's idea of a driver's car, either. What it was was wafting, well-built and as loaded with electronics and amenities as possible for the time. And that, it turns out, is what tens of thousands of Americans wanted, after all. Likewise, the Equus, which is a rolling parts bin of technology from the world's Tier 1 automotive suppliers. It's all here: adaptive cruise control; LED turn indicators; adaptive headlamps; lane-departure warning system; front side-view camera; thin-film transistor valor monitor in the instrument cluster. Residing in the center stack is an excellent and intuitive Driver Information System, an 8-inch display with navigation, audio, phone, HVAC and vehicle dynamics functions managed through a iDrive-like rotary control in the console. The signature bit of hardware is the 608-watt Lexicon surround-sound audio system with count-'em 17 speakers. This might be the best-sounding audio unit on the market.

The Equus is also a temple of the venerated posterior, beginning with the 12-way-adjustable heated/cooled/massaging driver seat, with power extending seat cushion and headrest. And then there's what Hyundai called the Ultimate package, a Maybach-like set of business-class power reclining seats in the back, with heating and massage; power headrests with tilt-in adjustable bolsters like some airline seats; a refrigerator in the center console, abaft of the rear seat/climate/entertainment control panel and 8-inch display; and three window shades for the full celebrity treatment. And everything is swathed in glove leather and Alcantara, trimmed in a choice of three varieties of wood, bezeled in well-crafted aluminum brightwork and bathed in a kind of narcosis of ambient light.

The only problem with the Ultimate is that, really, there isn't enough legroom in the back to operate the power leg supports. The system sort of obliges you to remove your feet.

What would you pay for such a car? Ah, well, here is where the old Lexus LS400 and the new Equus stand on the exact same launching pad. The standard, fully equipped Equus Signature edition retails for $58,000, and the limo-like Ultimate retails for $64,500. By my rough estimate, that makes the Equus about $25,000 cheaper than a comparably equipped Lexus LS460 L (long wheelbase). This is not aggressive pricing; this is D-Day pricing, an attempt to establish a beachhead in a larger assault—on Lexus, on the U.S., on the world. 

We've seen this movie before, when Lexus debuted the LS400 in 1989 for under $36,000—a price that made competitors howl and brought accusations that Toyota was selling under cost. The worm seems to have turned.

In truth, the Equus is not the equal of the German dreadnoughts, or even the Lexus flagship. But the deficits in handling and character require a degree of connoisseurship to appreciate, and what is that compared with a savings of 25 grand or more? 

The bigger question is the brand equation. In the space of two decades, Hyundai has transformed itself from a pitiable also-ran Asian car maker to a powerhouse. But will Americans embrace a Hyundai—any Hyundai—that costs more than $50,000? Volkswagen couldn't give away the superb Phaeton in the U.S., even thought it was one of the finest cars in the world.

But Hyundai is rolling up wins, and success breeds respect. Is Hyundai a premium brand? Now, with the Equus, yes. Is it a prestige brand? Try to stay awake to find out.