The funny thing about normalcy in banking is that it's an awfully abnormal occurrence.

Still, even bankers who have been around forever seem to think that that turbulence is temporary and normal times are just around the corner. These bankers position their companies accordingly, and if something resembling stability arrives, they expect it to last.

The problem, though, is that modern finance is always shifting from boom to bust to boom again. The cycle, usually built around credit, is short. Just look at the past 20 years: the S&L crisis, Russian bond crisis, tech boom and bust, 9/11 and the recent financial meltdown.

Of course, bankers tend to define as normal such heady periods of asset bubbles, tech booms, and over-mortgaging. They think good times will last forever. And they are shocked when it all comes crashing down.

That's why investors should be skeptical of the confidence swelling after Bank of America Corp.'s first investor day in four years.

  Bank of America
BAC


2.86
%




 Chief Executive  Brian Moynihan's rosy projections depend on the return of stability in the financial world: mortgages that don't go bust, scandals and investigations that don't disrupt and a sustained rise in the market, with investors returning and credit cards repaid on time.

Glenn Schorr, the veteran bank analyst at Nomura Equity Research, put it this way: "Investors' main focus was on the company's 'normalized' earnings target of $45 billion to $50 billion."

Bank of America spokesman Bob Stickler concedes that the scenario is dependent on stability. No timeline was provided, and the projections were issued because of investor requests, he says. The Charlotte, N.C., bank needs to resolve its credit problems first, and the forecast "assumes there isn't a recession of significance."

"The pig has to move through the snake," Mr. Stickler adds, noting that the financial crisis was the equivalent of a "100-year flood."

Still, at times Mr. Moynihan seemed to stretch reality. For example, he said he has sworn off the M&A game, the source of so many of the bank's recent troubles. He sounds committed.

"I can't stress enough to you how much of a peace dividend we'll get without mergers," Mr. Moynihan said, adding the bank doesn't need a deal. "That peace dividend is effectively a permanent dividend."

We don't want to discourage Mr. Moynihan now that he has come clean. But get real. Under Hugh L. McColl Jr. and Kenneth Lewis, Bank of America and predecessors NationsBank Corp. and NCNB Corp. rarely turned down a deal.

"We do not have to acquire to meet our financial goals," Mr. Lewis said in 2007. Two months later, Bank of America announced its deal to buy LaSalle Bank for $21 billion. Then came Countrywide Financial Corp. for $2 billion — and Merrill Lynch & Co. for an eye-popping $50.3 billion in September 2008.

Mr. Stickler says Mr. Lewis, who retired at the end of 2009, had "holes to fill." Bank of America needed LaSalle and Merrill, and now Mr. Moynihan has a complete, nationwide franchise, Mr. Stickler adds.

Perhaps. You have to wonder how Mr. Moynihan will respond when  J.P. Morgan Chase
JPM


-0.07
%




 & Co. CEO  James Dimon and  Citigroup Inc.
C


0.93
%




 boss  Vikram Pandit start buying other financial firms. (For the record, they've sworn off deals, too).

It only takes one to have a slip for the whole lot to relapse. ("That regional bank was just so perfect for us, look at the synergies!" "Buying this credit card company gives us the benefits of scale!")

It's not just the pledge to end compulsive deal making that should make Bank of America investors leery.

After reporting a $3.59 billion loss for 2010 and a $2.2 billion loss in 2009, Mr. Moynihan believes Bank of America will rein in its mortgage losses and things will get back to normal.

Perhaps Mr. Moynihan knows something we don't. The bank is entangled in lawsuits over fraudulent foreclosures. It has $1 trillion in legacy loans in its servicing portfolio. The U.S. government is considering unwinding Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, which will require banks to either hold more new loans on their books or find private investors to buy them.

Mr. Stickler says Bank of America is aware of the potential changes, but can't make projections without more detail from the government.

When these mortgage-related losses are finally put to rest–the earliest analyst estimates put the year at 2014—Bank of America will create a "normalized" $45 billion to $50 billion in profits by mining its banking relationships and cross-selling products to existing customers in an "affluent America," to quote Mr. Moynihan.

Susan Thompson, a Bank of America spokeswoman, says the company is trying a new approach to cross-selling that minimizes infighting between, say, bankers and brokers. Mr. Stickler adds that Merrill is a premium brokerage network and Bank of America doesn't wall off its divisions like its competitors.

Ah, yes, cross-selling. It's the holy grail of banking: Buy your insurance, investment products, credit cards, corporate loans and M&A advice from a single bank. It's the old supermarket model. Who got that one right?

Does this sound familiar? "We're taking bold step, to organize businesses around the customer's point of view." That was Mr. Lewis in 2001. "To that end, we've changed organizational reporting structures, incentive plans and business processes throughout the enterprise to reflect the customer's view."

Mr. Lewis was in his first year on the job. Like Mr. Moynihan, Mr. Lewis said the worst was behind the bank. And his expectation was 10% annual profit growth, barring a disruption. Bank of America shares had been in an 18-month decline that shaved more than 25% off the bank's value.

In other words, just like normal.

 Write to  David Weidner at david.weidner@dowjones.com 