After four games in the Carmelo Anthony era for the Knicks, the only emerging trend is unpredictability.

The Knicks lost to the Magic 116-110 on Tuesday night, bringing their post-trade record to 2-2 and creating more questions about how this team has come together with their new stars, Anthony and Chauncey Billups. The Knicks shot just 37% on field goals, while the Magic made 52% of theirs. Magic center Dwight Howard scored 30 points.

The Knicks led by as many as 11 points in the third quarter and erased nearly all of the good vibes from Sunday's win against the Miami Heat.

Two days after holding LeBron James and company to 86 points, the Knicks found themselves carved up by B-list stars Jameer Nelson and Ryan Anderson in a confusing game full of leaky defense and bad shots. Howard scored 17 points in the first quarter alone.

As has been the case for all the games in the post-trade stretch, the Knicks' three stars scored plenty of points—Anthony scored 25, Amar'e Stoudemire scored 30, and Billups scored 30, including making 18 of 20 free throws. Stoudemire grabbed only two rebounds.

Billups didn't get a chance to repeat his heroics of Sunday night in Miami, when he hit a game-changing three-pointer. With two minutes remaining and the Knicks down six points, Billups' left knee collided with Howard's left knee, and he was replaced by Toney Douglas.

Nelson, who finished the game with 26, had 14 fourth quarter points, including seven straight during one stretch.

The Magic were lacking in depth—guard Gilbert Arenas was out with a sore knee, and forward Hedo Turkoglu was ejected four minutes to go in the second quarter after yelling from the bench.

Anderson started the first run for the Magic, making two threes within two minutes of each other in the fourth, and his wide-open 3-pointer with 8:57 left made it an 86-85 game. It was a game between the most trigger happy teams in the NBA—the Magic lead the NBA with 25.7 3-point attempts, and the Knicks are second with 24.7. The Magic only took 18 threes on the night, well below their season average, but their eight makes topped the Knicks, who hit seven on 30 attempts.

Anderson and Nelson's fourth-quarter heroics bailed out a Magic team that was struggling outside of Howard. At the end of three quarters, when Howard had 26 points, three Knicks had reached the 20 point plateau while no other Magic player had more than 12.

The Knicks hope their defense will be helped by Tuesday's signing of Jared Jeffries, who was bought out of his contract with the Houston Rockets last week. 