SEOUL—The Financial Supervisory Service said it will increase its monitoring of the flow of foreign capital to guard domestic financial markets from risks posed by speculation.

"Greater volatility in capital flows in and out of the country stemming from excessive liquidity, as well as a foreign-exchange war between key states, remain as risk factors for the global financial market," South Korea's financial watchdog said in a statement Monday.

The FSS said it will focus on how financial companies get foreign-currency-denominated funding and how they manage foreign-currency capital. The authority also said it will strengthen its monitoring of trading of foreign-exchange derivatives as well as the management of foreign-currency liquidity risk.

The remarks reflect Seoul's concerns about the potentially destabilizing effects of theflood of foreign capital entering domestic financial markets recently to take advantage of the country's comparatively strong economic growth.

Last June, South Korea imposed limits on banks' forward foreign-exchange positions.

Large positions in the foreign-exchange forward market—which allows investors to bet on moves in exchange rates—can make the Korean currency susceptible to large swings as banks and companies adjust their exposures during bouts of volatility. This could undermine the South Korean economy, which relies on exports.

Last month, the government announced a plan to impose a levy on banks' foreign-currency-denominated debt, exclusive of foreign-currency-denominated deposits. Legislators are considering reinstating a tax on foreign investors' purchases of local government bonds.

An FSS official said in December that the government plans this month to lower the ceilings on banks' foreign-exchange forward positions. The cap on domestic banks would be lowered to 40% of capital from the current 50%, while that on local branches of foreign banks operating in Korea would be dropped to 200% of capital from 250%. The official didn't specify when the change would take effect.

Also in its statement Monday, the FSS said it will step up its inspection of institutions it considers important to the financial system by thoroughly examining them annually. An FSS official said the authority has designated about 20 firms as systemically important, including the country's four largest banks—Kookmin,  Woori Finance Holdings Co. Ltd.,  Shinhan Financial Group Ltd. and Hana Financial Group Inc.—as well as savings banks and insurers.

The authority also said it will increase its monitoring of financial firms' risk management on loans to finance real-estate projects and other property-related lending in order to guard against further provisioning. It will also monitor the firms closely to ensure their fiscal soundness isn't hurt by excessive loan competition and herd behavior with regard to the management of funds.

The FSS also said it will tighten its examination of financial firms' governance to ensure proper checks on management are being carried out by board members, and that firms behave ethically. 

 Write to  Se Young Lee at vincent.lee@dowjones.com 