LONDON—The U.K.'s six biggest gas and electricity suppliers will be required to auction up to 20% of their electricity-generation output under new proposals to increase competition in the energy market, Britain's energy regulator Ofgem said Monday.

The energy companies have eight weeks to "engage constructively" with Ofgem's proposed changes to the market or risk being referred to the U.K.'s Competition Commission, the regulator said in a statement. 

Ofgem said a review of the retail energy market found that competition is being stifled by complex tariffs, poor supplier behavior and a lack of transparency. The regulator began the review last year after finding that margins on a standard-dual fuel-tariff had increased 38% from September to November after price increases. 

"Energy companies have failed to play it straight with consumers and so Ofgem is proposing to break the stranglehold the Big Six have over the electricity market by making them auction up to 20% of their generation output. This would increase price transparency and make it easier for new players to enter the retail market," Ofgem Chief Executive  Alistair Buchanan said in the statement. 

Ofgem's consultation on its proposed measures closes June 1, 2011.

A referral to the Competition Commission, though unlikely, comes at a delicate time. The potentially long drawn-out process could impact the billions of pounds investment required in the U.K.'s electricity sector over the next decade as power generated from fossil fuels is phased out in favor of renewables and low-carbon energy to meet European Union climate-change targets. 

Ofgem said that for the first time it had found evidence that suppliers are putting up prices quicker when wholesale prices rise, than they are cutting them when wholesale costs fall—a sign of a lack of effective competition, the regulator said. 

"Consumers must have confidence that energy companies are playing fair at a time when they are being asked to foot the £200 billion ($324.48 billion) bill to pay for the investment Britain needs to ensure secure and sustainable energy supplies," Mr. Buchanan said. 

Ofgem said it has called in an independent accounting firm to investigate how companies account for the cost of gas and power in their supply business, especially when they supply energy from another part of the same business. 

The energy regulator also announced a new investigation into  Iberdrola SA
IBDRY


0.91
%




's U.K. subsidiary ScottishPower, and is exploring whether it needs to bring similar actions in the non-residential market, where the concerns rest on switching being frustrated. 

A spokesman for ScottishPower said the company would cooperate fully with Ofgem, but said it believes its prices reflect costs and are in accordance with Ofgem's guidelines. 

The new probe into ScottishPower is in addition to an ongoing investigation into  Centrica
CPYYY


0.75
%




 PLC's energy-retail unit British Gas, Electricite de France SA's U.K. unit EDF Energy and  RWE AG
RWEOY


-0.59
%




's npower, into how they handle consumers' complaints. 

