Whether you call it a paleta, a lolly ice or an ice pop, it translates to one of the best things about warm weather. Popsicle makers across the country have been classing up this childhood favorite with innovative flavor combinations and the best seasonal ingredients. Here are recipes from a selection of expert pop makers. Who knew tequila, pepper and basil could put home chefs in such good humor? All recipes make 10 pops. (We used the Norpro Ice Pop Maker.) 

 Strawberry Basil 

 Meltdown, New Orleans 

2 pounds fresh strawberries  ¾ cup of raw sugar  10 large fresh basil leaves  1 teaspoon balsamic vinegar  Juice of ½ lime

Hull and wash strawberries and place in blender. Add all the remaining ingredients and puree until smooth. Pour into molds, add sticks, and freeze until solid, 4-6 hours.

 Plain Yogurt, Dried Fruits and Nuts  

 Las Paletas, Nashville 

20 ounces plain, non-fat yogurt  6 ounces pure cane sugar  ½ cup dried fruits and nuts 

Blend yogurt until it liquefies. Add sugar (make sure it disintegrates). Chop dried fruits and nuts into small pieces and add to the yogurt mix in small amounts, stirring slowly to prevent the fruits and nuts from sticking together. Scoop the mix into molds making sure to get an even amount of nuts and fruit into each mold. Insert sticks and freeze until solid, 4-6 hours.

 Cucumber, Elderflower & Tequila  

People's Pops, Brooklyn, N.Y.

3 medium cucumbers  3 ounces elderflower syrup  2 tablespoons freshly squeezed lemon juice  1 ounce tequila

Wash and peel cucumbers, then puree them. Transfer puree to a container with a pouring spout and add the elderflower syrup and lemon juice, then the tequila. Taste and adjust, but be careful not to add too much tequila as it will prevent freezing. Pour the mixture into your ice pop molds, leaving a little bit of room at the top for the expansion that occurs when liquids freeze. Insert sticks and freeze until solid, 4-6 hours. 

 Blueberry Lemonade  

 Popshop, Los Angeles 

1½ cups blueberries  1/3 cup fresh lemon juice  ½ teaspoon fresh lemon zest  2/3 cup cane sugar  2½ cups water 

Rinse the berries, then combine all ingredients in a blender on high until thoroughly and evenly pulverized. Hold a fine mesh strainer over a pitcher and strain the mixture by slowly pouring. Let the mixture rest until any froth that has formed has dissolved, or, remove the froth by spooning it off. Pour the liquid into the pop molds and add sticks. Freeze until solid, 4-6 hours. 

 Pineapple Chile  

 Locopops, three North Carolina locations 

1 very ripe, medium pineapple  1½ to 1 teaspoon cayenne pepper  1 cup water  1/3 cup sugar

Peel and core the pineapple. Separate the fruit into thirds; set 1/3 aside. Cut the other 2/3 of the pineapple into cubes; using a saucepan, cover with water and simmer for 10 minutes. Set aside to cool. Meanwhile, finely chop the reserved pineapple and set aside. Once cooked pineapple is cool, transfer to a blender. Add sugar and cayenne pepper to taste. Blend together and pour into pop molds, leaving a little space in each mold to add reserved chopped pineapple to each cavity. Add sticks and freeze until solid, 4-6 hours.