TOKYO—A political fund-raising scandal with echoes of one that just days ago brought down Japan's foreign minister is now threatening the country's leader, dealing a fresh blow to the government as it struggles with low approval ratings and a divided parliament.

Prime Minister Naoto Kan admitted Friday his fund-raising organization received donations from a foreign national. The admission comes after the Asahi Shimbun, a major Japanese daily, reported earlier in the day that Mr. Kan's organization had accepted 1.04 million yen, or a little less than $10,000 using exchange rates for the period in which the funds were received, from an ethnic South Korean. 

In addition to possibly further eroding Mr. Kan's already tenuous grip on power, the development may complicate the government's efforts to pass budget-related bills to fund cash handouts and other measures to support the economy after a contraction in the October-December quarter. 

It comes on the heels of the resignation of former foreign minister Seiji Maehara on Sunday after he was found to have also accepted donations from a Korean national living in Japan. 

While knowingly accepting money from a foreign national would violate Japan's political funding law, unlike Mr. Maehara, Mr. Kan may be able to sidestep the matter by asserting he did not know where the funds came from. 

Mr. Kan sought Friday to nip the scandal in the bud, denying he had knowledge of the donor's foreign citizenship, despite having dined with him several times. "I thought he was a Japanese citizen," Mr. Kan said before the Upper House Budget Committee. 

"I had no idea that he was a foreign national as has been reported." He said we would return the donations if the person who gave them was confirmed to be a foreign national.

Mr. Kan's fund-raising body received the donations from 2006 to 2009 from the foreign national, according to the Asahi, who it said is a former board member of a South Korea-affiliated financial institution. 

Cabinet ministers backed Kan Friday. Finance Minister Yoshihiko Noda said he doesn't see anything legally wrong with the funding issue, while economy minister Kaoru Yosano backed Kan's claim that he believed the funds were from a Japanese citizen. 