The political flap over Sen. Claire McCaskill's taxpayer-funded use of a private aircraft has ratcheted into a full-blown story, after the Missouri Democrat acknowledged she'd also failed to pay more than a quarter of a million dollars in property taxes on the plane, which she and her husband partially own. And what ought to be scaring the party is that there may yet be more of this embarrassing story to come. 

The Missouri Republican Party last week filed a complaint with the Senate Ethics Committee, demanding a full investigation into whether Ms. McCaskill had misused taxpayer dollars in her use of a private aircraft that she co-owns with her husband and other investors. The senator recently reimbursed the government some $88,000 to cover the taxpayer-paid cost of 89 trips she took in the plane, at least one of which she has acknowledged was to attend a purely political event. Congressional ethics rules and federal law forbid using taxpayer dollars for political events, and Ms. McCaskill's office has admitted it made a "mistake." 

Ms. McCaskill, who used to be a state auditor and who has pitched herself to Missourians as a transparency watchdog for the Senate, might have hoped that the repayment would prove the end of the story. But reporters have dug in and this week the senator was forced to hold a conference call in which she acknowledged that she had failed to pay a whopping $287,000 in property taxes on the plane since 2007. "There should have been a reporting to the county of the existence of this airplane," she said. "There are people I could blame for this, but I know better. As an auditor, I know I should have checked for myself. I take full responsibility for the mistake." She added that she had convinced her husband "to sell the damn plane." 

The story isn't ending there either. Yesterday the Kansas City Star reported that Ms. McCaskill will owe another $32,000 on top of the $287,000 after St. Louis County calculated four years' worth of unpaid personal property taxes on the plane, plus the interest, penalties and fees.

Republicans and reporters have questioned why Ms. McCaskill has refused to release the tax records related to the plane, to dispel questions about whether she or her husband have personally profited from its use. Even her announcement about back taxes was not accompanied by any tax records. 

This is a further hit to a vulnerable 2012 senator who is running on a good-governance platform. And it won't help to convince swing voters she's in tune with their average concerns, as she herself acknowledged yesterday: "I've been sick to my stomach for four days since this has happened, and I really do feel a lot of people are going to say 'How in the world? They've got this big business and they're wealthy. How did they not self-report this airplane?'" Good questions.

To read more stories like this one, please subscribe to Political Diary.