Osama bin Laden's death is likely to have a dramatic impact on the dynamic between the U.S. and Pakistan, whose relations were already strained, and on the Afghan war, the longest in U.S. history.

Mr. bin Laden was killed in Abbottabad, 40 miles from Islamabad. For years, Pakistani officials said they didn't know where he was. Abbottabad is home to a Pakistani military academy and also the town where, in March, Pakistani intelligence officers arrested Umar Patek, a senior Indonesian militant with links to al Qaeda, in Abbottabad.

 News updates and reactions from around the world. 

Talat Masood, a former Pakistani army general, said the killing of Mr. bin Laden will have a huge impact on al Qaeda's morale, even if he was not involved in the day-to-day running of the organization. "It's a huge setback for al Qaeda forces in psychological and military terms," Mr. Masood said. "They'd built a myth surrounding him. He's a leader who is supposed to be irreplaceable."

Afghan government officials cheered the news of bin Laden's killing. "Without Osama, and what he represents—the only man to take down the U.S.—young Muslims may not be as enthusiastic to join terrorist networks," said Nasrullah Stanekzai, President Hamid Karzai's legal adviser.

"For the Taliban this is a big blow, as it is for Al Qaeda," he added. "This will hurt the Taliban's morale, but it won't stop their increased attacks on NATO and American forces."

A senior Western diplomat in Kabul was more optimistic. 

Photos from around the world.

 "Justice has been done" and more.

A look at Monday's front pages of U.S. newspapers on the news of Osama bin Laden's death. 

On the ground

Diagram from the CIA

Photos inside and out

"It could be a game changer, in terms of boosting the confidence of Americans and the international community, that this war was not fought in vain, that the sacrifices of our troops' lives have not been wasted," said Vygaudas Usackas, the European Union's special representative for Afghanistan. "It will be a substantial boost to embrace reconciliation efforts throughout the region."

Mr. Obama, who plans to begin the pullback of some 100,000 U.S. troops in Afghanistan in July, has described the defeat of al Qaeda as America's main objective in Afghanistan.

Mr. bin Laden's killing undermines al Qaeda's attractiveness as an ally to Afghan Taliban. 

U.S. officials estimate that there are only 100 or so al Qaeda militants in Afghanistan, mostly in the mountainous northeastern provinces. Separating the indigenous Taliban from al Qaeda's foreign fighters could make it possible to negotiate a political solution, U.S. and Afghan officials say.

"Without al Qaeda, we could deal with the Taliban. They would be just another party in another Third World country's civil war," one U.S. official said before the news of Mr. bin Laden's death.

While boosting the spirits of the Afghan government and its allies, the death may not necessarily change the course of the 10-year-old war.

A local Taliban commander conceded that Mr. bin Laden's death was a blow for militants but vowed reprisals.

"Taliban fighters have an admiration for Osama. It will affect their morale and will trigger the violence," a Taliban commander in Paktia province in Afghanistan said in a phone interview. "Taliban and al Qaeda fighters will start an offensive for revenge, and it will be a bloody offensive."

The Taliban regime's former foreign minister, Wakil Ahmed Muttawakil, agreed. "The death of Osama will not put pressure on the Taliban to negotiate. The Taliban are an Afghan movement, while al Qaeda is an international organization," he said.

News that Osama bin Laden had been killed swept across the Middle East just after morning prayer time. 

Officials in Saudi Arabia and other Arab nations could not be reached for immediate comment. However, reaction to the death of the man who called for bringing down the rulers who control the world's largest oil reserves as well as the cities where Islam originated is expected to be jubilant. 

Saudi officials had taken the lead back in the 1990s of trying to isolate Mr. bin Laden and limiting his ability to launch attacks against their ruling family and nation. His exile to Afghanistan was in part due to the fact that the Saudis had revoked his citizenship and Mr. bin Laden was in need of a safe haven to live.

Osama bin Laden's puritanical form of Islam is an outgrowth and radical form of the dominant strain practiced widely in Saudi Arabia known as Wahabbism.

Saudis have spent years trying to rehabilitate their citizens who have followed the violent philosophy espoused by al Qaeda, and have tried to shepherd their society away from religious leaders who support acts of terrorism, often with mixed results.

The death of Mr. bin Laden still leaves a large pool of militant Islamists who believe killing in the name of God is justified. The most active of the world's al Qaeda cells exist on the Saudi border, within the Arabian Peninsula nation of Yemen. Thus, Saudi officials will likely not be relaxing their counter-terrorism pursuits in the near future.

—Yaroslav Trofimov and Margaret Coker contributed to this article.

  CONTINUOUS UPDATES: News, Reactions, More  