The recent arrest of  Shahid Balwa, the debonair promoter of DB Realty, has brought into sharp focus the shenanigans in India's real-estate realm.

DB Realty was a small-time player that grew at a scorching pace over the past five years. In early 2010, it came out with a $325 million initial public offering, which received orders three times its size.

Last month, the penny finally dropped. 

DB Realty, now, is firmly embroiled in the 2G scam. Its market capitalization has dropped 77% to 24 billion rupees, and buyers and financiers have started vanishing. 

The DB Realty saga follows Unitech, yet another real-estate company that also is caught in the 2G imbroglio. But as the cookie slowly crumbles, observers should not be surprised.

Real estate, historically, has been among the murkiest sectors in India with archaic laws and cash sales attracting slush funds, and creating a nexus between builders and politicians.

The tide started turning in early 2000, when real estate got recognized as an "industry". The sector, which so far had relied on advance payments from buyers and unorganized moneylenders, now had access to the official banking system. 

In 2005, the government liberalized FDI norms for real estate. The buoyant economy and low interest-rate regime helped the sector register strong growth across both residential and commercial segments. 

And as the India story slowly caught on globally, funds flooded the market eager to catch a piece of the action. Bankers went berserk structuring complex deals to facilitate the avalanche of funds waiting to come in.

Overnight, a host of local real-estate companies smartened to the "valuation" game. They shed their old skins and morphed into new investor-friendly avatars. There was a stampede to acquire huge land banks, often at astronomical prices, and mind-boggling growth and juicy returns became the norm. 

Those were the heady days. Several real-estate companies raised money through private equity and IPOs. These companies also diversified into hotels, hospital, education and other land-intensive sectors. When Unitech bid for telecom licenses in 2008, it was hailed as yet another bold and transformational move by one of the sector leaders. 

So, when the global financial crisis struck, the sector was hit hard. 

At the bottom, the BSE Realty Index dropped by 89% compared to the 37% fall in the broader Sensex. Stalwarts such as DLF and Unitech, which make up nearly half of the Realty Index, saw their market cap collapse 84% and 91%, respectively. Several impending IPOs had to be shelved, including that of Emaar MGF, which was expected to raise $1.5 billion. 

Other listed companies saw more than a 50% drop in their net asset values. Issues such as faulty titles and enforcement surfaced. Banks stopped fresh lending, buyers got wary of taking on fresh commitments, and the ensuing liquidity crunch threatened the very survival of many players.

Luckily, for these real-estate companies, the markets turned in late 2009. As the credit crunch eased, banks restarted lending and buyers returned. The sector got a second life. 

While the Sensex is up 89% today from the March 2009 lows, the BSE Realty Index is up just 40%. Raising fresh funds is also not easy. The investment community having burned itself badly once preferred to stay away, and the brave ones were highly focused on sponsor reputation, due diligence findings and valuations.

Real estate needs to clean up its act and improve its operating practices if it hopes to attract institutional funding and scale up the business. Hopefully, the recent events will precipitate a purging.



—Samita Sawardekar writes a weekly column on deals and banking issues for Deals India. You can follow her on Twitter @ssawardekar

