Democratic officials in Wisconsin have filed a second legal challenge to the legislative process that facilitated the passage of Gov. Scott Walker's "budget repair bill."

The Dane County District Attorney on Wednesday filed a lawsuit in circuit court alleging that Republican senators didn't give proper notice of a meeting last week in which they passed the bill, which curtails collective-bargaining rights for public-employees unions.

District Attorney Ismael R. Ozanne, a Madison-based Democrat, said in a complaint filed Wednesday afternoon that Republicans posted notice of the meeting less than 24 hours before it began, in violation of state law.

Mr. Ozanne is seeking an injunction blocking the Wisconsin secretary of state from publishing the law as well as a ruling that would void it.

A spokesman for Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald said Republicans "are fully confident that every law was followed."

The meeting in question took place on Wednesday night, March 9, while 14 Democratic senators were in Illinois. They had gone there three weeks earlier to deny Republicans a quorum to pass the bill, which required 20 senators to be present because the bill involved fiscal matters. There are 19 Republicans in the body.

Mr. Ozanne accuses Republicans of violating a law that mandates a 24-hour notice for public meetings unless that much time was impossible or impractical. Even if the 24-hour period is impractical, the law requires a two-hour notice, which also wasn't given, according to the complaint. 

In the March 9 meeting, leaders of the state House and Senate said they stripped the bill of its fiscal components—eliminating the need for a 20-person quorum in the Senate. The Senate then passed the new bill 18-1. 

The bill was signed into law by Mr. Walker on Friday.

Secretary of State Doug LaFollette has said he would publish the law on March 25, the latest date allowed by law, to permit legal challenges to be filed. Publishing puts the law into effect.

In a separate lawsuit filed Friday, Dane County officials alleged that Senate Republicans included fiscal items in their amended bill, violating the requirement that 20 senators be present for such bills. 

 Write to  Douglas Belkin at doug.belkin@wsj.com and Amy Merrick at amy.merrick@wsj.com 