Sterling has been losing the battle of interest-rate expectations against the euro since mid-January. 

Since then commentary from various European Central Bank officials has investors convinced that European base rates will be raised in April, to the point where it could damage ECB credibility now if they aren't.

The Bank of England, meanwhile, has consistently refused to lift the U.K.'s bank rate from its record low at 0.5%, despite elevated domestic inflation levels. Most of its rate-setters believe prices will ultimately be tamed by weak growth and public-sector retrenchment.

As a result, forward sterling markets don't fully price in an increase in U.K. rates until August. Thanks to this disparity the euro on Friday reached its highest point against the pound since October 2010, at 88.19 pence.

However, over the weekend, a second front could have been opened up against sterling. Presidents of both the Philadelphia and St. Louis Federal Reserve banks suggested the Fed's quantitative-easing program should be reviewed.

Philadelphia's  Charles Plosser went so far as to present an exit strategy that involved simultaneous withdrawal of QE and interest-rate rises. He stressed he was speaking of a methodology to be employed once the time comes, rather than urging that such action be taken soon. Nevertheless, he provided a lot of detail for a man just shooting the breeze.

A well-known interest-rate hawk, Mr. Plosser also said the U.S. should start lifting rates from near zero to 2.5%, "starting in the not-too-distant future."

St. Louis's  James Bullard said Saturday that plans to buy $600 billion in Treasury securities should be kept under review and that the Fed may not need to buy so much given the strength of the U.S. recovery

Mr. Bullard gained a reputation last year for being Fed Chairman  Ben Bernanke's stalking horse. Weeks before important policy decisions or keynote speeches from Mr. Bernanke, Mr. Bullard would provide the heads-up.

So when Mr. Bullard speaks, foreign-exchange traders listen.

Cue a new bout of dollar strength as markets moved to re-price the withdrawal of U.S. stimulus. That sent sterling down to $1.5938 Monday, its lowest level against the dollar since the end of January.

In truth, it may not be likely that U.S. rates will actually rise much before their U.K. counterparts, even if it is all but certain now that European rates will. 

Officially, the Fed is still wedded to QE2 and super-low rates. And central banks, like supertankers, take a long time to turn.

However, if Fed officials stick to this newer sort of rhetoric, sterling and the Bank of England could find themselves squeezed between two bigger central banks that have both shifted back to more normal, postcrisis ways of setting policy.

Sterling wasn't looking much like a buy on purely economic grounds. If interest-rate differentials stop supporting it, too, it has only one way to go.

 Write to  David Cottle at david.cottle@dowjones.com 