DALBANDIN, Pakistan—A powerful earthquake in Pakistan that was also felt in India, Afghanistan and the United Arab Emirates damaged at least 200 mud-brick homes close to the epicenter, but caused no casualties, officials said Wednesday.

The 7.2 magnitude quake struck at 1:30 a.m. local time Wednesday in a remote area some 200 miles southwest of the Baluchistan provincial capital of Quetta, not far from the Afghan border. It sent thousands running from their homes in panic.

"I am sad over the damage caused to my home, but I am happy that we did not suffer any loss of life,"  Ali Dost a resident of Dalbandin, a town of about 15,000 people located near the epicenter, told the Associated Press. Part of the roof in his simple home had collapsed.

In the hours after the quake, some Dalbandin residents were so worried about aftershocks that they sat outside in the cold and dark rather than return to their damaged homes, police official  Asad Ullah told the AP.

Two hundred tents and blankets had been distributed to quake-affected people,  Tahir Munir Minhas, the head of Baluchistan's National Disaster Management Authority told the AP. Nighttime temperatures in the region have been hovering around the freezing mark.

The earthquake's aftershocks were felt in New Delhi, India's capital, more than 700 miles away, with walls shaking for a few seconds. 

Some Chinese state-owned mining companies have operations in the area close to the epicenter of the quake. It was unclear whether they were affected.

The quake damaged some 200 homes in Dalbandin,  Nadeem Ahmed, chairman of the disaster authority, told the AP. No casualties have been reported in the country so far, he said.

The area hit by the quake on Wednesday is known for its seismic activity. The country is also still reeling from last summer's deadly flooding, which killed almost 2,000 people, affected 20 million others, and caused billions of dollars in damages.

The city of Bam in eastern Iran was hit by a temblor in 2003, killing some 25,000 people. 

U.S. officials in Washington said they didn't have an immediate idea about what aid might be needed to respond to the Pakistani earthquake or what the U.S. could offer. 

But as soon as the geological service reported the earthquake, U.S. defense officials began gathering assessments of the damage and whether humanitarian aid might need to be provided.

The earthquake was centered in a critical area for both the U.S. and Pakistan. Baluchistan is a haven for the Afghanistan Taliban, whose leaders live in Quetta. American officials for years have pressed, unsuccessfully, for Pakistan officials to move against militants in Baluchistan.

Any natural disaster that distracts the Pakistani army from counterinsurgency operations along the western border will be of worry to U.S. officials. The Pakistani military is only now beginning to resume its combat operations after spending months leading recovery efforts after last summer's floods.

Militant groups may also try to mount their own aid efforts. After the floods, militant groups opposed to the Pakistani government publicized their relief work in an effort to undercut public support for the government.



