SYDNEY—Political opposition to an 8.4 billion Australian dollar (US$8.3 billion) takeover of  ASX Ltd.
ASX


0.93
%




 by Singapore Exchange Ltd. increased as the leader of one of the country's main opposition parties expressed reservations about the deal, which needs cross-parliamentary backing to succeed. 

Warren Truss, leader of the conservative National Party—the junior party in opposition—said his party hasn't decided if it will support the proposed takeover and that changes to the deal will likely be needed. "ASX has got an enormous task ahead of it if it is to persuade members of parliament that this takeover is in the national interest," Mr. Truss said. "Most people have got serious reservations." 

His comments follow remarks by senior Liberal Party lawmaker Malcolm Turnbull, who on Tuesday said the structure of the deal has made it harder to win approval. 

Representatives from ASX and SGX weren't reachable for comment. 

SGX last week sought approval from Australia's Foreign Investment Review Board, which can take as much as 90 days before referring the offer to Treasurer Wayne Swan, who must then decide on the deal. Under Australian law, no single shareholder can own more than 15% of the ASX, and any regulation to lift that threshold must be considered by both parliamentary bodies in Canberra. 

The pending combination of SGX and ASX has become an increasingly sensitive issue for the minority Labor government of Prime Minister Julia Gillard, which holds power because of the support of a handful of independents in Parliament. The ruling Labor government's key minority backers, the Greens and a group of non-party lawmakers, also have expressed opposition to the deal, arguing that it will erode Australia's sovereignty. 

Mr. Truss said the recent entry of rival exchange Chi-X into Australia will weaken the ASX, something that could support the case for the SGX takeover, though not in the deal's current form. 

"A merger between Singapore and ASX would help to strengthen Australia as a financial center. But Australians are concerned we may lose control of our financial markets," Mr. Truss said. "There's a view we may not have yet seen the final offer." 

SGX already has made some concessions to address concerns. In addition to offering more board seats to Australians, SGX has said that revenue generated from listings, transactions and fees on the Australian exchange would remain onshore. SGX has offered A$22 in cash and 3.473 SGX shares for each ASX share, valuing ASX at A$48 a share based on the closing price before the offer was announced.

 Write to  Enda Curran at enda.curran@dowjones.com 