Inconsistent economic policies across the U.S., Europe and Asia could lead to inflation and disrupt the global recovery but the fundamentals are in place for the beginnings of growth, according to Merrill Lynch Wealth Management's chief investment officer for Europe the Middle East and Africa, Bill O'Neill. He spoke to the Wall Street Journal Europe about his strategy for the year ahead. 

Read the complete  Wealth Adviser report .

  WSJE: What is the key risk to investors this year?  

 Mr. O'Neill: There are different sets of risks in different regions. It's not necessarily about policy makers acting on the basis of what is appropriate to their own domestic economies. We presume ultimately they will get that right. It is the extent to which these policies are mutually consistent and whether collectively they are good for the global economy in terms of balanced growth. That has got to be [in investors' minds]. 

  WSJE: How is this global imbalance in policy manifesting itself?   

 Mr. O'Neill: China, for instance, is using an interest rate tool and market policy to squeeze inflation rather than accept the rule of higher exchange rates. It is now squeezing the domestic economy at the expense of the external economy. At the same time, you have this go-for-growth policy in the U.S. where the economic picture is increasingly looking better. But is it really consistent with the extraordinary steps the Federal Reserve has taken?

  WSJE: And is the U.S. growth policy consistent with the Federal Reserve's policy?  

 Mr. O'Neill: It might not be seen as appropriate in two to three years time when the full ramifications of quantitative easing I and QE II have been felt. But this is still open to debate. The dollar, in terms of its resilience, seems to be signaling that the market feels that [this growth policy] is appropriate at this stage. 

  WSJE: Is the go-for-growth policy in the U.S. working?  

 Mr. O'Neill: I am still somewhat skeptical to the extent to which consumption can grow from here. Households still can't get access to credit. Income growth from here will be limited. I don't see how we are in a position to say the U.S. economy is growing at the levels that will take unemployment down. We need to see 4% to 5% economic growth for it to have a significant impact on unemployment. 

  WSJE: How does U.S. and European fiscal policy differ?  

 Mr. O'Neill: Broadly speaking, the issue in Europe is around fiscal rectitude. It may be voluntary or it may be involuntary in the case of some of the peripheral economies. The U.S. [must] tackle, like Europe, the consolidation and the stabilization of public debt. 

  WSJE: Should the U.S. and Europe have the same policies for growth?  

 Mr. O'Neill: Not necessarily. But there is a crying need for some sort of signal to the markets that the U.S. is taking longer term fiscal sustainability seriously. There is little evidence of that at the moment. 

  WSJE: Why do you say that?  

 Mr. O'Neill: There seems to be no appetite at this stage to tackle the longer-term deficit issue. Whereas in Europe they actually aim to tackle it and Germany is obviously leading the rest in terms of fiscal goals. 

  WSJE: Why is tackling the deficit so relevant to investors?  

 Mr. O'Neill: It is relevant because [such policies] ultimately might undermine the dollar. And there is also an unwanted rise in longer-term interest rates. The imbalance suggests higher inflationary pressure and both higher nominal and real long-term interest rates, which could potentially harm the recovery. 

  WSJE: Are you of that view?  

 Mr. O'Neill: No. But it is something that needs to be confronted in 2011 and 2012. It is not about setting targets but about basic efforts to address the imbalance problem.



  WSJE: What's another key issue investors should consider this year?  

 Mr. O'Neill: Inflation growth. The markets are becoming more uncertain about whether inflation is a risk. In 2009 and 2010, it was clear that the risk was growth weakening rather than inflation, but now it isn't looking too clear. Also on what basis should interest rates rise and by how far? How far do emerging markets' central banks have to go to quell inflation? This has to do with the influence of commodity price inflation or longer-term inflation expectations.

There is also an effect from the rise of inflation in emerging markets through the role that these economies have in manufacturing. They are no longer price-takers. They are price-makers in a number of markets, including commodities, and as well as the supply of manufactured goods. These areas are a source of inflation, not deflation. 

  WSJE: Are we likely to see interest rate hikes anytime soon?  

 Mr. O'Neill: Some economies are beginning to see the need to respond. It is very likely that in Europe we are going to see rate hikes in the second part of the year. This will begin with the U.K. where I think it will be clear by the middle of the year that the economy has not floundered on the back of the tightening of fiscal policy. This would be the basis for the European Central Bank to move on interest rates in the second half of the year once the systemic issues in relation to sovereign debt and the potential damaging effects on the European Union have been addressed. 

I think Europe will lead in the response to the shifts of the patterns of inflation. Given the weak pricing power that labor has in the U.S., I don't see the Federal Reserve having to move on interest rates until 2012. 

We can't absolutely rule out another round of quantitative easing but I don't see one proceeding on that basis.

  WSJE: Could fiscal tightening in the U.K. lead to a double-dip recession?  

 Mr. O'Neill: We see a broader recovery around manufacturing. I don't think that it is going to be demolished by the tightening of fiscal policy, which is gradual. Economic growth won't be undermined by job losses in the public sector. 



  WSJE: Besides inflation, what else should investors be wary of?  

 Mr. O'Neill: 2011 is a very uncertain time which makes multi-asset diversification very important. This year will be characterized by a much more nuanced macro environment than anything we have been used to since the onset of the financial crisis. The policies to address the legacy of the financial crisis have been seen, broadly speaking, to be successful. We haven't entered a new depression but the market is still coming to its conclusions on the longer-term ramifications of the crisis and the policy responses that followed on [from that]. The market is becoming more wary of the medium-to-longer-term implications particularly around growth and inflation risk. In that environment, investors really must remain focused strongly on diversification, not just in terms of return opportunity but also in dampening down volatility. 

  WSJE: Equities showed strong returns in 2010. What should investors be looking at this year?   

 Mr. O'Neill: The broad policy would be to invest in assets that are fairly valued, linked to an improving economic cycle and out of debt. We like equities, emerging markets and the U.K. equity market. We don't like Europe because the policy risk has the potential to significantly devalue the market. The early growth signals are not as strong as they are in other regions. On debt markets we are particularly negative on government debt in the core bond markets. We are buyers of commodities and equities over debt. 

  WSJE: Is the European debt crisis nearing a resolution?   

 Mr. O'Neill: The sovereignty issue is still the elephant in the China shop. I still think things in Europe are likely to get worse before they get better, but by the middle of the year Europe would have done enough to forestall further deteriorations of solvency.