In screenwriting, you have to cover a lot of ground with very few words (a mentor of mine once described it as "the thong bikini of writing.") Instead of spending a half page describing a character, I have to do it in a sentence. And it better be a good sentence, specific and vivid enough to help everyone from a casting director to a costume designer bring that person to life.

In order to do that, I need to know my characters like they're family. My brother is the kind of guy who uses his spare bathroom as a beer microbrewery. With that one sentence, you get a sense of him. Maybe you can even picture an actor who would play him. "The kind of guy who…" is a helpful test to know how close I am to really understanding the characters who will drive my plot for 110 pages. If I can't finish that sentence, I'm not ready to write.

Once I have the characters, I map out every step they take from "fade in" to "the end." This steers me clear, hopefully, of meandering scenes and superfluous dialogue. My office wall is covered with 3x5 notecards that say things like "AT THE FERRIS WHEEL: She convinces him to enter the competition; he reveals nut allergy."

Each scene should function like a "mini movie," with a beginning, middle and end, a clear conflict, and also a visual element—it's a movie after all, not a radio show. Scenes average about two pages, 350 words per scene. That's a little over half the number of words in this article, so aggressive choices are a necessity.

When the script runs long, decisions about what goes and what stays hinge largely on the story's spine. The spine is its essence, the thing you can't change without fundamentally altering the whole piece. I've thrown away exquisite pieces of dialogue, set pieces that made me giggle, characters I've lived with for months, because at the end of the day, they weren't necessary to the story.

For the new movie "Prom," which I pitched to Disney and wrote for the studio, I did research by asking people about their prom nights. A lot of what I heard wasn't PG material. But because I had a good sense of the spine of my story, I could take the essence of these memories and make them work for a family film.

My husband's prom-night tale involved getting ditched by his date, who ended up in a closet making out with another guy. Despite her behavior, my husband still drove her home from the party. How could I capture the emotion of his experience, the bitterness and embarrassment of that drive home, without the closet scene? How could I do it in the most concise way possible?

I've worked on scripts about rodeo champions and talking Chihuahuas, overprotective fathers and alien kids in search of their spaceship. No matter the world or the concept, condensing a story into its most revealing details is the key. Capturing that look, gesture, dialogue or (better) the words that are not said—that's what I'm after. That's why I end up throwing away as many pages as I keep.

And though I understand the necessity of this process, I have to admit that it's always a struggle for me. I'm the kind of writer who goes on and on even when I'm given a word limit. That can mean death in my profession, so I have cultivated the discipline of distillation and a keen love for the most powerful tool I've found as a screenwriter: the delete key.

—Ms. Wech lives in Los Angeles and works in both film and television. "Prom" opened Friday.