TOKYO—American Airlines and Japan Airlines Corp. Tuesday set into motion the details of the first alliance since the liberalization of airline services between the U.S. and Japan, unveiling a new joint business that will operate on 10 trans-Pacific routes. 

Under the tie-up, the two airlines—both members of the Oneworld alliance—will take advantage of the "open skies" pact reached between the U.S. and Japan in 2009 to liberalize flight services between the two countries to improve the convenience of their flights. 

The 10 routes to be operated under the new alliance include connections between Tokyo and Chicago, New York, San Francisco, Los Angeles. The two airlines also aim to work together for connecting flights from the destinations of the 10 routes.

As part of efforts to lure customers under their new joint operations, next summer the two companies will widen by about two hours the time interval between the first and second daily Narita-Chicago flights to 11:00 a.m. and 6:15 p.m. 

The announcement follows approval by the U.S. and Japanese authorities last year of antitrust immunity for the proposed joint trans-Pacific operations. 

Until now, the joint efforts by the two airlines had been limited to such operations as code-sharing and frequent flyer programs. But now they will be able to jointly decide on prices and flight schedules under the latest tie-up. The two partners will share revenue to be generated through the joint business. 

JAL President  Masaru Onishi said that the two companies expect their new joint operations to generate an annual operating profit of 13 billion yen ($156 million). He declined to say how they will share the revenue.

The initiatives come as Japan aims to make airports around Tokyo regional hubs in Asia to compete with rival airports in Singapore, South Korea and other countries. 

The new services also come as JAL strives to get back on its feet after filing for bankruptcy protection a year ago, in the biggest case of nonfinancial bankruptcy protection in Japan to date. JAL also decided to keep its alliance with American, which won a high-profile battle with  Delta Air Lines Inc.
DAL


0.67
%




 over who would be able to partner with the Japanese carrier. 

— Yuri Tomikawa contributed to this article.

 Write to  Yoshio Takahashi at yoshio.takahashi@dowjones.com 