WASHINGTON—Senate Democratic leaders, seeking to break an impasse over Republican-backed spending cuts, on Tuesday proposed broadening the scope of budget negotiations into more politically volatile terrain that includes taxes, subsidies and entitlement programs.

Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D., Nev.) said that efforts to bridge the parties' $50 billion difference in proposed budget cuts for the remainder of fiscal-year 2011 could reach beyond domestic discretionary spending and move into tax policy and programs such as farm subsidies.

"There are other places we can move to bring about some cost savings,'' Mr. Reid said. "Domestic discretionary, defense, mandatories, revenues."

Sen. Charles Schumer (D., N.Y.) is expected to echo that suggestion in a speech Wednesday and argue that tens of billions of dollars of deficit-reduction measures could be found if budget talks are broadened.

Republicans reacted coolly to the idea. They said weren't ready to expand the parameters of the debate on spending for the fiscal year that ends Sept. 30 to tackle bigger budget problems.

"Right now we need to crawl before we can walk, and that means finishing last year's business and complete a spending bill," said Michael Steel, a spokesman for House Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio).

Don Stewart, a spokesman for Senate Republican Leader Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, dismissed the idea of increasing taxes to close the budget gap. "Their answer is to raise taxes, not to cut spending, and that's not something anyone else is talking about," Mr. Stewart said.

The change in Democratic strategy could mark a major shift in focus in the budget battles. Debate so far has focused on discretionary programs controlled by annual appropriations, a narrow sliver of federal spending. Most of the rest of the budget is mandatory spending for entitlement programs, such as Medicare and Social Security.

A small bipartisan group of senators working privately on a broad deficit-reduction proposal that would reach beyond discretionary spending met again Tuesday, but they haven't been blessed by Mr. Reid, the White House or GOP leaders.

Their efforts continued Tuesday with the latest in a series of tightly held private meetings. At issue immediately before the Senate is a bill passed by the Republican-controlled House that would cut the $1.08 trillion discretionary budget by $57 billion this fiscal year. Senate Democrats have proposed cutting less than $5 billion.

The Senate is scheduled to vote Wednesday on the parties' two alternatives. Neither is expected to garner the 60 votes needed to pass, but those failures are expected to prompt new negotiations between the parties on a compromise.

While the votes Wednesday are expected to fall along strict party lines, some Democrats have said they don't believe their party's proposal goes far enough to reduce spending.

"It was a little light on cuts," said Sen. Ben Nelson (D., Neb.). 

Some Republicans said they endorsed the level of cuts made in the House bill but are not happy with some of the programs cut to achieve it.

Sen. Richard Lugar (R., Ind.) said he would support the House bill but objected to its cuts in foreign aid and to the Corporation for Public Broadcasting. 

A sense of urgency is rising as the impasse continues and lawmakers face a March 18 deadline. Without some type of new funding legislation, many government operations would have to be suspended on March 19.

"Everyone here knows we need a serious dialogue about our fiscal situation-discretionary spending, entitlements, and revenues," said Sen. John F. Kerry (D., Mass.) in a Tuesday floor speech. "And when we're honest about it, we acknowledge that to do this appropriately, everything - revenue, tax reform, spending and entitlements - needs to be on the table. ''

Mr. Reid appeared to single out federal subsidies paid to farmers, which total more than $15 billion each year.

"Commodity price for farms, farm products have never been-never been higher than they are today. There's money there," Mr. Reid said at a press conference Tuesday.

While he didn't explicitly say he would seek to cut subsidy payments to agribusinesses, Mr. Reid's comments implied that he believes those programs could be ripe for reductions.

—Corey Boles contributed to the article.

 Write to  Janet Hook at janet.hook@wsj.com 