WASHINGTON—The Environmental Protection Agency is granting an exemption under its controversial greenhouse-gas requirements, saying that it will provide a three-year reprieve for facilities that burn wood chips and other biomass products to generate electricity. 

These facilities, often times power plants and paper makers, represent a small segment of the sectors that have to comply with the EPA's new greenhouse-gas regulations, which went into effect Jan. 2. 

But the EPA's action was seen as an important move at a time when the agency has been accused of overstepping its bounds and has come under fire for imposing potentially costly regulations. 

"We were pleased with EPA's announcement today," said Bob Cleaves, president of the Biomass Power Association. "We think it's a step in the right direction and we're encouraged that EPA is listening to industry." 

The EPA said it was deferring permitting requirements for the biomass facilities for at least three years, citing the need for more scientific analysis. 

"We are working to find a way forward that is scientifically sound and manageable for both producers and consumers of biomass energy," EPA Administrator Lisa Jackson said in a statement. 

Biomass products, such as scrap lumber or agricultural waste, emit carbon dioxide when they are burned. But biomass facilities have asked for special treatment because they say emissions are offset by the carbon dioxide that trees absorb throughout their life. The facilities also say tree scraps, if not burned, would decay and emit methane, another greenhouse gas. 

Biomass supporters also say facilities will abandon biomass and switch to fossil fuels if their products were regulated just as strictly. 

Environmental groups dispute the biomass industry's claims of "carbon neutrality" and warn of a future when facilities cut down forests of live trees for fuel, rather than use scraps and byproducts. They also criticized the EPA for postponing requirements for three years. 

"While it's reasonable for the EPA to continue evaluating the issue, it should not grant a blanket exemption in the meantime to industries planning to...burn trees for electricity," said David Carr, senior attorney with the Southern Environmental Law Center. 

As of Jan. 2, the EPA's greenhouse-gas rules require power plants, refineries and other major sources of greenhouse-gas emissions to take steps to reduce their pollution and obtain permits when building new facilities or making major modifications to existing ones. 

Frank O'Donnell, Clean Air Watch, said the EPA's decision was understandable. 

"I don't think it's an off-the-wall decision," Mr. O'Donnell said. "This is a small subset of emissions." 

 Write to  Tennille Tracy at tennille.tracy@dowjones.com 