As the battle to tame the nuclear crisis entered its seventh day, many Japanese turned their attention to the fate of the workers inside. 

These anonymous workers, some employees of Tokyo Electric Power Co. and other contract workers making 9,000 yen a day ($110), migrate from one nuclear facility to another—and now are exposed to dangerously high levels of radiation inside the stricken plant.

To accelerate recovery efforts, the government raised the maximum allowable exposure to emergency workers at the Fukushima plant Thursday to 250 millisieverts from 100, a level that causes many people to develop radiation sickness. 

Currently, 300 people work on the plant grounds, down from 800 at normal times but higher than 50 people following an evacuation soon after the disaster first hit, Tokyo Electric said. 

After one twitter user tweeted that her father was a nuclear worker at another plant headed for the Fukushima plant, voices of praise filled cyberspace. "My dad is up for retirement in a half year so when he told me he had volunteered to go, it nearly made me cry," said the user tweeting under the handle NamicoAoto. "He is a helpless man at home. I've never been so proud of him as I am today."

Even the scant information officials have disclosed gives a glimpse into the suffering of workers inside. 

Two people have been missing since a huge explosion damaged one of the plants on Tuesday, while one worker was found outside in another location lying unconscious. Two workers, while working in the main control office wearing protective masks, were taken to the hospital. 

"When I saw the building stripped down to its skeleton, I thought this couldn't be happening," said one contract worker interviewed by TBS, a television network. He was inside one of the reactor buildings when the quake occurred, but later escaped. 

He said workers weren't made aware tsunami waves had hit and a nuclear emergency declared. "Just looking at those images now give me shivers. I can't imagine how scared the guys inside must be feeling," he said. 

 Write to  Yuka Hayashi at yuka.hayashi@wsj.com 