LONDON—U.K. Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne said Sunday that the government won't soften its ambitious austerity measures to tackle the budget deficit despite the headwinds of rising unemployment, inflation and slowing economic growth. 

Mr. Osborne said the coming budget, which he will present Wednesday, will reaffirm the government's commitment to its £111 billion fiscal tightening program, saying to do otherwise would be a "huge mistake for the country" that would risk economic stability. 

Still, the government will have room for a few small budget giveaways. The government will scrap, for instance, a planned inflation-linked rise in the flight duty that is leveled at aircraft passengers, a person familiar with the matter said. The move to not raise the tax, which will cost the government around £150 million this year, comes in recognition of the increased cost of travel caused by soaring oil prices and other inflationary pressures on households, this person said. 

Mr. Osborne will also make statements on other taxes, including an update on the so-called non-dom tax, which taxes people who live in the U.K. but claim their true home is elsewhere for tax purpose. 

Mr. Osborne hinted that there are likely to be few dramatic measures around taxation and spending cuts at this budget. 

"But having undertaken the rescue mission last year, I don't have to cut back and ask for more this year," Mr. Osborne said during an interview on the British Broadcasting Corp. "So in the budget I am not going to ask for more tax increases or spending cuts." 

The chancellor said Wednesday's budget will put in place policies to encourage job creation and economic growth. That will include a £300 million package to help alleviate youth unemployment through programs such as apprenticeships, the person familiar with the matter said.

The coalition government has been criticized by the opposition Labour Party for cutting too much too soon, which Labour argues puts the U.K.'s fragile economic recovery at risk. 

The budget comes at a delicate time for the U.K. economy, with unemployment at its highest level in 17 years and inflation at 4%—twice the Bank of England's target. In the fourth quarter of 2010 the economy shrank 0.6%. 

Mr. Osborne also indicated that the budget will make progress on the coalition's aspiration of lifting the threshold on paying income tax to £10,000. 

 Write to  Ainsley Thomson at ainsley.thomson@dowjones.com and Alistair MacDonald at alistair.macdonald@wsj.com 