INDIANAPOLIS—Around here, they regard Rex Ryan with smiles and looks of bemusement in hotel lobbies and downtown stores and even in a corner or two of the Indianapolis Colts' locker room. That crazy football coach from New York? Boy, he talks a lot. One of his guys tried to trip a player, right? And what's the thing with him and his wife's feet? 

Mr. Ryan's Jets play the Colts here Saturday in an AFC wild-card game, and in his relatively short tenure as a head coach in New York, he and his team have courted controversy for what they've done, what they've said and how they've said it. 

From the braggadocio inside the organization that HBO's "Hard Knocks" made plain to a series of incidents personal and professional that have become fodder for tabloid back pages and YouTube voyeurs, the Jets under Mr. Ryan have been a delight for those who like a football team that keeps things interesting.

Considering that Indianapolis is set in a much smaller media market and its residents are infused with the friendliness and conservatism that characterize the Midwest, this city at first seems an ill fit for Mr. Ryan, a coach disposed to drawing attention to himself and his team. So what if Mr. Ryan, and not the staid Jim Caldwell, were the Colts' head coach? Could Mr. Ryan survive here? Could he thrive here?

Truth be told, he would probably fare quite well.

As long as Mr. Ryan kept the Colts at the same level of success they've maintained since quarterback Peyton Manning arrived in 1998—the team has won at least 11 games in 11 of the last 12 seasons—people would accept him, according to Indianapolis mayor Gregory Ballard. Mr. Ballard was a senior at Indiana University when the school's men's basketball team won the national championship in 1976 under a rather volatile coach: the chair-throwing, technical-foul-accumulating Bobby Knight. But Mr. Knight also won 661 games and three national titles during his 29 years at Indiana and never ran afoul of the NCAA's recruiting rules and regulations.

"So yeah, styles can play here," Mr. Ballard said in a phone interview. "You can win here as long as you do it ethically and the team is hard working and you do it together. That's how people like to do things here."

The key question, Mr. Ballard said, is not whether Colts fans and the Indianapolis community would tolerate Mr. Ryan's outspokenness, but whether the Colts themselves would. Mr. Ryan's fierce and obvious loyalty to the Jets is appealing to several Indianapolis players. "I love Rex Ryan," running back Dominic Rhodes said. "Their players are the best in the world, and you can't tell him different." On Twitter, defensive end Robert Mathis wrote: "I like Rex Ryan. He means no harm2other teams, he's all about his boys which is cool."

But collectively the Colts have cultivated a more reserved, low-key persona over the years—in part because it reflects the personalities of their recent head coaches, Mr. Caldwell and Tony Dungy; in part because it reflects the personalities of several of the players themselves. Mr. Caldwell said that he doesn't judge other coaches for the manner in which they conduct themselves in public, but he added that he values authenticity in a person's words and sees that quality in Mr. Ryan.

Of course, in New York, Mr. Ryan's brashness—he said recently that he thought the Jets would win the Super Bowl this year—allows him to cut through a cacophony of media voices that aren't present here. 

"He's in New York. This is Indiana," defensive end Dwight Freeney said. "I guess it's a different culture around here. That's who we are. Rex does what he has to do to motivate those guys. That's the type of guy Rex is. That's his coaching style. It's good for them. I don't know. If he came here, it would be a lot different than it usually is around here."

Perhaps the most curious dynamic would be the relationship between Mr. Ryan and Mr. Manning, who is regarded as the team's de facto offensive coordinator and is the team's unquestioned leader—and a vocal one at that. Away from football, Mr. Manning has been playful when levity has been appropriate, appearing in a series of humorous commercials and on "Saturday Night Live" in 2007. 

But during the regular season and playoffs, he immerses himself so completely in preparing for each game that he might not tolerate such distractions from his head coach.

"I'm probably the wrong guy to ask," he said to reporters Tuesday during a news conference when asked how Mr. Ryan's act would be received in Indianapolis. "I don't know who would be the one to ask. Maybe you could have a little conference among each other."

 Write to  Mike Sielski at mike.sielski@wsj.com 