  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.75
%




 Chief Executive  Steve Jobs surprised a crowd of fans by taking the stage Wednesday to unveil the next version of his company's iPad tablet.

Mr. Jobs's surprise appearance was greeted by a standing ovation by the crowd in San Francisco. The executive, who took a medical leave earlier this year, joked with the audience, saying he "didn't want to miss today."

Mr. Jobs, a cancer survivor and transplant recipient, appeared energetic though thin as he took the stage at the invitation-only event.

The Cupertino, Calif., consumer electronics maker unveiled a second-generation iPad. Mr. Jobs said the iPad 2, which has a dual-core microprocessor and two video cameras, is thinner and lighter than its predecessor. 

The new version will start at $499, which is the same price as the original model. It will be available in black and white colors and offered by both AT&T Inc. and Verizon Wireless. Mr. Jobs said it will begin shipping on March 11 in the U.S. and in more than two dozen other countries on March 25.

Apple's new iPad is hitting the market at a time when a slew of other manufacturers have announced plans to launch similar products this year. As competition intensifies in the growing tablet space, analysts and companies are also concerned about a looming price war.

Mr. Jobs rattled off a list of statistics about the growth of the iPad. The device, which debuted last year on April 3, generated $9.5 billion in revenue in 2010, he said. More than 2,500 publishers have joined the iBookstore that was created for the iPad and the company has paid $2 billion to developers of programs sold at its App Store. 

By the end of 2010 there were already 30 different tablets for sale, according to research company PRTM. The company now counts 102 tablets from 64 different makers that are either available now or in development.

The category "is completely overbuilt," said  Brian Gladden, Dell Inc.'s chief financial officer, in a recent interview.

Some of the most high-profile tablet contenders so far haven't chosen to undercut the iPad's price. Motorola Mobility Inc.'s new Xoom tablet, based on  Google Inc.'s Android operating system, costs $799 without a cellular service plan compared with $729 for an equivalent iPad. 