U.S. import prices continued to rise at a strong pace in April, pushed higher by energy costs that have since come down over the past week amid sharp price swings. 

The price of goods imported to the U.S. rose by a higher-than-expected 2.2% in April from the month before, the Labor Department said Tuesday. That followed a 2.6% rise in March. It's the first time since June 2008 that import prices increased by more than 2.0% for two straight months. 

Economists in a Dow Jones Newswires survey had predicted a 1.7% monthly increase in import prices for April. 

The report was the first of three this week that are expected to show inflation was boosted by higher energy prices in April. A sharp rise in the prices of oil, metals, grains and other commodities has been a major factor behind the recent uptrend in inflation. 

Tuesday's report showed that import prices rose 11.1% compared to April 2010, the biggest annual gain in a year. 

Import fuel prices advanced by a monthly 6.7%, accounting for about 80% of the overall rise in import prices. Petroleum import prices jumped 7.2% in April from March. Over the past 12 months, petroleum import prices have surged by 36.8%, the biggest annual gain in a year. 

While petroleum has been a major driver of rising import prices, other raw materials also are contributing to overall gains, heightening inflation concerns. Excluding petroleum, import prices increased a monthly 0.6% in April. 

Federal Reserve officials are debating when to start boosting interest rates to prevent inflation from rising too much. The most powerful decision-makers believe the central bank can afford to wait for a while as the economy continues to improve because they expect the rise in commodity prices to be temporary. 

During the first 10 days in May, global energy prices have receded, but the recent strong volatility shows how unpredictable they can be. Crude oil futures fell sharply in Asia trade Tuesday, trading close to $100 a barrel, following news of an increase in margin requirements for oil contracts, which could force speculators to close out positions. On Monday, prices had risen almost 6% -- above $103 a barrel -- pulled higher after heavy flooding and problems at a Mississippi refinery triggered a surge in gasoline prices. 

Tuesday's report also showed that import prices for foods, feeds and beverages increased 1.8% last month, driven by a sharp rise in coffee prices. 

Regionally, import prices from China rose by 0.4% in April from March and by 2.8% compared to April 2010, the biggest annual gain since December 2008. Import prices from Japan rose by 0.3% in April and by 3.2% over the past 12 months. Import prices from Canada, Mexico and the European Union also rose last month, led by higher petroleum prices. 

Consumer prices, for which data are due Friday, are expected to have risen by 0.4% in April from March on the back of higher energy and food prices. 

Separately, U.S. wholesalers stockpiled goods in March as sales rose strongly, suggesting some improvement in an economy that slowed down in the early months of 2011. 

The inventories of U.S. wholesalers increased by 1.1% to a seasonally adjusted $442.92 billion, the Commerce Department said Tuesday. 

Economists surveyed by Dow Jones Newswires had expected a 1.0% increase in wholesale inventories during March. 

Rising commodity prices contributed to higher dollar values for sales and inventories. Still, the better-than-expected gain in inventories suggested wholesalers might be stocking up in anticipation of future demand. 

The report said sales by wholesalers in March rose 2.9%, to $392.01 billion. 

The data showed wholesalers' inventories are relatively lean compared to sales. The inventory-to-sales ratio measures how many months a firm would take to deplete current inventory. The gauge fell in March to 1.13 from 1.15 in February. The historically low level of the ratio indicates there is room for factories to produce goods and satisfy demand from companies. 

Consumer spending slowed in the first three months of 2011 as gasoline prices squeezed Americans' budgets. But economists expect the economy to gain momentum this year. Last week, the government reported private-sector payroll jobs increased by the most in five years during April. And credit-card debt rose for only the second time since the 2008 financial crisis, according to Federal Reserve data on consumer borrowing in March. 

While gasoline prices are rising, a Social Security payroll tax reduction has eased the pain by letting consumers keep more of their paychecks. 

One wholesaler, Interline Brands Inc., which distributes parts to plumbers and other contractors, said it sales for the quarter ending April 1 grew 21.3% compared to the same period a year earlier. 

Inventories are a component of gross domestic product, which is the broad measure of economic activity in the U.S. Wholesalers account for about 30% of all business inventories in the U.S., with manufacturers and retailers making up the rest. 

Inventory rebuilding, a big driver of the early stages of the economic recovery, picked up in early 2011, adding to economic growth. 

In March, wholesalers' inventories of goods designed to last three or more years climbed 0.4%. Sales of these so-called durable goods rose by 2.3%. 

Non-durable goods inventories increased 2.0%. Non-durable goods sales rose 3.4%, with petroleum surging 7.9% and chemicals rising 6.3%. 

In February, overall inventories increased an unrevised 1.0%. Sales fell 0.3%, revised up from a previously estimated 0.8% decline. 

—Jeffrey Sparshott contributed to this article.

 Write to  Luca Di Leo at luca.dileo@dowjones.com and Jeff Bater at jeff.bater@dowjones.com 