The "Redneck Riviera" could get some help from the Land of the Rising Sun. 

The new board of  St. Joe Co.
JOE


-0.18
%




, which owns nearly 600,000 acres in the Florida Panhandle, is looking to Asia for investment.  Bruce Berkowitz and  Charles Fernandez, the new chairman and vice chairman, respectively, have traveled twice in the past six months to Asia to court investors and executives at technology and manufacturing companies. They hope to remake northwest Florida as a tech-oriented aerospace region. 

The two are looking to make an imprint after their Fairholme Funds Inc., which owns nearly 30% of St. Joe, won a struggle for board control. It ended last week in the ouster of four board members, who were replaced by Messrs. Berkowitz and Fernandez and their allies.

Mr. Berkowitz said in an interview Monday that the Hong Kong office of  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS


0.04
%




 was assisting St. Joe's effort to attract funds from investors in China, Singapore, Japan and South Korea, with the aim of capitalizing on economic growth and deep capital reserves in Asia. 

"We're trying to build a bridge between the U.S. and Asia," Mr. Berkowitz said. "Right now in Asia, they have lots of our dollars. You can trade it for a euro, you can trade it for a yen, but at the end of the day, that dollar has to come home to the U.S."

—Robbie Whelan

  Donald Trump is set to sign a deal that will bring his brand to the Black Sea.

Mikhail Saakashvili, president of the Republic of Georgia, is expected to appear with Mr. Trump in New York on Thursday as Mr. Trump inks an agreement to license his brand for a residential project of more than 100 units to be built by Silk Road Group in the Black Sea resort town of Batumi. 

"Mr. Trump believes that the Batumi market is ready for a five-star, world-class, signature Trump property," said  Michael Cohen, special counsel to Mr. Trump. 

Mr. Trump and Silk Road also are negotiating a licensing deal for a residential tower in Georgia's capital, Tbilisi. Georgia-based Silk Road, run by Chairman  George Ramishvili, has interests in transportation, telecommunications, and other business lines across Central Asia.

Both projects face financial hurdles. Silk Road executive  Giorgi Rtskhiladze said the cost of both projects will total about $240 million, and the company wants to raise about 25% of the funds before breaking ground. Mr. Rtskhiladze said about 10% of the funding has been secured, and construction could start within 18 months.

—Anton Troianovski

A Deutsche Bank AG-controlled fund, RREEF, is seeking to foreclose on the Westin San Francisco Market Street, a 36-story, 636-room property controlled by Goldman Sachs Group Inc.'s Whitehall Real Estate Funds and  Mahmood Khimji's Highgate Holdings.

The hotel was bought in 2006, part of an array of hotel investments made by Whitehall and Highgate at the time. Formerly the Argent Hotel, the new owners rebranded it Westin, and put on about $210 million in debt, including the $22 million in junior debt held by RREEF. When the loan matured last year, it wasn't paid off, triggering a default, according to people familiar with the matter.

Goldman, which holds about $40 million of debt junior to RREEF and is part of the joint venture that controls the hotel, and Highgate still may be able to raise capital to ward off aggressors. The foreclosure auction is scheduled for April 15, according to a notice put out by the Carlton Group, RREEF's adviser on the auction.

—Eliot Brown