SENDAI, Japan—More than a week after Japan's northeast was devastated by an earthquake and tsunami, there are small signs that the government, aid organizations and even private individuals are beginning to push back the tide of destruction, at least in some areas.

A noodle shop here, named Gengotsuya, reopened for business Sunday and quickly filled up after putting out a big red ramen-noodle flag signaling it at last had noodles in stock. While much of the city was spared damage from the tsunami, few restaurants have reopened because the natural disasters knocked out power and water supplies, as well as easy access to ingredients.

"Once we put the flag out, people just started pouring in," said shop manager  Rie Endo, as more than 30 customers slurped noodles nearby. "We are already out of ramen."

See all the graphics on the situation in Japan -- from before and after photos to the status of the reactors to survivors' stories.

Massive needs remain unmet across the tsunami-affected area. Some 367,000 people are still living in evacuation centers, and many of them lack full meals or adequate medication, especially elderly residents who have chronic medical conditions.

Persistent fuel shortages are crippling relief efforts in some areas. Bullet trains to the affected cities, their lifeline to the rest of the country, aren't expected to start moving anytime soon, and few companies have started operating. Other big problems could also emerge, especially if officials fail to fully contain radiation from the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant.

Still, the reopening of Gengotsuya is one of many signs that some of Japan's attempts to alleviate the pain of its citizens are working, at least in some areas. 

The number of homes without water, while still high, has decreased to about 1.02 million houses, from at least 1.5 million on March 14, according to government data. The number of homes without electricity has dropped to about 247,000 from 4.7 million on March 12, according to  Tohoku Electric Power Co.

At some evacuation centers in Sendai, which is among the easiest-to-reach of the affected cities, water, juices and food rations are starting to pile up because too much has arrived. Government officials are also starting to take the first tentative steps toward reconstruction, calling on the Japanese construction industry to make plans for building 30,000 homes, with some 200 homes already under way in Iwate prefecture. 

If the trend holds, it would go some way toward vindicating moves by the Japanese government to discourage some foreign aid agencies from swarming into the tsunami zone—a step it took to prevent chaos as the first stages of the aid effort rolled out. Complaints about the speed of the aid effort have increased in recent days, though aid agencies have generally supported the government's decision, at least publicly.

"It's not surprising that given the damage and the scale of the disaster, it's taking some time to get things done," said Andrew Wander, an emergency media manager for Save the Children, who is working in Japan. "We're not overly concerned," he said. There seemed to be less need for blankets, for instance, as more supplies get through, he said. 

Many of the most noticeable improvements are outside of the areas that were hit by the giant waves on March 11. The resumption of power in much of Miyagi prefecture by the end of last week, for example, meant many people once again had cellphone service, as well as street lights and traffic signals.

Many main roads to and along the coast have been cleared, making way for a noticeable ramping-up of aid trucks as well as rescue workers. The badly damaged coastal neighborhoods of Ishinomaki, for example, were so quiet on Thursday that one of the only sounds was that of crows. By Friday, streets were filled with police and a constant buzz of helicopters overhead.

Across the coast, engineers in blue uniforms toting cameras and surveying equipment could be seen quietly recording the damage on roads, train stations and power lines. Long lines outside of grocery stores and convenience stores have disappeared in some places as confidence has grown that new supplies will continue to trickle in. In Sendai, fresh fruits and vegetables have been available in some markets, though at three times the regular price.

Gasoline remains the one precious commodity that people and even government offices are having trouble getting. There are still long lines of hundreds of cars at gas stands as well as lines of people with cans for kerosene often used to heat homes here.

In Rikuzentakata, an inlet fishing village of 23,000 in Iwate prefecture, where 10% of the population was killed by the tsunami or is missing, mayor Futoshi Toba says the lack of gasoline remains the main problem.

"We don't have the facilities to distribute the fuel to our people so they can't begin their search for missing family members due to lack of transport," he said.

Medicine is also still an issue. Mr. Toba said that emergency medical supplies have arrived with medical aid teams, but people must travel to a nearby hospital to get prescription drugs for chronic diseases such as high blood pressure, and many don't have gas to do that. About 35% of the village population is over 65.

While the village has received enough food and water to go around, the shift in donations—from ready-to-eat pastries and rice balls during the first few days to donations of uncooked rice and cup noodles—poses a problem for evacuation areas still without gas or electricity. "We're tremendously grateful for any and all donations, but in some areas, the evacuees' needs aren't being met," Mr. Toba said. 

In Sendai, the aid effort for those living in evacuation centers is evolving from keeping people alive to making them comfortable, said  Hiroyuki Fukuda, who is helping manage the supply chain for aid in Sendai. A public school that has become the main distribution point for the city is now bursting with boxes of toilet paper, instant noodles, Heinz baked beans and "Classy Mixed Nuts." While the center sometimes has to scrounge for gasoline, it is making an increasing number of deliveries, Mr. Fukuda said.

"We really don't need any more water or blankets," he said.

"And while any kind of food is great because it will be consumed, the people in the settlements are asking that instead of just instant noodles and other snack food, people could start sending food that's more substantial." 

No one dares predict how long it will take before people living on the floors of public schools across the coast will get to go home.

It will take months, if not years, for those areas to bounce back. In the meantime, it looks like some people are starting to try to return to a regular life in any way they can.

Some of the streets and houses that were deserted until last week, now have people in work boots and gloves, clearing out the debris and muck that they waves had dropped into their living rooms. More than 100 people that saw Genkotsuya's Ramen flag turned their cars and bicycles around and dropped in.

"It was delicious. I really miss hot meals," said Fukuichi Saito after finishing a miso ramen and gyoza. "It's been a long time."

—Daisuke Wakabayashi in Rikuzentakata, Japan, Kana Inagaki in Tokyo and Patrick Barta in Bangkok contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Eric Bellman at eric.bellman@wsj.com 