The U.K.'s Conservative-led government unveiled a plan to revamp the 63-year-old National Health Service amid loud protests from doctors and other health-care professionals, as a closely watched fight over state-financed health care moved into high gear.

Prime Minister David Cameron's plan is meant to cut huge swaths of bureaucracy and give doctors responsibility for deciding how most of the system's annual budget is spent. It will also allow more private health-care companies to compete to provide services.

The Department of Health said the plan, which needs to be approved by lawmakers, will improve care and save as much as £1.7 billion ($2.7 billion) a year—money that will be reinvested in the health service. 

But unions representing doctors and nurses have assailed the speed and scope of the plan as "extremely risky and potentially disastrous."

The public debate over the NHS—considered a sacred cow politically—came into focus Wednesday when Mr. Cameron addressed the topic in Parliament.

"We won't be able to get waiting times down, we won't be able to improve our public health in this country, unless we cut the bureaucracy in the NHS," he said. 

But the opposition Labour Party moved quickly to capitalize on Britons' attachment to the NHS.

"He's breaking his promise on no top-down reorganization of the NHS," said Labour leader Ed Miliband. "It's the same old story—you can't trust the Tories on the NHS!"

Mr. Cameron's overhaul is an attempt to address a problem debt-laden Europe faces: how to tackle the ever-increasing costs of state-financed health systems without incurring the wrath of voters. 

France, Italy and Spain are all slashing spending on brand-name pharmaceuticals and encouraging use of lower-cost generic drugs. To plug a projected €11 billion ($14.7 billion) deficit in Germany's health-care budget in 2011, the country is raising premiums for the vast majority of Germans enrolled in statutory health-insurance funds, and cutting spending on pharmaceuticals, hospital and doctor visits.

Since the NHS's founding in 1948, health care has taken an increasingly large part of Britain's public spending. In the year ending March 31, the government is expected to spend £122 billion on health care—17.5% of its total budget and the second-biggest slice of the public purse after social-protection payments such as the state pension and welfare.

The previous Labour government more than doubled the NHS's budget in real terms over its 13 years of power. Public satisfaction rose, but numbers from the Office of National Statistics show the NHS's productivity fell 2.3% from 1997 to 2008.

"Like every other Western industrialized nation, we won't sustainably live within our means with unreformed public services and outdated welfare systems," Mr. Cameron said in a speech this week. He has pledged not to cut spending on the NHS, but says he wants to make it more efficient by "opening up the system, being competitive and cutting out waste and bureaucracy."

One of the project's main goals is to cut a large layer of financial managers and ask general practitioners to oversee spending. The idea is that doctors familiar with patient needs are best suited to decide what sort of treatment to fund. The government hopes this will improve care and cut wasteful spending,—primarily on expensive hospital visits and other secondary care— but not everyone is convinced.

In a recent survey by pollsters ComRes, 57% of general practitioners asked said they don't want to take on the responsibility for planning and buying health-care services, with almost half saying they didn't think it would lead to an improvement in patient care.

"Why would GPs find it easier than the previous managers did?" said  Lynn Young, primary-care adviser to the Royal College of Nursing, a trade body for nurses. 

Pilot projects adopting this approach are already under way in several parts of the country. A group of 10 general practices near Cambridge, England, banded together last year to take control of a big slice of their region's health-care spending.  Simon Brown, a general practitioner who leads the group, said the new approach has cut spending on pharmaceuticals, and reduced the number of elective and nonelective procedures performed. 

The GPs have done so partly by meeting regularly and scrutinizing each other's care, he said. "There's nothing like meeting your colleagues around the table and them saying, why are you spending more money?" he said in a phone interview. 

The GPs have also taken responsibility for managing a local hospital, where they have reduced the number of admissions and the average length of stay, Dr. Brown said. Under their system, as soon as a new patient arrives, doctors draw up a plan for discharge, and the plan is reviewed daily, Dr. Brown said. If a patient stays more than seven days, his attending physician and GP are required to discuss whether the right approach is being taken, he said. 

The new health-care bill also allows patients more flexibility to choose their health-care providers, and gives private health-care companies more opportunity to compete for NHS work. The British Medical Association—the main union for doctors—said in a report last month that it is "concerned about the role of the market in the NHS."

In polls, the NHS is typically cited by Britons as being one of the issues that most affects their voting behavior. The public's belief that the Conservative Party would slash the budget of the NHS and privatize it contributed to the party's three massive election defeats at the hands of the Labour Party.

—Vanessa Fuhrmans contributed to this article.

 Write to  Jeanne Whalen at jeanne.whalen@wsj.com and Alistair MacDonald at alistair.macdonald@wsj.com 