Ivan Putrov doesn't look like a man who is making a bold career move. The Kiev-born classical dancer left London's Royal Ballet last year to develop a new dance-drama with electro-pop duo the Pet Shop Boys—their first for dance —and next Tuesday is opening night. Given the significance of the project—new three-act story ballets are rare, and those set to pop music, rarer still—Mr. Putrov could reasonably claim to be too busy to eat, sleep or even speak. Yet if not exactly relaxed, he looks little different from any other dancer taking a break from rehearsal: lean, focused and dressed down in old clothes.

At only 31 years old, Mr. Putrov is still in his prime as a ballet dancer and could have continued in lead roles at the Royal Ballet, whose wide repertory and stable funding makes it a magnet for some of the world's best dancers. Yet last summer he swapped the renowned troupe for the life of an independent artist and headed to Sadler's Wells, the north London dance theater where the new production has its premiere. 

"It is exciting to work on a new full-length ballet, a story ballet, with new music and designs," says Mr. Putrov. "Neil and Chris [the Pet Shop Boys' Neil Tennant and Chris Lowe] have been my friends for some time and they'd written a score for Eisenstein's 'Battleship Potemkin' in 2004, so I knew they could create musical atmosphere and characterization. And I asked them if they'd like to work on a project with me, maybe a dance project."

The ballet is based on one of the lesser-known stories by children's author Hans Christian Andersen. "Chris had been reading Andersen's fairy tales and really liked 'The Most Incredible Thing,'" says Mr. Putrov. "And it was suggested as a project to Sadler's Wells, and here we are."

Written in 1870, Andersen's short story tells the tale of a king who will give half his kingdom and the hand of his daughter in marriage to the man who can produce the "most incredible thing." A poor man creates a magnificent clock with carvings of Moses, Adam and Eve and the four seasons, and all agree it is the most incredible thing. But then another man appears and destroys the clock, and the people think him even more incredible. The princess is obliged to marry him, but at the wedding, the clock's figures return to life and defeat the destroyer, allowing the princess to marry the clock's young creator.

Aimed at a broad audience including families, the ballet features Clemmie Sveaas as the princess, Aaron Sillis as the clockmaker and Mr. Putrov as the baddie. During his career with the Royal Ballet, Mr. Putrov was invariably cast as the romantic lead. "It's very good to dance a villain," he laughs. "I haven't done this before."

Mr. Putrov was born in Kiev in 1980, the son of two dancers from the Ukrainian national ballet troupe, Natalia Berezina-Putrova and Oleksandr Putrov. He literally grew up in the theater, appearing on stage for the first time at the age of 10 in the Ukrainian ballet "The Forest Song." Mr. Putrov went to ballet school in Kiev, and at the age of 15 won the prestigious Prix de Lausanne competition, where the then-Royal Ballet School director Merle Park was a judge. He subsequently spent 18 months at the school and on graduation in 1998, was invited by the Royal Ballet's director, Sir Anthony Dowell, to join the company itself.

Although Mr. Putrov could have returned to Kiev to dance big roles in the Ukrainian troupe, he accepted the offer from London in a more junior position. He was eventually promoted to the most senior rank of principal, and was widely praised for his dancing in Kenneth MacMillan's story ballets, including "Manon" and "Romeo and Juliet," and Glen Tetley's modern classic "Pierrot Lunaire."

"The decision to stay in London was based on my family being so well-known in Kiev," says Mr. Putrov. "If I had gone back, there would always be the idea that whatever I achieved was because of my parents, my connections. So I chose to go far away. Maybe this new project is the continuation of that."

Despite Mr. Putrov's talent as a classical dancer, his new project is a risk, albeit a calculated one. The life of independent dance artists isn't easy. Not only must they develop their own projects but are also forced to arrange their own classes, both of which are provided by ballet companies. There, they are also given a regular salary and supported if they are injured, as happened to Mr. Putrov in 2006, when he took almost a year off to recover from a knee injury. "It gave me time to look around, go to exhibitions, meet people, be inspired."

Mr. Putrov doesn't mention that ballet companies also have hierarchies, and repertories dominated by princes and swains, of which he has danced his fair share. Some dancers feel these constraints and pursue other projects, with fulfillment coming from greater self-determination and new creative collaborators. In this, Mr. Putrov seems well placed. As well as the significant friendship of the multimillion-disc selling Pet Shop Boys, whom he met through Sam Taylor-Wood, when the artist made a short film of him in 2003, Mr. Putrov also has the support of Emma Gladstone, a producer at Sadler's Wells, who assembled the show's creative team. "Ivan's experience and breadth of work is exceptional," Ms. Gladstone says, adding that the production is scheduled to return to the theater in 2012. 

The famed Bolshoi ballerina Maya Plisetskaya once described ballet as dancers "singing with their bodies" and how audiences instinctively respond to this "song." Mr. Putrov echoes her description when he talks about dance. "Ballet is not literal. It is not an exact language," he says. "Dancers create emotions from the steps and music, and transfer it to the audience. You cannot 'stage' your emotions. There is a Chinese proverb—I forget it exactly, but it's something like 'A movement describes a thousand feelings.'"

 "The Most Incredible Thing" at Sadler's Wells, March 22-26; www.sadlerwells.com 

 Write to  Sarah Frater at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 