NEW DELHI – India's merchandise exports rose 32.4% to $20.61 billion in January from a year earlier due to improving global demand, setting them on course to exceed the government's target for the fiscal year. 

Exports during April-January, the first 10 months of the current fiscal year, rose 29.3% to $184.63 billion, according to provisional data issued Tuesday by the Ministry of Commerce. 

The government had set a target of $200 billion for merchandise exports in the current fiscal year through March. However, buoyed by the growing overseas demand for Indian products, trade ministry officials have lately said the exports are likely to reach about $225 billion during the year. 

"The data is encouraging, especially the growth in non-oil imports, which shows demand in the economy is good," said Anjali Verma, an economist at MF Global India. 

N.R. Bhanumurthy, an economist at think tank National Institute of Public Finance and Policy, said the robust growth in exports will allay some concerns of a slowdown in economic activity that were stoked following weak industrial output data. 

India's industrial output grew a mere 1.6% year-on-year in December, the slowest pace in 20 months, as a tight monetary policy led manufacturers to scale back production, according to data issued last month. 

Tuesday's data show January imports rose 13.1% to $28.59 billion, largely due to a rise in non-oil imports, which were up 23.8% from a year earlier to $20.73 billion. Oil imports fell 7.8% to $7.85 billion. 

The slower growth in imports compared with exports helped narrow the south Asian economy's trade gap to $7.98 billion from $9.71 billion a year earlier. 

Oil imports during April to January rose 13.9% to $79.96 billion, while non-oil imports increased 19.2% to $193.64 billion. 

India's export growth had slowed for the first time in nine months in July last year after expanding more than 30% each month between November 2009 and June 2010, largely because of comparisons with weaker numbers during the economic crisis. Since then, the growth has stabilized above 20%, driven by steady demand for gems, jewelry and engineering goods. 

The firm external demand comes amid robust local manufacturing output, reflecting Asia's third-largest economy is cruising near its pre-crisis growth rate. 

Separate data showed expansion in manufacturing activity accelerated in February, aided by a surge in new orders. 

The seasonally adjusted HSBC Purchasing Managers' Index rose to 57.9 in February from 56.8 in January. A figure above 50 indicates expansion. 

"Growth is holding up well, but unfortunately this is at the cost of rising inflation," said Leif Eskesen, chief economist for India & Asean at HSBC. 

He expects the Reserve Bank of India to remain hawkish and in a tightening mode, with another 100 basis points of rate hikes expected this year. 

The RBI has already raised its key policy rates seven times in the past year as it struggles to tame intense inflationary pressures in an economy that has shrugged off the effect of the global economic crisis and is projected to grow 8.6% in the current fiscal year, the fastest pace among all major economies except China. 