Dr. Joseph Purita had done operations like this before—taking stem cells from a subject's bone marrow and fat cells and inserting them into an injured area. But in the spring of 2010, when he performed the procedure on Bartolo Colon's elbow and shoulder, he didn't expect the pitcher to have success—at least not the kind Colon has seen for the Yankees this season. 

"I was the biggest skeptic of all," Purita said. "When they told me about this, I don't mind doing this case, I don't mind helping him, but don't expect this fella to go back to playing ball. He's 36, 37 years old, elbow and a shoulder injury, in a pitcher? Let's be realistic here." 

That's exactly why Dr. Leonel Liriano brought Colon to Purita. He wanted a pitcher who was older, broken down, who could be rejuvenated via stem cell therapy. He didn't want a young pitcher. He wanted someone who was arguably past his prime. 

"When you have a guy like Bartolo Colon who was really really good, was out of baseball, but then has a comeback like he did, you have to at least wonder if this really works," Liriano said. Now that Colon is proving to be a success story—heading into Friday's start against Boston, Colon was 4-2 with a 3.86 ERA—Purita says he's seeing the possibilities everywhere and expects that other pitchers in their mid- to late-30s with nagging arm problems will sign up for the procedure, too. 

The big question that the story has generated is how Major League Baseball and its players union will come to view this situation. The league hasn't quite signed off on this yet. Baseball officials said they are concerned because Purita has admitted using Human Growth Hormone, a substance banned by baseball, in previous surgeries on non-athletes. An investigation is underway, these officials said today. 

Purita and Liriano said they had not used HGH in treating Colon or any other professional athlete. Liriano said he expected this scrutiny. 

"For the last 10 years, baseball has been in a war against PEDs. When you have a new procedure like this one, that has the degree of success we had with Bartolo, people are going to have suspicions," he said. 

Taking blood cells from one area of the body and injecting them into a blood-poor area to promote healing and attract stem cells is a procedure known as Platelet Rich Plasma therapy, or PRP. Doctors say the platelets act like homing beacons, calling stem cells to the area to help growth and healing. This procedure isn't new. 

Doctors have also been using stem cells to promote healing. In fact, introducing stem cells into the injured area is the very purpose of microfracture knee surgery. There, tiny holes are drilled into the bones in the area to allow stem cells to seep out into the injury. 

Purita says his team simply takes those procedures one step further. Rather than waiting for the platelets to attract stem cells, or drilling holes in bone to access stem cells, they directly pull stem cells from a cell-rich area, and inject them into the injury site. 

Before Friday's game, Colon hadn't talked about the surgery or addressed Major League Baseball's concerns. He was scheduled to address the issue after Friday night's game. 