SYDNEY—Blackstone Group agreed Friday to buy  Valad Property Group for 208 million Australian dollars (US$227.3 million) and the assumption of around A$600 million of debt, its second deal with an Australian property company this year and a fresh sign that private equity activity is accelerating. 

The acquisition of Valad gives Blackstone ownership of office buildings and retail malls across Australia and New Zealand, as well as funds managing A$8 billion in assets, including several in Europe. 

It comes hot on the heels of Blackstone's US$9.4 billion purchase of 588 U.S. shopping centers from debt-laden  Centro Properties Group, based in Melbourne, in March. 

Sydney-based Valad was vulnerable to a takeover after investing heavily in property developments before the financial crisis. This left it paying interest on loans for new projects that hadn't begun generating any income. 

Valad Chairman  Trevor Gerber said the board considered an orderly windup of the company before recommending the Blackstone offer to its shareholders. Its other options included an equity raising, and the sale of selected assets.

The deal, which has the U.S. private equity firm offering A$1.80 for each of Valad's listed securities, is expected to close late July. 

Valad's securities rose 52% to A$1.75 after trading restarted Friday on the Australian Securities Exchange following the formal announcement of the offer. 

Australia was out of favor with many foreign private equity companies until the middle of last year, when the government introduced a new taxation regime that better protected their investments. 

The tax regime, passed into Australian law in June, allowed foreign private equity firms to set up local managed investment trusts and elect to have investments treated as capital gains, rather than income, giving them a tax advantage. 

That helped to eliminate some of the uncertainty that foreign private equity investors faced since the Australian Taxation Office issued a draft ruling late in 2009 that said foreign private equity investors should pay income tax rates on their investments, a higher rate than the capital gains taxes they have more recently been paying.

Private-equity deals last year exceeded A$5 billion, up more than eightfold from 2009 and the largest amount since 2006. These included the A$2.7 billion bid by a Carlyle Group LP-led consortium for hospital operator Healthscope Ltd.

 Write to  David Winning at david.winning@dowjones.com 