There are two kinds of crowds in New York City. There's your classic piling-onto-the-subway, attending-a-Knicks-game, watching-the ball-drop-in-Times-Square-on-New-Year's-Eve, crowd. Then there's a more select crowd that shows up for things like gallery openings. They're far more dangerous because the worst that can happen at a subway or ball game is the crowd goes berserk and you suffer death or dismemberment. But a gallery crowd can bring out all your insecurities.

It's for that reason I was apprehensive about visiting the Armory Show of modern and contemporary art, which ran through the weekend at piers 92 and 94 on the  West Side. So I enlisted the help of art adviser  Heather Flow to lead the way through the seemingly endless maze of exhibitors, point out the hot new artists, and explain what I was missing.

I stopped Ms. Flow at a painting by  Alyssa Monks of a young woman who appeared to be partially submerged in a bathtub. Kinda liked it. Ms. Monks may not be Chuck Close or  Richard Estes, but she got right the distortion of light on water and floating lost in thought. Ms. Flow didn't share my enthusiasm. "I don't see it as adding that much to the conversation," she explained. 

What did excite her was an  Alex Prager video of a gorgeous redhead who either commits suicide, or learns to fly—the resolution of whatever problem she's suffering (one suspects it's romantic) left ambiguous. The video ends after she goes airborne among the pigeons, her hair floating in the breeze. In the final scene her ruby pumps crash to the ground in a field of broken glass, though with her no longer in them.

I wasn't prepared to spend the tens of thousands of dollars Ms. Flow suspected the video cost (or anything for that matter, except perhaps for a double espresso at the bar to keep me focused). But I was curious how one persuades a collector to invest in an easily reproducible video. Ms. Flow conceded it wasn't an unreasonable question.

"Alex did a box set that included six film stills and the video," she explained.

"I think she's someone very interesting."

We sought out the booth of dealer  James Barron both because he's a friend of mine and also because he had what Ms. Flow contended was the most interesting work in the entire fair: an almost 8-foot-by-6-foot photograph by  Wolfgang Tillmans. It looked to me like grape food coloring dispersing in water, but it apparently blurs and stretches the definition of photography. 

"This is the best piece," Ms. Flow stated confidently.

"A lot of people have told me that," Mr. Barron agreed. He added he had mixed feelings about selling it. "I fought to get it. It took me years to get purple."

Utterly apart from the art and whether or not our tastes meshed, I was curious about the profession of art advising. Ms. Flow, 29 years old, said she has about 10 clients at any one time. She takes a 10% commission on a sale, but prefers to work on a monthly retainer based on the collector's purchasing budget—the retainer subtracted from the commission when the client buys a work of art that she's recommended. 

Ms. Flow grew up in North Carolina and got started in the business after she graduated from the University of Virginia. She started to take trustees of various arts organizations she worked for, such as the American Federation of Arts, on tours of Chelsea galleries. "I didn't think it was a real job," she explained, "until a friend sat me down and said, 'It's a real job. You should get paid for it.'"

She specializes in artists of her own generation. The optimistic idea is that over time the artists, Ms. Flow, her clients, and perhaps most of all the economy will grow and prosper. She's been at it four years, managing to make it through the recession with her client base intact. "It takes a lot of work," she said. "I'm out looking at galleries at least four times a week."

All of our peregrinations to this point had been in Armory Show's modern wing. We descended a flight of stairs, crossing over to the contemporary section. "The people watching will be better in this area," the art adviser predicted and it was, though it was pretty good in the modern area as well—with lots of hip-looking people, both young and not so young, their clothes sense and self-images firmly in place.

Ms. Flow led the way to the booth of Peres Projects, a gallery that was featuring the works on paper of Brooklyn resident  Joe Bradley, a Whitney Museum Biennial alumnus in his mid-30s. "I think he is going to be one of the most important American painters," she said as we stood before (and I'm loathe to use this description because it's a tedious cliché but…) a preschooler's scrawls, with a particular emphasis on phalluses. 

Our final stop was to admire the work of Analia Saban, born in 1980 and an artist whose work Ms. Flow owns. She visited the artist's studio in Los Angeles recently. "The studio visit showed me she was engaging intellectually with some art historical themes," Ms. Flow explained, "and that engagement was fluent throughout her work."

I frankly can't say for sure what those art historical themes were and was too bashful to ask as we stood before the work—a bag of white paint tacked to a canvas. "I'm sure it's dry," gallery owner  Josh Lilley said when I asked whether I could touch, "but probably not 100% dry. It's a new piece. It's a continuation of her floor-based painting bags."

"I wish I owned this piece," Ms. Flow said wistfully.

"We all wished we owned this piece," Mr. Lilley said.

— ralph.gardner@wsj.com 