ITAMAR, West Bank—Israel authorized the construction of hundreds of new homes in Jewish settlements in the West Bank in response to the killing of a married couple and three of their children in Itamar settlement late Friday, the prime minister's office said. 

The new housing is slated for the large blocs of settlements in the West Bank that Israel wants to hold on to as part of a peace agreement, but it is likely to complicate efforts to resume the moribund talks with the Palestinians, who won't negotiate while Israel builds in the West Bank. 

The decision, made Saturday night by a committee of cabinet ministers on settlement construction, answers a longstanding complaint by the settler leadership that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has stymied growth of larger settlements by not approving enough building.

"They murder and we build," Mr. Netanyahu said while paying a condolence call to relatives of the victims. 

Nabil Abu Rudeineh, a spokesman for Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas, said the authorization of the new building was unacceptable. "The Israeli decision in the current atmosphere will only create many more problems," he said in a statement released to the PA's official news service.



Thousands of Israelis attended the family funeral held in Jerusalem Sunday. Danny Dayan, chairman of the umbrella setter leadership group, the Yesha Council, accused Mr. Abbas of inciting the killings and criticized peace talks.

"Giving him more power, giving him more territory, giving him a state, will lead us to a terrible situation—a new war," he said.

The stabbing deaths of the Israeli family during the Jewish Sabbath triggered an Israeli army manhunt in Palestinian districts near the northern West Bank city of Nablus. On Sunday, Israel's army sealed off the Palestinian village of Awarta to conduct house-to-house searches.

The Itamar settlement attack—the deadliest of its kind in three years—ratchets up tension between Israel and the Palestinian Authority at a time when peace talks between them are at a stalemate.

The targeting of an area of Jewish settlers known for vigilantism against Palestinians also threatens to trigger a surge in violence, and police forces stepped up their presence on West Bank roads to prevent Arab-Jewish flare-ups as Israeli mourners from the funeral made their way home to the settlements.

A military official said, "Any sort of violence could have a snowball effect."

Israeli officials identified the victims as Udi and Ruth Fogel, their 11-year old son Yoav, 4-year-old son Elad and 3-month-old daughter Hadas. Two of the couple's other young children were left alive, Israeli media reported. The killings were discovered when the couple's 12-year-old daughter, Tamar, returned home after midnight, realized something was amiss and called for help to get into the house. 

The Aqsa Martyrs Brigades, an off-shoot of Mr. Abbas's Fatah party, claimed responsibility for the attack. 

Palestinian leaders joined U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki-Moon and the White House in denouncing the killings. 

Mr. Abbas telephoned Mr. Netanyahu to convey his condemnation of the attack, the Israeli leader's office said. It added that Mr. Netanyahu had demanded that Palestinian police forces join in the search for the killer. 

Palestinian police stepped up their presence in the streets of Nablus, but it was unclear whether they were taking active part in the search. 

Salam Fayyad, the Palestinian Authority prime minister, said during an appearance in the West Bank: "We clearly and firmly condemn all forms of violence, and I condemn what happened last night in Itamar, just as I condemn the crimes against Palestinians." 

The last deadly attack on settlers came in August, when four Israelis were killed in a shooting near Hebron on the eve of the most-recent round of Israeli-Palestinian peace talks. The U.S.-mediated talks collapsed a few weeks later, after Israel refused to extend a partial moratorium on construction in settlements on West Bank land claimed by Palestinians as part of a future state. 

Israeli officials say Mr. Netanyahu is preparing to unveil an initiative aimed at reviving the talks. They say he may offer the Palestinians a provisional state within temporary borders until negotiations produce a full-scale peace accord on definitive borders, the status of Palestinian refugees and rival claims to Jerusalem.