LONDON—The highest oil prices in 2½ years have begun to trigger some deterioration in demand, oil producers and consumers said, a surprising fallout from the disruption in oil production that has resulted from unrest in the Middle East. 

The Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries Tuesday slightly downgraded its annual forecast for global oil consumption growth for the first time this year, as it emerged that kingpin Saudi Arabia had cut back production on lackluster demand for extra barrels. 

In late February, Saudi Arabia had increased production to compensate for lost supplies coming from war-torn Libya. The Saudi disclosure drove London oil prices—which had briefly topped $127 a barrel Monday—down by as much as $5 per barrel at one point Tuesday. 

The news came after the International Energy Agency, which represents oil consumers, warned earlier in the day there were signs that high prices had started to bite into fuel demand. 

In its monthly report, OPEC cut its world oil demand growth forecast for 2011 by 50,000 barrels a day—having previously upgraded its views on the back of bullish economic prospects in its monthly reports since the beginning of the year. The group, which produces more than a third of the oil consumed each day globally, still forecasts world-wide demand to grow by 1.39 million barrels a day in 2011. 

OPEC pointed out that U.S. gasoline sales fell by almost 1.3% in January, as people drove less and bought more efficient cars to make up for higher fuel prices. 

The producers' group said it might cut its forecast even further as higher oil prices hit transport fuel demand worldwide. 

The IEA, while keeping global oil consumption estimates for 2011 unchanged, also warned Tuesday that "preliminary January and February data suggest that high prices are already starting to dent demand growth." 

Both organizations said that although the impact of Japan's nuclear shutdowns would boost fuel demand, the increase wasn't enough to upgrade global consumption forecasts. 

Underscoring the warnings, Saudi Arabia has recently reversed a production boost intended to match any Libyan shipments lost to markets due to the civil war in the North African nation, a Saudi official and other people familiar with the matter said.

The official said it was due to lower Japanese demand and refining maintenance, as plants shut down early to avoid high crude costs. 

Oil prices have risen by about a quarter since the beginning of this year after unrest engulfed or threatened many countries in the Arab world, which supplies a large part of the world's oil needs.

But there are concerns that the less bullish demand picture is symptomatic of a slower economic recovery.

The IEA said "there are real risks however that a sustained, $100 per barrel plus price environment will prove incompatible with the currently expected pace of economic recovery."

On Monday, the International Monetary Fund already said global economic growth will slow to 4.4% this year, from 5% in 2010, with high oil prices and a spread of Europe's sovereign debt crisis threatening the recovery.

A major supply disruption that pushes oil prices up to $150 a barrel could cut as much as three-quarters of a percentage point off growth rates for many nations, the IMF said.

On a more positive note, however, the IEA said that prices could correct naturally in the face of moderating demand.

"The surest remedy for high prices may ultimately prove to be high prices themselves," the agency said.

—Summer Said in Riyadh contributed to this article.

 Write to  Benoit Faucon at benoit.faucon@dowjones.com and James Herron at james.herron@dowjones.com 