The full programming of the 2011 Lincoln Center Festival, which will run July 5 to Aug. 14, is being announced Tuesday.

And the international headliners are many: The Mariinsky Ballet (formerly the Kirov), will join the previously announced Royal Shakespeare Company and the Cleveland Orchestra.

The Mariinsky will present two evening-length ballets—"Anna Karenina" and "The Little Humpbacked Horse"—choreographed by Alexei Ratmansky. An additional mixed bill will include George Balanchine's "Symphony in C." 

Stage director Peter Brook's "A Magic Flute," a minimalist version of Mozart's opera, will have its American premiere, as will the Royal Danish Opera's production of "Selma Jazkova." In a musical contrast, the festival will also include the Brazilian experimental musician Tom Ze.

Theater offerings at the festival will include the Druid Theatre Company's production of Seán O'Casey's "The Silver Tassie," directed by Garry Hynes, as well as the American premiere of "The Temple of the Golden Pavilion" by Japan's Kanagawa Arts Theatre.

Every evening from July 5 to July 31, the facade of the David H. Koch Theater will be given over to the hyper-slow-motion portraits of artists shot by portraitist David Michalek. 

During the 2007 festival, Mr. Michalek's "Slow Dancing" installation—for which he recorded five seconds of movement and played it back over 10 minutes—was similarly placed.

The Lincoln Center Festival will also be a stop on the Merce Cunningham Dance Company's Legacy Tour. 

On July 16, the Merce Fair will present a full day of events including performances, concerts, rehearsals, discussions and more.

As previously announced, the Royal Shakespeare Company will be in town to perform—"As You Like It," "Julius Caesar," "King Lear," "Romeo and Juliet" and "The Winter's Tale"—at the Park Avenue Armory. 

And the Cleveland Orchestra will launch its multiyear residency at the festival with work by Bruckner and John Adams. 

Tickets go on sale to the public March 14 at CenterCharge (212-721-6500) and the Lincoln Center Festival website (www.LincolnCenterFestival.org).