White House officials seeking someone to run the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau have so far failed to find a nominee, with several candidates rebuffing the administration's overtures, according to people familiar with the process. 

One concern of some: That accepting would undercut Elizabeth Warren, the Harvard law professor and consumer advocate who is currently a special adviser to the president charged with setting up the bureau. She remains a hugely popular figure among many Democrats and anathema to many Republicans.

Many on the left want Ms. Warren, a longtime critic of the financial industry who pushed to create the consumer protection agency, to become its director. 

 The nascent bureau must have a director in place by July 21 in order to get a slate of broad powers to attack fraudulent and abusive financial practices. 

That deadline could result in the White House nominating Ms. Warren, now a special adviser to the president charged with setting up the bureau. She is believed to want the job but her candidacy likely would trigger a Senate confirmation battle. President Barack Obama could avoid that fight by appointing her during a congressional recess before July 21.

The White House has unsuccessfully reached out to possible nominees, including Democratic former Michigan Gov. Jennifer Granholm, Democratic former Delaware Sen. Ted Kaufman and attorneys general from Iowa, Illinois and Massachusetts, these people said. Among those under consideration for the post include Democratic former Ohio Gov. Ted Strickland and Federal Reserve Board member Sarah Bloom Raskin.

A White House spokeswoman said Mr. Obama "will consider a number of candidates for the position of director. The President believes Elizabeth Warren is a powerful voice for American consumers and that she has been extraordinarily effective at standing up the agency thus far. We are not going to get ahead of the President's process by commenting on whether specific individuals are under consideration for specific personnel openings."

Ms. Warren, through a spokeswoman, declined to comment.

The CFPB is an independent agency that gets its funding through the Federal Reserve, rather than through Congressional appropriations. Its requested budget for fiscal year 2011 is $134 million. The agency's rulings can be overturned by the Financial Stability Oversight Council and such a move must be initiated within 10 days of a rule being issued and with a two-thirds majority. 

A recent report by inspectors general of the Federal Reserve and the Treasury Department said the agency can't exercise the new powers it received as part of last year's financial-regulatory overhaul law until a confirmed director is in place. Those powers include the authority to supervise non-bank financial firms, such as payday lenders, and prohibit unfair, deceptive or abusive practices related to consumer financial products. 

"I'm very concerned that if the White House doesn't act immediately to nominate a qualified director, this agency will begin its life without the ability to use all of its tools to protect consumers," said Travis Plunkett of the Consumer Federation of America. 

Some proponents of the agency say the White House limited its options by deciding last year to appoint Ms. Warren as a special adviser to the president, rather than nominating her as director. At the time, it was unclear whether Ms. Warren would be confirmed. But appointing her special adviser irked many lawmakers who saw it as an attempt to sidestep the Senate confirmation process.

Getting anyone confirmed as director now may be more difficult. Democrats control a narrower majority in the Senate and could have trouble garnering 60 votes needed for confirmation, given criticism of the agency. Alabama Republican Sen. Richard Shelby, who has called the CFPB's creation "a mistake," already has worked to scuttle the nomination of Joseph Smith to head the Federal Housing Finance Agency, and opposes the nomination of Peter Diamond to the Fed board.

Mr. Shelby has said he believes Ms. Warren is too ideological for the job and criticized Mr. Obama for appointing her to the temporary post. More recently, Sen. Shelby accused Ms. Warren of leading a "regulatory shakedown" of mortgage servicers after news reports focused on her role in advocating stiff penalties for foreclosure problems.

House Financial Services Chairman Spencer Bachus, a critic of the CFPB who has introduced legislation to blunt its powers, said the agency shouldn't be run by a director but rather by a five-member commission.

"All other agencies have that setup," Mr. Bachus said. "This is really the most powerful agency ever created. The director has unlimited authority, there's no accountability, she reports to no one … and she's already asserting authority she doesn't have." 

The threat of a confirmation battle has hindered the administration's search, with some potential candidates expressing concern about the process, according to people familiar with the matter. But the bigger challenge appears to be huge support for Ms. Warren, whom many don't want to upstage. 

"My personal feeling is that Elizabeth Warren should have that position," said Mr. Strickland, who said he hasn't been approached by the administration. "She's an impressive person .... My preference would be for her to maintain that position."

Ms. Granholm, in a Facebook posting last week, said she had taken herself out of the running. "I think nominating Elizabeth Warren is a fight worth waging," she wrote.

People familiar with the matter said Ms. Bloom Raskin is an attractive candidate because she just won Senate confirmation to the Fed and Republicans may be hard-pressed to find something new to block her nomination. However, there is concern in the White House about poaching a governor from the Fed, which already has two vacancies on its seven-member board. 

 Write to  Deborah Solomon at deborah.solomon@wsj.com 