 Dizzy's Club Coca-Cola  Broadway at 60th Street, (212) 258-9595  Through Sunday

 Avery Fisher Hall  10 Lincoln Center Pl., (212) 721-6500  Saturday

 Dizzy's Club Coca-Cola  Broadway at 60th Street, (212) 258-9595  Through Saturday

There's no better illustration of the past, present and future of essential American music than the sight of legendary saxophonist Frank Wess fronting the Juilliard Jazz Orchestra: It's one of the most senior players in jazz (pushing 90) collaborating with some of the youngest (two of whom, drummer James Mcbride and trumpeter Gabriel Medd, have just turned 20) to make a sound that's ageless. 

Although advertised as a Count Basie celebration, both sets on opening night featured a lot of Duke Ellington, thus providing a perfect lead-in to Jazz at Lincoln Center's climactic Essentially Ellington concert this Saturday (which will be webcast live), at which three prize-winning high school big bands will put up their Dukes alongside JaLC majordomo Wynton Marsalis. For even more Ellington, a small group of still-youngish competition veterans led by trumpeter Tatum Greenblatt will offer an excellent late-night set of Ellingtonia and Strayhorniana in a modern manner in the Ellington All-Stars concert. 

Four events presented by Jazz at Lincoln Center over a 10-day span illustrate the Ellington-structured hierarchy of education and achievement at JaLC: High-school groups vie for supremacy in the Essentially Ellington competition, and the best make it to the annual big show at Avery Fisher on Saturday. The most outstanding players, hopefully, will get into Juilliard. The after-hours set at Dizzy's (the All-Stars) spotlights different interpretations of Ellington by five players who made it through the high-school and college levels and are working now professionally. ("We're here to serve as example of the fact that people do play music after high school," Mr. Greenblatt said.) 

Then, the very cream of the crop can aspire to play with Mr. Marsalis in the Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra, which, coincidentally, played several slices of early Ellington (including "The Mooche" and "Black and Tan Fantasy") in the Allen Room last week as part of their concert "Prohibition and the Jazz Age." The message is clear: The music of Duke Ellington is an essential part of every jazz musician's development.

On Tuesday, both the full orchestra and the quintet sets contrasted Ellington repertory warhorses ("Cottontail" and their own reading of "The Mooche") with some more obscure items, and both bands earned extra credit for focusing on Ellington blues and exotica. The Juilliarders came forth with the 1956 "Feet Bone" and "Oclupaca" (which opens the 1970 Latin American Suite) in those categories, and, an hour later, the All-Stars matched them with the 1958 "A-Flat Minor" (which is actually in F major, go figure) and "Ad Lib on Nippon" (best known in the 1966 Far East Suite). The quintet, with its trumpet (Mr. Greenblatt) and trombone (Willie Applewhite) frontline, also offered thoughtful readings of Strayhorn's "Smada" and "Johnny Come Lately." 

But it wasn't only Essentially Ellington; it was also Basically Basie. Juilliard conductor Bob Stewart began with Eddie Durham's "Every Tub," with Pete Anderson taking Lester Young's classic opening tenor solo. Guest Frank Wess supplied two Countish originals reflecting his many years of royal service—"Dejection Blues," and "Segway in C"—before closing the set with his own chart on "Battle Royal," thus bringing everything back home to Ellington. To say that Mr. Wess sounds amazing at 89, on both tenor sax and flute, is not enough of a compliment: He plays with an astonishingly full tone, a limitless flow of improvisational ideas, and no end of things to say about the blues.

The orchestra finished with the oft-played Ellington band theme "Take the A Train," reanimated considerably by an extended solo by Mr. Wess. Enjoyable as it was, there was a bittersweet quality in that everyone knew it would be the final tune of the set. Fortunately, there's plenty of Ellington to be heard this week; Lord knows, everything the man wrote was essential.



 Jazz Standard  116 E. 27th, (212) 576-2232  Tuesday

 City Winery  155 Varick St., (212) 608-0555  May 27

If some music is uncategorizable, the music of saxophonist and composer Roy Nathanson inspires deep thinkers to exhaust their thesauri dreaming up all kinds of categories: postmodern, eclectic, psychedelic jazz, avant-garde, punk jazz, gonzo jazz (all right, I made up that one); he also played with the Lounge Lizards, purveyors of "fake jazz." Mr. Nathanson celebrates his 60th birthday with his two signature bands, the Jazz Passengers and Sotto Voce, in two different venues, both with a plethora of vocal and instrumental guest stars. (The City Winery event also promises the participation of seven poets, including Yusef Komunyakaa.) If there's one overarching point regarding Mr. Nathanson's music, from his bizarro covers of 1960s pop hits to team-ups with rock royalty like Debby Harry and Elvis Costello, it's that he consistently shows that sheer musical strangeness can be highly entertaining.

 The Village Vanguard  178 Seventh Ave. South, (212) 255-4037  Through Sunday 

At 64, trumpeter Tom Harrell's playing and compositions continue to get better and better. Using the same consistently excellent quintet (saxophonist Wayne Escoffery, keyboardist Danny Grissett, bassist Ugonna Okegwo and drummer Jonathan Blake) he's fronted for the last five years and four albums, Mr. Harrell keeps coming up with one intriguing new tune after another, displaying a personal approach to melody, harmony and form—not to mention one of the most beautiful trumpet tones currently out there. He's one of the few bandleaders who can hit us with nine new original compositions in a row and still hold our attention. He also employs tactics that one might in other contexts find gimmicky, like electronic keyboards and the solar-system sounds heard at the start of his excellent new album, "The Time of The Sun," and makes them sound marvelously musical.

 Birdland  315 W. 44th St., (212) 581-3080  Through Saturday

A set by saxophone icon Pharoah Sanders seems like 75 minutes in church: Whether he's playing tempered notes or signifying with his signature squalls, he preaches with a big tenor tone of the sort that compels you to fall on your knees. These saxophonic sermons, equal parts modal and free jazz in the manner of his "The Creator Has a Master Plan," make up the bulk of his performance. Here he's especially well supported by longtime pianist William Henderson, who seems to have learned from and built upon McCoy Tyner's angular harmonies much the same way Mr. Sanders learned from John Coltrane. At 70, Mr. Sanders knows what he's doing and, more importantly, can do it better than ever. 

 Feinstein's at Loews Regency  540 Park Ave., (212) 339-4095  Through Saturday

As her artistry matures, Nnenna Freelon is growing less mannered (the last time I saw her, at a Nancy Wilson tribute, she seemed to be trying to out-Wilson Ms. Wilson). At Feinstein's, the only thing she does to excess are her occasionally distracting hand movements. Her vocals are appreciably understated, without any pseudo-Gospel falderol or excessive scat. She doesn't start belting right away, but rather has the patience to build to big moments, as on "Squeeze Me," and her most convincing numbers are the ones where she barely raises her voice above a girlish whisper, like "The Very Thought of You." Her arrangements (by musical director Brandon McCune), like "I Feel Pretty," (rendered "Footprints"-style in 6/8), are also subtly musical. As a celebration of Lena Horne, Ms. Freelon doesn't delve into dates and stats in her patter but rather shares her experience of the late diva's spiritual inspiration. 