Some people are preparing to give Chinese President Hu Jintao a warm welcome when he arrives in Washington this week.

Sen. Chuck Schumer isn't one of them.

Instead, Mr. Schumer says he wants to use the Chinese leader's visit to deliver a message: "Both Democrats and Republicans in the Senate and the House, and the American people are just fed up when, up and down the line, China doesn't play by the rules and seeks unfair economic advantage."

The New York Democrat started trying to deliver that message Monday, the eve of the Chinese leader's arrival in the U.S., when he unveiled the latest version of his legislation to punish China for suppressing the value of its currency. And on Tuesday he's opening a new front when he uses a visit to a New York optics company to push the Obama administration to call out Beijing for hoarding its reserves of rare-earth metals, making life difficult for a range of manufacturers.

Mr. Schumer has been trying for most of the last decade to promote the message that China doesn't play by the rules, with mixed success. Yet his renewal and expansion of the effort now points to a basic, underlying reality: The global economic trauma of the last three years has intensified the economic strains between Washington and Beijing, while ensuring that they will be the dominant feature of the global economic landscape for years to come.

The loss of millions of American jobs has increased anxiety about the outsourcing of work to China, while the rise in the budget deficit caused by the crisis has raised fears about relying on China to finance American spending.

Meanwhile, the Federal Reserve's program of pushing down interest rates to help revive the economy has Beijing complaining that America's own monetary manipulation is worsening China's inflation problem. Simultaneously, Europe's debt crisis figures to keep it bogged down for years, making the U.S.-Chinese competition an even more prominent feature of the international economic landscape.

Above all, the recession has left Americans deeply insecure about their prospects in this long-term economic competition. Indeed, a year ago a Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll found for the first time that Americans were more likely to name China than the U.S. as the nation that would be the world's leader in 20 years.

Against that backdrop, Mr. Schumer's message that the Chinese are gaming the international system to their advantage, while hardly new, may have special resonance. In an interview, he argues that the cumulative effect of China's policies is making a broader range of political players open to his arguments.

"If it were just one area, if they were fine on most things...that would be one thing," he said. "It seems in almost every place you look, not only do they seek advantage, which every country does, but they seek unfair advantage."

The cornerstone of the Schumer case against China remains his charge that Beijing suppresses the value of its currency to give its exports an advantage and to undermine the efforts of foreign firms to sell in the Chinese market. For six years, he has offered legislation to prod administrations—first a Republican one, now a Democratic one—to move against China for currency manipulation.

He's been trying to make his legislation look more reasonable, both to attract broader bipartisan support and to avoid the charge that passing it would, in his words, have "calamitous" consequences for international finances. 

In the new version, Mr. Schumer—and Republican Sen. Lindsey Graham, the main Republican co-sponsor—don't simply call for imposing tariffs on Chinese goods to punish it for its currency policies. Instead, the legislation equates currency manipulation with unfair subsidies; allows an industry that feels damaged to file a complaint as it would against a nation dumping products on the U.S; and gives the offending country 90 days to negotiate a change before countervailing duties would be imposed.

Mr. Schumer is widening his focus by going after rare-earth metals. These metals are mined predominantly in China and are crucial for manufacturing items such as batteries, wind turbines and specialized lenses. China has cut quotas and raised taxes on exports of rare-earth metals—the latest example, Mr. Schumer says, of a "mercantilist" economic policy.

The danger in railing against China is that complaining can become merely an excuse for Americans to avoid taking responsibility for their own problems. Moreover, U.S. administration officials say China is finally allowing its currency to move upward in meaningful ways. 

Still, Mr. Schumer has a useful role to play by being the bad cop on such issues, allowing the Obama administration to play good cop in talks with China, and he knows it. Current trends suggest he can keep playing the role a long while.

 Write to  Gerald F. Seib at jerry.seib@wsj.com 