  Google Inc., fresh off announcing a management shake-up, will give a $100 million equity award to Chief Executive  Eric Schmidt, who in April will be succeeded by company co-founder  Larry Page.

  Poornima Gupta, a spokeswoman for Google, said Saturday that it was the first such award for Mr. Schmidt since he joined the company in 2001. It includes stock and stock options, and vests over four years. She declined to comment further.

Mr. Schmidt's equity award is highly unusual, according to compensation experts and compensation data. Most such equity awards are given to new CEOs rather than sitting CEOs. And Mr. Schmidt's award is the largest in grant-value dollars for a sitting CEO since Motorola Inc. awarded a grant valued at $103 million to its then co-CEO,  Sanjay Jha, in August 2008, according to Wall Street Journal research.

"It is probably unprecedented to see that magnitude of an award for someone shifting from CEO to [just] chairman," said  Irving S. Becker, head of the U.S. executive-compensation practice for consultants Hay Group.

Other top Google executives have periodically received smaller equity awards.

Google on Thursday said Mr. Schmidt would become executive chairman to work on external matters such as partnerships and government relationships. Messrs. Schmidt and Page said the moves are intended to speed up decision-making at the top of the Internet giant, which on Thursday posted strong fourth-quarter results and said it generated more than $29 billion in revenue in 2010.

Bloomberg reported on the award to Mr. Schmidt late Friday.

Mr. Schmidt oversaw a period of tremendous growth as chief executive for the past decade, as Google turned into a Web search-engine powerhouse with a complementary search-ad business. The company has since expanded to graphical and video ads, as well as developing operating systems for mobile devices and laptop computers, among other things.

On Thursday, Mr. Schmidt filed paperwork to sell company shares currently valued at $335 million this year, his first such sale in more than three years. He currently owns 9.2 million Google shares, which are valued at nearly $5.8 billion and represent 9.6% of the company's voting power, according to the filing. When the sale is completed this year, the voting power would fall to 9.1%.

—Joann S. Lublin  and Scott Thurm  contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Amir Efrati at amir.efrati@wsj.com 