MACAU—U.S. casino magnate  Steve Wynn said his company doesn't face any regulatory risk as the U.S. government looks into whether his rival has violated the foreign corrupt practices act, sparking concerns there could be a sectorwide probe. 

"We've never been investigated by anyone and have no risk of any kind whatsoever," the chief executive of  Wynn Resorts Ltd.
WYNN


-3.58
%




 said in an interview Saturday in his first public comments on the matter amid concerns regulators could intensify scrutiny of U.S. gambling companies thriving in booming Macau. 

He also said he doubts rival gambling tycoon  Sheldon Adelson is guilty of accusations made in a high-profile lawsuit against him and  Las Vegas Sands Corp.
LVS


-1.84
%




 that the company believes has sparked the U.S. federal probes into its conduct. Las Vegas Sands has denied the allegations. 

"Is he the kind of guy that would go say 'go blackmail the politicians'? Nah. I don't believe it. That's making him out to be a moron. It's not on the cards," Mr. Wynn said. 

Mr. Wynn acknowleged he hasn't always been on great terms with Mr. Adelson, whom he described as a "controversial" and "very strong personality." But, in a rare moment of solidarity, he praised his competitor for his "bravura," which Mr. Wynn believes has enabled Mr. Adelson to take on ambitious projects, and for his "unquestionable" commitment to Macau. 

"You may take issue with his style but you can't take issue with his accomplishments," said Mr. Wynn, who added he didn't want to be seen as taking sides on the issue, which he believes is causing "great concern with regulators." 

The comments follow a disclosure by Las Vegas Sands in March that it had received a subpoena from the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission for documents related to its compliance with the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and that the Justice Department was conducting a "similar investigation." The law prohibits U.S. companies from making payments to foreign officials to get or keep business. 

Las Vegas Sands said it believed the subpoena stemmed from allegations in a lawsuit filed in October against the company by its former head of Macau operations,  Steve Jacobs. The Nevada Gaming Control Board said it has also initiated an investigation into the same matter. 

Later that month Las Vegas Sands's Macau unit  Sands China Ltd.
SCHYY


-3.45
%




 said in a statement to the Hong Kong stock exchange that the city's securities regulator had asked the company to produce "certain documents" for an investigation into alleged breaches of the Securities and Futures Ordinance and that it was "not permitted to comment further at this time." 

Hong Kong's Securities and Futures Ordinance, which took effect in 2003, gave the regulator more power over listed companies, including the ability to make criminal prosecutions. Analysts said they believed the Hong Kong investigation was linked to the suit's allegations. 

"I read that [stock exchange filing] as the Chinese people saying 'Sit down...this is enough inflammatory rhetoric, this involves our country, we want the facts themselves in an orderly fashion,'" Mr. Wynn said. 

In the case, filed in a Nevada court in October against Las Vegas Sands and its Macau subsidiary, Steve Jacobs accuses the company of wrongfully terminating his employment because he wouldn't comply with what he says were illegal demands from Mr. Adelson. 

Among its allegations, the suit accuses Mr. Adelson of ordering Mr. Jacobs to threaten to use "improper leverage" against senior government officials and to arrange "secret investigations" of them so that any negative information could be used against them. 

Mr. Jacobs also alleges that Mr. Adelson wanted him to continue using the services of a Macau attorney,  Leonel Alves, despite concerns his employment could risk violation of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act. 

Mr. Alves is a member of the Macau government's Executive Council. 

According to the document, Mr. Adelson also ordered Mr. Jacobs to threaten to withhold business from major Chinese banks "unless they agreed to use influence with newly elected senior government officials of Macau" to get "favorable treatment." 

Further, the suit accuses Mr. Adelson of insisting that Mr. Jacobs withhold information from Sands China's board about "material financial events, corporate governance and corporate independence," preventing it from having a chance to rule on whether such information should be disclosed to the Hong Kong Stock Exchange. 

In addition to denying the allegations, Las Vegas Sands filed a counterclaim last month accusing Mr. Jacobs of extortion. According to the filing, Mr. Jacobs was angry about being fired and threatened to go public with claims against Mr. Adelson and the company that he knew were false unless "he was paid money to which he was not entitled." 

The counterclaim also alleges Mr. Jacobs endangered the company's relationships with the Macau and China governments by commissioning an investigative report on Macau public officials without seeking approval from the board of Sands China or from Adelson.

 Write to  Kate O'Keeffe at kathryn.okeeffe@dowjones.com 