LONDON—Activity in the U.K. construction sector grew at its fastest rate in eight months in February, adding to the mildly positive signals to emerge from the economy of late. 

The Purchasing Managers' Index for the construction sector jumped to 56.5 in February from 53.7 in January, Markit Economics and the Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply said Wednesday. A reading above 50 indicates a rise in activity. 

The data are another upbeat signal for the U.K. economy after Tuesday's manufacturing PMI reading showed a record pace of expansion. However, the country's economic recovery will depend on the services sector, which has been less buoyant in recent months. The PMI reading for that sector, which makes up three-quarters of U.K. output, will be published Thursday. 

Officials on the Bank of England's Monetary Policy Committee have said there is a growing case to raise interest rates, especially if the economy performs well in the first quarter after a decline at the end of 2010.

January's reading was particularly strong because of a rebound after heavy snow in December. But Markit said a significant rise in new business and a reduced number of job losses kept the index elevated. 

There were further signs of the inflationary pressures that are worrying BOE policy makers. Constructors' input costs grew at the fastest rate since August 2008, Markit said. That, as well as concern about the impact of government spending cuts on their order books, meant companies were less optimistic than in January. 

  Howard Archer, economist at IHS Global Insight, said the sector's outlook is uncertain. "The construction sector faces a challenging environment," he said. "Public spending cuts, still-tight credit conditions and a subdued housing market are particular problems." 

Construction was one of the weak spots in the U.K. economy in the fourth quarter of 2010. The sector contracted 2.5% between October and December, contributing to the overall 0.6% quarterly fall in U.K. gross domestic product. Figures for economic growth in the first quarter of 2011 will be published in April. The construction sector represents just over 6% of the economy. 