SYDNEY—Miners producing more than a fifth of the iron ore traded globally reported rising prices and record output, signaling a pick up in the global economy.

  Rio Tinto
RIO


0.25
%




 PLC and Fortescue Metals Group Ltd., the world's second- and fourth-largest iron-ore producers, reported they shipped a combined 225 million metric tons of the steelmaking ingredient last year.

"The market is strong, demand is strong. I'd love to be able to produce more, but we're buoyant about the medium term," Fortescue Executive Director  Russell Scrimshaw said Tuesday.

Prices for the major steelmaking ingredients, iron ore and coking coal, have been rising sharply in recent weeks as a rekindling of global economic growth clashes with adverse weather in Australian mining regions that are critical for supplies. Flooding over the past month has cut production from mines in the Bowen Basin. And Australia's Bureau of Meteorology is predicting a heavier-than-usual cyclone season for the Pilbara, an arid region of northwestern Australia that accounts for around a third of the seaborne supply of iron ore. Both events are connected to the La Niña weather pattern. 

"We've got out fingers crossed, but La Niña seems to be playing a bit of havoc with northern Australia, in particular," said  Paul Hallam, Fortescue's director of operations. 

The poor weather benefits miners, who can make up in increased prices what they lose in production. Energy consultants Wood Mackenzie estimate that prices of hard coking coal could rise to as high as $500 a metric ton from $225 a ton currently because of Queensland's floods. Benchmark iron ore tracked by the Steel Index, settled at $179.50 a ton Friday, up 23% from the start of November. 

Macquarie Group forecast iron ore will average $164 a ton this year, while Morgan Stanley forecast $172 a ton. "Industrial production in the developed world will prove to be stronger than we had previously anticipated heading into 2011," Macquarie said. 

  Hayden Bairstow, an analyst at CLSA in Sydney, said that such high prices put Rio Tinto and Fortescue in strong positions, despite a 20% jump in Fortescue's production costs to $41.50 a ton.

Fortescue's prices averaged $150 a ton in the fourth quarter.

Rio Tinto said production of coking coal from the Bowen Basin mines fell 6% in the fourth quarter.

Some analysts predict prices of the commodity to double to as high as $500 a ton as a result of Australia's supply disruption.

Rio said limited operations are under way at its Bowen Basin mines but declined to estimate of the impact of the weather.

Analysts have expressed concern that more increases in iron-ore and coal prices could spur inflation for industrial products or slow steel output. "There's a point at which the steelmakers can't make money, and if they can't push through steel price increases they'll just stop producing," Mr. Bairstow said.

 Write to  David Fickling at david.fickling@dowjones.com 