MANAMA, Bahrain—Political unrest has sent stock markets tumbling across the Middle East and is threatening economic growth and the employment prospects of populations already hungry for change. 

Ratings agencies have taken a dim view of many Arab economies and the cost of insuring risk across the region has surged amid the popular revolts that have spread from North Africa to the oil-rich Persian Gulf. 

Stock markets have extended their losses in recent days as investors mull whether the gathering turmoil could infect the region's more stable oil-producing regimes, including the world's largest crude producer, Saudi Arabia. 

Saudi Arabia's Tadawul Index, the region's largest market, dropped 3.9% to 5323.27 on Wednesday, its lowest level since April 2009. The gauge has now lost 20% in a 13-session losing streak. The cost of insuring the kingdom's debt against default, meanwhile, rose to its highest level since July 2009, according to data-provider Markit. 

Elsewhere, Dubai's DFM General Index retreated 3.5% to 1374.43; Qatar's market fell 3.6% to 7657.47 and Bahrain's market slipped 1% to 1409.79.

In spite of the market losses, economists say Saudi Arabia and other oil-rich Gulf states are likely to feel the region's turmoil less than their neighbors, in part because fears of disrupted oil supplies have sent the price of crude oil above the $100-a-barrel mark. That provides an economic cushion to big oil-exporting nations.

Much more vulnerable, these economists say, are the diversified economies that rely on service-sector income and foreign direct investment, including Egypt, Tunisia and Bahrain, a smaller oil producer. Industries employing millions of workers across the region are increasingly hurting as demand slides, fueling fears that states without the resource wealth to offset their economic pain could face further unrest as business dries up and unemployment rises. 

"The effects will vary across the region, but this will obviously have a major impact on the real economy and jobs" in countries with large service sectors, according to Said Hirsh, Middle East economist at Capital Economics in London. "Jobs will be at risk. There are incredibly tough times ahead." 

Egypt's political turmoil has already delivered a blow to the country's tourism sector, which accounted for more than 5% of the economy in 2010. Tourism brought in close to $13 billion in Egypt last year, but economists expect the tumult to cut that figure by more than 40% this year. 

Analysts at Cairo-based investment bank EFG-Hermes expect a 3% contraction in Egypt's anticipated gross domestic product in 2011— compared with the previous projection of 6% growth—while continuing labor protests are also likely to drag on Egypt's manufacturing sector, particularly its labor-intensive textiles industry. 

Cairo's stock market remains closed, with officials announcing Tuesday that the bourse—long one of the region's top performers— won't reopen until March 6. The reopening has been postponed several times amid fears of a market plunge when foreign investors are finally able to cut their exposure to Egypt. 

In Bahrain, where more than two weeks of antigovernment protests from the country's Shiite majority have left seven dead, hotels and restaurants report business has collapsed. Shop owners at the kingdom's sprawling malls say political unrest has deterred tourists and spooked consumers, and they have cut prices to spur traffic. At the Sheraton Hotel in Manama, one of Bahrain's largest, less than 20% of the 256 rooms are occupied, while two of the complex's three restaurants have temporarily closed.

Last week, Bahrain's Crown Prince Salman bin Hamad al-Khalifa withdrew from hosting the Formula One race that was scheduled for mid-March, dashing a major source of revenue and good publicity. 

Bahrain's central bank Governor Rasheed Al Maraj said last Thursday that the kingdom's banking sector has not been hit by the protests but conceded the economy's service sector is "hurting."

In Tunisia, where the second prime minister in a month was sworn in last week, continuing political paralysis has the critical tourism industry. Civil servants and factory workers have been protesting almost daily in Tunisia's capital, Tunis, and other cities, seeking pay raises or better work conditions. In a Wednesday note accompanying a credit-rating downgrade, ratings agency Fitch said the overthrow of the former regime has "raised expectations," but it stressed that any new government "will face similar economic challenges, most significantly, high youth unemployment."

One potential development, economists say, is that the deteriorating economic outlook could choke economic activity and boost unemployment, even in countries that are enjoying democratic reform, further increasing political instability and widening divisions within society, frustrating efforts to get derailed economies back on track. 

By contrast, analysts say the risk of significant economic shocks or violent unrest spilling over to the region's largest economy, Saudi Arabia, is for now limited because Saudi hydrocarbon riches have translated into relatively high per capita incomes and standards of living. 

"Saudi Arabia's economy is solid and it is sitting on foreign assets of 102% of its GDP," said John Sfakianakis, chief economist at Riyadh-based Banque Saudi Fransi. High oil prices will give the country "an extra fiscal boost," he said. "So the economy is at no risk."

But oil-rich states, spearheaded by Saudi Arabia, have opted to raid their fiscal balances to shore up political stability. In a move seen as seeking to cement domestic support and head off discontent among the Shiite minority population in its oil-rich eastern province, Riyadh last week announced a $36 billion state benefits scheme—on top of a $400 billion five-year infrastructure development program already under way.

That move, if on a smaller scale, was mirrored by the United Arab Emirates on Wednesday, where the country's ruler announced a $1.6 billion spending program on improving utilities in the poorer parts of the country. 

Gulf monarchs in Oman and Kuwait in recent weeks have also announced lavish spending plans to placate anti-government movements and silence calls for reform. 

—Matt Bradley in Cairo and Oliver Klaus and Nikhil Lohade in Dubai contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Joe Parkinson at joe.parkinson@dowjones.com 