Israel looks set to push through a sharp increase in oil and gas taxes after a committee of experts recommended nearly doubling the state's share of future revenue from oil and gas finds.

The committee, headed by Eytan Sheshinski, an expert in public finance, made its recommendations in the face of fierce opposition from energy companies that have invested billions of dollars in exploring for oil and gas off the Israeli coast.

Those efforts were rewarded late last year when  Noble Energy Inc.
NBL


1.80
%




 confirmed earlier estimates that its vast Leviathan field in the eastern Mediterranean contained 16 trillion cubic feet of natural gas—making it the world's largest deepwater gas discovery in a decade. The find is so large it could ultimately allow Israel to become a gas exporter. 

Noble and its partners were strongly opposed to any tax changes, particularly those that might be applied retroactively to existing fields, and lobbied hard against them. Noble declined to comment on the committee's recommendation.

The Sheshinski committee recommended increasing the state's share of revenue from oil and gas finds to between 52% and 62% from 30% now. 

That was less than had been proposed under the committee's interim recommendations, published in November. It also said royalty rates, levied on production, should remain at their current rate of 12.5%.

The changes will be debated in the Knesset, Israel's parliament, and, with government support, are thought likely to pass.

There was also good news for Noble and its project to develop Tamar, a gas field about half the size of Leviathan that it discovered in 2009. 

The committee said any field that started producing by 2014 would be partially exempt from the increased tax rate, which would be levied only after the producers had recovered 200% of their initial investment in exploring for and developing the oil and gas. Tamar is expected to meet that criterion. 

The concession on Tamar could help kick-start development of the field, which was put on hold after the Sheshinski committee put forward its original proposals in November. Then, banks went sour on the project and Delek Energy Ltd., Noble's partner, which is an arm of Delek Group, said it would have to re-evaluate the field.

Delek Energy criticized the recommendations, saying they would cause "irreversible damage" to the Israeli energy industry. The company called on the government to exempt all recent gas discoveries from the planned tax rises.

Israeli Finance Minister Yuval Steinitz had long argued for tax increases, saying Israel's current petroleum-tax regime, which dates from 1952, was far too generous to oil firms. "The situation where the citizens of the state of Israel are almost the only ones in the whole world—certainly in the Western world—who can't enjoy their natural resources is insupportable, and we are changing that here and now," he told journalists Monday.

 Write to  Guy Chazan at guy.chazan@wsj.com 