SAN FRANCISCO—If there's one thing people here seem to agree on, it's that nudity during an athletic event isn't a problem. But the city's tolerance for other forms of debauchery during Bay to Breakers, its annual cross-town footrace, has finally run out.

This Sunday, on the race's 100th anniversary, officials have banned inebriated and unregistered runners, as well as any wheeled objects. Those prohibitions wouldn't be controversial at most road races—but for many participants, Bay to Breakers has little to do with running and a lot to do with finding creative ways to transport alcohol for 7.5 miles.

In recent years, mobile taverns known as floats—including a Viking ship, a tiki hut and a pole-dancing cage—have co-opted the race, allowing costumed revelers as well as runners to dance and drink as they go. 

Bay to Breakers runners finally crossed the line, say city officials. This year, organizers moved the race's start time to 7 a.m. from 8 a.m., and plan to put intoxicated runners in so-called sobering tents. In TV public service announcements, the city warns: "We're serious." (Nude participation, however, has gotten a green light.)

Now some regulars are devising ways to party on. 

Joe Kukura, a freelance marketing writer, plans to run with a sequined mobile bar attached to his chest, complete with lime and salt, to serve with the tequila he will keep in plastic bottles on a utility belt. For the last decade, the 40-year-old has handed out free tequila shots in Dixie cups to other racers, and swears this year will be no different. 

"Drinking alcohol on the racecourse while running is the foundation of this race's popularity," he says. "I am going to uphold the tradition."

On his blog exercisingwhileintoxicated.com, he suggests other vessels for carrying alcohol during the race, including flasks, hydration backpacks, and specially-designed brassieres.

An organization called Citizens for the Preservation of Bay2Breakers is also fighting to keep what they call the "fun police" from ending their carnival. 

"This is about the right to have fun in your own city," says organizer Ed Sharpless, a 38-year-old tech entrepreneur. His group's Facebook page has attracted more than 15,500 followers. 

"Our goal is to get as many people as we can out there enjoying themselves in any way they feel is appropriate," he says.

Race organizer AEG, a subsidiary of Anschutz Co., says it encourages nonathletic fun through a costume contest and participants who run tied together as so-called centipedes. 

"Come in costume, or come naked—just don't come drunk," says spokesman Sam Singer. "Our goal is to keep the knuckleheads away."

Bay to Breakers began as an effort to lift San Francisco's spirits in the years following the catastrophic 1906 earthquake. In recent decades, it became known as a roving party in which participants who choose to wear clothes at all don costumes like pink gorilla suits as they run, walk or stumble their way across the city from San Francisco Bay to the waves, or breakers, of the Pacific Ocean. Serious runners stick to a pack at the front. Last year, half of the estimated 70,000 participants were "bandits," or people who didn't register.

But organizers and some people who live along the race path say the party has gone from fun to disgusting. Last year, participants left behind 47 tons of trash and 32 people were taken away in ambulances, mostly for alcohol-related injuries.

Howard Chabner, who lives at the halfway point of the race along Fell Street, says his wife got ready last year with a garden hose to spray away all of the drunks using their doorstep and side of their house as a toilet. (They had to use the hose.) 

While he enjoyed the costume spectacle in the past, "it has really gotten way out of hand," Mr. Chabner says. "I've been to Mardi Gras, and the people there were much more respectful."

The debate over whether and how to tone down Bay to Breakers dates back to 2009, when organizer AEG attempted to ban alcohol, floats and nude participants. That fell to the wayside after Mr. Sharpless' group and city supervisor Ross Mirkarimi intervened to broker a deal to restore everything except booze in glass bottles. 

"Nudity and floats are part of the overall eccentric nature of the race and what makes it so great," Mr. Mirkarimi told reporters at the time.

The debate flared again last summer after a torrent of neighborhood complaints, and a decision by bank ING Groep N.V. to end its sponsorship because of what it called "shifting priorities." Race organizers feared they might be left without a sponsor in the race's centennial year. In March, the race found an 11-hour backer in Zazzle Inc., an e-commerce website.

This year, San Francisco Police Cmdr. James Dudley says his beefed-up team of more than 200 officers—complemented by an undisclosed number of new private security officers—will strictly enforce a ban on floats, drinking and unregistered participants by using fences along the racecourse and checkpoints.

"You aren't going to see officers chasing the naked runners through the crowd because they don't have a bib on," says Cmdr. Dudley. But "we are going to stop all the kegs rolling through."

Organizers have also boosted the number of portable toilets from 811 to 1,226. Zazzle employees will hand out stickers that read "potty hero" to people who use them. Signs along the route will read: "Hold it! Almost there."

Citizens for the Preservation of Bay2Breakers is offering revelers tongue-in-cheek advice on how to circumvent the race's official new temperance.

The group made an online video survival guide showing a rather un-fit man rolling a keg through the hills of San Francisco, gaining strength for the feat by drinking beer. At the end, he celebrates like Rocky Balboa on the steps of City Hall—but with a beer in each hand.

 Write to  Geoffrey A. Fowler at geoffrey.fowler@wsj.com 