Greed and fear no longer seem to be playing such a violent game of tug-of-war with markets.

After a long stretch in which macroeconomic hopes and fears dictated the rise and fall of stocks, bonds and commodities—known in the market as the risk-on, risk-off trade—there are tentative signs that more-traditional concerns are reasserting their power.

In recent weeks, for example, moves in stocks and the U.S. dollar have had little connection—a breakdown of the trend during much of 2010, when they were virtual mirror images of each other. Stocks were considered risky and would rise when investors were feeling confident, while the dollar was a haven, benefiting when investors were worried.

Commodities, too, have broken away from rising and falling with risk perceptions. Now more old-fashioned concerns, like the weather, are having an impact. Corn, soybean and wheat prices jumped this month after supply estimates were cut due to dry weather in South America and floods in Australia.

That could be a relief to investors frustrated by what they see as a market often detached from fundamental concerns, thwarting efforts to make long-term trades.

"When risk recedes as a driver of returns, then fundamentals can become more of a driver," said  Joseph Mezrich, quantitative research analyst at Nomura Securities. "What you want is risk not being the driver—good or bad."

He and other analysts warn that markets are still a long way from running entirely on fundamentals. Many of the factors that have fostered the market's unusual relationships, also known as "correlations," since the financial crisis are still in place and might retreat only slowly, if at all.

The nonstop, frenetic interplay of asset classes across global markets defies simplistic analysis, and defining a "normal" market is a fool's errand anyway. Longstanding relationships form and break down suddenly and for any number of reasons in the best of times.

And the liquidity being pumped into the financial system by the Federal Reserve is a force that could warp markets for months to come.

"The clearest divide between where markets have been and where they go will be when the Fed starts tightening," said  Alan Ruskin, global head of G-10 foreign-exchange strategy at Deutsche Bank in New York. "That will precipitate a very different thought process."

Still, many analysts say there are early signs that some of the unusually strong correlations that took root amid the rolling financial crises of recent years may be breaking down.

Stocks and the dollar may be one of the clearest hints of creeping normalcy.

The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index and the dollar, valued against a basket of key trading partners' currencies, have moved in similar directions less than 10% of the time in recent trading days, according to an analysis by Nomura currency strategist  Jens Nordvig. In technical terms, this means they have a correlation coefficient of roughly 0.1. 

A correlation of 1.0 between two assets means they move in the same direction 100% of the time. A correlation of -1.0 means they move in the opposite direction 100% of the time.

For much of last fall, the correlation of the dollar and the stock market often approached -1.0, meaning the dollar was almost always falling when stocks were rising, and vice-versa. 

For much of the past month, that correlation has been close to zero, meaning the relationship between stocks and the dollar has been, practically speaking, almost nonexistent. 

This seems to be happening partly because investors are no longer using the dollar as a proxy for their risk appetite. On a "risk on" day, the dollar would decline as investors bought the euro, stocks, commodities and other risky assets. When the prevailing attitude was "risk off," the dollar would rise as investors plowed into the safety of Treasurys. That binary choice is no longer being made.

Similarly, the correlation between individual stock-market sectors has fallen recently to 78%, its lowest level in nearly two years, from a peak above 90% last year, according to Brown Brothers Harriman market strategist  Charles Blood. "This suggests a weakening of the 'macro' market environment," Mr. Blood told clients in a note last week.

Meanwhile, gold and U.S. stock prices are no longer moving in the same direction, as they did for most of the second half of 2010. Their correlation has turned negative recently, with gold mostly falling as stocks rise. Gold and Treasurys, which also moved together at times last year, have been unconnected lately. 

There are many possible explanations for the gold-stock breakup. One could be that gold bugs are starting to see the balance of monetary policy in the world moving away from easy money to tighter money.

This is especially clear in emerging markets, where policy makers from China to Brazil have been trying to slow their runaway growth amid signs of rising inflation. 

Emerging-market stocks and U.S. stocks are still mostly in harmony, as are U.S. stocks and commodities. But those relationships could weaken if U.S. policy stays loose and emerging markets keep tightening.

"One of the key themes for 2011 is that global growth is not created equally, and not all economic cycles are at the same point," said  Gregory Peters, global director of fixed-income research at Morgan Stanley. "Emerging markets are much more in middle to later cycles, while developed markets are still very much in the early cycle."

The recent return of individual-investor, or retail, money to the U.S. stock market might also help lower correlations between stocks and other assets, and among stock sectors, suggests  Douglas Cliggott, U.S. equity strategist at Credit Suisse Group.

Mutual-fund investors, who avoided putting new money to work in the stock market for about two years after the crisis, tend to move more slowly than hedge-fund investors. They might be less likely to yank their money out of the market in droves, unlike pack-traveling hedge funds. 

 Write to  Mark Gongloff at mark.gongloff@wsj.com 