Investors are about to see a darker side of money-market mutual funds. 

Starting Monday, the Securities and Exchange Commission will release monthly snapshots of money funds' "shadow" prices, which reflect the actual market value of the funds' holdings as opposed to the steady $1 price at which investors buy and sell shares. 

The new data will help investors still shaken by the financial crisis to gauge the true risks of money funds—and see why these conservative investments aren't quite the same as cash. 

Money funds' market values can bounce around slightly from day to day. Yet that fact traditionally hasn't been apparent to investors because money market funds use special, though perfectly legal, accounting practices to maintain a steady share price.

Shadow prices also have been murky until now because money funds were previously required to disclose them to the SEC only twice a year, and the data were in a format inaccessible to small investors. 

The shadow price disclosure is part of broad new money-fund regulations issued by the SEC early last year. The rules were designed to reduce money funds' risks in the wake of the blow-up of the Reserve Primary fund, which "broke the buck" in September 2008 by dropping to 97 cents due to holdings of Lehman Brothers debt and a wave of shareholder redemptions. 

Investors can find the shadow prices in money funds' SEC filings, searchable at www.sec.gov. But the new data have important limitations, including the fact that there is a two-month delay in the disclosure—so data released Jan. 31 will reflect shadow prices on Nov. 30. 

The fund industry, which resisted disclosure of shadow prices, is concerned about how investors might react to money-fund prices that deviate slightly from $1. Some investors seeing shadow prices below $1 might be prompted to move to a guaranteed product such as a bank account, said  Brian Reid, chief economist at fund-industry trade group Investment Company Institute, in a conference call with reporters and investors Tuesday.

Investors lately have shown little patience for any hint of money-fund instability. "It's a sensitive sector," says  Peter Rizzo, senior director at Standard & Poor's. Particularly among larger institutional investors, he says, the "first reaction in the financial crisis was 'take your money out, ask questions later.'" During the week of Sept. 15, 2008, investors yanked more than $300 billion from prime money funds, forcing funds to try to sell portfolio holdings in stressed markets. 

The shadow prices will be carried out to four decimal places, and investors shouldn't be alarmed by prices that deviate very slightly from $1, analysts say. As long as the fund's shadow price remains between $0.995 and $1.005, investors can buy and sell shares at exactly $1—since the price isn't more than half a cent away from $1. A shadow price below $0.995, however, may force a fund to "break the buck" and pay redeeming shareholders less than $1.

But the shadow price data can raise red flags even when investors are still buying and selling shares at $1. Consider a fund with a shadow price of $0.996. Investors who sell those shares for a full $1 are getting slightly more than their fair share, at the expense of the remaining shareholders. If enough shareholders sell shares under that scenario, and the fund firm doesn't prop up the fund, the fund could fall under $0.995 and break the buck. 

Key forces that can cause shadow prices to bounce around include interest-rate changes, credit events such as a ratings downgrade or default, and investors dumping the fund. 

As with all fixed-income investments, rising interest rates generally cause prices to fall. A major one-day rate increase of 1 percentage point, which is extremely rare, would cause a $1 shadow price to fall to $0.9983, according to the ICI. (That assumes the fund's "weighted average maturity," a measure of interest-rate sensitivity, is the maximum allowed under money-fund regulations.) 

A bigger problem could be if the securities held by a money fund default, depending on the holdings' size. A fund that has 1.25% of assets invested in a security that defaults and sees its value drop 40%, for example, risks breaking the buck, according to the ICI.

With the new disclosures, investors should expect to see shadow prices within a very narrow range, fund firms say. According to S&P, as of Oct. 30, money funds rated by S&P had shadow prices ranging from $0.9982 to $1.001.

 Write to  Eleanor Laise at eleanor.laise@wsj.com 