Scott Kim has an odd talent—he's a brilliant problem maker.

Mr. Kim belongs to an elite cadre of "puzzle masters" who spend their days building logical mazes and brain teasers. In more than 20 years as a professional puzzle designer, Mr. Kim has worked on everything from word, number and logic puzzles to toys such as Railroad Rush Hour and computer games such as "Obsidian" and "Escher Interactive," which features interactive puzzles based on M.C. Escher's optical illusions. Lately, he has been developing smartphone game apps and contributing a bimonthly puzzle column to Psychology Today.

Mr. Kim defines puzzles as "problems that are fun to solve and have a right answer," as opposed to everyday problems like traffic, which, he noted, "are not very well-designed puzzles."

"My goal as a puzzle designer is to create a meaningful experience for the player, not just 'I solved it,' " he said.

  Download one of Scott Kim's puzzles.  

Mr. Kim, who is youthful looking at 55, with a round, unlined face and sheepish smile, has mostly shunned popular forms like Sudoku or crosswords, which he dismissed as "filling out someone else's matrix." Instead, he aims to invent new forms, specializing in computer and print puzzles that pose logical problems or test mathematical or visual skills. 

He often begins by choosing a cognitive area or skill he wants the puzzle to test. One puzzle challenged players' ability to visualize negative space, the white space that surrounds and defines shapes and letters. A smartphone game he's designing requires players to think three-dimensionally by reassembling, in the fewest possible steps, a car or building that has been cut into pieces.

 From "The Playful Brain," by Richard Restak and Scott Kim: 

• Find a sequence of four letters that appear in two different five-letter words, differing by one letter. The words end in "P" or "H"; the first four letters are the same. Hint: the first letter is "C," and the words mean "hold hands or fight."

• Arrange numbers 0 to 9 so that three numbers plus three other numbers equal the four remaining numbers. (Start by drawing 10 boxes to hold three digits in the top row, three in the middle row and four in the bottom row, which will be the sum of the top two rows).

• Four people sit down for dinner in four different chairs and want to sit in a different combination each night. How many nights can they sit down without repeating an arrangement?

Andrea Bartz, news editor for Psychology Today, said his puzzles are always harder than they look. "They're deceptively and elegantly simple," Ms. Bartz said. "It looks like it should be very easy, but it takes a long time."

Growing up in Los Angeles, Mr. Kim was obsessed with magic and mathematics. He began drawing mazes and creating crossword puzzles in the second grade. In the sixth grade, he made his first original puzzle. He began folding letters of the alphabet made out of construction paper to make other letters. He folded the letter F over so that the base covered the shorter horizontal line and formed a U shape. "This excited me to no end," said Mr. Kim, who still uses the puzzle in lectures, asking people to guess the letter underneath. (Most guess L.)

Mr. Kim studied music during college and received a self-designed Ph.D. in computers and graphic design at Stanford. As a college student, he wrote letters to Martin Gardner, the author and mathematical-games columnist for Scientific American. The two began corresponding, and Mr. Kim sent him a new take on a classic logic puzzle. Scientific American published the puzzle, and Mr. Kim realized he could make a living from something most people view as a form of procrastination.

Below are ambigrams of the alphabet, `mirror' and `J.S. Bach,' which are mirror images of themselves; `Wall Street Journal' and `mathematics' read the same upside down.

Mr. Kim works on puzzles daily from his home in Burlingame, Calif., a Bay Area suburb with "an excessive number of trees," Mr. Kim said. He lives with his wife and two kids, ages 12 and 4, in a house teeming with art supplies, board games, mathematical toys, art books and instruments, including piano and drums. 

He likes changing locations frequently throughout the day, moving from his office to the kitchen table, then to the library or a coffee shop. Each time he changes surroundings, he tackles the problem anew. "I often find that the amount of progress I make is proportional to the number of times I start," he said. He's constantly doodling and carries a 3-by-5-inch notebook to record ideas, notes and images. 

He borrows ideas for puzzles from architecture, music, science and art (favorite designers include Milton Glaser and Charles and Ray Eames). Occasionally, he gets ideas from dreams. After he dreamed he was surfing on waves of color, Mr. Kim had an idea for a computer game whose goal is to stay on the red wave.

He takes frequent walks because he feels that increased blood flow keeps his brain alert and prefers strolling rather than sitting when he meets with other game designers or book or magazine editors. "If you're sitting across the table from someone, the geometry of the situation says confrontation," he said. "If you're walking with somebody, you're heading in the same direction, and the spatial dance you're doing is a little more cooperative." 

Designing puzzles can be exhausting. To unwind, and spark ideas, Mr. Kim dabbles in music and art. He composes Bach-like fugues, often in his sleep, and has studied the dizzying art of M.C. Escher. Science-fiction writer Isaac Asimov called him "the Escher of the alphabet" for his ambigrams—words and phrases that can be read in multiple directions. (An example: Write the word "chump" in cursive but leave the semicircle of the "p" open so it doesn't touch the p's tail. Flip it upside down.) 

He defines a good puzzle as one that gets people to look at the problem in a new or counterintuitive way. "What I always want is to have several little 'aha' moments where your brain is very happy," he said.

 Write to  Alexandra Alter at alexandra.alter@wsj.com 