LONDON—Factory-gate prices in the euro zone posted their sharpest monthly gain in 29 years in January, the latest sign that inflationary pressures are building faster than expected, ahead of the European Central Bank's policy meeting Thursday.

Industrial producer prices jumped 1.5% from December, the strongest gain since January 1982, the European Union's Eurostat agency said Wednesday. On an annual basis, producer prices were 6.1% higher than in January 2010, the sharpest year-to-year increase since October 2008. In December, industrial producer prices rose 0.8% on a monthly basis and 5.3% annually. 

Economists are confident the ECB's Governing Council won't raise its main interest rate from a record low of 1% at its policy meeting Thursday, but they say ECB President  Jean-Claude Trichet may harden his anti-inflation rhetoric to show a rate rise is getting closer. 

After the last policy meeting Feb. 3, Mr. Trichet said ECB interest rates remain appropriate but close monitoring of price developments was warranted. He said inflation would probably be above the ECB's target of just below 2% this year before eventually moderating. 

"With the bank stress tests underway and still a lot of uncertainty regarding the endgame of the debt crisis, the ECB will be wary to pull the trigger now,"  Peter Vanden Houte, an economist at ING, said in a note. "We see a first rate hike only in the fourth quarter of the year." 

The Eurostat data showed the monthly jump in producer prices was driven by energy and intermediate goods. Producer prices for energy rose 3.2% in January, the sharpest gain since July 2008, while intermediate goods prices rose 1.5%, matching the record gain seen in January 1995. However, even stripping out construction and energy, industrial producer prices rose 0.8% on the month, the sharpest gain in 16 years. 

More up-to-date surveys suggest the rally in producer prices is continuing. A survey of purchasing managers in the euro-zone manufacturing sector by financial information firm Markit released Tuesday showed input costs and output prices both increasing at record rates in February. 

Although producer prices for intermediate goods and energy surged in January, factory gate prices for consumer-related goods posted only modest gains, a sign that demand in that sector isn't as strong. Producer prices for durable consumer goods rose 0.2% on a monthly basis in January, while factory-gate prices for nondurable consumer goods gained 0.4%, both repeating the increases seen in December.

 Write to  Nicholas Winning at nick.winning@dowjones.com 