Two years after Chrysler Group LLC was ushered into bankruptcy, the auto maker is poised to repay the $7.5 billion in loans it received from the U.S. and Canadian governments, and deepen its alliance with  Fiat SpA.

The repayments, expected by the end of the quarter, involves new term loans to be extended to Chrysler by a group of banks in a private debt offering and an infusion of cash from Fiat in exchange for an additional 16% stake in Chrysler that will lift the Italian auto maker's holding to 46%. 

The loans would likely be at a sharp discount to the double-digit interest rate that Chrysler is now paying to the U.S.

"The interest rate on the new loans will make a material difference to our profit and loss statement," Chrysler Chief Executive Officer  Sergio Marchionne said Thursday in Detroit without providing details. 

"There is no doubt that once we repay the US and Canadian governments, the perception of our brands and the perception of this house will improve," Mr. Marchionne said. "Will it show itself in an increased market share? It may, but we still have a lot of work to do here."

Two years ago on Saturday, Chrysler filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection. It since emerged and is now producing vehicles with more fuel efficient engines, an expanded its international sales reach through its Fiat alliance, and is moving closer to reporting a profit. 

Rival  General Motors Co.
GM


-1.32
%




, which entered bankruptcy court protection the same year as Chrysler, is also out and a publicly traded company again. It reported profits in 2010 that were its highest in more than a decade, and managed to maintain its market share despite losing four of its eight U.S. brands. GM is expected to report another solid profit when it releases earnings on May 5. 

"Today the American [car] manufacturers are growing stronger, creating new jobs, and manufacturing the fuel-efficient cars and trucks that will carry us toward an energy independent future," U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner said in Detroit on Thursday. 

Treasury is looking to further reduce its stake in GM this summer with a secondary offering of shares, with hopes of offloading its entire stake by year's end, according to people familiar with the situation. At GM's current share price of $31.91, the U.S. would lose around $10 billion on its $50 bailout of the auto maker.

Chrysler didn't disclose the banks it has hired to underwrite the new debt securities. A group of banks, led by  Goldman Sachs
GS


-0.14
%




 Group, and including  Citigroup Inc.,
C


0.63
%




 Morgan Stanley,
MS


-0.48
%




 and  Bank of America Corp.
BAC


3.39
%




, will handle the deal, according to people familiar with the plan. More details are expected when Chrysler releases its first quarter earnings Monday. 

The new financing is expected to trigger the release of as much as $3.5 billion in low-interest loans from the Department of Energy that Chrysler intends to use to re-tool its plants to build more fuel-efficient vehicles, people familiar with the plan have said. 

"We have things that need to get done, like introducing new transmissions, and they require a significant amount of capital," Mr. Marchionne said. 

Mr. Marchionne has hinted that he is considering operating Chrysler and Fiat as a single global company under one stock listing. The company may use Chrysler's Auburn Hills, Mich., office as it headquarters.

"You will see a higher level of integration between the two companies," he said on Thursday. "I mean the whole objective is to turn this [Chrysler-Fiat partnership] into a global automotive concern." 

He is already working behind the scenes to move vehicle production within Fiat and Chrysler's network of plants, essentially building a Fiat in the U.S. or a Chrysler in Italy if it saves the company money.

 Write to  Jeff Bennett at jeff.bennett@dowjones.com 