HONG KONG—In the second week of the "milkshake murder" retrial, prosecutors presented key testimony from one of Nancy and Robert Kissel's domestic helpers, who described to jurors Friday how she unwittingly assisted in Ms. Kissel's attempt to cover up Mr. Kissel's death. 

Maximina Macaraeg, who worked for the Kissel family for nearly four years, testified that on Nov. 5, 2003, Ms. Kissel ordered her to clear out a storage room near the family's home in the Parkview apartment complex, as well as to purchase rope and a medical belt for Ms. Kissel's back. Police would later find Mr. Kissel's body in that storage room, wrapped in a carpet bundled up with rope and packing tape. 

Ms. Kissel was convicted in 2005 of murdering her husband, an investment banker at Merrill Lynch, but is standing trial once again after Hong Kong's highest court found flaws in the original proceedings. In the previous trial, Ms. Kissel testified that she killed her husband in self-defense, and described years of physical and sexual abuse by Mr. Kissel.

At the start of her new trial last week, Ms. Kissel, 46 years old, pleaded guilty to manslaughter, but not guilty to murder. 

Prosecutors say she served her husband a sedative-laced milkshake and later killed him with multiple blows to the skull. Prosecutor David Perry has sought to show that Ms. Kissel was of sound mind when she killed her husband and that she sought to coolly cover up the crime during the roughly six days between her husband's death and police's discovery of the body. 

Ms. Macaraeg told the jury Friday how Ms. Kissel also asked her to help move cardboard boxes that would be sent to the storage room. Although Ms. Macaraeg didn't know what was in the boxes, police later discovered bloodstained towels and pillows from the master bedroom. 

The testimonies of Ms. Macaraeg and her sister-in-law, Conchita Macaraeg, who was also employed by the Kissels, are also key to the prosecution's apparent effort to cast Ms. Kissel as hot-tempered. 

On Friday, Ms. Macaraeg described Ms. Kissel as loving but also prone to slamming doors when Ms. Macaraeg made a mistake. She described the Kissels' marriage as a happy one, at least for the first two years she worked for them, but said the relationship seemed to grow tense in 2003, after the family left Hong Kong to escape the outbreak of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, or SARS.

In a brief cross examination before the court adjourned, defense council Edward Fitzgerald appeared to suggest Ms. Kissel's mood swings might be related to depression, citing Ms. Macaraeg's previous testimony that Ms. Kissel's mood seemed to worsen in 2003. 

During questioning, Ms. Macaraeg said she had a bad feeling after seeing that Ms. Kissel had bought a new rug for the living room. Later that evening, Ms. Macaraeg was ordered to let movers into the apartment to haul the old rug out. She testified it took three or four men to load the rug onto the trolley, and said the Kissels' youngest child, Reis, went to hold the door open for the movers. As the movers pushed the trolley out, Ms. Macaraeg said, the young boy said something smelled bad and exclaimed "eeww."