Years after the Mafia was all but declared dead, federal agents conducted their largest ever roundup of suspected mob members and associates Thursday, charging 127 people in the Northeast with crimes ranging from execution-style slayings to illegal card games.

Early-morning raids in New York, New Jersey and Rhode Island netted 119 people, charged in 16 separate indictments, that authorities say are affiliated with La Cosa Nostra. Five of those charged were in prison; three were at large.

Many of the suspects charged were known, court documents say, by the kinds of nicknames aficionados of gangster films and books have come to savor: Meatball, Baby Shanks, Tony Bagels, Jimmy Gooch, Jello, Vinnie Carwash and Jack the Whack.

While the mob's power has been depicted as waning in the face of competition from Asian, Latin and Eastern European gangs, U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder said the Mafia was still a "menace to our nation" that is "a major threat to the economic well-being of this country."

Court documents describe internal power struggles and revenge killings, control of a concrete and cement workers' union, extortion of pornography shops and nightclubs named the Satin Doll and Cadillac Lounge, and a scheme to take money from longshoremen working the New York and New Jersey piers at Christmas.

Five of the alleged mobsters charged Thursday by federal authorities in a big roundup, which included purported members of crime rings in New York, New Jersey and New England.

"Organized crime is a shadow of what it was 20 years ago," said Bruce Mouw, a former Federal Bureau of Investigation agent who led the probe that sent former Gambino boss John Gotti to prison.

"But you still have five families [in New York], you have captains, you have crews; they still control a lot of labor unions, they still control a lot of the construction industry, different companies, still commit crimes and according to the indictments, they still kill people."

Among the arrested were suspected members and associates of all five New York organized-crime families: the Gambinos, Genoveses, Bonannos, Lucheses and Colombos. 

Authorities also charged members of the DeCavalcantes in Newark, N.J., and the New England Mafia family in Providence, R.I.

Attorneys for most of the people accused couldn't be reached for comment Thursday.



Prosecutors wield a powerful weapon against organized crime with the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, a broad law enacted by Congress in 1970 that allows them to charge Mafia members with being part of a criminal enterprise based on the commission of certain crimes.

The record of success by prosecutors has been mixed. Major figures have been convicted, but often only after setbacks to the government. 

Lower-level figures often plead guilty, serve time and go back to their crime-family lives.

Federal officials said Thursday that they brought the multiple cases at once because the charges were ready, but a defense lawyer suggested the coordinated effort was for public consumption.

Jeffrey Lichtman, an attorney who represented John Gotti Jr. in a trial where the son of Mr. Gotti was accused of various offenses including securities fraud and racketeering, said Thursday's bust represented a "pretty package" where "only a fraction" of the alleged crimes are new.

"When you peel back the first page of the indictment, you see lots of junk from the '80s and '90s," said Mr. Lichtman. "We hear these pronouncements every few years by the government that they've dealt a blow to the mob, but all they are doing is taking these ridiculously old crimes and presenting them as new. I don't think today's arrests are quite as significant as the government has made it out to be."

The indictments Thursday laid out the hierarchical structure that has wormed its way into popular culture: bosses, or dons, and underbosses, who manage the organizations; consiglieres who give advice; and captains, or capos, who receive payments known as tributes for running crews of soldiers and associates. 

More than 30 official Mafia members, known as "made men," were among those charged, authorities said.

The highest-ranking, according to prosecutors, were Luigi Manocchio, 83, the former boss of the New England mob; Benjamin Castellazzo, 73, the acting underboss of the Colombo family; Andrew Russo, 76, the Colombo street boss; Richard Fusco, 74, the Colombo family's consigliere; Joseph Corozzo, 69, consigliere of the Gambino family; and Bartolomeo Vernace, 61, a Gambino administrator.

One reason such sweeps are not always effective, said Howard Abadinsky, a professor at St. John's University who has written about the Mafia, is that those arrested are soon replaced on the street. "You make room for up-and-comers," he said. Mr. Abadinsky said the Mafia had also continued to thrive by moving into new areas, including cyber crime, health-care fraud, and other "cutting edge" criminal areas.

The arrests included members and associates of all five New York organized-crime families:

The charges Thursday included schemes such as one by suspected Colombo associate Michael Castellano and others to defraud MoneyGram International, a money-transfer company, of $1.5 million. One of the men allegedly posed as a MoneyGram employee and arranged for fraudulent money orders which were then picked up using false identification. 

Lynda Michielutti, a spokeswoman for MoneyGram, said the company had been working with authorities since 2005. "We were obviously pleased to learn today that the investigation came to fruition," she said.

Mr. Castellano and others are also accused of tricking people with poor credit histories into wiring up-front payments through Western Union by promising them loans.

Other charges involve more traditional Mafia activities, such as loan-sharking, gambling and murder. One was the January 2002 killing of Marty Bosshart, a member of a Gambino narcotics-trafficking crew, by a family associate, Tony LaBarca, and others, according to one of the indictments filed Thursday.

Read about significant arrests and trials of organized-crime figures.

Mr. Bosshart, 30 years old, was lured into a car with Mr. LaBarca and the gunman, Gennaro Bruno, and shot in the head, and his body left on the side of a road, because he wanted to cut a high-ranking family member out of their marijuana-trafficking operation, prosecutors said.

Ronald Rubinstein, a lawyer for Mr. LaBarca, said the charges against his client were "very serious." He said he would be in a better position to make a bail application once he listens to conversations recorded by a cooperating witness in the case. Mr. LaBarca was detained late Thursday.

Mr. Vernace, then a Gambino captain, was charged in connection with the double murder of Richard Godkin and John D'Agnese, who owned the Shamrock Bar in the Woodhaven section of Queens in 1981, prosecutors said. The two men were allegedly shot to death in a dispute with a Gambino associate close to Mr. Vernace over a spilled drink.

But most of the charges relate to various kinds of scams, such as the one Colombo associate Angelo Spata is accused of running last year on the city of New York, by under-reporting income from an Italian festival called the Figli di Santa Rosalia. The festival celebrates Saint Rosalia, the so-called "Little Saint" and patron saint of Palermo, Italy.

—Sean Gardiner, Evan Perez and Tamer El-Ghobashy contributed to this article.

 Write to  Michael Rothfeld at michael.rothfeld@wsj.com, Sean Gardiner at sean.gardiner@wsj.com and Chad Bray at chad.bray@dowjones.com 

  Complete Coverage: Organized Crime  