An oily substance of unknown origin is washing ashore in parts of Louisiana that were among the hardest hit by  BP PLC's Deepwater Horizon oil spill last year, the U.S. Coast Guard and local government officials said Monday. 

The Coast Guard and a Jefferson Parish spokeswoman said they have mobilized oil-spill-response equipment, and the Coast Guard has hired a contractor to lay containment boom in hopes of stopping the substance from penetrating inland waters and ecologically sensitive shorelines. 

"We're not clear where this is from," said Coast Guard Capt. Jonathan Burton, who is based in Morgan City, La. "We don't have an identifiable responsible party." 

Photos taken by Jefferson Parish officials show globs of reddish matter coming ashore on Elmer's Island, a state wildlife sanctuary. 

Other photos, taken off Port Fourchon, show stretches of the Gulf's surface coated in a thin film and streaked with bright orange streams of thick matter. 

The Coast Guard said it didn't suspect the matter was residual oil from the BP spill. The agency's scientists said they would have expected a different trajectory for the substance if it had been left over from last year's spill. And what's coming ashore doesn't look like crude that has been sitting in the Gulf of Mexico for nearly a year, according to Capt. Burton. 

Still, the Coast Guard is using analysis of chemical properties to compare samples from BP's runaway well with material collected from Louisiana beaches this weekend to see if they match. Results from those tests should be available Tuesday, Capt. Burton said. 

The Coast Guard is also investigating whether the oily substance could be related to crude released by a hurricane-damaged platform Saturday, but there is no evidence that the incidents are related, Capt. Burton said. 

The platform, owned by Anglo-Suisse Offshore Partners LLC, leaked an undetermined amount of oil for four to six hours during an operation to permanently seal it, Capt. Burton said. 

It's unclear whether the platform could have leaked enough oil during that time period to account for the substance washing up in Louisiana.

Executives with the closely held company weren't available for comment. 

The substance was first reported along Louisiana's coast on Saturday, said Kriss Fortunato, a Jefferson Parish spokeswoman. On Sunday, the substance came ashore in greater amounts, coating stretches of shoreline that totaled about half a mile, the Coast Guard said

Jefferson Parish had no official estimate of how much of the material had reached land or lurked near shore, but "it's a significant amount," Ms. Fortunato said. Sheen believed to be associated with the goopy material reportedly stretches on the Gulf's surface for miles, she said.

Some 10,000 feet of boom has been deployed on Grand Isle and an additional 19,000 feet of both hard and absorbent floating barrier have been ordered for the operation, Capt. Burton said in a news release. 

The Coast Guard has hired environmental-response company ES&H to begin cleaning up the oily substance and has authorized the disaster-response contractor to buy whatever additional boom and equipment are needed to contain and clean up the substance.

Capt. Burton said the cleanup and containment effort was being paid for by the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund, which holds oil royalties to cover spill-cleaning costs.

In a separate probe, the Coast Guard determined that what was reported Saturday as potentially a miles-long oil slick is actually a plume of silt emanating from the Mississippi River. 

Samples from the plume taken from a Coast Guard cutter have found only trace amounts of oil and grease in the murky cloud.

"At this point, the dark substance is believed to be caused by a tremendous amount of sediment being carried down the Mississippi River due to high water, possibly further agitated by dredging operations," the Coast Guard said in a news release.