I answered my phone recently to hear a friend shrieking in my ear. "Check your inbox for the email I just sent you," he wailed. "And please, please tell me I didn't hit Reply All."

You know that feeling: You hit Send—and your heart nearly stops.

This shouldn't still be happening. After almost two decades of constant, grinding email use, we should all be too tech-savvy to keep making the same mortifying mistake, too careful to keep putting our relationships and careers on the line because of sloppiness. 

Sadly, we are not, as  Bill Cochran, a 44-year-old advertising creative director, can attest. Last summer, as the Dallas agency where he works, the Richards Group, was gearing up to produce Super Bowl spots for a major client, Bridgestone Corp., his boss sent an email to about 200 employees with a schedule of meetings where creative teams would present work, competing in rounds until the agency selected ads to present to the client for review. 

Mr. Cochran seized the moment to rally his writing partner. He drafted an email reply critiquing the in-house competition, noting which colleagues he thought would give his team a run for their money—and which wouldn't. "It was written in locker-room talk," Mr. Cochran says. "I listed the people I thought were 'gonna bring it.' "

You can guess what happened next. Minutes after hitting Send, he got an email. "Oh God…Bill," a co-worker,  Wendy Mayes, wrote. "You just hit REPLY ALL!"

Mr. Cochran felt the blood drain from his head. He reread his email several times, telling himself it could have been worse. Then he sent out a second Reply All message: "Sorry about that. I am going to go climb in a hole now." 

"We all say these things," Mr. Cochran says, looking back. "But most people aren't stupid enough to put it in an email."

Used intentionally, Reply All has its benefits. It's convenient. And it can be polite, especially in a work situation. 

"If you were in a face-to-face meeting and someone made a comment or asked a question, you would be considered rude if you whispered your reply in just that person's ear so no one else could hear it," says  Patricia Wallace, a psychologist and author of "The Internet in the Workplace." 

But Reply All is dangerous. It makes us feel in the loop. And it can be a way to toot our own horns. Never mind that we hate how group emails multiply like rabbits in our inboxes. "Many people lean toward covering their rears by overinforming their bosses and colleagues," Dr. Wallace says. "They can then say, 'Well, I cc'd you on all that debate last month...Didn't you read it?' " 

Why don't email programs have a "dummy button" that pops up when we hit Reply All and asks, "Are you sure?" There are applications for that, such as Sperry Software's Reply to All Monitor. 

"It's a tricky technical problem to solve without getting in the way, because there's a certain velocity at which people are using these applications," says  Bill Wetherell, director of design for  AOL Inc.'s AOL Mail. "There will always be the person who lacks boundaries and will say things that he shouldn't say. We can't prevent that."

To make email more like in-person communication, AOL is considering ways to show faces, rather than just names, in the To field in a new email product coming out in the next six months. "I wonder if the Reply All problem would occur if you saw 100 faces in the email," Mr. Wetherell says.

Microsoft Corp.'s Outlook offers a standard template that users can elect to get a warning if they try to email to more than 50 people.   Google offers an Undo Send button in Gmail, which works for Reply All emails, too. You enable it by setting a delay in your out-bound emails, from five to 30 seconds. If you don't realize your mistake in time, you're out of luck.

  Helen Georgaklis wishes there had been a warning for one of her colleagues at a financial firm where she used to work. She was helping prospective clients, a couple from her church, refinance their home, and she introduced them to the colleague via email. His Reply All response? She recalls it was something like, "Thank you sexy Helen. I'm sure that all your male clients love working with you because you are so hot." 

Right away, the husband replied to say he was uncomfortable with the content of the email. The colleague apologized profusely to her and her clients. They continued with the mortgage refinancing, but after it was done, the clients shunned Ms. Georgaklis at church. Her working relationship with her colleague chilled.

"The damage was done," says Ms. Georgaklis, 44, who lives in Montreal and founded a self-help book series. 

There's an even bigger Reply All mishap: the email storm. It starts with an email sent accidentally to the wrong distribution list. Then everyone starts furiously replying to all. 

Some email storms have lasted so long—overloading servers with hundreds of thousands of emails—that at least one company, TV-ratings provider Nielsen Co., has disconnected the "Reply to All" button from its system.

In 1997, Microsoft weathered a storm involving an estimated 15 million emails. A 2007 email storm at the U.S Department of Homeland Security clogged the system with millions of emails.

Mr. Cochran, the advertising creative director, couldn't sleep the night after his Reply All disaster. His "apology tour" began the next day. On the phone and in person, he said he was sorry to each colleague he named. 

"A lot of people just laughed, and a few said they felt sorry for me that I had to endure the finger-pointing," he says. "I think a lot of people felt, 'Man, I am glad I didn't do that, because that's a lot of crow to eat,' " says  Christopher Smith, 38, another creative director at the agency.

The ribbing went on for weeks. Mr. Cochran's email went viral inside the agency minutes after it was sent. Co-workers sent their own Reply All retorts. Some called Mr. Cochran an idiot, some pretended to insult others and then asked, "Uh-oh, did I send that to all?"

"His name became synonymous with idiotic behavior, such as 'Don't pull a Cochran,' " says Ms. Mayes, 35, the copywriter who alerted him to his gaffe.

Mr. Cochran had to face his colleagues in the weekly creative meetings. One of his early ad ideas was to have a young girl who tries to stop people from reading an email where she lists the boys she thinks are cute. 

In an ad that Bridgestone eventually chose to run during the 2011 Super Bowl—a spot Mr. Cochran and his creative partner called "Reply All"—a man frantically drives around town, running into offices and ripping out computers and snatching Blackberrys from people's hands to keep them from reading his email.

Mr. Cochran had lots of time to reflect on ways to avoid repeating his mistake. "I felt awkward right up to the final presentation, where I had to tell the people at Bridgestone that this was based on a true story," he recalls. "Everyone who was named in that email was in the room with me." 

His advice: Move your Reply All button as far from the Reply button as possible. "And now I certainly gut-check what I want to say about someone before I put it in an email."

—Follow this column at www.Facebook.com/EBernsteinWSJ.

 Write to  Elizabeth Bernstein at Bonds@wsj.com 