FRANKFURT—Germany's labor market faltered unexpectedly in December as the early onset of winter hit hiring in the construction sector, the Federal Labor Office reported Tuesday. 

The seasonally adjusted number of unemployed rose by 3,000, instead of the 13,000 fall expected by economists polled ahead of time by Dow Jones Newswires. The Labor Office also revised November's figures marginally to show a decline of only 8,000, instead of the 9,000 originally reported. 

Analysts said the figures are likely to be a blip, and that joblessness would fall again as the economic recovery continues. Germany's economy is expected to grow by around 2% this year. 

"The economic dynamic is unbroken and we would expect further progress on the labor market this year," said  Eckhart Tuchfeld, an economist with Commerzbank in Frankfurt. 

The weather pushed the unadjusted number of people out of work back above 3 million, reaching 3.016 million, or 7.2% of the workforce. In November, joblessness had fallen to an 18-year low, as Europe's largest economy recorded a remarkable comeback from its worst recession since World War II. In seasonally adjusted terms, the jobless rate remained unchanged from November at 7.5%. 

Over the whole of 2010, unemployment averaged 3.244 million, or 7.7% of the workforce. The federal government expects it to fall to 3 million this year, a forecast that Labor Office head  Frank-Jürgen Weise said was "realistic ... but it won't be much better than that." 

Parts of German industry are already urging the government to relax immigration rules in order to address emerging skill shortages in the country. Commerzbank's Mr. Tuchtfeld noted that the engineering and health-care sectors are particularly short of workers, due partly to Germany's well-documented demographic problems. 

However, the three-party ruling coalition in Berlin is divided on the issue, with the business-friendly Free Democrats supporting looser rules and the conservative Bavarian Christian Social Union opposing them. According to the Labor Office, 15% of foreign workers living in Germany were unemployed in 2010, compared to a rate of 6.5% for the local population. 

The Federal Labor Office's Mr. Weise said that "demand for labor remains high." The seasonally-adjusted number of vacancies rose by 10,000 in December. According to the Federal Statistics Office, Destatis, the average number of people employed in Germany rose by 432,000 last year to 40.92 million, the highest in the 20 years since reunification. 

Germany generally pays its unemployment bill through an insurance system which levies premiums off employers and employees to pay for benefits and job training. The unexpectedly strong economic rebound in 2010 meant that the deficit in this scheme was only €8.19 billion ($10.93 billion), instead of the €17.9 billion originally forecast. Consequently, the federal government needed to transfer only €5.25 billion to cover the scheme's deficit. 

This year, the Labor Office expects a shortfall of €5.4 billion, which will need to be covered in full from the budget, as the Labor Office drew down all of its reserves last year. In contrast to last year, the government will no longer make outright transfers to the Labor Office, but rather give it an interest-free loan. 

Meanwhile, Germany's gross domestic product is likely to grow 2.2% in 2011 and 1.3% in 2012, the Berlin-based DIW economic research institute said Tuesday. 

DIW economist  Ferdinand Fichtner said the rate is likely to be significantly below growth in 2010, which the DIW predicts reached 3.7%. That points to a sustained though moderate recovery for the German economy, with unemployment hovering just over three million this year, the DIW said. 

DIW president  Klaus F. Zimmerman said the biggest factor in the euro zone's continued recovery is how officials handle the debt crisis. He said European leaders missed an opportunity last month when they outlined plans to create a permanent crisis fund. 

"The regulations for future participation of banks and savings actions are not clear enough," Mr. Zimmerman said. "That will prompt continued uncertainty on financial markets, accompanied by negative consequences for the affected countries and the broader euro zone." 

 Write to  Geoffrey T. Smith at geoffrey.smith@dowjones.com 