Gentlemen, you may have the winter blues, but are you ready for winter pinks?

Start bracing yourself. Next fall, stores may be carrying some very colorful overcoats, thanks to designer labels such as Bottega Veneta, Burberry and Jil Sander. They were among the brands who showed wool and cashmere overcoats in vivid colors such as cherry red, Fanta orange and Pepto-Bismol pink during the men's fall/winter 2011 collections in Milan and Paris this month.

As shocking as the pinks may be, the coats fit in with a series of recent efforts by the menswear industry to push men out of their color comfort zones. In recent years, American men—long a staid lot when it comes to style—have responded positively to designers' promptings to put more color into their wardrobes. There was a colorful-striped-shirt craze in 2004, and orange, lilac and cobalt blue showed up on sweaters, shirts and sport coats last spring. Blinding, multicolored plaid shirts have been popular for more than a year, and this spring, some in the fashion industry are pushing colored pants.

Still, dressy coats are a new frontier. Overcoats have long been a color-free zone for men, going no brighter than camel. 

It's not at all clear that American guys will warm up to bright overcoats if menswear designers choose to show them during New York fashion week next month.

Of course, these coats appeared on European runways first precisely because European men tend to be more open to colorful clothes. Continental men have long worn dress shirts, pants, jackets and accessories in a wide range of colors, as well as the recent wave of bright-colored cotton and linen pants. 

Retailers hope that colorful coats will inspire men to shop because they don't already have such items in their wardrobes. 

"It's always color that draws a person to a rack," says Eric Jennings, men's fashion director at Saks Fifth Avenue in New York City. He adds that the retailer plans to carry some of the colored outerwear—"especially in our contemporary zone," which is aimed more at a customer who is very into fashion. Also, some of the brightest colors—like other extreme runway looks—could be somewhat toned down by the time they make it to stores. 

Bottega Veneta called the colors it used in its fall 2011 men's show "vivid sapphire, peridot, orange resina and a fiery red called corniola."

 Write to  Ray A. Smith at ray.smith@wsj.com 