The Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco has elevated its top economist, John Williams, to be its new president. 

The selection, announced Tuesday, concluded an extended search to replace Janet Yellen, who left last year to become the Federal Reserve Board's vice chairman in Washington. 

Mr. Williams, 48, ran the San Francisco Fed's research department, and has sometimes taken positions that are controversial among his colleagues or with the public. 

In recent years he has teamed up with a conservative critic of the central bank to raise questions about the effectiveness of one of its programs. He has also raised the idea that the Fed might be better off seeking inflation higher than its present 2% goal.

—Jon Hilsenrath

California's attorney general has asked a federal appeals court to allow gay marriages to resume while the court considers the constitutionality of the state's voter-approved ban on same-sex unions.

Attorney General Kamala Harris submitted a petition to the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals on Tuesday.

The appeals court is considering the case after a judge struck down the ban last year. The court imposed a stay on that ruling during the appeals process.

In Tuesday's petition, Mr. Harris joined lawyers for the two gay couples who sued to overturn the ban in asking the court to lift the stay. 

—Associated Press

 House Oversight Committee Chairman Darrell Issa said Tuesday he fired his spokesman after discovering he had shared emails he received from reporters with a another journalist. 

Mr. Issa (R., Calif.) said in a statement he had dismissed Kurt Bardella after Politico reported that Mr. Bardella had passed his emails with reporters to Mark Leibovich, a New York Times journalist writing a book about Washington culture. who has been on leave from the New York Times since December.

Mr. Bardella did not respond to requests for comment. Mr. Leibovich and a New York Times spokewoman said they would not discuss dealings with sources. 

—Mr. Issa said he had concluded that his spokesman's actions were "highly inappropriate, a basic breach of trust with the reporters it was his job to assist, and inconsistent with established communications office policies."Louise Radnofsky

In what may be a last-ditch effort to save its fading season, the Striking musicians of the Detroit Symphony Orchestra voted to return to work without a contract Tuesday if management agrees to enter into binding arbitration. 

The musicians agreed to work under the conditions management has imposed while continuing negotiations, musician spokesman Greg Bowens said. 

"It was a gut-wrenching decision," he said. "We'll see if management accepts the hand of friendship or slaps us in the face instead."

DSO management had no comment on whether it would accept the terms and reinstate the remaining performances it had suspended. 

"We're very encouraged by today's unanticipated announcement and welcome receiving the union's proposal so we can discuss the details under which the musicians would return to work," DSO spokeswoman Elizabeth Weigandt said in a statement.

 The musicians have been on strike since October after DSO management asked for hefty pay cuts amid the organization's growing deficit. The DSO, hurt by a loss of donations and attendance as the Michigan economy works to recover, estimates it will be broke in two years if it doesn't curtail costs. 

—Jeff Bennett

The Army plans to toughen its fitness tests for the first time in 30 years to make sure all soldiers have the strength, endurance and mobility for battle, adding exercises like running an obstacle course in full combat gear and dragging a body's weight.

Officials at Fort Jackson, a major Army training center, said Tuesday the new regimen would replace twice-a-year testing that focused on push-ups, sit-ups and a two-mile run. Trials are starting this month at eight bases and the plan could be adopted Army-wide after reviews later this year.

The shift follows other Army efforts to overhaul training, improve diets and help older soldiers keep fit.

Lt. Gen. Mark Hertling, the head of Army training, said the fitness test had to be revamped because repetitive exercises like sit-ups don't translate into survival on the battlefield.

—Associated Press

The Labor Department has fined three movie-theater companies a total of $277,000 for allowing workers under 16 to perform dangerous jobs and work long hours in violation of child-labor laws.

The theaters have paid the fines and agreed to set up compliance programs.

Regal Cinemas Inc., of Knoxville, Tenn., received the largest fine, of $158,000, for employing minors to load and operate trash compactors.

Milwaukee-based Marcus Theatres Corp. was fined $94,000 similar violations. The Labor Department said that the company also allowed minors to work beyond the hours permitted under federal law.

Wehrenberg Inc., of St. Louis, was fined $25,000 for allowing minors to run trash compactors and operate motor vehicles.

—Associated Press