Six years after opening his downtown eatery Freemans, restaurateur and arbiter of cool Taavo Somer is taking the zeitgeist back by storm with the first look book for his men's haberdashery shop, Freemans Sporting Club. Shot by multimedia artist Tim Barber, the tongue-in-cheek images, which show the brand's duds on models, flaunt Mr. Somer's latest collection of utilitarian-hip menswear while winking at certain Manhattan archetypes (Urban woodsman! Neo-locavore! Sartorial soccer dad!). The look book is also being sold as playing cards and a wall calendar. But Mr. Somer, a former architect who was raised in rural Pennsylvania and has been dubbed "the patron saint of hipsters" by the New York media, is set on relinquishing his title along with the ubiquitous plaid trend this spring. "There's something happening with coral and washed out magenta," he notes. (Downtown dandies, listen up.) Next up? Fresh off the heels of opening his second Bowery canteen, Peels, Mr. Somer plans to decamp to Brooklyn where he will whittle his own line of salvaged wood furniture. Somewhere Daniel Boone is smiling…

 I  f I could own one article of clothing, it would be an overcoat from Greenfield, a company based in Brooklyn. It's 100% cashmere and Gore-Tex so it's wind-proof and water-resistant. Raincoats have to keep you dry, which sounds basic, but I can't tell you how many I've worn that don't. 

 My style icons are David Lynch, Elvis Costello, Julian Schnabel and Jeff Bridges in "The Big Lebowski." I also love that designer with the floppy bow tie [Alber Elbaz]. He looks like a sad clown from the 1930s.

 I call my uniform today tweed vomit. The jacket is from Harris Tweed, which is made on an island off the coast of Scotland. The wool comes from sheep that are on the island and is typically woven by men. I don't like shopping so I wear the same clothes for about a week or two.

 I don't wear accessories but I love cologne. Right now I'm wearing Patchouli from Santa Maria Novella. My three grooming tips for men: wear cologne, don't wash your hair every day and use your own moisturizer. My wife gets mad when I steal hers. 

 It's a popular answer but I love the Hotel Costes in Paris. It has the most genius lobby. The courtyard transitions from breakfast to lunch meetings and into a scene at night. It's amazing to see the whole spectrum of Paris throughout the day and the owner is such a maniacal proprietor. After all these years he's still straightening out the forks. I'm sure someone gets fired if a chair is out of place.

 Our refrigerator upstate usually has Irish butter and cheese. I love the Cabot cloth-bound cave-aged cheddar, which we use at Freemans and Peels. 

 It's not on the menu but my favorite thing at Freemans is the vegetarian sandwich with chicken. It's made with radicchio, cave-aged cheddar, apple and vinegar dressing. If you ask, they'll make it. 

 When I'm not eating at Freemans I like Il Buco and Balthazar. Fifty percent of the time I eat by myself and their bars are great for solo dining. I also used to eat at Blue Ribbon and Florent late night, but now I'm normally in bed by ten.

 My favorite shop is New York Velo. They're the least bike-shoppy. The thing about bike shops is that no matter what city you're in, the staff is always highly judgmental of which album you bought or the kind of bike you own. Like, "You want those pedals?" Here, they're not like that at all. 

 Whenever I visit a city, I'll go to at least one dive bar. Tosca in San Francisco is amazing. It's this really beautiful space with old oil paintings and one bartender who wears a white dinner jacket and makes really good drinks. 

 I get around the city on my custom-made bike for Freemans Sporting Club. I started with a Surly frame and added white tires, which are hard to find. 

 The most helpful tools I own are Surefire flashlights because they always come in handy, and my Blackberry Bold. 

 But I'm not techie. I killed myself on Facebook. The only reason I was on in the first place was because a friend created a fake account of me and was writing embarrassing things. It took a year to convince Facebook that it wasn't me. 

 On my nightstand is Pete Nelson's book, "Treehouses of the World." When I was a kid, my dad built us a treehouse. My mother taught German and called it a "spielplatz," which means play place.

 In a world of copycats, the true originals are Keith McNally [Pastis, Balthazar, Morandi] and Andre Balazs [The Standard, Mercer Hotel]. They make places that are instantly popular but that also have longevity. Another one who is bucking the trend is Cesar Ramirez of Brooklyn Fare. He chooses ingredients based on how they taste, not whether or not they're local.

 The only place I'd call to make a reservation is '21' Club. New York churns and burns through places. With all the finicky customers, bloggers and trends, the fact that '21' Club has been able to survive is a big reason why we go there. It's amazing that after all these years it has weathered through. 

—Edited from an interview by Nicole Berrie 