SACRAMENTO, Calif.—Jerry Brown, sworn in Monday for an unprecedented third term as California's governor, said in a generally somber inaugural address that he would propose a "painful" budget next week in order to help solve the state's financial woes.

The Democrat said he would stick to his campaign promises: no one-time, "smoke and mirror" solutions to budget gaps and no new taxes without voter approval.

"This is a time to honestly assess our situation and make tough choices," said Mr. Brown, who inherits a $28 billion budget gap through June 2012 from departing Republican Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger and the California legislature. Mr. Brown has said there would be budget cuts ahead.

The new governor said he would protect school spending and called on the Democrats and Republicans in the oft-gridlocked state legislature to work together. "At this stage of my life, I have not come here to embrace delay and denial," said Mr. Brown, 72 years old.

Breaking legislative stalemates may be difficult. Even Mr. Schwarzenegger, whom many Democrats and Republicans considered a nonpartisan leader, was unable to do so. Part of the problem was the budget gaps, which totaled $90 billion over the past two years. 

Democrats have resisted major spending cuts, while Republicans say they will fight any tax increase. The California Assembly Republican leader, Connie Conway, said in a statement she hoped Mr. Brown would push for spending control "instead of tax hikes to fund more of the same government that led to this budget crisis." 

Mr. Brown is the son of the late former Gov. Pat Brown. He first became governor in his own right in 1975, when the Golden State economy was as vibrant as his wave of brown hair.

"I get to follow in my father's footsteps once again," he said in his speech. "And 36 years after my first inauguration as governor, even follow in my own."

Much has changed between the tenures of Mr. Brown, who held the governor's post before term limits were instituted. 

State leaders lost flexibility on budget matters because of a property-tax cap and other voter-approved measures. The state's economy, once the envy of other states, has become the butt of jokes. 

And Mr. Brown, whose few remaining hairs have gone white, molded himself into a more centrist politician after stints as Oakland mayor's and state attorney general.

But some things are still the same. Mr. Brown presents himself as a tightwad—a campaign ad last year touted his sales of the state mansion and limousine during his first tenure. 

On Monday, he eschewed inaugural balls and planned to attend a private reception at a railroad museum after a labor union held a hot dogs-and-potato chips party for him on the Capitol lawn.

In a speech that was fiery at times, Mr. Brown also flashed the wit and the off-the-cuff style that defined his campaign. After introducing his 99-year-old aunt in the audience, he delivered a message for those entertaining ideas about succeeding him.

"By the way, for those who might be hankering after my job, it might be awhile, so relax," he said. "The genes are good."

 Write to  Stu Woo at Stu.Woo@wsj.com 