If you've turned up your nose at the likes of barley, wheat berries or the unappetizingly-named spelt because of their reputation for being the stuff of hippies or health-nuts, you've been missing out on an entire category of good eating.

Greek-born food journalist Maria Speck, who now lives and teaches cooking classes in Cambridge, Mass., shines a light on these misunderstood ingredients in her new book "Ancient Grains for Modern Meals."

The volume of Mediterranean-influenced recipes will inspire you to stock up on whole wheat flour (for fig muffins stuffed with honeyed goat cheese) and bulgur (to be flecked with butter-roasted almonds and cinnamon) or—gasp!—spelt (the base for a pizza crust that's topped with fennel, prosciutto and apples). $30, randomhouse.com 

A chocolate maker transforms the raw cacao bean into the silky stuff that we know as edible chocolate; a chocolatier goes a step further, using that same tasty chocolate as a base and carefully blending it with compatible strains or additional flavorings to create something new. Sebastian Cisneros falls into the latter camp.

His line of chocolate bars, Cocanú, features complex combinations of spices. The spicy Picasso infuses a rare raw, dark strain made by Picari in Mr. Cisneros's homeland of Ecuador, with cayenne and smoked paprika.

Then, there's the Othello, which starts sweet with a wonderful white chocolate from Venezuelan producer El Ray, and "for the tragic finish," Mr. Cisneros says, hits you with coffee from Coava, a micro roastery in Portland, Ore., where he currently resides. From $4 per bar, cocanu.com 

When Massachusetts resident J.D. Sethi set out to bring a taste of his native India home, he did some serious marketing research. He asked his American friends what their go-to item is on Indian menus. The overwhelming response: Lassi.

He and his wife Geetu, a microbiologist, spent a year developing an authentic version of their native land's healthy, yogurty drink that could remain stable on grocery shelves (it holds up for 50 days). Their Dahlicious quenchers are made on a farm in Vermont.

The milk comes from the property's 150 grass-fed, BST-free cows, and the culture cocktail comprises five bacteria; it's the same combination used in India and accounts for the distinct sour, earthy character of these refreshing sippers. The only other enhancers are the fruits that define each flavor—blueberry, mango, strawberry and banana—and, except for that last which is so sweet it requires none, organic cane sugar. $2, dahlicious.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications 

The milk for DAHlicious lassi smoothies comes from cows free of bovine somatotropin, or BST. A previous version of this article incorrectly said that the cows were BFT-free. 

—Charlotte Druckman