LISBON—As Europe's debt crisis has engulfed Portugal, politicians on the right and left of the country's spectrum have shown remarkable unity in defending Portuguese finances and rejecting a bailout.

Now, that political camaraderie is splintering ahead of a national vote on Sunday for Portugal's president—one that threatens to reopen traditional rifts between the ruling Socialist Party, on the left, and the center-right Social Democrat Party.

The vote is largely ceremonial: Portugal's president is head of state but doesn't run the government. The incumbent, Social Democrat Anibal Cavaco Silva, is widely expected to be re-elected.

Even so, Sunday's election is important because the president has the power to dissolve Parliament and call a general political election—something Mr. Silva has hinted might happen. 

Mr. Silva and other Social Democrats seek to push their advantage against the Socialists, led by Prime Minister José Sócrates—pushing hard enough for political gains, but not so hard as to suggest an atmosphere of broader political instability.

Pedro Passos Coelho, leader of the Social Democrats, has ended his yearlong cease-fire with the prime minister and is going on the attack. Mr. Coelho is accusing Mr. Sócrates's Socialist administration of failing to implement spending cuts and other austerity measures, effectively putting Portugal dangerously close to asking the European Union and International Monetary Fund for a bailout. The prime minister has said Portugal doesn't need outside help to square off its finances.

"If the IMF enters Portugal, the current government will have to step down," Mr. Coelho, 46, recently said on local radio TSF. Mr. Coelho's attacks could hurt Mr. Sócrates's efforts to restore Portugal's credibility on debt markets and push the country into deeper financial pain. 

High interest rates paid by Portugal to finance its large public debt have fueled concerns that the country will be next, after Greece and Ireland, to seek a bailout. Last week, Portugal succeeded in selling €1.25 billion ($1.68 billion) of government bonds, but economists said the interest rate demanded by investors on 10-year notes, at 6.72%, remained close to levels deemed unsustainable.

That is why analysts expect Mr. Coelho to be careful in not lashing out too publicly against the government, lest he destabilize Portugal's already delicate standing in the markets. "He does not want to be seen as a cause of instability," said João César das Neves, an economist at the Catholic Portuguese University in Lisbon.

Last year, Mr Sócrates's government said it would cut the budget deficit to 4.6% of gross domestic product this year, from an estimated 7.3% in 2010.

At the time, Mr. Coelho's Social Democrats vowed to help the government's efforts. Mr. Sócrates's Socialists alone don't have a majority in Parliament. With Communists and other leftist parties refusing to support his austerity drive, Mr. Sócrates sought support from Social Democrats to pass budget-reduction measures, including an increase in sales tax, a freeze of pension payouts and cuts in civil-servant remunerations. In a sign of goodwill, Social Democrats abstained when Mr. Sócrates presented his 2011 budget, allowing for it to pass in November.

But as the presidential campaign has gone into full swing this month, traditional rifts have reappeared. "We have helped Mr. Sócrates's government get all the necessary tools to govern, including a budget," says Carlos Moedas, adviser to Mr. Coelho on economy issues. "Now, it's his turn to act."

The Socialist Party has urged Social Democrats to remain supportive of Mr. Socrates at a time when the country was facing tough economic challenges.

Mr. Silva, the outgoing president, is ahead in recent opinion polls with about 60% of projected votes. His main challenger, Socialist Party candidate Mañuel Alegre, is a distant second in polls, with 15% to 30%.

During the campaign, Mr. Silva hasn't been outspoken about his plans regarding Parliament. But he did say that he couldn't rule out that Portugal might get drawn into a "deep political crisis"—which some analysts have taken to mean a general election is near.

"At this moment, to be in government is horrible," said Mr. César das Neves, the Lisbon economist.

 Write to  David Gauthier-Villars at David.Gauthier-Villars@wsj.com and Alex MacDonald at alex.macdonald@dowjones.com 