The $3.8 billion spent by the U.S. government to map the human genome spurred the creation of tens of thousands of jobs and gave rise to an industry that—while slow to deliver medical breakthroughs—now generates about $67 billion in annual economic activity, according to a new study.

The genome-sequencing project triggered many novel types of economic activity, the report said, from the manufacture of sequencing machines and other instruments to the devising of genetic test kits and diagnostic materials used for lab experiments. 

The investment also produced significant economic returns in the form of tax revenues and personal income, according to the study. 

The Human Genome Project, funding for which began in 1988, was an international undertaking led by the U.S. that identified the three billion letters of chemical code of human DNA, and mapped 21,000 or so genes. A private company, Celera Corp., undertook a parallel effort.

Scientists hoped the rival projects would lead to faster diagnosis of disease as well as improved treatments. But several key benefits—such as drugs tailored to a specific patient's DNA—have been slow to materialize. And the links between genes, disease and putative treatments have turned out to be more complicated than expected, undercutting some of the promises made by scientists when the genome map was first published.

Nonetheless, the Human Genome Project, of which a full draft was completed in 2003, kick-started a new life-sciences industry with a growing economic impact, according to the report by Battelle Memorial Institute, a nonprofit that carries out scientific research.

"One surprise is that the genome-based industry that exists today is larger than we expected," said Simon Tripp, an economist at Battelle who co-authored the report, which was funded by Life Technologies Corp., a biotechnology firm in Carlsbad, Calif.

Using data from the study, energy companies such as Exxon-Mobil, BP and Shell are researching the genomics of biofuels, while biotech firms are using plants' genomic data to produce plant varieties with high biomass or specialized oil content. Pharmaceutical companies are using genetic data to fit drugs and their dose to the genomic profile of individual patients. 

In a time of high unemployment and amid a fierce debate over the government's role in creating jobs, science-based institutions and corporations are increasingly keen to showcase the benefits of medical-research funding on the American economy. 

Such moves are also prompted by tightening research budgets and worries about America's competitiveness in science-related fields. A report released in December indicated that China was on the verge of overtaking Japan as the second-biggest spender on all research and development after the U.S.

Federal support has always played a big role in the U.S. life-sciences sector. Of the $3.8 billion federal funding for the human-genome project, $2.8 billion originated at the U.S. National Institutes of Health, and the rest at the Department of Energy.

That $3.8 billion, along with subsequent capital provided by the government and the private sector, generated a total return of roughly $49 billion in direct and indirect federal tax revenues over the last two decades or so. (The $3.8 billion is worth about $5.6 billion in constant 2010 dollars.)

Over the same period, those initial investments also helped to drive $796 billion in direct and indirect economic output and generate $244 billion in total personal income, according to Battelle's calculations.

For its 23-year study, Battelle used an economic modeling approach known as input-output analysis. It measured the direct impact on the national economy from the genome project and follow-on federal research investments, plus the activities of the genomics-enabled industry sectors. 

Also included was the indirect economic impact—or ripple effects—of these activities by calculating the subsequent spending of suppliers, and what their employees spend in the overall economy.

In 2003, for example, the NIH and DOE together invested $437 million in the Human Genome Project. That directly led to $552.9 million in economic activity, the creation of 5,025 jobs and $51 million in federal tax revenue. When the ripple effect is included, the impact was greater: $1.65 billion of economic output, 12,422 jobs created, and $125.5 million in federal tax revenue.

"The $3.8 billion from the federal government wasn't the only capital that went in to the genomics industry but it was foundational. It drove other spending," said Mr. Tripp of Battelle. 

In 2010 alone, the genomics-enabled industry supported 310,000 jobs. Most were created in the private sector.

A separate report has found that spending by the National Institutes of Health directly and indirectly supported nearly 488,000 jobs and produced $68 billion in new economic activity in 2010.

The report, by economist Everett Ehrlich, notes the traditional role of the NIH in backing life-science research. About 83% of the agency's $30 billion annual budget goes to funding the work of non-NIH researchers.

According to Mr. Ehrlich's report, NIH investment in 2010 helped create 487,900 U.S. jobs. It cited past analysis showing that "NIH funding has consistently generated positive returns that are strongly complementary with private investment, rather than an obstacle to it."

The NIH report was released by United for Medical Research, an advocacy group.

 Write to  Gautam Naik at gautam.naik@wsj.com 