The North Atlantic Treaty Organization ended days of bickering and agreed to take over command of the no-fly zone over Libya. For now, the U.S., France and U.K. will continue to lead the riskier task of trying to drive back ground forces loyal to Col. Moammar Gadhafi.

The setup creates at least a temporary split-command structure in the skies above Libya, an arrangement U.S. military staff say raises hazards for allied forces. It is a potential problem, too, for President Barack Obama, who described the Libya intervention to the public as one in which the U.S. military would quickly take a back seat to America's allies.

Allied forces pushed ahead with both facets of the air campaign Thursday, hitting a Libyan jet that had ventured into the air. The U.S. military says the no-fly zone now extends across the Libyan coast, and as far south as Sabha, which is about 480 miles south of Tripoli.

But the strikes on Col. Gadhafi's ground forces have failed to loosen their siege of the key western city of Misrata, driving some residents to flee to the coast at the city's northern tip.

Libya was only the most active battleground Thursday in uprisings that continued to sweep through the Arab world. Yemen's president, a counterterrorism ally of the U.S., discussed a deal to resign within days to end an armed standoff with forces loyal to a top general in the streets of the capital.

In Syria, an ally of Iran that is the latest Arab regime to see protests flare, the hardline government scrambled to tamp down their biggest challenge in years. And the kingdom of Bahrain, a U.S. ally, warned Iran that escalated criticism of the ruling family's decision to use force to crack down on protesters could lead to "conflict."

U.S. officials said the authority for NATO to execute the implementation of the no-fly zone has been put into effect immediately. They said the final details for NATO to pursue more aggressive actions to protect Libyan citizens would be completed over the weekend. "This is a major step forward," said a senior official.

Track the latest events in Libya.

Although the conflict is still in its early days, disquiet is growing among U.S. lawmakers of both parties who have criticized the White House for the seemingly open-ended nature of the military mission. Any fresh hiccup in extricating the U.S. from a command position could exacerbate the administration's domestic political troubles.

On Thursday, the White House agreed to dispatch top administration officials to Capitol Hill next week, when lawmakers return from a short recess, in a bid to wrest control of the debate.

NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen said in Brussels that while a deal had been struck that would put NATO in command of the no-fly zone, the alliance was still discussing whether to assume command of operations such as those that are now targeting Libyan ground forces. Diplomats at NATO said Turkey had opposed the allied involvement in attacks on Libyan forces.

U.S. officials said late Thursday that Secretary of State Hillary Clinton had engaged in extensive negotiations with Turkish, British, French and other officials over the previous 24 hours to get NATO agreement to command both the no-fly and ground-attack operations.

Mrs. Clinton said significant advances have been made against Col. Gadhafi and that the "coalition is in control of the skies over Libya." She also said that humanitarian efforts have picked up, with the U.S. sending 18 doctors and nurses to the city of Benghazi.

U.S. officials and former military staff, however, said the split command structure will pose challenges for the Pentagon and the Obama administration unless it is unified in the coming days.

In Misrata, Libya's third-largest city, the infiltration of Col. Gadhafi's fighters appeared to show the limits of air power in routing ground forces.

A doctor with the rebels said that while coalition airstrikes had offered some reprieve from their shelling of the city, Col. Gadhafi's forces still held positions to the city's east, west and south, controlled a main thoroughfare, and had snipers on rooftops inside the city.

See some key dates in Col. Gadhafi's nearly 42-year reign.

Track daily events in Middle Eastern countries.

"They are terrorizing people," said the doctor. Of the city's 400,000 people, 70,000 live in the city center, according to the Libyan government.

U.S. Vice Adm. William Gortney, director of the U.S. Joint Staff, said allied aircraft would stop short of striking inside cities for fear of causing civilian casualties.

Adm. Gortney said aircraft were hitting regime forces outside Misrata, as well as outside Zintan and Ajdabiya.

"If you can work on their supply lines, their logistics capability, cut them off, they're not going to be able to sustain their efforts inside the city," he said.

Asked if that approach would be enough to stop Col. Gadhafi's forces, Adm. Gortney said, "We are working on achieving that goal as hard as we possibly can, meeting the constraints of, once again, the collateral damage concerns if we went inside the city." 

A U.S. military official said the situation in Misrata, which is 125 miles east of the capital, was "deteriorating."

Adm. Gortney said the U.S. Africa Command, the Stuttgart-based military headquarters currently overseeing operations, was "working with our international partners and nongovernmental agencies out there on the humanitarian-assistance mission—on the planning for that mission."

Libyan officials said coalition strikes have claimed innocent lives; Adm. Gortney said "the only civilian casualties we know are for certain are the ones that the Libyan government itself has caused."

Meanwhile, the United Arab Emirates said it will send 12 fighter aircraft to help enforce the no-fly zone. The U.A.E.'s decision marked the most significant contribution from an Arab state to the mission.

Abu Dhabi's decision followed extensive consultations between the Obama administration and the U.A.E. in recent days, as Washington has sought significantly enhanced Arab support for military action authorized last week by the United Nations, according to American and Emirati officials.

The U.A.E. initially voiced reservations about engaging in anything beyond humanitarian relief efforts in Libya, in part because of a dispute with Washington over the U.S.'s response to the political crisis in Bahrain.

Qatar has committed to deploying two fighters, plus transport aircraft, to help enforce the no-fly zone. British Prime Minister David Cameron told Parliament that Kuwait and Jordan are providing logistical capabilities to the Libya operation.

Turkey's parliament on Thursday approved sending ships to join a NATO operation to enforce a U.N.-sanctioned arms embargo, though the Turkish government has criticized the air raids.

Russia's former ambassador to Libya, who has met frequently with Col. Gadhafi in recent weeks, said the Libyan leader is surrounded by aides willing to fight with him to the end but can't hold off Western-led forces for more than a few months because of dwindling supplies of food and fuel.

—Alistair MacDonald contributed to this article.

 Write to  Sam Dagher at sam.dagher@wsj.com and Stephen Fidler at stephen.fidler@wsj.com 