It was just this past Monday that National Public Radio President Vivian Schiller was asked how current efforts to cut off her organization from federal funding differed from past attempts. "It's the deficit," she said, just before renewing her claim that NPR couldn't maintain its standards without taxpayer largesse.

Two days later, Ms. Schiller's sales pitch lies in ruin and she's out of a job. This morning she was forced to resign from her position after the latest in a series of scandals that tarnished NPR's image. Last month, conservative provocateur James O'Keefe conducted a video ambush of two NPR executives. He lured them to a Washington, D.C., restaurant for a meeting with two of his employees who were posing as Muslim philanthropists hoping to donate $5 million to the organization.

Ron Schiller (who is not related to Vivian Schiller) and Betsy Liley, two top fund-raising executives at NPR, were caught on camera confirming all of the stereotypes about NPR as a shop full of left-wing elites. Mr. Schiller lashed out at the tea party as "white, middle America, gun-toting—it's pretty scary. They're seriously racist, racist people." He also compared climate-change skeptics to flat-earth believers and praised his employer for terminating analyst Juan Williams last year. But the most damaging comment was Mr. Schiller's admission that "it is clear that we would be better off in the long run without federal funding."

NPR scrambled to do damage control after the video hit the Internet, calling the views expressed on it "appalling." Mr. Schiller resigned and Ms. Liley was placed on "administrative leave." NPR also emphasized that it had taken no money from the would-be Muslim givers.

But it may be too little too late. Republican House Majority Leader Eric Cantor released a statement saying that "top public broadcasting executives finally admitted that they do not need taxpayer dollars to survive" and that "when our government borrows 40 cents of every dollar that it spends, we must find ways to cut spending and live within our means." Look for Republicans to dig in their heels and insist on NPR defunding, and don't be surprised if some Democrats join them.

Mr. O'Keefe's war on NPR may not be over. His video sting was clearly labeled as "Part I" of an ongoing investigation. Recall that when he brought down the liberal activist group ACORN in 2009, it was with a series of videos that he released bit by bit until the credibility of the organization was shredded. Perhaps Ms. Schiller was forced out in part because NPR officials realized that Mr. O'Keefe wasn't finished releasing material.

To read more stories like this one, please subscribe to Political Diary.