When they were little girls in Iceland, the Leifsdóttir sisters used to hang out in the basement of their grandmother's house with their uncle, Ragnar Kjartansson. Visiting there meant obeying his rules: Don't touch his gelled Elvis hairdo, keep their fingers off his Beatles records and listen closely while he smoked a pipe and expounded on the ways of the world.

In the years since then, Mr. Kjartansson has risen to become an internationally recognized artist, a discovery of the 2009 Venice Biennale exhibition. But he still finds time to boss those nieces around. In his first-ever U.S. solo museum show that started this week at the Carnegie Museum of Art in Pittsburgh, the women are bringing to life a vision he dubs his "singing sculpture."

The exhibit, "Ragnar Kjartansson: Song," features the three sisters, now aged 17 to 23, lying on a bed and singing a tune the artist wrote based on a misremembered Allen Ginsberg poem, "Song." Mr. Kjartansson wants them to sing the piece in a loop for six hours a day over three weeks. "Once you start doing a mantra, it's like, no problem," he told the women, by way of advice.

The artist dreamed up the idea for the piece while lying in a hammock in a hippie commune in Poland. He was further inspired when the Carnegie's curator, Dan Byers, sent him images of the museum's Hall of Sculpture, a white marble space modeled on the Parthenon that serves as the backdrop for the work. 

The blonde women are meant to evoke nymphs, wearing diaphanous gowns and taking turns strumming a guitar. The sisters, all aspiring artists, practiced the song in one-hour doses, repeating lyrics such as "The weight of the world is love" until it almost hypnotized them. "This song has been stuck in our heads for the past year," said the eldest, Ragnheidur Harpa Leifsdóttir.

They are ready to sing through hoarse voices, head colds and general boredom. "If one of us is sick, we can lie in the bed, and the other can sing in a graceful way, or hide under the covers," said Rakel Mjöll Leifsdóttir, a 21-year-old music student. 

The exhibit also includes a display of Mr. Kjartansson's video works, including one where his mother spits on him repeatedly over a 10-year time period. "It's, like, super-duper Freudian," he said.

The 35-year-old artist, who lives with his wife and 7-month-old daughter in Reykjavik, has created endurance pieces before. At the Venice Biennale, every day for six months he painted a portrait of an artist friend, who posed in a black bathing suit. They filled a 14th-century palazzo with canvases, beer bottles and cigarette butts. On the last day, they blasted the theme from the movie "Chariots of Fire," while the artist painted his model standing in a victory pose.

The sisters have participated in their uncle's artwork before, including, as kids, performing a tableau vivant while singing a song he wrote called "Rich Bitch." At the last minute, he tried to cut that curse word. But this time, the youngest, Íris María Leifsdóttir, then 6, was the one barking instructions. "No, you can't," she said. "This is an impact word." 

 Write to  Ellen Gamerman at ellen.gamerman@wsj.com 