Q. I have had my home listed on a for-sale-by-owner site for several months. Recently, a real estate agent called me up and said that she had a buyer who was interested in seeing my house. However, she wants me to sign a one-time showing agreement, and also to promise to pay a 3% commission should her clients buy my home. Since she made it clear that she represents the buyers only, I don't know why I should pay that. After all, I am selling my home "by owner" to avoid paying any commissions! Is she justified in asking me for one?

 -- Los Angeles 

A. In real estate, except for certain taxes and fees, everything is negotiable. However, if an agent brings you a buyer, it is customary for you to pay a commission. Although you may be able to bargain it down, often it is half of the prevailing commission rate, which typically runs between 4% and 7%, depending on the area and the price of the home.

For this you get, essentially, nothing, other than someone who can help speed along the inspections, mortgage approvals and other paperwork that accompany any home purchase—at least from the buyer's side. You'll also have someone involved in the process who will not get paid unless the deal goes through, and so who will try to solve any snafus that may arise should, say, the bank balk on an appraisal or her clients suddenly develop buyers' remorse.

Without your own agent, however, you will have to investigate comparable sales to help set a reasonable price; find out essential information about your house, like its square footage and zoning details; prepare your house for showings; arrange for repairmen to fix the problems that are inevitably uncovered during inspections; handle negotiations, and arrange for settlement. 

And because the buyers' agent, though likely to be quite friendly, is not representing you, all the while you will have to be circumspect in what you tell her, because she is obligated to tell her clients any juicy details that might help them wrangle a better deal. Because of this, it's essential that you hire a good attorney to look out for your interests during the escrow and closing process. Although it may be infuriating to have to pay for the services of someone who is actually representing someone else, remember that in a traditional deal, you are doing that anyway.

If you agree to see the agent's clients, don't be surprised if sometime before the showing, the agent shows up at your door with a "one-time showing" agreement. It will identify the clients, set the commission, and legally prevent you from trying to cut the agent out of the deal by negotiating one-on-one with the clients later. That's fair enough if the agent has brought you a buyer, but read the agreement carefully and make sure you understand under what conditions you might owe her a commission. You don't want to be on the hook to pay if, through no fault of your own, the deal falls through.

 Write to June Fletcher at fletcher.june@gmail.com.