FRANKFURT—Germany's economy in 2010 grew at the fastest pace in a generation, but doubts are growing that its export-fueled expansion can defy Europe's widening debt crisis.

Strong demand from China and elsewhere in Asia for German cars, machinery and other goods helped to drive growth of 3.6%, the country's statistics office said Wednesday—the strongest since East and West Germany were reunified in 1991.

Yet some question whether Germany's export- and manufacturing-dependent model can ultimately weather stagnant output in Southern Europe. 

"It's hard to see how those markets are going to be particularly buoyant ones," says  Philip Whyte, economist at the London-based Centre for European Reform. "There's an element of optical illusion about Germany's rebound."

On Wednesday, the World Bank forecast the global economy will grow at a modest3.3% in 2011, with developing countries emerging as a stabilizing force against the riskier outlook for wealthy nations. The bank warned that "serious tensions and pitfalls" remain in the global economy, such as Europe's debt crisis and volatile international capital flows, which "could derail the recovery." 

Germany's robust performance in recent months has lifted other economies in the region, softening the impact of the debt crisis as they put in place deep spending cuts in an effort to restore confidence in their public finances. But the austerity measures will depress the region's already fragile economic outlook, and if Germany's economic fortunes sour, the effects would be felt around Europe.

Fears that the debt crisis will spread from Portugal to much-larger Spain and even deeper into the euro zone have persuaded Europe's leaders to pursue more aggressive measures in combating the crisis. Euro-zone countries have been in talks about a "comprehensive package" of measures,including rules for national economic policies and mutual aid, according to a senior European official. Leaders hope to reach an agreement in the coming weeks.

In some ways, Germany has benefited as Europe's debt crisis has pushed the euro lower, making German goods more competitive abroad. Investor doubts about the region's weakest countries have driven capital into German assets. 

But if Europe's efforts to stem the crisis fall short, Germany's recovery, which came after its worst contraction since World War II, could quickly derail. 

"We have a good German market and a good development in exports outside of Europe, but Europe itself is in a very difficult situation," says  Stefan Kirschsieper, chief executive of Walter Kottmann GmbH, a family-owned business in Wuppertal, Germany, that makes chisels for electric hammers used in the building industry.

His company's sales grew 30% last year, thanks to increased demand from Asia, Eastern Europe and North America that offset a big drop in orders from Southern Europe. Mr. Kirschsieper expects a further 20% to 30% rise this year, putting his company back where it was in 2007, before the global recession hit. But he worries how long markets outside of the euro bloc will be able to make up for weakness in Spain, Portugal and Greece.

The economic and fiscal crises in Greece, Ireland and Portugal have only limited direct impact on Germany's €2.5 trillion ($3.24 trillion) economy. Those countries accounted for just over €16 billion in German exports in 2009. But if the debt crisis spills over to Spain, Belgium and Italy, as many economists fear, German exporters would take a big hit. Germany shipped almost €125 billion in exports to those countries in 2009, the latest year for which data are available.

For now, Germany's resurgence exposes a growing north-south divide that poses a threat for the European Central Bank's one-size-fits-all monetary policy. Last year's Germany's growth surge coincided with a pickup in inflation driven largelyby food and energy prices. German unions, which during the downturn accepted little or no wage gains in exchange for job security, are pressing for higher pay to keep pace with inflation.

In addition to exports, business investment and government spending have fueled the German expansion. Consumer spending, long dormant in Germany, advanced just 0.5%. Some economists expect that to improve this year, however, amid greater hiring and investment..

Many economists expect Germany to record solid growth in 2011. "There seems to be a self-reinforcing mechanism at work that makes it feel a lot more durable than past recoveries," says  Thomas Mayer, chief economist at Deutsche Bank Group in Frankfurt.

The government cites the GDP figures as support for its recent emphasis on stable government finances as a means to achieve growth—an approach at odds with many other industrialized countries including the U.S. and Japan "The message is that growth and consolidation are not on the opposite sides," German Deputy Finance Minister Steffen Kampeter said in an interview. 

Germany's state budget deficit was 3.5% last year, the first time since 2005 that Germany has exceeded the 3% limit set by EU budget rules. Still, Germany's deficit is a fraction of those in the U.S., U.K. and Japan. 

"We did our homework" since the sick-man days of 2003, says Mr. Kampeter, citing reforms of the social-security system and better labor-management relations that made the economy more flexible.

—Jonathan Cheng  and Marcus Walker contributed to this article.

 Write to  Brian Blackstone at brian.blackstone@dowjones.com 