BANGALORE – Wednesday beat forecasts with a 34% rise in net profit for the October-December period after it received more outsourcing contracts and its foreign exchange losses shrank. 

Shares of India's fourth-largest information technology company by revenue jumped to a one-year high after the company followed industry leader Tata Consultancy Services Ltd. in posting better-than-expected quarterly results, reflecting the sustained spending on outsourcing services by clients. 

With a skilled, English-speaking work force, India remains one of the preferred technology outsourcing destinations for customers in developed markets still recovering from the economic slowdown. 

The demand environment for outsourcing services is dynamic, HCL Chief Executive Vineet Nayar said in a statement. "We would see a strong 2011 from a demand point of view," he told reporters at a news conference. 

Based on U.S. accounting standards, HCL's net profit for the October-December period increased to 4 billion rupees ($88.2 million) from 2.98 billion rupees a year earlier. Profit rose 21% from the first quarter. 

Consolidated sales jumped 28% to 38.88 billion rupees from 30.41 billion rupees after it added 46 clients. On a sequential basis, revenue was up 4.9%. 

The average of estimates in a Dow Jones Newswires poll of 26 analysts was for a net profit of 3.67 billion rupees on revenue of 38.31 billion rupees. 

The robust results cheered investors, pushing shares to a high of 517.5 rupees in early trade. In afternoon trading shares were up 3.5% at 505.8 rupees in a Mumbai market 0.9% lower. 

The company posted 6.5% growth in business volume in the past quarter, outperforming Tata Consultancy's 5.7% rise and Infosys Technologies Ltd.'s 3.1% increase. 

However, the margin on earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation shrank to 16.3% from 21.1% a year earlier, hurt by losses at its business process outsourcing division and a 33% rise in expenses as the company made investments to capture greater market share. 

The company has been under fire from investors and analysts during the past couple of quarters as its revenue growth continues to be consumed by rising sales, general and administrative expenses. 

CLSA Asia-Pacific said in a note that HCL's absolute Ebitda has been "flattish" for seven quarters, though revenue has surged faster than peers. 

The Ebitda margin remained flat compared with the July-September period, due mainly to cost controls. 

Chief Executive Nayar said he expects the margin to expand this quarter and the next, as the company puts more employees on billable contracts and cuts expenses. 

But CLSA cautioned that though HCL may win back margins in coming quarters, a new round of wage hikes will start from July 1. "There are many imponderables still." 

HCL also said that foreign exchange losses in the second quarter narrowed to 134 million rupees, from 1.26 billion rupees a year earlier and 655 million rupees in the July-September period. 

"This is the pain on account of the hedge that we took three years back, and this is the last quarter of pain," Chief Financial Officer Anil Chanana said. 

The company, which earns more than half its revenue from the U.S., took a $1 billion hedge cover three years ago against an appreciation of the rupee when the local currency was rising against the dollar. But the bets led to huge losses subsequently after the rupee fell. The losses shrank in the October-December period, when the local currency rose 3.5% on average against the greenback. 

The company added 2,049 employees after accounting for those who left in the past quarter, taking its head count to 72,267 at the end of December. 

 Write to  Dhanya Ann Thoppil at dhanya.thoppil@dowjones.com 