JAKARTA—The European Union hopes to complete one free trade pact with a Southeast Asian nation in 2011 and the most likely partner is Singapore, EU Trade Commissioner Karel De Gucht said on Friday. 

The EU and Singapore launched talks in 2010 and the island nation has the "highest possibility" of sealing a trade deal with the EU this year, Mr. De Gucht said. The EU has begun talks with Malaysia and is also exploring the possibility of negotiations with Vietnam and Indonesia. 

In Northeast Asia, meanwhile, South Korean lawmakers yesterday ratified a free-trade agreement with the European Union.

Mr. De Gucht spoke to reporters on the sidelines of meetings this week with trade ministers from the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (Asean). 

The EU in 2009 shelved negotiations with the Asean bloc - which in addition to the above nations includes Brunei, Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, the Philippines and Thailand. The EU concluded that differences in development with the nations were too great and also balked at the inclusion of Myanmar because of alleged human rights abuses. 

Mr. De Gucht said negotiations with Asean will not resume until the bloc's own process of regional economic integration is complete. The target date for that completion is 2015, but some economists view that as overly optimistic. 

"Once we have these negotiations done with all individual member states, if they are interested in doing so, and this economic community comes about, that I think will be the right moment to turn to a region-to-region approach," said Mr. De Gucht. 

Mr. De Gucht said that a proposal to withdraw tariff benefits from a host of developing countries starting in 2014 "is now in the final phases of decision-making by the Commission." He said that an announcement could come as early as next week. 

He offered no details on the scope of the likely proposal, except to say that it will lay out a system of tariff breaks that is "more selective than in the past." 

EU officials told the Wall Street Journal that such large developing economies as China, India, Indonesia and Russia are likely to lose benefits under the new proposal. But the proposal could undergo changes as it goes through the larger EU legislative process. 

Mr. De Gucht said the European Commission has agreed to look at "new scientific evidence" regarding palm oil exports from Indonesia. Those exports currently don't qualify for use in biofuels in the EU, under an EU environmental directive. 

But Indonesia claims to have scientific evidence that its palm oil meets the EU standard. "We are ready to look into it," said Mr. De Gucht. However, he added that imported palm oil is used less and less in biofuels and more in food, cosmetics and other consumer products. 

 Write to  Martin Vaughan at martin.vaughan@dowjones.com 