U.S. nuclear regulators on Friday removed a key hurdle facing  Southern Co.
SO


0.12
%




's bid to build two nuclear reactors near Augusta, Ga., saying the project doesn't pose environmental risks.

The Nuclear Regulatory Commission said it completed an environmental review of Southern's proposed Vogtle units and didn't find anything that would prevent it from issuing licenses to the company, which could be the first time regulators approve the construction of a new nuclear-power reactor in the U.S. in over 30 years. 

The NRC still needs to complete a safety report on the project and finish a review of the proposed reactor's design. 

The decision to move Southern's project forward comes as the agency is launching a review of U.S. nuclear-plant safety in response to the crisis at Japan's Fukushima Daiichi nuclear-power complex, which has been leaking radiation since being damaged by the March 11 earthquake and tsunami. Japanese officials have been scrambling to prevent a meltdown and contain radiation from spent nuclear fuel stored at the plant. 

President Barack Obama and NRC Chairman Gregory Jaczko have said the U.S. needs to learn from the Japanese disaster. Still, administration officials have said they plan to push ahead with efforts to revive the U.S. nuclear-power industry as part of a broader plan to shift to energy sources that don't emit carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases.

Southern's Vogtle plant is the only nuclear-power project that has received a U.S. Department of Energy loan guarantee. Valued at $8.3 billion, the guarantee eases financing by reducing the risk of default for debt investors. 

As a utility that can pass along costs to ratepayers, Southern has been able to secure financing even as other companies, such as  NRG Energy Inc.,
NRG


-0.86
%




 have faced criticism over investments in nuclear reactors at a time when power prices and demand remain weak on the wholesale market. 

"It's very positive that our Vogtle project is moving forward on schedule and as planned," Southern spokeswoman Beth Thomas said. Southern expects to begin the NRC's hearing process this summer, though no dates have been set, Ms. Thomas said. 

The Vogtle project site, 26 miles southeast of Augusta, already has two reactors. Southern has a 45.7% stake in the $14 billion project, with three partners making up the rest. In reviewing the project, the NRC is using for the first time a process intended to make it easier for companies to get permits for nuclear facilities as long as they use a reactor design that the agency is now considering for certification.

Southern is looking to build and operate two reactors using the AP1000 design from Westinghouse Electric Co. The NRC can't issue a license to Southern unless it approves the design, which it is reviewing. A decision about the design is expected later this year.

The NRC is also expected to complete this year a review of a new  General Electric
GE


0.17
%




-Hitachi boiling-water reactor design, NRC spokesman Scott Burnell said. 

Some members of Congress and environmental groups have called for the NRC to suspend action on new licenses until it completes its investigation of existing facilities' safety.

 Write to  Naureen Malik at naureen.malik@wsj.com and Tennille Tracy at tennille.tracy@dowjones.com 