WASHINGTON—U.S. Rep. Randy Neugebauer, a staunch critic of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, is "pleasantly surprised" by the way White House adviser Elizabeth Warren is setting up the highly controversial agency charged with policing financial markets. 

Still, he has harsh words for President Barack Obama, who has yet to nominate someone to serve as the consumer bureau's permanent director. 

"The president needs to get off high center here and give that agency someone who's in charge," the Texas Republican said in an interview. "Some pretty important decisions are being made, and we need to make sure that we're dealing with the person that's going to be there [in the] long term." 

If Mr. Neugebauer had his way, the president would make the announcement within days, which would then kick off what could be a lengthy approval process in the U.S. Senate. 

"He really needs to do it in the next week or two," said Mr. Neugebauer, chairman of the House Financial Services Committee's oversight and investigations subcommittee. "We have this huge new bureaucracy that's being stood up by someone who has not been confirmed. I just don't think that's good policy." 

Mr. Neugebauer won't vote on the nominee because the Obama pick only needs Senate approval. 

But the lawmaker says he'd like Mr. Obama's nominee to be someone who enjoys support from financial-industry players as well as consumers. 

While nothing has been finalized, Mr. Neugebauer envisions a spring hearing at which Ms. Warren would testify before members of the panel about the progress she's making in setting up the consumer-watchdog agency. 

In the meantime, he's eagerly awaiting Ms. Warren's response to a series of questions he recently sent her on the agency's budget plans, staffing decisions and other issues. 

The consumer bureau, a centerpiece of the Dodd-Frank financial-regulatory overhaul, would have broad power to supervise banks and other financial firms. 

With the bureau poised to start in six months, newly empowered House Republicans are seeking to curb the bureau's powers and change its structure and funding so that it faces greater congressional scrutiny. 

Congress created the bureau as an independent agency that receives funding from the Federal Reserve's budget. 

However, Mr. Neugebauer and other Republicans want to change that. 

"I feel strongly we have to take it out of the Fed," he said. "Does consumer protection require the same amount of independence as monetary policy? I don't think so." 

Still, Mr. Neugebauer's criticisms are aimed mostly at the bureau and not at Ms. Warren, whom he describes as "intelligent" and "a good listener." 

Mr. Neugebauer said Ms. Warren had a reputation as a financial-industry villain, someone who routinely criticized banks and Wall Street. But she seems to be making balanced decisions about the agency, hiring people with industry experience, for instance, he said. Also, he agrees with her push for simpler mortgage-disclosure forms. 

Ms. Warren has been meeting with a diverse group of lawmakers, bankers and consumer advocates as she works to set up the bureau. Mr. Neugebauer had planned to reach out to Ms. Warren, but she called him first. 

"She beat us to the punch," said Mr. Neugebauer, who had his first sit-down meeting with Ms. Warren earlier this month. 

The Obama administration decided against nominating Ms. Warren for the top bureau post earlier this year because of signs Republicans would block her appointment. Bypassing the Senate confirmation process all together, Mr. Obama named Ms. Warren a special adviser in charge of setting up the agency in September. 

Still, without a Senate-confirmed director, the bureau's powers will be limited when it comes to supervising nonbank financial firms, for instance. 

In the interview, Mr. Neugebauer seemed somewhat open to backing the Harvard law professor as the bureau's permanent chief. 

"She wouldn't be my last choice. I don't know whether she's my first choice, but she certainly wouldn't be my last choice," Mr. Neugebauer said. 

If someone other than Ms. Warren were to run the bureau, the agency's direction could change, creating more uncertainty among stakeholders, he noted. 

"If it [the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau] isn't going away, then what we have to do is deal with what we've got, and I think it's easier to deal with an agency where we have a little bit more permanency about its operations," he said. 

 Write to  Maya Jackson Randall at Maya.Jackson-Randall@dowjones.com 