Tuesday, one euro bought 8.9428 Swedish kronor. A chart accompanying Wednesday's article on the rise of the Swedish Krona was incorrectly scaled editions of The Wall Street Journal Europe, putting the euro's Tuesday point at 7.9428 krona. The corrected chart is at left.

French auto makers estimate that they made little more than half the number of vehicles in France in 2010 than they did five years ago. Also, France expects 1.6% economic growth for 2010, while Germany is forecast to post 3.7% growth for 2010. A Monday World News Outlook article incorrectly said that the auto estimate and economic-growth figures were for 2011. 

Franck Noel, a resident of the International Village condominium complex in Lauderhill, Fla., was never late on his payments to the homeowners association, which lost track of his December 2008 payments for monthly maintenance and assessments. A Dec. 31 front-page article about the complex incorrectly reported that he paid late fees.

James R. Wittstein, an attorney in Fairfield, Conn., says that working with an appointed mediator and a bank representative in mortgage disputes "requires the borrower to sit eye-to-eye with the bank's attorney and means there is someone to hold accountable rather than just some service person on the telephone. It humanizes the process and instills some accountability." A Dec. 31 U.S. News article on compulsory mortgage negotiations incorrectly attributed the quote to Christopher Brecciano, an attorney at Ma'ayergi & Associates in Stamford, Conn.

A photo that accompanied a Dec. 30 article about Half Moon Bay, Calif., that was published in some editions pictured a structure near the coastal city. The caption incorrectly described the site as being in Half Moon Bay.

Credit Suisse Group analyst Moshe Orenbuch's last name was misspelled as Ohrenbuch in a Monday Money & Investing article about bank stocks.

As of Dec. 31, the Jets football team had a win-loss record of 10-5, and the Giants' record was 9-6. Jason Gay's Dec. 31 Sports column incorrectly gave the records as 10-4 for the Jets and 10-5 for the Giants.

Most clothing is exempt from New Jersey's 7% sales tax. A Block Party article on Property Friday said incorrectly that clothing purchased in Newark's Urban Enterprise Zone was taxed at 3.5%. 