The cinderblock walls of Marple Newtown High School teacher Thom Williams's classroom will be demolished in the weeks ahead. But there's been a reprieve of sorts for the hundreds of messages written on those walls by his students.

 Erasing Signatures From History (3/02/11)

The school district's solution: creating a photographic record of each cinderblock.

Photography teacher  Penny Gardner and her students "will be using digital technology to capture Thom's walls so that the musings, quotes, signatures, and art that he encouraged will be saved for all to view," said the school's principal,  Ray McFall.

"We hope that this will help preserve the impact that Thom had on the school and his students. We think Thom would be pleased."

Mr. Williams's classroom was featured last week in the Personal Journal's Moving On column, which focused on people's urge to add their signatures and messages on the walls of places that have meaning for them.

For 35 years, while teaching at the Newtown Square, Pa., school, Mr. Williams encouraged his students to cover his classroom's walls with favorite quotes, original art and their deepest thoughts. He died in December of cancer at age 63.

The school had announced that the classroom walls would be taken down in a renovation project now under way, saddening many of Mr. Williams's former students. Their efforts to save their signatures and wall art intensified in the last week, as they lobbied the school district with calls and emails.

Mr. Williams's classroom "is a tangible record of his free spirit and its impact on students," Dr. McFall said in a statement. "In the midst of our renovations we recognize that his room is a unique and irreplaceable record that must be preserved."

In recent days, students have taken 300 photos of the classroom and will continue the project in the weeks ahead. An online slideshow will be created, and Ms. Gardner plans to frame large photos of the classroom's lost walls, which she hopes to display permanently in the English department's hallway.

 Write to  Jeffrey Zaslow at jeffrey.zaslow@wsj.com 