WASHINGTON—The U.S. military doesn't want to send troops into Libya, even for humanitarian duties, until Col. Moammar Gadhafi has left power, a senior defense official said Friday. 

The admission provided a sign of the Pentagon's skittishness about taking overt military action against the government. 

"It is so problematic to put boots on the ground," the senior defense official said. "The risk I worry about is because there is no alternative to the government, we would be stuck. And we've seen that movie before."

The official was delivering a message heard frequently inside the Pentagon. The Defense Department has repeated those arguments in internal administration discussions about its response to the Libyan crisis.

Military officials say a no-fly zone wouldn't protect rebel forces and that military intervention while Col. Gadhafi remains in power risks sucking the U.S. into a long-term presence in the country.

Defense officials remain wary because of their experience in Iraq, where what was conceived as a relatively quick campaign aimed at toppling the government became an eight-year exercise in nation building.

In a news conference Friday, President Barack Obama also signaled his reluctance to order a military intervention, discussing the risk of military action and the prospects that such an approach could divide the international community. 



"When it comes to U.S. military actions, whether it's a no-fly zone or other options, you've got to balance costs versus benefits," Mr. Obama said. "And, you know, I don't take those decisions lightly."

Mr. Obama said he was consulting closely with Defense Secretary Robert Gates and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Adm. Michael Mullen, who themselves have expressed doubts about using U.S. air power to keep Col. Gadhafi's planes and helicopters from attacking rebel forces. Mr. Gates said such a no-fly zone must begin with an attack on Libya's air defenses.

The U.S. has deployed 1,200 Marines to the Mediterranean to be ready to provide humanitarian assistance. But the senior defense official said those Marines wouldn't go into Libya until Col. Gadhafi has lost power.

Other senior U.S. officials said there haven't been any discussions about sending covert special-operations teams into Libya to train or organize the rebels.

Inserting U.S. forces into an environment with a weak or nonexistent government could saddle the military with the task of providing stability and governance, much as the U.S. had to do in Iraq and, to a lesser degree, in Afghanistan, according to U.S. officials.

The 2003 invasion of Iraq and the long occupation that followed have left the U.S. military humbled about its ability to change a country. Successful stability operations are long, troop-intensive, costly and extremely difficult to conduct.

One military officer said the lesson the Defense Department has taken away from Iraq and Afghanistan is that profound change in a society comes only gradually and is difficult to impose from the outside.

And some officials say the U.S. needs to be careful that any intervention into Libya doesn't end up making the U.S. and its allies less secure. Putting Marines into Libya, even to deliver relief supplies, could become an al Qaeda recruiting tool, some officials fear.

Al Qaeda in the Maghreb, the North African offshoot of the terror group, has been of little direct threat to the U.S. But American intervention in Libya could strengthen its position. The group would likely denounce American presence as an occupying force or accuse the U.S. of trying to steal the country's oil.

"Our presence would be a hugely powerful recruiting tool and that creates its own risk," the senior defense official said. "This would make them a very powerful adversary."

The U.S. military has begun helping refugees who have fled Libya into Tunisia, and the White House has announced a civilian humanitarian assistance effort for Libya, beginning with a diplomatic team being sent to rebel-held Benghazi to assess the situation. 

A senior U.S. official said humanitarian operations help the U.S. image in the region, showcasing American largess. But a military operation would likely be seen as an attempt by the U.S. to shape the government that emerges in Libya, he said.

"We can do a humanitarian intervention, and we ought to," said the senior U.S. official. "But a military intervention says, 'I am coming in here to change things.' "

A no-fly zone remains one option the U.S. is discussing. While the Pentagon has done extensive planning and looked into what European air bases could be used to control Libyan airspace, the U.S. hasn't moved an aircraft carrier to the Mediterranean Sea. A carrier, though not necessarily needed, would make a no-fly zone much easier to enforce.

Defense officials predicted a no-fly zone would simply not achieve the results opponents of Col. Gadhafi expect, doing little to protect the rebels from ground or helicopter attacks and doing virtually nothing to drive the dictator from power.

Following the 1991 Gulf War, the U.S. set up no-fly zones in northern and southern Iraq. Although the zones prevented Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein from threatening his neighbors, the intervention didn't stop him from pushing back a rebellion from the Kurds in the north and brutally putting down a Shiite insurrection in the south.

"It just isn't the right tool for this security situation," said the senior defense official. "It certainly would not stop the violence."



 Write to  Julian Barnes at julian.barnes@wsj.com 