TOKYO—A plan to shore up embattled  Tokyo Electric Power Co.
9501


0.14
%




 disclosed Friday sowed uncertainty over how much taxpayers would have to shoulder to pay claims that could exceed ¥2.5 trillion, or roughly $31 billion, and rattled investors worried that stock holders, bond holders, banks and utilities could be hit too. 

The plan advanced Friday by the administration of Prime Minister Naoto Kan to prop up the ailing utility amid Japan's unfolding nuclear-power crisis now goes to Japan's fractious parliament, where the plan could falter amid calls by some lawmakers for stronger measures to limit the amount of public money used in any bailout.

Approval of the plan to prop up the company, known as Tepco, came after last-minute disputes within the ruling party over how heavily the company should be penalized and who in the end would pay the massive costs. 

"The government, as it recognizes its social responsibility in having so far promoted nuclear power policy in coordination with nuclear power operators, is going to support Tokyo Electric Power…while aiming to minimize the burden on the people," the government said.

The rollout of the plan, along with comments from government officials, raised fresh concerns about Tepco's future and whether shareholders and bondholders will be expected to share in the pain. Tepco shares fell 5.4% Friday to finish at ¥453. Also this week, the cost of insuring Tepco's debt rose in the market for credit default swaps.

Analysts said that among the areas of confusion was the stipulation by the government that it was "seeking cooperation from all stakeholders," taken as a veiled reference to measures that may sharply reduce shareholder equity. 

Similarly, bank shares fell sharply after chief government spokesman Yukio Edano said that "the public will not support" the injection of public funds into the company unless creditor banks are willing to renegotiate new loan terms. He specifically excluded loans made after the quake, however.

Major lenders  Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group and  Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group
MTU


-1.10
%




 were both lower, closing down 3.8% at ¥2,452 and down 2.8% at ¥383, respectively. SMFG declined to comment on the plan.

"If Tepco fails, banks would lose everything. Banks would thus have no choice but to accept that if asked by the government," said Hideyuki Ishiguro, investment strategy supervisor at Okasan Securities. 

Tepco and the government haven't released any estimates, but Bank of America Merrill Lynch has said that total compensation payments could be from ¥2.5 trillion to ¥4 trillion ($31 to $49 billion). 

Under the program, the government will create a state-backed institution that will keep the utility solvent and has the right to borrow government funds that it will then loan to Tepco. Company President  Masataka Shimizu has said that the crisis has created severe problems in trying to raise funds in the financial markets. 

The fund, which will be in place for any future accidents as well, will receive funding from payments by Tepco, along with the other major utilities that have nuclear plants. It's not clear how the utilities will react. Chubu Electric Power Co., which covers central Japan, declined to comment. 

One of the government's conditions for aid—accepted by the company—is that Tepco set no prior ceiling on the total amount of compensation. 

Tepco also has agreed to seek cooperation from all of its stakeholders, which government officials said could mean that investors would be asked to accept losses. 

The government will also have a hand in managing the utility through a special commission to make sure it sticks to promises to sell assets and undertake restructuring. In addition, officials have said that the government could end up with an ownership stake. 

Some lawmakers said there should be stronger measures to ensure that the public doesn't foot the cost, while others say the government should bear more of a direct responsibility since a failure in regulation was partly responsible. 

Tepco has said it would undertake its own large-scale restructuring, which is expected to include a sale of nonessential assets, such as real estate and securities holdings. 

Speaking at a parliamentary committee meeting, Prime Minister Kan said that the Tepco accident will prompt changes to Japan's nuclear safety standards. 

—Mitsuru Obe and Judy Lam contributed to this article 