DUBLIN—Ireland's embattled Prime Minister Brian Cowen won a vote of confidence in his leadership on Tuesday, clearing the way for him to lead his fractured Fianna Fail party into the next general election. 

Mr. Cowen proposed the secret ballot in his own leadership of the ruling right-of-center political party in an attempt to end persistent questions over his leadership skills and handling of the economic crisis. 

His chances received a significant boost earlier Tuesday from Finance Minister Brian Lenihan, who said, "He is the best person to lead us into the next election," though he acknowledged that Mr. Cowen had "lapses in judgment."

The finance minister said there was no point in electing another leader before the March election who doesn't support government policy.

"We have to take responsibility for our part in the current difficulties," he said. 

Mr. Lenihan acknowledged that with around 14% support among the electorate, Fianna Fail lawmakers are worried about the very survival of the party, which has been in power for nearly 54 years of its 85-year history. 

Although Mr. Cowen was expected to win the vote, the prime minister's supporters took no chances: Minister for Justice Dermot Ahern cast his vote for Mr. Cowen from his hospital bed after an operation. 

Earlier, Mr. Lenihan denied he was preparing to take over as party leader himself. 

"I didn't have the luxury of indulging my ambitions on this particular matter.…I haven't had time to organize a coup or a challenge in the last year," he said.

However, Fianna Fail lawmaker John McGuinness said Mr. Lenihan had wanted the leadership of the party: "He did encourage dissent, he did encourage us to look at the numbers" to launch a no-confidence motion.

Mr. Cowen said he sees a general election taking place in the spring.

Also Tuesday, Mr. Lenihan also said the 5.8% average interest rate for the European Union-International Monetary Fund's €67.5 billion ($90 billion) rescue package is set and can't be renegotiated "unilaterally" by Ireland.

"There isn't going to be a unique renegotiation of the interest rate that applies to Ireland," Mr. Lenihan said. Ireland is also contributing an additional €17.5 billion to the IMF/EU financial-aid package.

The prime minister said he accepted the resignation of Foreign Affairs Minister Micheal Martin—the only senior minister to publicly challenge Mr. Cowen ahead of the vote—and said both men agreed to campaign at the next election.

Mr. Martin said he accepted the result of the vote, and said the government's mixed signals before the EU/IMF loan was agreed to last year was a "watershed moment" in his coming out against Mr. Cowen.

 Write to  Quentin Fottrell at quentin.fottrell@dowjones.com 