With oil prices soaring and revolution in the air in North Africa and the Middle East, it's little wonder investors want to take a few chips off the green baize and cash them in.

All of a sudden the world has become uncertain again, so safe havens are sought after. Capital protection is in, gambling firmly out.

And yet, as with so many aspects of post-crisis finance, things aren't what they were, even for supposed haven investments. This new world has few of the comforting certainties of the old, even when all you're looking for is the safest, dullest place for your money.

The long agony of Europe's weaker sovereign borrowers in 2010 proved one thing at least: government bonds, which used to be thought of as a "risk free" investment, could in reality be no shelter at all, but in fact a dangerous source of financial risk itself. 

That story may have faded from the front pages for now, but both Spain and Ireland left the triple-A club of most creditworthy nations long before it did.

Moreover, even for those left in, the club has lost something of its allure. All the "big four" triple-A sovereign borrowers have their problems, even if they're clinging to gold-standard credit ratings, and everyone knows it.

The U.S. and U.K. remain addicted to debt. Admittedly the latter's government is trying valiantly to get a grip. But it's still finding the trick easier said than done, faced with a militant public sector used to years of plenty.

The U.S., however, hasn't even made a start, prompting Moody's, the credit rating agency, to say this at the start of 2011: "There is a small but increasing likelihood that markets will demand a higher risk premium on government debt, in sharp contrast to the safe-haven status that the U.S. Treasury bond has long enjoyed. The continued high level of deficits and upward debt trajectory could cause borrowing costs to rise more than now expected, making progress in reducing deficits more difficult in the future."

France and Germany may be better placed on this score, but even the mighty German bund is still tied to the contingent liabilities which come with being part of the euro zone. These include another round of bank stress tests to look forward to, along with new rules regarding how future struggling member states will be helped out. 

Risk free? Hardly.

Moreover, even if you can find a bond you like, the threat of inflation is looming over them all to a degree not seen for years.

So, let's look elsewhere. What about currencies, what about the good old yen? That's still an anchor for the prudent in hard times, isn't it?

Well perhaps, and, given the recent very large swing to net long position in the foreign exchange market, there must be plenty of investors who still think so.

However, as Monument Securities Strategist  Marc Ostwald pointed out, here's the rub. "Japan imports pretty much all of its oil and is very dependent on imports in the food arena, it has a grotesque budget deficit and a 200% Debt/GDP ratio, its companies have been reticent to invest any money in domestic infrastructure during the recovery [the pace is at around 84% of pre-recession levels], its politics are moribund, it has deeply embedded core deflation, and rises in inflation over the past 15 years have generally resulted in slower consumer spending, and its fixed interest yields are worse than pitiful," he says.

Need he go on? Doesn't look entirely risk free there, either, does it?

The dollar, then. Surely talk of its demise has been greatly exaggerated. Well, maybe, but it remains debt-laden and friendless in the markets, only likely to lose more buddies if the U.S. is drawn into military action in (or over) Libya. History suggests that Middle Eastern adventures aren't good for the greenback, even if the U.S. public has the appetite for another, which must be doubtful.

So, in the end the quest for safe havens most obviously ends up at the doors of gold and the Swiss franc. 

Gold is hitting record highs daily at the moment and looking extremely comfortable well above the $1,400 per ounce level. Meanwhile the dollar notched up its all-time low against the Swiss franc two weeks ago, and hasn't recovered much poise since.

But it's interesting to note that one of these two is a 150-year old redoubt in times of trouble, the other, well, it's been a store of last-ditch value for millennia.

So much for all that "financial innovation" we were always being assured had taken place over the past decade or so. All very well in the good times, none if it seems to be worth very much when the post-crisis chips are down.

 Write to  David Cottle at david.cottle@dowjones.com 