SEOUL—Japanese Defense Minister Toshimi Kitazawa ended a two-day visit to South Korea with a trip to the fortified inter-Korean border Tuesday, following a promise to work more closely with Seoul that has been met with lukewarm response in South Korea.

Mr. Kitazawa a day earlier met his South Korean counterpart, Kim Kwan-jin, to discuss ways the two militaries could work together, chiefly on intelligence-sharing and logistics.

In the wake of North Korea's November attack on a South Korean island, U.S. officials encouraged the South Korean and Japanese militaries to explore some form of cooperation and possibly some agreements, leading to this week's meeting.

But in South Korea, the idea of working with the Japanese military, the force behind Japan's colonization of the Korean peninsula a century ago, is fraught with symbolic meaning that is difficult to put aside. 

South Korean media played down the defense summit. Ahead of the meeting, South Korean officials lowered expectations after several announcements were made in Japan about prospects that some agreements might be produced.

As a result, the two ministers announced only that South Korea and Japan would continue to negotiate agreements to share military information and cooperate in the purchase and exchange of some goods and services.

South Korea and Japan have developed close relations and deep economic ties for several decades, but the two militaries haven't made any agreements. No timetable was set for coming to agreements, but officials said the ministers' meeting was a step forward.

"The talks served as an opportunity to develop bilateral military ties to a higher level and are expected to contribute to establishing a 'mature partnership,'" a joint statement said.

Adm. Michael Mullen, chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, in visits to South Korea and Japan last month suggested that the U.S. hold three-way defense exercises with Seoul and Tokyo.

Adm. Mullen saw North Korea's attack on the South's Yeonpyeong Island as an opportunity to build closer ties between Japan and South Korea, something the U.S., which is a defense ally of both countries, has long sought to achieve.

Last July, Japanese military officers observed a joint U.S.-South Korea military drill.

 Write to  Evan Ramstad at evan.ramstad@wsj.com 