All too often, women's winter wardrobes can get bogged down with too much black and other drab colors.

But designer  Cynthia Rowley says there are many ways to spice up your look—even in the dull days of January. The designer, who is known for creative touches in her designs, believes that women shouldn't shy away from wearing bright colors during the winter. She likes to inject deep purple, fuchsia or striking bright blues into an outfit. "It gives the wardrobe more liveliness and texture," she says.

When she wears a color that's more often seen during summer, she makes sure that it's in a season-appropriate fabric such as a stiffer satin or heavy lace. "It doesn't convey the airiness of summer but it does provide a more exuberant silhouette," she says. 

For women who are averse to bold shades, Ms. Rowley encourages simply "breaking up the black." For instance, she advises: "Wear a camel suede or grey leather boot with a black-on-black look, or break it up with an earthy brown belt. All of a sudden your whole ensemble will feel lighter." 

Glittery or patterned accessories can add punch to a winter outfit. "Using shiny or glazed materials in your ensemble —particularly in your shoes—adds a bit of interest and uniqueness," she says. Ms. Rowley sometimes wears leggings or stockings with colorful patterns or interesting details. She has a pair of black "studded tights" that are covered with little shiny black baubles, for example. "Whenever you move your legs, there's this reflectiveness that's both elegant and edgy," says Ms. Rowley, who likes to use the tights to add spark to a basic skirt and sweater.

The slight flash of a metallic belt on an all-black ensemble can bring the outfit "into sharp focus," she says. Also, "the right piece of statement jewelry can transform an otherwise nondescript or dark outfit," she says.

Despite her penchant for a bit of flash in the winter, Ms. Rowley believes people can go too far. Generally, she doesn't mix more than two different patterns within an outfit. Adding colors is not about "putting on the whole rainbow," she says. "I think it's more about just finding the right palette combination—a steel gray offset by a peppermint [green], or a purple with a deep orange jewelry accent." 

Another thing the designer avoids: Wearing truly summery dresses made of gauzy fabrics—even with dark-colored hosiery. "Gauzes and light crepes can be worn as blouses," she says, but in dresses, these fabrics "are kind of wrong for winter."

Still, Ms. Rowley admits she isn't always the most practical of dressers. "I've been known to brave the snow in stilettos," she says. "I never sacrifice style."

 Write to  Cheryl Lu-Lien Tan at cheryl.tan@wsj.com 