If one were to ask me the best investment I ever made—setting aside the standard claptrap about kids, delightful though they may be—I'd have to say birdseed. Approximately 15 bucks buys you a 40-pound bag of black oil sunflower seed. And the birds show their appreciation by transforming winter's slumbering landscape into a house party. 

While it's impossible to count them, I'd guess that during morning and midafternoon rush hour we must have a hundred birds arriving, departing or dining at one of our 10 feeders at our house Upstate. 

If I have any criticism, it's only that they're usually the same handful of species—chickadees, titmouse, blue jays, juncos, goldfinch, nuthatches, mourning doves, cardinals, purple finch. Don't get me wrong. There are few birds as companionable as a chickadee. And the sight of a brilliant cardinal against the whites and grays of winter is the stuff of haiku.

But part of the reason you're always glancing out the window—at least the reason I'm always glancing out the window—is in the hope of novelty, of sighting the bird you've never seen before, or only rarely. The odds aren't in your favor, especially this time of year, and also because unusual birds don't tend to patronize feeders. 

The excitement this winter has been over common redpolls, which come down from the far north, and resemble house finch except that most of their color is concentrated in a red cap. The other stranger is a little brown bird that frequents the suet, but not the seed feeders. 

I first spotted it about a month ago and, not being an avian savant, it took me a couple of weeks to figure out, with the help of the late  Roger Tory Peterson, that it was a wren. But what kind of wren? It's not an especially vivid bird. Its most distinctive feature is a white line over the eye. It resembled two wrens in Mr. Peterson's "A Field Guide to the Birds East of the Rockies"—a  Carolina Wren and a Bewick's Wren. 

Reading further, I learned that it was probably a Carolina Wren since the Bewick's Wren is uncommon in the Northeast. But based on my highly suspect powers of identification it looked more like the Bewick's Wren in the picture. It was less reddish-brown than plain brown. It had a noticeably long beak. And the tail was long, and white and black-stripped along the edges. I think the length of the tail initially threw me off. When I think of wrens I think of short, stubby tails.

But what the little bird may have lacked in plumage he, or she, more than made up in personality. I tend to work in bed in the morning and three Sunday mornings in a row the wren landed on the windowsill, apparently looking for dead insects, and more than a little tempted, it seemed, to join me indoors.

Friday afternoon it finally did. It hopped from the suet feeder outside the living-room window, through a slit in the slightly raised storm window, and onto the windowsill itself. From there it flew into the living room. 

The tiny fellow seemed anything but frantic. It explored the entire room—traveling between the windows, the floor, the top of the still-to-be-tossed-out Christmas tree, the bookshelves. At one point I feared it would become trapped when it vanished behind a row of books. But it calmly exited, retracing its route, and still apparently in no rush to leave.

Eventually, it occurred to me that I should take its picture and send it to someone who knows about birds. Perhaps they'd be able to positively identify it. 

The wren was certainly more cooperative than my BlackBerry, the only device available to take a snapshot. Sometimes the camera will zoom; sometimes it won't. But whether it was or wasn't zooming all the images came out dim or blurry or both. 

To my relief, after about 15 minutes of flying around the living room, the bird finally flew back out the window, unharmed. 

And flew right back in.

He had returned to the suet feeder, pecked off a couple of morsels, retrieved them from the snow, and then returned to the living room. 

It took me another 15 minutes to persuade him to leave again. 

I decided to share my late afternoon adventure, emailing  Marie Winn, the author of "Red-Tails in Love," and most recently, "Central Park in the Dark."

"A Bewick's Wren around here would be pretty extraordinary," she replied. "I suppose you're sure it's not a Carolina Wren?"

I sent Ms. Winn a couple of my lame BlackBerry images, which probably only confused the picture. She told me she was going to pass them along to a knowledgeable friend, and added, "I did once see a Bewick's wren. It was in Tucson, if I'm not mistaken."

Bird books often aren't helpful, especially when the bird (apologies birders!) is nondescript, closely resembles another species, or isn't posed the same way as the drawing or photo in the book. However, I was encouraged that my visitor might yet prove to be the rarity I hoped by a description of its behavior, and the very different behavior of the Carolina Wren, in  Frank M. Chapman's 1895 "Birds of Eastern North America."

"Whatever he may be when alone, he is never at rest so long as he imagines himself observed," Mr. Chapman writes of the Carolina Wren. "…as a rule he is seldom in sight more than a second at a time."

That certainly didn't sound like my slacker. But on the following page, this description of the Bewick's Wren did. "No bird more deserves the protection of man than Bewick's Wren. He does not need man's encouragement, for he comes of his own accord and installs himself as a member of the community wherever it suits his taste."

Ms. Winn forwarded my blurry images to  Lloyd Spitalnik, a well-known birder and wildlife photographer. Mr. Spitalnik responded that since the bird's breast appears "buffy" that would indicate it's a Carolina Wren. A Bewick's breast would be white. 

Buffy? What does Buffy mean? 

In any case, I haven't seen the bird since Friday. But now I have a real camera ready, in case he returns.

"Kinda hope it's white," Ms. Winn confided.

So do I. And not on his way back to Tucson. 

—ralph.gardner@wsj.com

 Write to  Ralph Gardner Jr. at Ralph.Gardner@wsj.com 