Mustard is the condiment for restless souls: There are enough varieties of it to taste forever. 

This pungent diversity has developed, in part, because mustard was historically one of the cheapest spices to produce—mustard plants could grow in Europe and didn't have to be shipped in from India or the South Seas. 

As such, many regions developed their own local mustard style—from pungent Burgundian spreads (most famously that of Dijon) to the sweet grainy stuff made famous in Bavaria. 

This diversity of styles makes mustard more fun than, say, ketchup, which aims for a singular scarlet standard. Here's a guide to some favorites from near and far. 

—Sara Dickerman

 1. The Heat-Seekers  

Sometimes, you need the adrenal thrill of mustard's heat. One of the nerviest forms of mustard is the dried powdered kind, like Colman's in the memorable yellow can, or the even hotter "Oriental" mustard powders ($2 for 4 ounces, penzeys.com), freshly mixed with plain cold water. It's often the mustard that's served alongside Cantonese barbecue, and it is just the thing to cut through all that sweet fattiness. For hot mustard with a little more nuance in texture and flavor, look to German mustards. Kleinhettestedt Beer Mustard ($14 for 270 ml, zingermans.com) is semi-smooth, with a bracing bite that can handle the most succulent sausages. (That it comes in an ancient-looking crock only adds to its appeal.) 

 2. The Smooth Operators 

Dijon-style mustard delivers a short, sharp shock to the senses, but with a distinctive creamy texture. Because it's so bold, it still provides heat and pungency when mixed into a vinaigrette—which it will help bind, by the way—or into a creamy sauce. One of my favorite Dijon tricks is to swirl a dollop into a lentil soup just before serving to give it a little edge. When cooking, it's not too critical to spend top dollar on a Dijon, but if it's being served naked, perhaps in an adorable antique mustard pot, it's not a bad idea to source directly from Burgundy: Fallot mustard ($6 for 7 ounces, formaggiokitchen.com) has a snappy sharpness that's never pinched or too sour. 

 3. Mustards to Chew On 

Whole-grain mustards (most famously Pommery Moutarde de Meaux, $19 for 17 ounces, worldsfoods.com) are a textural treat, with seeds that pop like rough grains of caviar. Because the seeds are less processed, they tend to be nuttier and less biting that the smoother varieties. In fact, Hawkshead Balsamic Mustard from the U.K. ($11 for 150 grams, chefshop.com) gets its fruity sharpness largely from the vinegar in the mix. So grainy, it's barely a paste at all—and the perfect textural addition to potato salad. 

 4. Little Miss Sunshines 

American-style mustards don't get a lot of respect from mustard snobs, but just because they are sunny yellow (from a hefty dose of the spice turmeric) doesn't mean they have to be ditzy. In Eastport, Maine, Raye's Mustard still stone-grinds its products in a 1903 mill. ($3 for 4 ounces, rayesmustard.com). The cold-stone process produces, among several varieties, Down East Schooner mustard: a velvety yellow condiment with a gorgeous texture and a grown-up piquancy that's not too sharp. Even more accessible is Sweet n' Fancy Yellow Mustard from Mustard Girl, a home-grown Wisconsin outfit that makes the well-rounded, squeezable mustard ($3 for 12 ounces, mustardmuseum.com), which calls out for a warm pretzel. 

 5. Hothouse Mustard-Flowers 

Mustard can be altered by any number of mix-ins—whiskey, beer, honey, horseradish, even truffles. The best of these find ways to complement mustard's assertiveness without overwhelming it with too much sugar or acid. It's hard to get romantic about mustard, but you might feel ever so slightly sentimental about the dark aubergine beauty of the Moutarde Violette ($13, zingermans.com), a whole-grain mustard that gets both its purple hue and its mellow, almost molasses-like flavor from the addition of grape must, the dark juice that is a byproduct of winemaking. The mellow-toned mustard pairs well with mountain cheeses or country pâtés. When mustard does showcase vinegar, it had better be good vinegar, like that made from Banyuls dessert wine, which has been combined to memorable effect. Try the semi-coarse mustard from KL Keller ($8 for 8 ounces, honestfoods.com)—a sweet-sharp way to glam up a potato salad or a ham sandwich.

 Corrections & Amplifications  The name of Colman's mustard was misspelled as Coleman's in a previous version of this article.