Every day  Sun Kim sends an employee from her Newkirk Avenue grocery store in Brooklyn down the block to check up on the prices of her competition: two green carts selling produce.

On a recent day, one of the carts was selling a pound of bananas for 59 cents. Ms. Kim decided to charge 79 cents to keep close to the competition. She said that the monthly revenue at her store has been cut in half since the carts appeared on her block in the spring of 2009.

"The green carts don't have to pay rent and electricity," she noted. "I can't compete with their prices."

In a town where jostling for a space is a sport there is a growing fault line: the grocery store, green cart tussle. The fight to sell lettuce and bananas is increasingly competitive.

The city started the green cart program almost three years ago to bring more fruits and vegetables to "underserved" neighborhoods with high rates of diet-related illnesses. Today, the city has issued about 450 permits to operate green carts in large swaths of the Bronx and upper Manhattan, as well as parts of Brooklyn, Queens and Staten Island. While most normal food carts can operate anywhere and tend to congregate in high-traffic neighborhoods like midtown Manhattan, green carts can sell only in designated zones.

The city's Department of Health and Mental Hygiene issues green cart permits. It is currently accepting permit applications from eligible individuals due on March 31, and grocers are up in arms. Under the current law, the department can issue about 550 additional permits. 

"Green carts are cannibalizing Korean-American grocery stores," said  Song Kim, the president of the Korean American Small Business Service Center in Queens, which represents more than 800 grocers.

In an emailed statement, the Department of Health noted that grocery stores have advantages that green cart vendors don't, such as the ability to advertise, store a greater variety of produce and "offer the convenience of shopping in one place for multiple household needs."

"Green cart vendors are limited to a 3- by 6-foot cart that is exposed to the elements," said the statement, pointing out that carts have overhead, such as paying for a commissary to store their cart.

Those involved in the program see the need for more carts.  Karen Karp, whose company provides training and administrative help for green cart vendors, says large parts of Queens don't allow carts. She points to Corona, where she said more than 50% of children are overweight. "There are a number of areas in Queens where there are the statistics that drove the green cart initiative in the first place that don't have permits available," she said.

There are 1,770 names on a waiting list for green cart permits in Manhattan, and 830 in Queens. New waiting lists for the other boroughs will be created beginning in May.

The prospect that more green carts could soon pop up doesn't sit well with  Ted Sung. Mr. Sung looks past the oranges piled high in front of his family's store to the two green carts half a block away on Nostrand Avenue in Brooklyn. The family-owned business estimates the carts cost it $1,000 a day in revenue. "We already have one or two carts during the daytime, if they are more, we will just keep losing customers," he said.

  Braulio Guzman, who operates one of the green carts near Mr. Sung's grocery store, says that he has problems with the brick-and-mortar stores. Sometimes big stores call the police, because they feel his green cart is interfering with their business, he said. Then he moves his cart. But he likes his regular location because it is just steps away from a subway exit and in front of a Duane Reade pharmacy. "We have many customers in the street," said Mr. Guzman, who pays $75 for a permit to operate the cart for two years.

Some lawmakers like  Peter Koo, a City Council member who represents Flushing, thinks green carts shouldn't be allowed within a certain distance from supermarkets.

The green carts have their fans in the community.  George Wright recently walked up to the two carts a block from Ms. Kim's store. "It's cheaper than other stores," he said, "and the fruit is very good."

Ms. Kim says the monthly revenue in her store has dropped to $5,000 a month from $10,000 a month because of the carts, the tough economy and nearby construction. That's before she shells out $3,500 for rent, buys the produce and pays an employee. The result is that she's losing money each month.

She figures it's going to get worse. Most of her customers pay with electronic food stamps and recently some green carts got portable devices so they can accept them as well.

 "I have to go bankrupt," she says.