MUMBAI --Mundra Port & Special Economic Zone Ltd. has won a $2 billion game-changing deal after a six-month bidding battle with companies around the world to operate and develop Australia's Abbot Point X50 Coal Terminal for 99 years. 

The deal will more than double Mundra Port's balance sheet size and its overall cargo-handling capacity, as well as help the company transport coal from Australia to India, where an expanding economy and surging demand for power from homes and industries are leading to a rush to secure supplies of the fossil fuel.

"The deal was signed in Brisbane between company officials and the Queensland government, this [Tuesday] morning," the Indian company said in a filing with the Bombay Stock Exchange. 

A statement from the Queensland state government said that the sale price exceeded its expectation of A$1.5 billion ($1.63 billion).

The sale money will help pay the state's bill for a string of weather disasters during the southern tropical wet season, which Australia's Treasury estimates have cost the economy A$9 billion ($9.78 billion) with a reconstruction bill of A$5.8 billion ($6.3 billion). 

"The proceeds from the lease of the Abbot Point Coal Terminal would help pay Queensland's share of the recovery costs," Queensland Premier Anna Bligh said. 

Mundra Port--India's biggest private port operator by capacity--is a unit of diversified conglomerate Adani Enterprises Ltd., which also controls Adani Power Ltd., a power producer with significant expansion plans.

The Abbot Point Coal Terminal, a coal-export facility which is expanding its capacity to 50 million tons a year in 2011, is located in northern Queensland, close to Adani's coal mines in the Galilee basin. 

More than half of India's power-generation capacity of 173.6 gigawatts is based on thermal coal, and the world's second-fastest growing major economy aims to add 163 GW capacity in the 10 years through March 2017. But the country faces a shortage of coal, which has forced state-run Coal India Ltd., the world's biggest coal producer, as well as private companies to explore options to import coal or acquire coal mines overseas. 

The Abbot contract strengthens the Adani Group's foothold in Australia where the group bought Linc Energy Ltd.'s coal mines for $2.7 billion last year and plans to invest A$6.9 billion ($7.5 billion) to develop the Galilee basin coal mines and related infrastructure in Queensland state. 

"Mundra has been looking at commercial centers all over India, and all over the world," said B. Ravi, chief financial officer at Mundra Port. "Abbot Point fits into the global strategy as well as the group's strategy in the region." 

He said the all-cash deal has been funded through acquisition finance by way of debt and the company will explore asset-level financing in a couple of months. 

 Bids From Australia, Overseas  

The Queensland government's bidding process for the Abbot Point X50 Coal Terminal attracted interest from companies and consortiums in Australia as well as overseas and took six months, Mundra said, adding that it "marks the beginning of expansion of business of Mundra Port outside India." 

Abbot Point is owned by North Queensland Bulk Ports Corp. Ltd. and has two berths capable of handling cape-size vessels of more than 200,000 deadweight tons with a capacity to load 50 million tons a year. It can be expanded to 80 million tons. 

The expansion may cost as much as A$600 million ($653 million) and take about three years, Mr. Ravi said, but added that the company hasn't yet finalized the port's expansion plans. 

In 2009-10, about 17 million tons of coal was transported through Abbot Point. 

Mundra continues to study acquisition opportunities in other parts of the world as demand for coal continues to grow in India. 

"Abbot Point is an existing profit making, operating port, soon, with take or pay arrangements for its entire 50 million ton capacity," the company said. 

Mundra expects Abbot Point to post revenue of $110 million in 2011, and margins to gradually increase by 2016 when expanded facilities are fully utilised with revenue of $305 million. 

Mundra Port, which operates India's largest private port in the western state of Gujarat, has ports at Mundra and Dahej. It is developing a port at Hazira and plans to develop a coal-import terminal at Vishakhapatnam in southern India. 

Mundra Port, with a capacity of 50 million tons a year, plans to handle 200 million tons of cargo a year by 2020. 

The Mundra deal could be the first step to make Abbot Point the largest coal port in the world, said a person familiar with the deal. 

"Theoretically, you could have 300 million tons to 400 million tons a year there," the person said. 

That compares with a target of 163 million tons a year currently at Newcastle, the world's busiest coal port in Australia's state of New South Wales, the person added. 

