LONDON—Facing an expected by-election defeat Thursday and languishing in the opinion polls, senior U.K. Liberal Democrat lawmaker David Laws said colleagues are braced for their "toughest year" in 2011 but warned opponents not to count his party out.

Recent polls have suggested that the opposition Labour party is headed for victory in the Oldham East & Saddleworth by-election in northern England. It is a seat which the Liberal Democrats, the junior party in Prime Minister David Cameron's coalition government, desperately hope to capture. The vote is the first major test of the coalition with a result expected to be announced local time early Friday. 

British by-elections have a habit of throwing surprises, but two surveys last weekend put Labour ahead by 17 points. Meanwhile, in the national polls, the Liberal Democrats are at record lows.

Speaking on the eve of the vote, Mr. Laws—a key architect of last May's deal which sealed the U.K.s first coalition government in 65 years—said a "strong performance" in the by-election was important. 

But he said Liberal Democrats lawmakers understand that supporters are still angry over broken pre-election pledges. With hard decisions on tax and spending yet to bear fruit, he said the party must now buckle down and wait out its current political problems. 

"Yes, we'd rather be at twice the opinion poll rating but nobody in the party that I talk to is saying… it was wrong to go into coalition and all of them appreciate this is going to be perhaps the toughest year of the parliament for us," he said in an interview. 

"We've had to compromise on some things… like tuition fees… and obviously we've had these massive plans to reduce the deficit which have resulted in very tight public spending plans, the increase in Value Added Tax. These are the most difficult and unpopular decisions we're likely to have to reach in the entire parliament."

Whatever the result, the Liberal Democrats' short-term political fortunes look grim. The party polled a record low of 7% in a YouGov tracking poll for The Sun newspaper this week, down from the 23% of votes it won in last May's national election.

In December, the party split down the middle in a torturous vote to approve the government's plans to treble the cap on tuition fees. In the same month, the Business Secretary, Vince Cable, the second most senior Liberal Democrat, was stripped of some of his responsibilities following ill-advised comments in a secretly taped conversation with undercover reporters.

Many expect the party to struggle in the May 5 local elections. A referendum the same day on reforming the voting system is far from certain to go the Liberal Democrats' way. Reforming the electoral system so that a party's seats better match its vote tally is a longstanding goal for the U.K.'s perennial third party and was its key prize for entering the coalition.

Mr. Laws, 45, says he has seen no evidence that the referendum will be won by the "no" camp. And after watching the Liberal Democrats political fortunes zigzag during his 17 years as an aide and lawmaker, the quietly-spoken, Cambridge-educated economics major is dismissive of talk of the party's demise as a national force.

"We have been written off more often than a piece of Latin American debt," says the former senior investment banker. "During this time…we've got stronger in local government. We're now part of the national government. We've got the Deputy Prime Minister." 

For Mr. Laws, the political demands of being in government turned personal after the Liberal Democrats joined the government—the first time Liberals had held high office since World War II.

A key player in the post-election coalition negotiating team, Mr. Laws was given a major job as number two in the treasury under Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne, the man who once tried to woo him over to the Conservatives.

Mr. Laws was quickly tipped as a rising star, a down-to-earth policy wonk with political antennae who was respected in both coalition parties. 

But three weeks in, Mr. Laws was forced to quit after it emerged that he had claimed parliamentary expenses for renting rooms from his partner, a breach of the rules. Mr. Laws repaid the money and said his motivation had been to keep his relationship with the man private.

Out of government, Mr. Laws remains a loyalist, strongly supporting the government's ambitious austerity plans, which Labour warns cut spending too far, too fast and risk sending the U.K. economy the same as way Ireland.

Mr. Laws believes the economy will withstand the £111 billion ($175 billion) in fiscal tightening the coalition has outlined, although he acknowledges a fresh downturn is not impossible and 2011 won't be "an easy year."

And he believes that U.K. borrowing costs will remain subdued even if political strains rise—not just because the U.K. austerity plans commands confidence in bond markets, but because investors "wisely" discount the fact that neither coalition partner can afford to bring down the government.

"The coalition partners have nowhere else to go for the time being, to be blunt," he said. "We need time to see the fiscal consolidation through, to prove to people that we made the right decisions on the economy (and) to get the deficit down."

As for Mr. Laws himself, Mr. Cameron said last month he wants him back in the cabinet "soon." 

The Liberal Democrat insist he is quite happy in his current role—supporting the government from the backbenches, feeding ideas in and offering advice to his former ministerial colleagues when asked. 

But he is not ruling out a return to frontline politics if cleared by a parliamentary inquiry into expenses, saying he will "avoid making any decision in either direction" until then.

 Write to  Laurence Norman at laurence.norman@dowjones.com 