NEW DELHI Boeing Co. which has an order backlog of 107 planes from Indian carriers, expects the country's airlines to add about 40 aircraft each year over the next two decades to meet an expected surge in air traffic in the fast-growing economy. 

The Chicago-based company will also start building its first maintenance, repair and overhaul center in India next month to take care of the expanding fleets of its customers, Dinesh Keskar, Boeing's India president, told Dow Jones Newswires. 

Boeing's bullish forecast for the Indian market comes at a time when IndiGo, the country's largest budget airline by marketshare, ordered 180 planes from rival Airbus. The European plane maker says Wednesday's order, estimated at $15.6 billion, is the single biggest for commercial jets by number of planes in aviation history. It includes 150 A320 NEO planes, a more fuel-efficient variant of the popular A320 aircraft, which competes with Boeing's 737 family of jets. 

SpiceJet, another low-fare domestic airline, recently placed an order for 30 Boeing jets and 30 turboprop aircraft from Bombardier Inc. 

Boeing estimates India will require 1,150 commercial jets at a price of up to $130 billion over the next 20 years--more than 4% of its worldwide forecast for commercial airplanes. Airbus, a unit of European Aeronautic Defence & Space Co., also expects demand for 1,032 commercial aircraft in India in the next two decades. 

"We see air traffic in India growing 15% per year over the next five years and about 8.5% on average over the next 20 years," Mr. Keskar said in an interview Thursday. 

He said Indian carriers will need more aircraft through new orders as well as leases to serve domestic routes and those around the subcontinent. Boeing's backlog of 107 planes is valued at $14 billion at catalog prices and runs through the financial year ending March 31, 2016, he said. 

With a fast-expanding economy of more than a billion people--half of them aged 25 or younger--India has become one of the world's hottest markets for aviation. 

Domestic air travel rose 19% during January-November 2010 to 46.8 million passengers, up from 2009's 8% rise, which followed a decline of more than 10% in 2008 when the global economic downturn sapped demand while higher fuel prices made flights unprofitable. 

"Today, the supply balance is in good check and fares are reasonable, they are not too high that they are one-sided," Mr. Keskar said. "There is now a reasonably good balance between supply and demand." 

Mr. Keskar didn't say if Boeing expects more orders from Indian carriers in the near future, but said the order backlog of Boeing and rival Airbus will force Indian carriers to lease more planes for their short-term fleet expansions. 

Air India's chief operating officer, Gustav Baldauf, said earlier this week that the airline plans to lease 107 planes by the end of 2015. Jet Airways (India) Ltd. also recently announced plans to lease 10 Airbus A330s. 

Mr. Keskar cautioned, however, that higher oil prices, a shortage of pilots and any imbalance between demand and supply in India could be likely hurdles to potential growth. 

Boeing will announce a new delivery schedule of the 787 Dreamliner for national carrier Air India later this month, Mr. Keskar said. Air India ordered 27 Dreamliners in December 2005, part of a deal for 68 planes. 

So far, Boeing has delivered 38 planes to Air India, including eight 777-200 long-range and 12 777-300 extended-range planes, Mr. Keskar said. 

He said that under the current schedule, which has been revised several times, Air India is to take delivery of the Dreamliners from the end of the June quarter. 

Boeing resumed airborne testing on its new fleet of Dreamliners in late December, more than six weeks after an electrical fire and power failure forced the company to suspend flight testing. 

Mr. Keskar also said the contract to build the $100 million aircraft maintenance, repair and overhaul center in the western Indian city of Nagpur has already been awarded to a company and an official announcement will be made soon. 

The center will initially cater to the Boeing planes of Air India, the joint venture partner in the project, and later service other airlines in the region, he said. 

 Write to  Santanu Choudhury at santanu.choudhury@dowjones.com 