HONG KONG—Hong Kong said it would hand out 6,000 Hong Kong dollars (about US$770) to each of the Chinese territory's adult permanent residents in a bid to diffuse widespread public discontent over a previous plan, even though the sweeteners could add to the city's inflationary pressures.

Following talks with pro-government lawmakers, Financial Secretary John Tsang offered to give the cash payments to each of the city's six million permanent residents aged 18 or above and waive 75% of a tax on individual salaries, subject to a maximum waiver of HK$6,000 per taxpayer. 

Mr. Tsang didn't provide further details. With about six million adult permanent residents in the Chinese special administrative region, the program would cost roughly HK$36 billion.



The government's cash handout replaces an earlier plan, unveiled at his Feb. 23 budget speech, to inject HK$6,000 into the retirement savings accounts of Hong Kong residents. The government said that program would cost HK$24 billion.

The payments mark the latest efforts by governments in a number of places, including fast-growing Asia, to offer subsidies and other payouts to the public to defray higher costs. The about-face came amid strong criticisms from lawmakers and social groups that the relief measures announced last week, such as the retirement account injections, were ineffective in mitigating the hardship of low-income groups in face of higher prices for real estate, food and utilities.

Mr. Tsang had earlier resisted demands for more tax reductions and direct cash payments to local residents despite ballooning government coffers, because he feared doing so would boost inflation, which the government forecasts at 4.5% in 2011 after a 2.4% rise in consumer prices last year. He acknowledged Wednesday that the revised measures would add to inflationary pressures, but said he needed to strike a balance and respond to the public outcry. 

The proposed cash handout is the first of its kind in the history of the former British colony. 

Mr. Tsang said last week that fighting inflation was the government's key task this year, but he cited the city's inability to implement major tightening measures because of Hong Kong's currency peg to the U.S. dollar, which bolts the city's monetary policies in lockstep to those in the U.S., where interest rates are set a pro-growth lows.

Mr. Tsang was attacked by some lawmakers for not delivering enough relief measures despite an expected budget surplus of HK$71.3 billion for this financial year. Pan-democratic legislators had planned to organize a major demonstration on Sunday calling for more relief measures. 

"I'm very glad that the government made the U-turn," said pro-government lawmaker Regina Ip, who was Hong Kong's former secretary for security. "If the government had better captured public opinion before presenting the budget than all this could have been avoided." 

Academics and lawmakers say that the sudden change in the administration's stance also exposes weaknesses in governance in Hong Kong. The city's chief executive is chosen by a process largely controlled by the Chinese central government in Beijing, while lawmakers are elected in a complicated process that gives outsize power to special interests such as business groups. 

"The government made such a drastic concession in just a few days, indicating that the decision-making process is very chaotic and has a lack of guiding principles," said Danny Lam, a professor of politics at the University of Hong Kong. 

"This is a very short-sighted step aimed at tackling mounting criticism ahead of Sunday's demonstrations," Mr. Lam said, adding such a plan could raise expectations for similar moves in the future. 

Still, opposition lawmakers on Wednesday pledged to go forward with Sunday's rally, saying that the government still hasn't responded to their demands for more long-term measures to narrow the wealth gap in the city.

 Write to  Chester Yung at chester.yung@dowjones.com 