  Citigroup Inc.
C


0.62
%




 swung to a fourth-quarter profit as lending strengthened overseas, but revenue from bond trading took a severe hit. The bank's earnings and revenue fell short of Wall Street expectations. 

Citigroup reported a $1.3 billion profit—compared with the year-earlier loss of $7.6 billion. Revenue more than tripled to $18.4 billion from $5.4 billion a year earlier, but fell more than 11% from the third quarter. Expenses rose because Citigroup hired more bankers and took a hit from the weakening dollar.

The bank took a $1.1 billion charge tied to the rising value of its own bonds following the U.S. Treasury Department's sale of its shares in the bank. Banks must record gains if the value of their debt falls, because it becomes theoretically cheaper to repurchase it. Conversely, they book charges if the value of the debt rises. 

On Tuesday, Citigroup's shares slid 6.4% to $4.80. The shares had risen after the Treasury sale above $5, a level not seen since mid-2009.

Chief Financial Officer  John Gerspach told reporters that Citigroup is "very pleased" with results, particularly because its investment in the Asian and Latin American lending businesses is paying off. Even the lackluster U.S. consumer-banking business is showing signs of life, he said, as credit-card lending seems to be picking up and loan losses continue to decline broadly. 

He said fixed-income trading was weak, but said the business, historically one of Citigroup's stronger operations, needs no fixing. Citigroup also continues to hire bankers around the world in capital markets, he said. 

Mr. Gerspach added that about $800 million of the valuation adjustment of Citigroup's own bonds flowed through the fixed-income trading business, which made the unit's performance look worse. 

 Track the performances of 150 companies as they report and compare their results with analyst estimates. Sort by date and industry.

Chief Executive  Vikram Pandit told investors during a separate conference call that despite an "uncertain" economy, "our focus is on achieving sustained and responsible growth." 

Mr. Gerspach said North America consumer-banking revenue should "grow modestly as loan demand begins to recover, particularly in the second half of the year." As loan demand in emerging markets increases, the bank is likely to have to set aside more funds to cover potential losses, this year, he said. 

The bank's credit-loss provision was $4.84 billion, down from $8.18 billion a year earlier. 

In the fourth quarter, the weakening dollar cost Citigroup $150 million, Mr. Gerspach said. Citigroup doesn't hedge its foreign-exchange risk much. "As the dollar weakens against many currencies, we will continue to see some pressure," Mr. Gerspach said, but "it's not a huge driver." 

Citigroup added $248 million to its reserve for potential claims to buy back soured mortgages from investors in mortgage-backed securities. The reserve now stands at almost $1 billion; claims from Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are expected to peak this year. Claims from private investors, a source of concern for bank investors lately, have been insignificant, Mr. Gerspach said. 

Citigroup reported a profit of four cents a share, compared with the year-earlier loss of 33 cents a share. Analysts polled by Thomson Reuters expected a per-share profit of eight cents. 

"Altogether, a soft quarter," Nomura Securities analyst  Glenn Schorr wrote in a research note. 

  John McDonald of Sanford C. Bernstein & Co. wrote in a report the quality of the core earnings was "soft given higher operating expenses," but "credit continues to improve and Citi's balance sheet looks solid. We see good long-term value in Citi's shares." 

At Citicorp, the company's core banking and capital-markets segment, profit jumped 36%, while revenue climbed 20%. Citi Holdings, which includes assets and businesses the company is unloading, posted a narrower loss as revenue dropped 11% but credit costs shrank. 

—Summer Said contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Matthias Rieker at matthias.rieker@dowjones.com and Matt Jarzemsky at matthew.jarzemsky@dowjones.com 