Away from the flags and festivities of London the royal wedding saw mixed results across the rest of the U.K. 

While many Britons where bedecking their streets in flags and bunting others stayed at home, reflecting the fact that the royal family is not uniformly popular across their realm. 

Across England and Wales there were over 5,500 road closure requests for street parties, with Bristol in south west England proving the most patriotic with 54 applications, according to the Local Government Association. 

Those who did fly the flag were particularly prevalent in southern England, with only one northern English city, Newcastle, among the top ten councils for street closure applications. 

Far fewer official street parties appear to have been organized in Scotland than in England, with 16 taking place in Edinburgh and only one in the country's biggest city, Glasgow. 

Surveys suggest an archetypal wedding enthusiast would be a politically conservative woman who is more than 60 years old and hails from southern England. Most likely to be apathetic: a libertarian-leaning Scottish man between 25 and 39 years old.

There is of course exceptions to the north south divide. John G Renicks butchers in Thornhill, southern Scotland, have done a roaring trade selling red, white and blue pork sausages. The butchers would usually sell some 100 pounds of pork sausage in a week have shifted 250 pounds, or around 3,000, wedding sausages, according to Iain Renicks, who runs the butcher with his brother. 

And in the south, Williams Holidays in Cornwall, southwest England, had to cancel their three-day London royal wedding tour, after only eight people booked up for a trip that would typically take up to 40. 

Still, owner Fred Williams says that many people's interest in Cornwall picked up as the day approached. "I think people got swept up with the pageantry of it all," Mr. Williams said. 

The idea of a late rush seemed to be confirmed by the Local Government Association, which said that local councils had been "inundated a final surge of applications" in recent days. 

"I think it's been a wonderful day," said Gordon Callan, an 82-year-old former British infantry soldier in Somerset, southeast England. Mr. Callan was up early to watch the wedding on TV and sat through the whole event. 

"We can do this better than anybody," he said. 

 Write to  Alistair MacDonald at alistair.macdonald@wsj.com 