 European leaders will meet in Brussels on Friday to debate a grand-sounding package to resolve the euro zone's debt crisis. But investors and analysts fear the deal will underwhelm, owing to political differences that have led Europe to scale down the measures' ambition. 

 Europe's banking supervisor defended proposals for a new round of bank stress tests against criticisms that they were set to replicate the weaknesses of a similar exercise last year, but the finger is pointing at Germany for leading the campaign to weaken the tests. 

 Authorities in the U.K. and Iceland arrested nine men—including a pair of high-profile U.K. property moguls—in connection with the collapse of Kaupthing Bank, in the latest arrests connected to the failure of Iceland's banking system. 

 The U.K. narrowed its trade deficit significantly in January, with exports rising to the highest level since records began in 1980, but experts said the improvement may be temporary and questioned whether trade will drive an economic recovery. 

Enda Kenny was voted in by parliament as Ireland's new prime minister, and faces a difficult task as he leads his debt-stricken country during what he described as its "darkest hour." 

 German industrial production jumped 1.8% in January, the economics ministry said, more than reversing December's weather-induced drop. 

Portugal sold €1 billion ($1.4 billion) in two-year government bonds, showing it is still able to tap the private sector for funds. But Lisbon paid dearly; 5.99% interest for only a two-year maturity. Germany pays just 1.75% for the same maturity. 

 Greece aims to offer its first diaspora bond to U.S. retail investors of Greek descent in the first half of this year, a senior Greek finance-ministry official said, after it filed a shelf-registration with U.S. regulators to proceed with the issue.  

Greece's unemployment rate continued to accelerate in December, rising to 14.8% compared with 10.2% in December 2009.

 Turkey's public opinion appears to be shifting against a massive investigation aimed at rooting out an alleged secret terrorist organization within the state, following charges against several journalists in connection with the case. 

The Treasury Department said it has received a $6.9 billion repayment from AIG, the troubled insurer it helped bail out at the height of the financial crisis. Treasury made a total cash investment in AIG of about $68 billion through the Troubled Asset Relief Program. 

U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk told senators the Obama administration is committed to resolving the remaining issues with the Colombia and Panama trade agreements this year. 

 Illinois Governor Pat Quinn signed a bill abolishing the death penalty, making Illinois the 16th state in recent years to take such action for reasons ranging from erroneous convictions to the high cost of defending capital cases. 

 National Public Radio's president and chief executive resigned in the wake of a scandal that has elevated the news organization's concerns about its future funding.  

Discovery, NASA's oldest shuttle, ended its career as the world's most flown spaceship, returning from orbit for the last time and taking off in a new direction as a museum piece.

 The government of the Canadian province of Quebec said it would halt most new natural-gas exploration and development, putting a new regulatory spotlight on shale-gas extraction amid environmental worries in the U.S. 

A member of the Chinese central bank's monetary advisory committee said China should aim for full yuan convertibility over the next 10 years, saying such a move is important for a "rising power" like China. 

 China targeted total spending of nearly $200 billion this year for the construction of subsidized housing, as the government steps up a campaign to address widespread complaints over the lack of affordable housing while also maintaining construction activity.  

 Managing relations with China will likely be a top priority for Japan's new Foreign Minister Takeaki Matsumoto, as a couple of months of relative calm between the two countries seems to be coming to an end. 

A 7.3-magnitude earthquake hit near northern Japan on Wednesday, with the tremors felt as far as away as Tokyo, which is around 420 kilometers to the south. 

In Pakistan, a suicide bomber attacked a funeral attended by anti-Taliban militiamen near the northwestern city of Peshawar, killing at least 36 mourners and wounding more than 100 others, officials said. The Pakistani Taliban claimed responsibility.

More than 100 citizens of the United Arab Emirates have submitted a petition to their rulers demanding an elected parliament with legislative powers, the first sign of a political response in the country to the political changes sweeping across the Middle East.

 Saudi Arabia's aged leaders are grappling with their biggest challenge in years as demands for sweeping internal change follow a wave of Arab unrest. The ruling Al Saud family now faces unprecedented calls for political overhauls before a "day of rage" promised for Friday by Facebook activists. 

In Egypt, clashes that broke out when a Muslim mob attacked thousands of Christians protesting against the burning of a Cairo church killed at least 13 people and wounded about 140, officials said. 

 Forces loyal to Col. Moammar Gadhafi seized the central square of a rebel-held city near the capital and stalled rebel forces in the east, as Libyan officials began a campaign to block international efforts to pressure the government. 

As the U.S., European Union and other governments looked into options for intervention as well a wider economic sanctions, a delegation of Gadhafi's government headed to Europe carrying messages for NATO and EU ministers meeting in Brussels on Thursday, senior European officials and diplomats said.

NATO defense ministers and EU foreign ministers and leaders have refused to meet the group, according to a senior European diplomat.

The EU's top foreign-policy officer said the EU will widen the scope of sanctions against Gadhafi's government, and backed calls for a United Nations-led investigation into events in Libya.

Pro-government forces stalled rebels with a heavy barrage of rockets in the east and threatened to recapture some towns where key oil facilities are situated.

Libya's central-bank governor said he had been in touch with the U.S. Treasury, the EU and other institutions in a bid to soften any freeze on the central bank's assets, though he added that he had been temporarily replaced by the country's finance minister and had his rıght to sign agreements withdrawn.

The government of Ivory Coast's presidential incumbent Laurent Gbagbo threatened to seize cocoa stocks held by exporters, and warned gold miners they could be nationalized if they don't cooperate with the government. 

 The damage done by Cyclone Yasi to the Great Barrier Reef, Australia's top attraction, will take decades to fully mend, according to a growing number of scientists—which could reduce both visitor numbers and the local fishing industry's catches. 