One of the most controversial cases in the New Jersey Supreme Court's history will be back before justices Wednesday, as an advocate for urban-school funding challenges Gov. Chris Christie's education budget cuts.

The landmark school-funding case, Abbott v. Burke, reemerges at a time when the court is in the midst of a political crisis. Mr. Christie, citing rulings such as Abbott, is remaking a court he believes has overextended its power by dictating how the state spends money.

The Education Law Center argues that Mr. Christie's education cuts last year—of more than $1 billion, depending on what is included—violated the Supreme Court's order to fully fund education for three years to evaluate a new formula being used to pay for schools.

"These substantial aid reductions in the formula's basic components deprive students of the resources deemed necessary for a thorough and efficient education," the Education Law Center wrote in its brief, referencing the state constitution's requirement to provide a "thorough and efficient" free public education. The center first filed the class-action Abbott case in 1981 on behalf of poor, urban children.

The state attorney general's office argues that the cuts were "unavoidable" because of New Jersey's "dire fiscal circumstances," and also challenges the court's power to make spending decisions. The state lost more than $1 billion in federal stimulus funds from the year before, and it dedicated about $10.3 billion of the $29.4 billion budget for 2010-11 to education.

The court in 2009 gave its blessing to the formula, devised under former Gov.  Jon Corzine, which sends more money to districts with children with higher needs—such as those in poverty, with disabilities or who know little English. 

That replaced the court's previous dictate to spend more money in what came to be known as "Abbott districts." But the court said the state needed a three-year period of full funding to determine whether the new method was a success.

In crafting the 2010-11 state budget, the Christie administration "depart[ed] significantly from" the formula, according to a budget analysis by the nonpartisan Office of Legislative Services, saying it budgeted less money than required and made cuts in a way that disproportionately affected certain districts.

But who lost out most under the cuts is up to interpretation. The state eliminated basic support from dozens of districts, but cut the most in dollars terms from the biggest districts, such as Newark, which receives heavy state support. The method cut up to 5% of local budgets.

That way, the Christie administration argues in court papers, the cuts showed "a principled commitment to minimizing the brunt of decreased funding on those districts most reliant upon state aid."

Still, the Education Law Center said the overall cuts are the main problem, forcing poorer districts to reduce basic areas of teaching and support. Some in education say the governor should have extended a tax increase on millionaires instead of cutting funding.

Court watchers said the judges could force the state government to spend more money on education—either in the middle of this budget year, which experts say is most unlikely, or in upcoming budgets. 

In the past, courts have given governors some leeway, such as in 2004, when the court allowed the McGreevey administration to borrow to meet budget—but just for that year.

Predicting what the court will do has become a bit more difficult, because its members are caught up in a political battle over the makeup of the court. Citing cases such as Abbott, Mr. Christie criticized the court for injecting itself into state budgetary decisions.

Mr. Christie started his quest to remake the court in May by attempting to replace a sitting justice, without tenure. But a political stalemate has kept his nominee off the bench, while the chief justice elevated a lower judge for a temporary appointment.

Associate Justice Roberto Rivera-Soto, protesting the temporary appointment without what he saw as a constitutional need, said last month he would abstain from voting. That gives more power to the views of the other justices, said  Edward Hartnett, a law professor at Seton Hall University who has focused on the court.

The subsidization of poor and urban districts has caused deep divisions and resentment throughout the state, with immediate policy and political consequences. Several Republicans during the final days of state budget negotiations last year nearly killed the deal because of concerns over the lack of funding for suburban districts.