Market risk appetite seems to rise and fall on a perpetual hair trigger, yet investors treated the weekend's stunning arrest of International Monetary Fund chief  Dominique Strauss-Kahn in New York with unusual equanimity. 

Especially in Europe, the benching of a key player in the euro zone's debt crisis might have been seen as a major problem at this delicate time for Greece. In fact, many European newspapers had said as much.

But as Monday's trading got under way, the euro remained in a narrow range, dipping beneath $1.41 in Asian hours only to reclaim lost ground and later climb above $1.42. Germany's government-bond market, meanwhile, usually the first port of call for the shellshocked, scarcely moved, and the cost of insuring European corporate and sovereign debt just twitched.

Of course, one man's absence can't undermine the work of the entire IMF, even if he is the boss. Even so, this calm seems almost eerie given Mr. Strauss-Kahn's position as key broker in Europe. Before his arrest he was, after all, en route to Berlin for talks with German Chancellor Angela Merkel. He was then due in Brussels to discuss the financial rescue of Greece, now all but sure to be locked out of international debt markets for longer than its initial rescuers envisaged.

  Dennis Gartman, a London-based investor who writes the Gartman Letter, pointed out in his daily market update Monday: "The situation regarding Mr. Strauss-Kahn could not come at a more difficult time for the Fund or for Europe generally, for the Fund is at the very centre of the bail-out program."

Moreover, the IMF head has been an important friend to Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou. During a trip to Athens in December, Mr. Strauss-Kahn was highly critical of European leaders for not tackling the euro zone's debt crisis earlier.

Greek officials have said privately that they are concerned at the loss of this key ally—more concerned than the torpid markets, evidently.

And Mr. Strauss-Kahn's arrest wasn't the only weekend euro problem that investors seemed to be shrugging off. 

German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble insisted in an interview with ARD TV in Germany on Sunday that Greece could be granted an extension to its bailout repayment, but that it would affect private creditors as well as European taxpayers.

Then, European Central Bank Executive Board member  Juergen Stark told regional daily Der Tagesspiegel in Monday's editions that Greece needs to step up its deficit-cutting efforts in order to qualify for the next tranche of financial aid from the IMF and the European Union.

And still the markets hardly moved. Investors are resigned to a debt restructuring, even if it isn't called one explicitly, and are doubtful only about when it will come. For all the uncertainties now surrounding Mr. Strauss-Kahn's position and the apparent hardening of attitudes toward Greece, to investors, it seems, the situation remains much as it was.

"All interested parties attempting to resolve Europe's sovereign-debt crisis will, in my view, rise above this one single unfortunate personal event soon enough," said  Howard Wheeldon, a strategist at BGC Capital Markets in London. "The IMF is an organization that must always be larger than its leader." 

However, London-based economist  Stephen Lewis, of Monument Securities, said the markets are probably being too complacent about Greek debt.

"They may be greatly underestimating policy makers' determination to resist debt restructuring or default," he said. "Consequently, the turmoil in the euro zone is not set to subside on the basis of Greek debt restructuring in the near term, followed by a quick return to business as usual. The outcome is likely to be messier than that."

 Write to  David Cottle at david.cottle@dowjones.com 