NEW YORK—Oil futures settled above $100 a barrel for the first time in more than two years, lifted by fighting in Libya and worries of oil-supply disruptions. 

Light, sweet crude for April delivery settled up $2.60, or 2.6%, at $102.23 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange, the highest settlement since Sept. 26, 2008. Brent crude on the ICE futures exchange recently traded up $1.24, or 1.1%, at $116.66 a barrel. 

Oil markets fixated on reports of heavy fighting in Libya on Wednesday. Forces loyal to Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi launched an offensive in the oil-rich eastern part of the country but met resistance from rebel soldiers. The oil-refinery city of Brega was a site of much of the fighting, according to reports.

Western countries have raised the possibility of enforcing a no-fly zone over Libya, though U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates criticized "loose talk" about U.S. military intervention in the North African country.

"The military activity going on is causing this market to erupt," said  Tony Rosado, broker at GA Global Markets in New York. 

The International Energy Agency said the conflict in Libya has caused more oil production to be shuttered than initially forecast. Between 850,000 and one million barrels a day of Libyan crude output has gone offline, the watchdog said. Last week, the IEA said between 500,000 and 750,000 barrels a day of Libyan crude-oil production had been disrupted. 

Still, the IEA said European refiners—the main recipients of Libyan oil—have "ample crude" in supply until "at least the end of March." Other countries in the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries have said they are able to step up production to make up for any shortfall in oil supplies.

OPEC—of which Libya is a member—said crude total crude production last month was little changed from January, suggesting that production increases from Gulf countries offset lost production from Libya. Saudi Arabia has raised production to nine million barrels a day, while Iraq, Kuwait, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates have also raised output. 

Still, market participants said oil was closely tracking the latest developments in Libya, even as most developed countries remain well-supplied. Many traders are fearful that the unrest that has swept the Middle East and North Africa in recent months will lead to additional violence and disruptions to crude supplies in other countries. 

"This market is so nervous and trading with such fear that the next headline could move it," said  Andy Lebow, an oil analyst at MF Global. 

Also lifting oil prices was a Department of Energy report showing a surprise decline in U.S. oil and fuel supplies last week. The DOE said crude stockpiles fell by 400,000 barrels last week. Analysts surveyed by Dow Jones Newswires expected an increase of one million barrels. 

Gasoline stockpiles fell by 3.6 million barrels, the DOE said, while supplies of distillates, including heating oil and diesel, fell 800,000 barrels. Analysts expected gasoline stocks to rise 100,000 barrels and distillate stocks to fall by one million barrels. 

The government also said supplies at Cushing, Okla., the delivery point for the Nymex contract, hit a record high last week, rising 1.1 million barrels to a record 38.6 million barrels. Brimming oil tanks at Cushing have kept the Nymex contract for West Texas Intermediate crude trading at a sharp discount to Brent crude in recent months. 

 Write to  Dan Strumpf at dan.strumpf@dowjones.com 