Indiana Gov. Mitch Daniels may not be the only Hoosier seeking the Republican nomination for president in 2012. The rumors started swirling over the weekend that Rep. Mike Pence could be throwing his hat in the ring as well.

Conservative leaders are certainly beating the drum for a Pence run. This week, Mr. Pence will receive a letter of support for a presidential bid from, among others, Dick Armey, a former Republican House majority leader; Brent Bozell, president of the Media Research Center; and Morton Blackwell, president of the Leadership Institute.

There is also a petition circulating on the Internet to draft Mr. Pence for president. It is being spearheaded by former Rep. Jim Ryan and former Reagan official Ralph Benko, who has close ties to the conservative blogging community and the tea party movement. We're also told that a coalition of conservative state legislators in South Carolina is urging Mr. Pence to run and promising to do all it can to carry the early primary state for the congressman. Mr. Pence also enjoys the support of two former GOP congressmen from Indiana—David McIntosh and Chris Chocola, who now runs the Club for Growth. "Mike has a Reagan quality to him that is lacking in many of the other first tier Republican candidates," said Mr. McIntosh.

Mr. Pence won the straw poll at a gathering of more than 1,000 social conservatives in Washington, D.C., over the summer—besting Newt Gingrich, Mike Huckabee, and presumptive front-runner Mitt Romney. One concern is what Sarah Palin's intentions are, since she would have a huge funding base if she runs. But the pro-Pence movement fears that she is highly polarizing and someone who would have a difficult time beating President Obama in the general election.

The other issue for Mr. Pence, according to his close friends, is that he is also being urged to run for governor back in Indiana. Mr. Daniels is term-limited, and Mr. Pence would be the strong favorite to succeed him, especially given that Mr. Pence's toughest potential opponent, former Senator Evan Bayh, has announced he will not run for governor next year.

One reservation about a presidential bid that Mr. Pence has expressed in private meetings is whether he can raise the money to compete with the well-funded Mitt Romney. But Mr. Benko said that shouldn't be a hindrance. "If Mike runs, the money will follow in a big way," he said. Mr. Pence has told friends that he will make a decision by the end of the month.

To read more stories like this one, please subscribe to Political Diary. 