NEW DELHI – Hero Honda Motors Ltd. Wednesday reported a fourth straight drop in quarterly profit, as a lack of price increases to offset higher raw material expenses as well as increased depreciation costs erased gains from record vehicle sales. 

Net profit for the fourth quarter through March declined 16% to 5.02 billion rupees ($113 million) from 5.99 billion rupees a year earlier, India's biggest two-wheeler maker by sales said. The figure met the 5.0 billion rupees average of estimates in a poll of 11 analysts. 

Hero Honda shares extended losses after the results to close down 3.6% at 1,600.10 rupees in a Mumbai market that finished 0.4% lower. 

Sales rose 31% to 53.91 billion rupees from 41.22 billion rupees as the company sold more motorcycles and scooters. Vehicle sales jumped 23% to 1.45 million units during the quarter, the company said. 

Hero Honda's profit has been falling despite rising sales volume in India, the world's biggest market for two-wheelers after China. Profit has been hit also because the company--unlike most of its rivals--didn't announce any significant price increase between January and April despite soaring costs of inputs such as metals and rubber. 

The company's raw material costs climbed 41% to 39.25 billion rupees.

Hero Honda also said that its depreciation costs soared more than fivefold to 2.37 billion rupees, but it didn't give any reasons. 

The company incurred interest costs of 81 million rupees during the quarter, compared with an interest gain of 44.7 million rupees a year earlier. 

Increased expenditure on marketing due to Hero Honda's association with some major sporting events, including the recent Cricket World Cup, also dented profits. 

An analyst, who didn't wish to be named, said the company's earnings margin before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization, of 15.4% for the quarter is above estimates, but the benefit doesn't show in the bottom line due to a higher depreciation charge. 

Hero Honda Chief Executive Pawan Munjal said the company is ramping up capacity at its existing three plants and finalizing plans for a fourth factory. 

Hero Honda has fully utilized capacity at its existing factories and is expanding as demand for scooters and motorcycles continues to grow. The company's three factories in north India can produce a combined 5.4 million two-wheelers a year. It is scouting for land to build a fourth factory. 

"We are almost at the final stage, having short-listed a few locations. We will soon be taking a final call on this," Mr. Munjal said. 

A new factory will also help Hero Honda to export more vehicles, as overseas demand for two-wheelers made in India is rising due to their lower prices. 

"New product development will be one focus area as we move ahead in order to expand our customer base. We are also exploring market opportunities in several parts of the world," Mr. Munjal said. 

A pact with Honda Motor Co. had so far restricted Hero Honda to exporting two-wheelers only to a few neighboring countries. 

Honda Motor and India's Hero Group were the founding partners of Hero Honda in 1984. In December 2010, Honda agreed to sell its equal 26% stake in Hero Honda to Hero Group to entirely focus on its wholly owned Indian unit. Hero Group bought Honda Motor's stake for about 38.42 billion rupees in March and now holds a 52% stake in Hero Honda. 

Hero Honda will continue to make motorcycles and scooters with technology from Honda after paying a royalty.

Hero Honda Chief Financial Officer Ravi Sud said the company paid 5.5 billion rupees, or 2.8% of sales, as royalty to Honda Motor in the past financial year. 

"We don't expect royalty payment to change from the current levels of 2.7%-2.8% of sales," Mr. Sud said.

 Write to  Nikhil Gulati at nikhil.gulati@dowjones.com 