Is it the economy? Better workout habits? For whatever reason, the American man is embracing shorter swimwear. And maybe it's about time. After all, suits that are considered skimpy stateside have long been perfectly acceptable abroad. "Ten years ago, it was all about longer board shorts," said Kevin Harter, men's fashion director at Bloomingdale's. "Now hemlines are going up, up, up."

"It's probably trends and function combining," champion surfer Kelly Slater said via e-mail. Even if below-the-knee trunks are associated with laid-back surfers, Mr. Slater said that on the board, they mostly "just get in the way."

But Mr. Slater's wave-riding predecessors paved the way for the oversized shorts that have dominated men's swimwear until recently. Surfers started wearing loose-fitting (albeit midthigh-length) trunks called baggies in the late 1950s and early '60s. Favored by charismatic icons like Greg Noll and Bunker Spreckels, baggies were the flowing emblem of coastal American bohemianism, with its beach bonfires, Volkswagen vans and salt-kissed hair.



However, the baggie remained a marginal style for nearly three decades. Hollywood sex symbols like Sean Connery and Robert Conrad wore much tighter trunks in their poolside scenes, and throughout the '70s and '80s, basketball players epitomized masculinity in crotch-grazing shorts. It wasn't until the '90s and early aughts that the looser (and, by then, longer) surfer look became the norm.

Now Brian Richardson, who runs the family-owned swimwear company Birdwell Beach Britches, said he is seeing a renewed interest in the shorts his grandmother started sewing out of a small machine shop in Santa Ana, Calif., in 1961. Until recently, the company's original 301 style, a best seller in the Mediterranean market, had been less popular in America than the longer 303. Not anymore. "We have noticed a trend going back to it," Mr. Richardson said.

Trimming of this sort has been a long time coming for Parke & Ronen, a menswear brand that has made abbreviated trunks for 10 years. "Before, in the department stores, they were asking for those big sizes—I was like, 'Dude, I don't make parachutes, I make swimsuits,' " co-founder Ronen Jehezkel said.

While he and his business partner, Parke Lutter, never had to convince their European customers that short is sweet, with Americans, Mr. Jehezkel recalled, "it was a culture shock when we went above the knee."

Amanda Boalt, designer of the men's swimwear line Strong Boalt, agreed that there is something "juvenile" about a man in sagging swimwear. She added, "When every schlumpy guy is wearing long board shorts and a baseball hat, fashionable guys don't want to."

To that end, the high-end St. Tropez swimwear brand Vilebrequin has lopped more than an inch off the hemline of its Ocean board short. "It correlates with trousers," offered Mr. Harter, of Bloomingdale's. "Over the last four years, pant silhouettes have become slimmer, and it's forced men to get in shape."

It could also be that hemlines are a market indicator. "We're not in great economic times. There's pressure to appear prosperous," said Mark-Evan Blackman, an assistant professor at the Fashion Institute of Technology. "A cleaner, shorter short looks more upscale right now."

Swim-trunk minimalism has its limits, though. There's little evidence that Speedos will be widely popular anytime soon. And, no disrespect to Wilt Chamberlain, but it will probably require a cultural shift to erase what Mr. Blackman described as the "homoerotic" connotations of very short shorts on men.

But even if midthigh shorts are still not the norm, those who have always favored them will feel considerably less out of step this summer. "At the Jersey Shore I can point to swimsuits, and say, 'Mine, mine, mine,' " Mr. Jehezkel said. "Before, if you were wearing Parke & Ronen there, you'd need a helmet."

—Darrell Hartman