Finding innovative ways to deliver health care has never been more important than it is today.

Read the complete Innovations in  Health Care report.  

With the passage of sweeping health-care legislation last year, 32 million more people are expected to flood into a health-care system already strained by rising costs and a short supply of physicians, nurses and other clinicians. 

At the same time, reining in health-care costs is crucial if the government is going to deal with a long-term budget deficit that is spiraling out of control. 

How will an increasing number of people get quality care at a cost that the nation can afford? The answer isn't hard to figure out. It's innovation.

Easier said than done, of course. Unlike many other industries, health care has remained highly fragmented, with a hierarchical culture resistant to change, and a payment system that rewards providers for quantity rather than quality of care. It has been slow to adopt technologies like electronic medical records that have the potential to make care more efficient and safer for patients. Even when new practices have been shown to improve care and reduce error, hospitals and doctors have been slow to adopt them. 

The government is determined to be part of that solution. The new health-care law also created a Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation charged with identifying, testing and spreading new ways of delivering and paying for care. In introducing the new innovation center,  Donald Berwick, head of the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services, promised that it will work with caregivers, insurers, and employers to replicate successful innovations in communities across the country.

But, he warned, "none of this will be easy. Government cannot and should not do this alone." 

In fact, as you'll see in this report, government is far from doing this alone. You'll read of doctors, hospitals, insurers, researchers and cities that are all experimenting with novel methods to improve the quality, safety and effectiveness of care at a reasonable cost. Some are pioneering new delivery systems that encourage providers to coordinate patient care, rather than work at cross-purposes with little communication. Others are rigorously testing safety practices to determine how teams of caregivers can reduce adverse events and errors. Still others are mining medical records to identify patients who aren't taking their medications or might benefit from enrollment in a clinical trial. 

And then there are all those attempts to give consumers the resources they need to stay healthier in the first place. That can mean things as simple as building more sidewalks and bike paths, or getting schools to bring back exercise at recess. Sometimes innovation means getting back to the basics. 