Bangalore --  Pagarav Patel, a Mumbai-based film producer, saw a business opportunity in polishing shoes and started a venture with a friend by pooling savings worth 1.4 million rupees($31 070.2).

They launched Shine Retail and opened a shop at the Hyderabad airport, where they employed four employees

But when Patel wanted to scale up the business, he found few takers among investors as they were not convinced of its commercial viability.

A month ago, they came across IndiaSocial Fund, the latest entrant in the social investment space, which now may invest up to $100,000 (4.5 million rupees) in the start-up.

Unlike most funds that raise money through investors such as pension funds, which are known as limited partners, IndiaSocial Fund is raising a fund of 250 million rupees solely through donations. The fund, which expects to have the first closing (typically when it reaches half the corpus amount) on April 2, will on average invest about 5 million rupees each in social enterprises that aim to improve the lives of the poor, and in patented and mass-market technologies or innovations by scientists outside government institutions.

It will seek returns of 15-18%, much lower than the 25-30% most venture capital firms expect.

The capital for the venture comes from donations that employees at companies make, at an average of 100 rupees a month toward social causes, said  Gaurav Shah, the fund's manager, adding he was looking at more tie-ups with corporations.

Currently, the fund gets contributions from 6,200 people as direct donations from their salary accounts.

While Shah is raising capital through donations made by corporate employees, investment decisions will be made by him and his team of a dozen. Though the fund is raised through donations, it is not a charity, Mr. Shah said.

"When we invest capital, our attitude would be that of a venture capitalist in terms of making suggestions, handholding the company, corporate governance, and we would look at returns," he said.

Shah is the CEO of Singapore-based investment-bank DeGroup DeConseil Pte. Ltd, which he founded in 2007. He began IndiaSocial Fund a month ago in what he calls his bid to cater to the under-served. The returns will be used for further funding, and he proposes to not take any share in the returns. IndiaSocial Fund employees would work from DeConseil offices in Mumbai and Noida to minimize overhead costs. 

IndiaSocial Fund has earmarked at least half a dozen start-ups or innovations to back.

Mohali-based scientist  Adess Singh is one such beneficiary.

Singh has developed a vehicle emission reduction technology and had met nearly a dozen investors before he came across IndiaSocial Fund.

"They (other investors) would say my innovation is too early for Indian markets," said Singh, adding that in the absence of financial backing for his technology he would have left it and moved on.

Not everyone, however, agrees with the social investor's model of raising funds.

"We are not at a stage that we need charity for social ventures," said  Vineet Rai, chief executive of Aavishkaar India, a rural and semi-urban focused investment fund. "Social business needs institutional capital to drive growth." 