WARSAW—Poland raised interest rates Wednesday and its central bank governor said further increases are likely as inflation fears mount in the largest economy of the European Union's eastern tier.

"I wouldn't interpret today's decision as a one-time adjustment," Marek Belka, governor of the National Bank of Poland, told reporters after the bank's Monetary Policy Council voted to raise policy rates by a quarter point, bringing the reference rate to 3.75%.

It was the first rate increase in Poland since June 2008, and demonstrated that inflation worries have grown to outweigh concerns that higher rates will slow economic growth and risk sparking an inflow of so-called hot money.

Consumer prices rose 3.1% in Poland in December, compared with the year-earlier period, above the central bank's target of 2.5%. Food and fuel prices have been the main drivers, and the monetary council said inflation is building as Poland's recovery accelerates.

Poland's gross domestic product, a broad measure of economic activity, rose more than 4% in last year's third quarter from the year-earlier period. That is helping push wages higher and adding to inflation concerns. 

Corporate-sector wages rose 5.4% last month compared with December 2009.

Mr. Belka, the central bank governor, said rate-setters would need to react to rising global prices for food and other commodities as well as purely domestic price pressures. The council meets again in March.

"The tightening cycle will likely be gradual, with an increase once a quarter the most likely scenario," predicted  Piotr Kalisz, an economist for Citibank in Warsaw.

As expectations rose that a rate increase was imminent, foreign funds flowed into Poland, pushing the country's currency, the zloty, to near a nine-month high. 

Mr. Belka said Wednesday that the zloty could appreciate by another 10%. He didn't say over what time frame he thought that might occur.

Jan Winiecki, a member of the monetary council, said at Wednesday's press briefing that Polish exporters should be able to handle the stronger zloty, which will make their goods more expensive abroad.

Poland was the only member of the European Union to have avoided a recession following the start of the global financial crisis in 2008. The depreciation of the zloty at the time helped keep Poland's exporters competitive and the economy growing.

Economists said Poland's economy remains on solid footing, after rising 4.2% in the third quarter of 2010 from the year-earlier period and 3.5% in the second quarter, which sharply topped expectations.

The zloty has since regained much of its precrisis strength. Last April, the central bank, under its previous governor, intervened to weaken the zloty when its value was near the level it is at again now.

Citibank's Mr. Kalisz said Wednesday's rate increases will help Poland meet its inflation target, boost the zloty and brake economic acceleration.

"Economic growth is already above 4%, and if we continue accelerating at this pace, we would soon hit 5%, which would make the MPC concerned that the economy might overheat," he added.

 Write to  Malgorzata Halaba at malgorzata.halaba@dowjones.com 