INDIANAPOLIS—Throughout the five days they had to prepare for Peyton Manning before Saturday's AFC wild-card game here, Jets coach Rex Ryan and his defensive coordinator, Mike Pettine, analyzed film of the recent playoff games that Mr. Manning had lost.

The common thread they found, Mr. Pettine said, was this: The defenses that were most successful against Mr. Manning and the Indianapolis Colts played "rope-a-dope." They might flood the field with defensive backs, as the New England Patriots had years earlier. They might try to limit the number of possessions the Colts' offense got in a game, as the New Orleans Saints did in Super Bowl XLIV last year. What they didn't do was blitz him very much.

So after the Jets had beaten the Colts 17-16, to advance to the divisional round this Sunday against the Patriots, Mr. Pettine could explain just how challenging it had been for his defense to hold Indianapolis to one touchdown and three field goals. In devising their game plan, Mr. Ryan and Mr. Pettine elected to suppress the very aggressiveness that had defined their defensive philosophy.

In fact, according to Mr. Pettine, the coaches cut "a huge block of pressure packages" out of their game plan entirely. The Jets usually rushed four down linemen, sometimes as few as three, in an attempt to confuse Mr. Manning, to make him hesitate before deciding where to throw the football or to check down to a safer, shorter option.

"We definitely mixed our coverages, played it more straight up, mixed in some loaded zones and different things like that," Mr. Ryan said. "Very rarely did we come after him."

The results spoke for themselves. Though Mr. Manning completed 18 of his 26 passes, only one of those completions went for more than 25 yards, and Mr. Manning targeted the Colts' top wide receiver, Reggie Wayne, just once in the entire game. Mr. Wayne did make that catch—and gained one yard on it.

There were two keys to this strategy. The first, Mr. Pettine said, is "that you have to be patient." There were moments during Saturday's game, he said, at which he and Mr. Ryan were tempted to fall back on their complex blitz schemes, and the two engaged in several heated exchanges as they communicated via their headsets.

"It almost cost me my job a couple of times reminding him" to stick to their plan, Mr. Pettine said, "but we did it."

The second key was the presence of cornerback Darrelle Revis, who covered Mr. Wayne one-on-one for the game's entirety. The last time Mr. Wayne—who racked up a career-high 111 catches during the regular season—caught only one pass in a game was on Dec. 28, 2008, in a 23-0 Colts win over Tennessee, and never in any of his previous 16 postseason games had he had so few receptions.

Often on Saturday, Mr. Revis said, Mr. Manning would drop back, look toward Mr. Wayne, size up Mr. Revis' coverage, and elect to throw the ball to another receiver.

"One thing I tried to do was mess with [Mr. Manning] a little bit, try to disguise: move up, move back, press, sometimes bail," he said. "Just try to do different things."

This season, of course, had gotten off to a controversial start for Mr. Revis. Demanding a new contract, he held out for several weeks before signing a four-year deal worth a reported $46 million. The investment proved a wise one, at least in the context of Saturday's victory, because Mr. Ryan and Mr. Pettine's confidence that Mr. Revis could shut down Mr. Wayne made their more passive approach viable.

"This was one of those games where it was, 'Hey, Darrelle makes a lot of money, and he's going to earn it this week,'" Mr. Pettine said. "He showed why we paid him."

 Write to  Mike Sielski at mike.sielski@wsj.com 