SEOUL—South Korea's current-account surplus rose in December as the nation exported more automobiles, ships and electronics, bringing the surplus for the full year to the fourth-largest on record and providing further support to the local currency. 

The current-account surplus, the broadest measure of South Korea's trade with the rest of the world, totaled $2.11 billion last month, up from a revised $1.93 billion in November and $708.7 million a year earlier, the Bank of Korea said. 

The current-account balance remained in the black for a 10th consecutive month after posting deficits in January and February of 2010, as exports were boosted by the global economic recovery. 

The surplus for all of 2010 reached $28.2 billion, slightly falling short of the central bank's earlier forecast of around $29 billion. Still, last year's surplus was the fourth largest ever, backed by strong exports of semiconductors and autos. In 2009, the country ran a surplus of $32.8 billion.

"Interim dividend payouts (to foreign investors) were higher than expected in November, while royalties and other service-related payments overseas at year-end also increased, which ate into the full-year surplus," Lee Young-bog, a senior manager with the BOK's balance of payments statistics team, told a media briefing.

He said South Korea will continue to run a current-account surplus in January, helped by robust exports of ships and automobiles, although energy imports are also expected to rise due to cold weather.

Economists said the underlying trend of current-account surpluses will likely continue this year, lending further support to the Korean won, although the size of the surplus is expected to shrink as imports increase in line with the improving economy. 

The market expects South Korea's current-account surplus to fall to between $10 billion and $15 billion in 2011, compared with the BOK's forecast of $18 billion. 

Thursday's data showed the goods account had a surplus of $3.7 billion in December, up from a surplus of $3.2 billion in November. The BOK attributed the rise to brisk exports of automobiles, ships and electronic devices. For 2010, the goods balance posted the second-largest surplus ever, at $41.9 billion.

A shortfall in the service account, which includes outlays by South Koreans on overseas trips, reached $1.2 billion in December, widening from the $304.5 million deficit the previous month. The capital and financial account, which tracks cross-border investments, posted a net outflow of $336.2 million in December, compared with a net outflow of $2.19 billion in November. 

In early Seoul trade, the dollar fetched 1,113.9 Korean won, compared with 1,116.0 won late Wednesday, weighed on by the current-account data.The won has risen about 1.7% versus the dollar so far this year.