Don't look now, but an adult conversation has begun on the federal budget deficit.

Away from the shrill noise of Congress's battle over spending this year, Washington has quietly begun the most serious debate on long-term deficit-reduction in decades—the "adult conversation" that political leaders have said will be needed to address this fiscal year's forecast of a $1.65 trillion deficit and the nation's long-term fiscal woes.

Even as the parties have deadlocked over discretionary spending cuts involving less than 2% of the $3.7 trillion budget, the political climate is growing more hospitable to the kind of grand bargain needed to rein in the rest of the budget—potentially encompassing the tax code, the defense budget and entitlement programs, such as Medicare and Social Security.

The deficit has been the subject of political rhetoric for decades, but something has changed in the aftermath of the 2010 elections. Politicians in both parties have read the results as a pox on the status quo, and see inaction as politically risky. 

Prospects for action are still dim. But Robert Reischauer, former director of the Congressional Budget Office, said he believed that chances of a broad deal have increased a hundred fold in recent months—though only from 0.1% to 10%. Still, he said: "The ball moved forward a lot more—and a lot more rapidly—than I thought it would.''

Among the signs of a changing climate:

• When several senators held a policy-heavy briefing on deficit reduction in the middle of an ice storm last month, more than 40 of their colleagues—almost half the Senate—showed up.

• Democrats initially wanted to freeze discretionary spending this year, but retreated almost without a fight. Debate on the remaining 2011 budget is now entirely about what, not whether, to cut.

• Cuts in entitlement programs, untouchable just months ago, are being pursued by both House Republicans and Senate Democrats, in very different ways. The recent stalemate over cuts to domestic discretionary spending in this year's budget has underscored how little can be saved in those programs, which make up only 12% of the budget

• Some of the most conservative Republicans in the Senate, such as Tom Coburn of Oklahoma, have pushed back against criticism from anti-tax activists, and remained open to revenue increases as part of a broad deficit-reduction deal.

With the 2012 campaign season looming, this spring is crunch time for the adult conversation, which will be conducted on separate tracks in coming weeks.

Track one: A bipartisan group of senators known as the "Gang of Six,'' who set up the ice storm meeting, are writing a deficit-reduction plan based on the work of a presidential commission that called for $4 trillion in revenue increases and spending cuts over 10 years. 

Track two: House Republicans, shrugging off conventional wisdom about electoral risks, have decided to propose curbs on Social Security and Medicare spending, without the political cover of White House partnership. Targets for spending reductions will be included when the House Budget Committee produces a 2012 budget in April. 

The two tracks haven't crossed in public. But Erskine Bowles and Alan Simpson—cochairmen of the White House fiscal commission—are positioning themselves as bridge figures.

The two men met privately Wednesday with members of the House Budget Committee—a rare, bipartisan huddle of that highly partisan panel. Earlier in the week, Messrs. Simpson and Bowles dined with members of the "Gang of Six" senators. They also met with Blue Dog Democrats, a conservative faction in the liberal House Democratic Caucus. 

When House Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan (R., Wis.) sets targets for cutting entitlements in April, he isn't expected to include policy proposals for meeting the spending goals. The big question, he says, is whether the White House and Senate Democrats will see his plan as a partisan target, or as an invitation to talk. 

``I'm expecting partisan attacks, for sure," Mr. Ryan said in an interview. "The question is: Does it come from everyone on the left, or just some?"

The White House's low profile thus far has infuriated Republicans—who believe they are stepping out on the issue at some political risk—and baffled some Democrats. "Governors are expected to lead. Mayors are expected to lead. County executives are expected to lead," Sen. Tom Carper (D., Del.) said in an interview. "We need our presidents to lead." 

Aides familiar with the Gang of Six talks say that the White House has stayed abreast of their work, but seem to be keeping a distance because of concern that a presidential role would impede progress among the senators and potentially politicize a process that is proceeding apace. Republicans view that as an act of political cowardice, and worry that any deal that is struck with Senate Democrats will have to be renegotiated with the White House if the president doesn't get more involved now. 

Even with White House involvement, the obstacles to a comprehensive budget deal are enormous. Many Democrats are loath to make changes to Social Security and Medicare. But of late, Democrats have been arguing more about whether the retirement program should be changed as part of the broader deficit debate, and less about whether changes should be made. 

A bigger question is whether Republicans will give ground on revenue increases in order to reach a deficit-reduction deal. Three conservative Republicans who were members of the presidential deficit commission took heat from an influential conservative activist, Grover Norquist of Americans for Tax Reform, after they endorsed the panel's report, which called for overhauling the tax code and raising revenue. 

But the three—Sens. Saxby Chambliss of Georgia, Mike Crapo of Idaho and Mr. Coburn—publicly pushed back.

"Our pledge is to protect taxpayers, not special interests," the senators wrote in a letter responding to Mr. Norquist. "To do so, we must analyze every aspect of the federal budget, including the tax code."