  Google Inc. doesn't seem daunted about acquisitions in the wake of its failure last year to land online coupon site Groupon Inc. Indeed, the Internet giant's deals chief plans to be very active, despite challenges that include soaring valuations for some Web start-ups.

Coming off a record 48 acquisitions last year, Google is "going to continue to be aggressive," said  David Lawee, Google's vice president of corporate development, in an interview. 

Rather than large targets like Groupon, the main focus for Google continues to be small start-ups that can be a source of new technology, talented engineers and revenue. But courting those start-ups has seldom been harder.

The skyrocketing valuations of Internet and mobile device-related start-ups don't appear to worry Mr. Lawee, who said they were "high, but they reflect the real possibilities." He added: "these are truly exciting times" for entrepreneurs.

Besides the possibility of competing offers from other well-heeled Internet firms, such as Facebook Inc. and Twitter Inc., many entrepreneurs can easily raise money from venture-capital firms to hold off the need to seek a buyer. 

"The robust environment that we are in has raised the bar in terms of what it will take for leading entrepreneurs to consider" selling to big companies, said  Terence Kawaja, chief executive of LUMA Partners LLC, a boutique investment bank focused on digital media. "That, I think, is the sign of a healthy marketplace," he said.

There can be antitrust hurdles to overcome. Google is still awaiting the Justice Department's approval of a $700 million deal announced last summer to buy ITA Software Inc., which is expected to help Google develop a service for searching for travel fares.



There is also a perception that big companies, Google included, can be bureaucratic places that move slowly and are otherwise inhospitable to entrepreneurs. Mr. Lawee says that doesn't happen at Google, despite having more than 24,000 employees.

"If you're en entrepreneur and you come to Google, your days as an entrepreneur are not over," he said. "Bringing small entrepreneurial teams into Google who have a strong vision for what they want to do has been highly successful for us."

In 2003, for example, Google bought Applied Semantics, which had several dozen engineers and helped Google develop a text-advertising network called AdSense, now a multibillion-dollar revenue generator. The company's 2004 acquisition of Keyhole led to Google Maps upgrades. 

The 2005 purchase of a small firm run by  Andy Rubin, called Android Inc., led to the development of what is now a leading operating system for smartphones. 

"I would love to have 25 more Andy Rubins here who are working on projects with longer time horizons than most people are willing to invest in," Mr. Lawee said.

The core team of the online advertising service DoubleClick—Google's biggest-ever deal, at $3.2 billion—has remained with the company since the deal closed in 2008. 

Thanks in large part to the deal, Google will grab 12.6% of the U.S. display-ad market by the end of the year, or $1.3 billion, up from 9.6% last year, research firm eMarketer predicts.

More recently, Google paid $25 million for a small team of entrepreneurs at start-up DocVerse, which had built a tool that let people edit Microsoft Office files online. 

"We've been fortunate to have autonomy," said DocVerse co-founder  Shan Sinha, adding he was surprised by the "rate and pace at which the company deployed the product."

Mr. Lawee said the company has a 70% success rate when it comes to acquisitions. A Google spokesman said more than two-thirds of the founders of companies acquired by Google in its 12.5-year history are still at Google.

Not that every important entrepreneur has stayed engaged. The two co-founders of the online video service YouTube, which Google purchased in 2006 for $1.2 billion, are no longer running that operation, and one has left the company.

Several top executives at mobile-advertising firm AdMob left Google shortly after last year's $750 million acquisition. People familiar with the matter said the business is growing rapidly and could generate $1 billion in revenue within the next year to 18 months.

In 2005, Google bought Dodgeball, a service for mobile phones that let people notify their friends that they had "checked in" to a public location such as a restaurant. In 2007 the Dodgeball founders, including  Dennis Crowley, left Google, saying publicly that it didn't support their project. 

Mr. Crowley went on to found a similar service, called Foursquare, which now says it has seven million users. Mr. Crowley declined to comment. 

Last fall people familiar with the matter have said Google offered more than $5 billion to buy Groupon but no deal was reached. Google has since begun testing a service that would compete with Groupon's. Google and Groupon have never confirmed reports of deal talks, and Mr. Lawee declined to comment on the subject.

Mr. Lawee, a 45-year-old Montreal native, has led Google's acquisitions effort since 2008. Before joining Google in 2005, he sold a social network for videogame players to Viacom Inc. and was a venture capitalist.

He said Google's acquisition strategy won't change with the ascension of co-founder  Larry Page to chief executive in April, replacing  Eric Schmidt, who will remain as executive chairman.

 Write to  Amir Efrati at amir.efrati@wsj.com 