Aiming to bring artistic perspective, sociological insight and frisky candor to a media subculture branded NSFW (or "not safe for work," for Internet tenderfoots) CineKink NYC returns Tuesday for its eighth year of blurring genre and gender. True to its name, the weeklong festival surveys an assortment of dramatic, documentary and experimental films that adopt outré sexuality as a theme.

Yet, as founder Lisa Vandever argues, it's no longer a festival at which entries get a free pass because they focus on edgy subject matter or just happen to be arousing to watch. "We're booking films that look like real movies," she said, "after all these years of programming things for content rather than production value." 

With most of the festival's screenings hosted by Anthology Film Archives, there's a certain kinship implied with the American independent cinema movement that the Second Avenue venue has long championed. In some cases, the "indie" refers to pornography stars who have jumped behind the camera, constructing their own erotic concepts outside predictable convention. There's the "alt-porn" performer Kimberley Kane, for instance, whose extremely NSFW "My Own Master" will be screened in an excerpt. And Buck Angel, a female-to-male transsexual performer who brings his autobiographical documentary "Bucking the System." In other cases, the work comes from directors who are fascinated by the sex industry but steer clear of much graphic display.

"We started making movies as a response to porn we saw that terrified us," said Julie Keck, a Chicago-based filmmaker who produces short videos with her partner, Jessica King. The pair's latest piece, "Wiggle Room," a so-called "kinky cutie," will make its premiere on a Friday night shorts program. "But we couldn't show anyone our movies because we were in careers where that would be frowned upon." 

CineKink, Ms. Keck explained, gave the pair the nerve to step out as filmmakers. Last year, they showed "Libido Land," which was inspired by Sasha Grey, an adult movie performer turned mainstream actress ("The Girlfriend Experience," "Entourage") who once described herself as an existentialist.

"We thought that was kind of funny, wanting to be an existential porn star," Ms. Keck said. "Libido" isn't actually about Ms. Grey, but it explores the notion within the story of a heterosexual couple that needs to spark their relationship.

"We joke about making actual porn, but we're too squeamish," Ms. Keck said. "But we love the idea of crossover porn stars. It's much harder work than what anyone does for the Oscar."

Ms. Vandever, whose festival also plays in Las Vegas, San Francisco, Chicago and Los Angeles and Portland, Ore., describes CineKink's tone as "sex positive." But the variety of work also includes critical perspectives on sex and media. "Run, Run, It's Him" is a first-person, feature-length account of Canadian porn fan Matthew Pollack, whose personal relationships suffer amid his obsessive consumption of X-rated videos. And a Saturday panel called "Porn Again," moderated by Museum of Sex curator Sarah Forbes, examines the debate over pornography as vice or virtue.

Panelist Tristan Taormino will raise the subject of "ethical porn." "It's really about raising standards to create a really positive work environment," said Ms. Taormino, a writer and producer who divides her time between New York and Los Angeles, where she produces a signature line for Vivid Entertainment, a company best-known for its celebrity sex tapes. She'll screen some examples of what she means: scenes from a series she created in which female performers live out aggressive sexual fantasies they conceive and cast for themselves.

Ms. Taormino was excited about the idea of screening such fare in a real theater for an open-minded audience likely to take the occasion to discuss "what they like and don't like." 

"People who are watching this on their iPhones," she said, "are really missing the nuance."