MUMBAI—Indian lenders Tuesday asked the central bank to cut its mandatory bond and cash holding ratio to help release liquidity into the cash-starved banking system, the chief executive of the Indian Banks Association said. 

"Bankers have made a very clear representation that the SLR [statutory liquidity ratio] and the CRR [cash reserve ratio] must come down,"  K. Ramakrishnan told reporters after a meeting with officials from the Reserve Bank of India. 

Bankers traditionally meet top officials from the central bank ahead of scheduled monetary policy meetings. The next RBI meeting is due on Jan. 25. 

To maintain the SLR, Indian lenders have to keep a specified percentage of their net deposits invested in government bonds or gold. The mandatory bond reserve ratio, or SLR, is 24%, while the cash reserve ratio is 6%. 

Mr. Ramakrishnan said sluggish deposit growth remains a matter of concern, even as a pickup in loans points to healthier growth. "CASA [current account savings account or low-cost deposits] is a matter of concern. Credit is growing. It will grow at 22%-24%," he said. 

Indian banks have been facing a cash deficit since late September. The situation worsened in December as customers withdrew large amounts of cash for festive spending and to buy shares and debt that several companies offered in October. 

The cash shortfall, which averaged more than 1.5 trillion rupees ($33.18 billion) daily until the end of December, was aggravated by heavy corporate withdrawals for advance tax payments. 

The liquidity crunch translated into a higher cost of borrowing, with the overnight call rate ruling consistently above the Reserve Bank of India's lending rate of 6.25%. Interest rates on short-term debt instruments, such as certificates of deposit and commercial papers, have doubled since April. 

Several liquidity easing measures by the RBI, including bond buybacks and cuts to the mandatory bond holding rule, have helped ease the pressure on cash availability among banks. 

A move to hold twin liquidity injection windows daily by the RBI, as well as increased government spending, has also helped. But the daily cash deficit still averages more than 800 billion rupees. 

Several lenders, including the country's largest by assets—State Bank of India—have had to raise deposit rates and tap the short-term debt market to correct cash mismatches. 

"Liquidity is our concern … as deposit rates have shot up, [net interest] margins are going to be under pressure," added  J.P. Dua, chairman and managing director of Allahabad Bank. 

Bankers have sought assistance from the RBI in restructuring loans given to microfinance institutions that are facing challenges following the introduction of new regulations. 

Union Bank of India's chairman and managing director,  M.V. Nair, said bankers also discussed the possible amortization of pension liabilities and restructuring of loans to microlenders. 

India's microfinance sector has been subject to new rules following allegations that some lenders in the southern state of Andhra Pradesh, which accounts for about 30% of the country's microfinance industry, used coercive recovery practices and pushed borrowers into a debt trap. 

In November, the Andhra Pradesh government passed a ruling calling all microfinance institutions to register their members and cut interest rates. 

Rating agency CRISIL later downgraded several micolenders, putting them on a "rating watch with negative implications." 

Mr. Ramakrishnan said banks have asked the RBI to coordinate with the Andhra Pradesh government to ensure recovery of loans and the protection their money. 

A committee, headed by Y.H. Malegam, a senior member on the RBI's central board of directors, is expected to submit recommendations on the microfinance sector by the end of January. 

 Write to  Nupur Acharya at nupur.acharya@dowjones.com 