NEW DELHI – Food prices in India rose in the week ended April 23, signaling that inflation remains stubbornly high despite previous steps to rein in prices, and raising expectations of more monetary tightening through the year. 

The wholesale price index for food articles rose 1.0% to 184.5 during the week from 182.6 in the week ended April 16, driven by costlier vegetables, according to data issued Thursday by the Ministry of Commerce and Industry. 

On a year-on-year basis, the food inflation rate eased marginally to 8.53% from 8.76%. Prices of non-food articles rose about 28% year-on-year. 

  India Finance Minister: Inflation Major Concern  

Costlier food and non-food items drove the primary articles index 0.8% higher to 192.6 during the week ended April 23, from 191.1 the previous week. The index was up 12.11% from a year earlier, accelerating from the 12.08% rise in the week to April 16. 

Chief Economic Adviser  Kaushik Basu said general inflation remains at unacceptably high levels, although it is beginning to ease. 

He said that tackling inflation requires global cooperation and the Indian government should take the issue up at international forums. "The global structure of inflation is beginning to change," Mr. Basu said at a conference. 

Data last month showed the wholesale price index-based inflation rate in March rose to 8.98% from a year earlier, compared with 8.31% in February, driven by high prices of food and manufactured products. 

Surging global commodity prices and rising prospects of an increase in domestic retail fuel prices are also stoking inflationary pressures. 

Mr. Basu said he expects an April inflation reading below 9%. 

Financial markets are bracing for continued aggressive monetary tightening by the central bank. 

The Reserve Bank of India Tuesday announced a bigger-than-expected 0.5 percentage point increase in its lending rate - deviating from the 0.25 percentage point increases it opted for on the preceding eight occasions - as inflation shows little signs of easing and continues to threaten the economy's long-term growth prospects. 

Economists are now closely watching for the seasonal June-September monsoon rainfall, which could help boost farm output and cool food prices. 

Madan Sabnavis, chief economist at Care Ratings, said food prices may show some signs of easing due to a good winter harvest but the monsoon rains will be crucial if there is to be a bigger decline. 

The RBI's policy moves will improve transmission of monetary policy and may prove more successful in fighting inflation, he added. 

Economists are also on the watch for a possible increase in retail fuel prices by the federal government once elections in five provinces conclude later this month. 

A surge in prices of crude oil—India's largest import--has mounted pressure on the government to pass on the burden of increased prices to consumers and not put at risk its fiscal consolidation targets, which could further stoke price pressures. 

 Write to  Anant Vijay Kala at anant.kala@dowjones.com and Mukesh Jagota at mukesh.jagota@dowjones.com 