On West End Avenue, two projects—one under construction and one proposed—have triggered a debate over the city's historic-landmark preservation process. 

The houses at 732-734 West End Ave. are slated to give way to a $10 million, 16-unit apartment complex scheduled to open in June 2012. Another project similar in size is planned for 508-510 West End Ave., but is on hold, as the city Landmarks Preservation Commission considers extending local historic districts to include those properties.

Expansion of the historic districts would essentially halt the planned apartments. "We were concerned that a number of brownstones were going to be torn down and sliver buildings built between some of the prewar brownstones, which would look horrible," said  Richard Emery, president and co-founder of the West End Preservation Society, which launched the West End expansion effort. 

The developer of the project at 508-510 West End Ave. stands to lose millions of dollars if it is restricting from building as planned, said spokesman  Ken Frydman. He said that the developer, Sackman Enterprises, the managing agent for the properties, is willing to work with the community on facade design. 

The Real Estate Board of New York, a trade association that represents some of the largest developers in New York, is strongly opposed to the West End expansion, saying it reduces the value of smaller buildings. 

"You're basically freezing that three-story, four-story townhouse in perpetuity,"  Michael Slattery, REBNY's senior vice president said.

A building in a historic district is required to obtain an extra layer of city permits required for proposed alterations to a building's facade. Minor changes that aren't permanent, like a seasonal window air-conditioning unit, don't need approval. However, major changes, like a demolition or a new addition, require a public hearing and commission vote, said  Elisabeth de Bourbon, a spokeswoman for the Landmarks Preservation Commission. 

The enlargement of the West End historic-district protection—which actually involves three separate expansion proposals—is the most controversial pending before the landmarks commission, according to the real estate board. In all, there are 12 proposals to designate or extend districts in 10 neighborhoods. If all were approved, they would add more than 3,000 buildings to the historic preservation lists, currently protected. REBNY hasn't weighed in on the other proposals.

The next hearing on the West End expansion is slated for June 28. Most of the proposals will have been voted on, or had a public hearing, by year-end, according to the commission. 

Commission Chairman  Robert B. Tierney said part of the current push is to give neighborhoods more attention in boroughs other than Manhattan. The Bronx, for example, "has not gotten the attention that's warranted by the history and architecture over the years," he said.

Many neighborhood organizations spearhead the efforts. In Brooklyn, the Park Slope Civic Council, which has clamored to expand the historic district there, is conducting an online "building genealogy" survey, asking for detailed histories from homeowners in the area. The group also seeks volunteers to generate community support. 

"You have to have a reasonably coherent streetscape," Mr. Tierney said. "When you're walking down the streets of the West Village or Brooklyn Heights, you know you're not in the Financial District."

But that coherence argument has been criticized by REBNY, which says that previous landmarks commissioners cited a lack of streetscape coherence outside of the boundaries they set for the original West End historic designations. 

Mr. Tierney said that the commission doesn't always get it right the first time when crafting historic-district boundaries. While a neighborhood may not have undergone a wholesale change, the opinions of commission members about what makes the neighborhood historic can differ from their predecessors. 

"These things can be revisited," he said.