An influential but now-discredited study that provoked fears around the world that childhood vaccinations caused autism was based largely on falsified data, according to an article and editorial published Wednesday in the British Medical Journal.

The article, by journalist Brian Deer, found that important details of the cases of each of 12 children reported in the original study either misrepresented or altered the actual experiences of the children, the journal said. "In no single case could the medical records be fully reconciled with the descriptions, diagnoses, or histories published in the journal," the editorial said. It called the study "an elaborate fraud."

The original article, by British doctor Andrew Wakefield and other researchers, was published in the highly regarded journal The Lancet in 1998. The study concluded that the measles, mumps and rubella vaccine—a mainstay of public-health disease prevention efforts around the world—was linked to autism and gastrointestinal disorders. 

The findings provoked a still-raging debate over vaccine safety and they prompted thousands of parents to forgo shots for their children. Measles outbreaks were subsequently reported in several Western countries. Several epidemiological studies conducted since the Wakefield paper by public-health authorities haven't found any link between the vaccines and autism.

The Lancet withdrew the article in January of last year after concluding that "several elements" of the paper were incorrect. But the journal didn't describe any of the discrepancies as fraud. A British regulator stripped Dr. Wakefield of his medical license last May, citing "serious professional misconduct" in the way he handled the research.

Efforts to reach Dr. Wakefield weren't successful. 

Speaking on CNN Wednesday night, Dr. Wakefield defended his research. "The study is not a lie. The findings that we made have been replicated in five countries around the world," he said.

The editorial in the British Medical Journal noted that Dr. Wakefield "has refused to join 10 of his co-authors in retracting" the paper's conclusions. The Lancet wasn't reached for comment.

In the article, Mr. Deer reported interviewing parents of the children included in the Wakefield study and finding important discrepancies between their recollections and medical records and what was reported in the Lancet. In one case, for instance, symptoms of autism and bowel problems appeared well before a child was vaccinated.

In another case, a parent whose child was purportedly included in the study found none of the descriptive detail resembled the child's experience. 

Despite the Lancet retraction and other challenges to the original paper, "damage to public health continues," the British Medical Journal's editorial said, fueled "by unbalanced media reporting and an ineffective response from government, researchers and the medical professions." The journal said "hundreds of thousands" of British children remain unprotected even as efforts continue "to restore parents' trust in the vaccine."

 Write to  Ron Winslow at ron.winslow@wsj.com 