European policy makers stand on the verge of another unpleasant summer just 12 months after they first thought they had addressed the sovereign- debt crisis.

Greek bonds remain in a funk. Yields on the debt have risen too high for the Greek government to handle over the long term. Authorities will have to do something in addition to last year's €110 billion aid deal for Greece, the first bailout of a euro-zone government. 

Analysts warn that even if a further deal is secured, that may not be enough to prevent investors from selling Irish, Portuguese and Spanish debt, reasoning that if Greece needed more funds just a year after its bailout, other heavily indebted countries may need more aid too. Portugal is close to getting an aid package, and investors see a risk that Spain's heavy debts could make it another trouble spot.

A senior Greek government official said Tuesday it expects that a June audit of its budgets will show it needs a new financial-aid package of nearly €60 billion to cover its needs stretching into 2013. The Greek finance ministry said efforts are under way to find a realistic solution, but "there are no specifics yet regarding the size or details of a package."

Hope for a deal helped pull Greek bond yields lower. A final decision won't be made until June, after the International Monetary Fund and the European Union complete a review of Greece's ability to handle its debt, the senior Greek official said.

Talk over how to address Greece's problems, and those of other fiscally weak European countries, has dragged on for months, with only sporadic action. Analysts say that by not acting promptly, politicians are delaying the inevitable unless they can come up with a more convincing plan to ensure that countries such as Greece don't default. Financial markets have judged the support measures put in place so far as inadequate, and even counterproductive, in as much as they have shrunk the economies they were meant to help.

"Policy makers in the euro zone have been reactive and are trying to repair the boat even as it is sinking," said  Richard McGuire, senior fixed-income strategist at Rabobank International. 

"Some form of additional package for Greece will have to be agreed as Greece will not be able to return to the market next year to meet its refinancing needs." 

Another measure being discussed is extending the maturities on existing Greek debt, giving the country more time to repay loans. 

Ireland, which had to accept a bailout last year after its banking sector buckled as bets on the property market went sour, may consider that option as well. Dublin has argued that the terms of its bailout package are harsh and has tried to negotiate lower borrowing costs. 

"If Greece were to go down the route of rescheduling debt repayments, Ireland will not be far behind," said  Marc Ostwald, fixed-income strategist at Monument Securities, adding that even the latest measures being proposed may fall short of containing tensions.

"We need structural reforms in the euro zone but these will not be popular as it is difficult for the political fraternity to sell it to their public," Mr. Ostwald said.

Greek bonds have been pummeled in recent months. Annual yields on two-year debt were at more than 24% Tuesday, from around 15% a couple of months ago. 

Yields on 10-year Greeks bonds stood at 15.271% Tuesday, having risen by nearly three percentage points since March. Trading volumes have been extremely thin, leaving wide spreads between bids and offers for bonds. 

According to the Greek official who discussed the second aid deal Tuesday, possible measures being considered include allowing the European Financial Stability Facility—the euro-area rescue fund—to buy Greek bonds in the primary market.

Greece has been expected to come back to the market next year, when it faces €33 billion of bond redemptions. Without more action from the EU and IMF, that isn't likely. 

 Write to  Neelabh Chaturvedi at neelabh.chaturvedi@dowjones.com 