  His Restaurants:  

The Corson Building and Sitka & Spruce



 What He Is Known For: 

Farm-driven cuisine and a strong DIY ethos.

Matt Dillon treats his two Seattle restaurants, Sitka & Spruce and The Corson Building, more like homes than public places. Both restaurants have open kitchens and daily changing menus that use the freshest ingredients possible.

Mr. Dillon, 37, got his start in the food world at the age of 13, when his mother was managing a friend's café and prepared foods business. Mr. Dillon washed dishes and tended to prep work. 

In 2006, Mr. Dillon opened Sitka & Spruce, an intimate restaurant located in a strip mall that quickly became the talk of the town. Two years later, he opened his second restaurant, The Corson Building. 

Uncompromising in his commitment to "hyper-local" fare, Mr. Dillon says he would "rather use something from close by than something better that's far away." Whenever possible, Mr. Dillon makes condiments himself. At both restaurants, menus change daily and bread, yogurt and pantry items, like jams, pickles, canned tomatoes and dried fruit, are made in-house.

In his 20s, Mr. Dillon, who is covered in tattoos, played drums and guitar in a psychedelic-punk-rock band called Resin. His cooking is surprisingly delicate—yet not "precious," as he points out.

For his first Slow Food Fast contribution, he shares a salad recipe that calls for oranges, marinated feta and fresh-picked herbs. This recipe is far from your typical fruit salad. Mr. Dillon uses Middle Eastern spices in the marinade. He recommends using an Israeli sheep's-milk feta and sweet, juicy heirloom navel oranges, such as a blood-orange variety or Cara Cara. 

The salad works, says Mr. Dillon, because the ingredients simply "taste good together." With the herbs and spices and extra care he showers on, the salad doesn't just work, it seduces.

  Total Time: 25 minutes Serves: 4  

1 teaspoon coriander seed  1 teaspoon anise seed  3/4 cup olive oil  2 tablespoons red-wine vinegar  1/3 cup chopped almonds or pistachios, or a combination  1/2 teaspoon pepper flakes  1 teaspoon kosher salt, plus extra for sprinkling  3 ounces sheep's milk feta, crumbled  1/3 cup parsley leaves  1/3 cup oregano leaves  4 navel oranges  2 cups loosely packed arugula

 What to Do: 

 1.  Toast coriander and anise seeds over medium heat about 2 minutes. 

 2.  Roughly crush seeds with a mortar and pestle. 

 3.  Whisk olive oil with red wine vinegar in medium bowl. 

 4.  Stir in coriander, anise, pepper flakes, nuts and salt. 

 5.  Gently toss feta pieces and herbs with vinaigrette and let marinate.

 6.  Using a sharp knife, remove peel and pith from oranges. Slice each orange, horizontally, into 6 rounds.

 7.  Arrange orange slices on a platter and sprinkle withextra salt. Scatter arugula leaves over oranges. Spoon feta mixture over top and drizzle some remaining marinade over salad.