RALEIGH, N.C.—North Carolina's population growth far outstripped the national rate over the past decade, according to data released Wednesday by the U.S. Census Bureau, thanks to the state's boom early in the decade and its resilient economy during the recession.

The state grew 18.5% during the decade—compared with 9.7% for the U.S. overall—pushing North Carolina's population to 9.5 million people. The growth was spread across all demographics but was particularly strong among Hispanics, whose population more than doubled to 800,120.

North Carolina moved one notch past New Jersey to become the 10th most populous state, according to an analysis of census data by William H. Frey, a demographer at the Brookings Institution in Washington, D.C. 

"North Carolina had a very prosperous decade and even the last two years weren't as horrible as the rest of the country," Mr. Frey said. "As a result, there's a huge amount of growth." 

The state's economic recruiters say North Carolina has increased the number of high-skilled and low-skilled jobs, and drawn businesses from other parts of the U.S. with relatively low housing costs and a moderate climate. 

The state posted a slight increase in the overall number of nonfarm jobs in the past decade, with double-digit percentage-point losses in manufacturing and construction positions offset by big gains in science, education and health jobs, according to the state's Employment Security Commission. North Carolina has also become a magnet for retirees.

North Carolina is part of the New South, joining states like Virginia and Georgia with diversifying economies and populations. They differ from Deep South states such as Alabama and Mississippi, whose growth has been comparatively lackluster. 

Five of North Carolina's six largest cities are now majority minority, with more blacks and Hispanics than whites, as continued migration of blacks to the South also pushed up the state's population. Charlotte, Winston-Salem and Greensboro became majority-minority in the decade, joining Durham and Fayetteville. 

Charlotte, the banking hub, has nearly doubled its population since 1990, and has also become increasingly diverse. The white population dropped to 45% in 2010 from 65% in 1990. Hispanics now make up 8.4% of the state's population, up from 4.7% in 2000. 

The state's rural and suburban counties have also diversified, with 16 of the state's 100 counties more than 10% Hispanic, including Johnston County, an agricultural and pork-producing county in the state's sandy east. That's up from four counties in 2000. No county had more than 5% Hispanic population in 1990; now, 63 counties do. 

Winston-Salem has a 14.7% Hispanic population, and is among five big cities that are at least 10% Hispanic. Pauline Morris, coordinator of the English as a Second Language Program at Forsyth Technical Community College in Winston-Salem, said the program has more than 50 classes, up from fewer than 20 a decade ago.

—Conor Dougherty contributed to this article.

 Write to  Valerie Bauerlein at valerie.bauerlein@wsj.com 