  Raj Rajaratnam privately told colleagues after being arrested in October 2009 on insider-trading charges that the government "would never meet a meaner b—d."

The hedge-fund titan, founder of the Galleon Group, quickly hired a lawyer with a track record of going for the jugular:  John Dowd.

 On Tuesday, Mr. Rajaratnam and his lawyer will get their showdown, in a jury trial that will be among the most closely followed in Wall Street history. 

Mr. Rajaratnam told people close to him after his arrest that he intends to testify on his own behalf. Such a strategy is a relatively rare in white-collar criminal cases because of the risk of a slip-up during cross-examination by prosecutors.

With a net worth exceeding $1 billion, Mr. Rajaratnam is the rare defendant wealthy enough to take on the government. His legal bill by trial's end could reach $40 million, people familiar with the matter estimate, including the tab for a nine-member team from Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP assembled by Mr. Dowd. He is a partner and co-head of white-collar defense there.

Criminal complaints and developing disclosures in the Galleon insider trading case allege a far-reaching and complex scheme. Here, the known and alleged relationships.

In late January, prosecutors contacted Mr. Dowd to explore whether Mr. Rajaratnam was interested in negotiating a plea agreement, people familiar with the matter say. Mr. Rajaratnam quickly brushed aside the overture, so a specific potential deal never was discussed, they say.

Mr. Rajaratnam, raised in Sri Lanka, has told associates he is confident he will win. For months, he has gathered trading data and other material to help Mr. Dowd build his case. 

Mr. Rajaratnam was inspired, according to a person who knows him, by an early call of support from entrepreneur  Mark Cuban, who himself is battling the U.S. in a civil insider-trading case. Mr. Cuban says he told Mr. Rajaratnam: "Just because the government says something doesn't make it true."

Mr. Dowd has pursued a defense strategy that is combative, even by the rough-and-tumble standards of large criminal trials. In May, for instance, he accused prosecutors of lying in their attempt to use wiretaps in the case. A judge disagreed. 

The Galleon saga is the largest insider-trading case in a generation. 

It involves a cast of technology executives and other hedge-fund traders that the U.S. has alleged is a symbol of a culture of insider trading in the financial markets. Nineteen of 26 defendants have pleaded guilty in an investigation marked by the government's extensive use of wiretaps, including about 90 hours of calls involving Mr. Rajaratnam that could be used at trial.

If the 53-year-old defendant is found guilty on the 14 counts of securities fraud and conspiracy he faces, he could spend more than 20 years in prison. If the government loses, that will be a major blow to its heavy focus on insider-trading cases—and make it more difficult to pursue future cases at trial.

Key to Mr. Rajaratnam's defense will be the argument that the data he received didn't constitute inside information—and that he wouldn't have known if it did, according to court filings. Mr. Dowd will also attack the credibility of the government's witnesses, people familiar with his strategy say. 

Behind Mr. Rajaratnam's fighting stance is Mr. Dowd, a 69-year-old former military lawyer known for being willing to mix it up with legal foes. "He has a Marine's view of combat and takes it to court with him," says Washington lawyer  James Sharp, a longtime friend.

The son of a retail executive in Boston, Mr. Dowd is a Red Sox fan who tools around the harbor at Chatham, Mass., in his 26-foot fishing boat and sometimes entertains relatives by rubbing lobsters on the back of their shells to put them to sleep, colleagues say.

Mr. Dowd showed his skill in picking apart evidence to help his client when he represented Sen. John McCain (R., Ariz.) two decades ago in the "Keating Five" scandal; five senators were accused of corruption in their dealings with  Charles Keating, chairman of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association, which collapsed in 1989.

Mr. McCain—who was reprimanded by the Senate committee for "exercising poor judgment," but never charged—declined to comment.

Mr. Dowd was hired by baseball in 1989 to investigate charges that batting star  Pete Rose had gambled on games when he was manager of the Cincinnati Reds. Mr. Dowd's investigation subjected him to heavy public criticism from Mr. Rose and his legions of fans. In a report, Mr. Dowd said Mr. Rose bet on dozens of games. Mr. Rose voluntarily agreed to a ban from baseball. He wasn't charged. Mr. Rose didn't return calls for comment. 

Mr. Dowd's last major criminal trial was in 1997, when he defended Arizona Gov. J. Fife Symington against bank-fraud charges. 

In that case, Mr. Dowd at times shouted at prosecutors, a person close to the situation said, and lost his cool during a pretrial meeting when a prosecutor suggested that a slide Mr. Dowd wanted to use in his opening argument might not be permissible. A spokesman for Mr. Dowd denied that.

"John does not broach disagreement kindly," said  David Schindler, one of the prosecutors on the case. Mr. Symington was convicted at trial but later pardoned by President Bill Clinton.

Mr. Dowd attempted to persuade the judge overseeing the Galleon case to throw out evidence the government gained through wiretaps of Mr. Rajaratnam's phones, asserting that the government left out details about a cooperating witness's history and behaved dishonestly when applying to a magistrate judge for the wiretaps.

"They gamed the system," Mr. Dowd said in a filing.

Mr. Dowd lost that argument in November when U.S. District Judge Richard Holwell, who is overseeing the case, allowed the recordings to be admitted as evidence. He criticized the government, however, for "glaring" omissions in its applications.

At trial, Mr. Dowd will argue that Mr. Rajaratnam's activities at Galleon involved legitimate stock research.

In proposed instructions for the jury, Mr. Dowd said, "The law does not place professional investment advisers like Mr. Rajaratnam at their peril simply because they seek to obtain information about the companies they invest in on behalf of their clients." He also argued that the law allows investment advisers to speak with corporate insiders to obtain information.

—James Oberman contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Susan Pulliam at susan.pulliam@wsj.com and Chad Bray at chad.bray@dowjones.com 