 Longreach closed the first round of fund raising for a second $750 million Japan fund, defying talk the nation's disasters will harm capital-raising and deal-making. Some investors are betting the calamities will create opportunities in coming months.  

 The U.S. stock market has powered back in the face of major global uncertainty. It may have bond investors to thank for that. Funds have flowed out of bonds and into equities.  

 Credit Suisse expects the share of its profit generated in the Asian-Pacific region to quadruple within four years.  

 Glencore International plans to kick off by the end of April the Hong Kong retail portion of an IPO that aims to raise as much as $10 billion through a dual listing there and in London.  

 Investors in Hong Kong who lost money from investing in so-called Lehman minibonds will receive compensation of up to 96.5%, up from about 60% agreed to in 2009.  

 Banco Santander will take a 19.9% stake in a joint venture with China Construction Bank that will provide banking services outside of major Chinese cities.  

 Sinopec said its full-year net profit increased 14% as higher oil prices and fuel sales offset lower refining margins.  

 A growing number of Japanese companies are cutting or eliminating dividends, in a sign that many firms expect profits to decline following the earthquake.  

 Philippe Jabre, one of Europe's best-known hedge-fund managers, lost $300 million in the aftermath of Japan's earthquake. But he says he isn't sure that he made many mistakes.  

 Nasdaq OMX and IntercontinentalExchange are still discussing a bid for NYSE Euronext, but the talks are facing hurdles, such as how much to offer.  

 Kabul Bank, Afghanistan's biggest lender, will be liquidated starting next month, a step required by the IMF as it renews aid to the country.  

 Yen bulls are sticking with the currency despite the G-7's efforts to stem its rise. Investors also are more optimistic about the euro.  

 Syria's government warned the public against more demonstrations while making a major concession by promising to lift the emergency law in place since 1963, in what appeared to be another step to control unrest.  

Islamic militants seized control of a weapons factory, a strategic mountain and a nearby town in southern Yemen.

 Portugal's prime minister, José Sócrates, was re-elected leader of the ruling Socialist Party with an overwhelming majority. He resigned as prime minister last week after opposition parties rejected a proposed austerity plan.  

An earthquake that toppled homes in northeastern Myanmar last week killed more than 70 people, and there were fears the toll would mount as conditions in remote areas became known.

Chancellor Merkel's center-right coalition appeared to have lost a key election in Germany's southwest, which could weaken her authority and highlights the rise of the Green party. 

Canadian political parties began campaigning for a May 2 national election after the ruling minority Conservatives were toppled in a no-confidence vote Friday. 