It may sound crazy, but the Yankees were actually happy to see the Red Sox roll into town. 

The Yankees have looked sloppy and unmotivated over the past two weeks, making errors and poor plays against teams like Detroit and Kansas City. 

So perhaps a dose of intensity, in the form of the hottest rivalry in sports, is just what the doctor ordered, manager Joe Girardi said .

"That is my hope, that we start playing better baseball," Girardi said. "We're here against the Red Sox, a very talented club, and I'm hoping that brings out the best in us, because we have not played well for the past two-and-a-half weeks."

Girardi is putting his faith in the fact that this is a veteran club that knows it can't just coast through the early months. 

"You can't just get through months," Girardi said. "This is not a young team that got off to a great start and thinks we're always going to play like this. Our guys know how difficult this game is."

Girardi bristled at the suggestion that his team needed additional motivation in the form of a top rival. 

"I don't think it's that we're lless motivated," he said. 

—Daniel Barbarisi

HOUSTON—The ballpark has changed, and the players he managed are long gone. But the Mets' visit to Houston Friday still brought back memories for manager Terry Collins, who hadn't set foot in this city since he was fired by the Astros after the 1996 season.

That was Collins' third year managing in Houston, though the year he remembers most was his first one. In 1994, the Astros were among the best teams in the National League before a player strike cut short the season.

At the time of the strike, Houston was 66-49, a half-game out of first place in the N.L. Central.

 Would the Astros have made a playoff run? Would it have affected the trajectory of his managerial career? Collins can only wonder.

"We were really playing good when the strike hit," he said. "Our pitching was really coming on. That was as good a lineup as anybody in the National League had. Montreal might have out-did us on the pitching side, but we could match them up man for man. 

"And nobody was having a better year than Jeff Bagwell was. It would have been a fun last 39 games to watch."

—Brian Costa