Is Mr. October helping to mediate a settlement to the NFL's labor impasse? In a way, yes.

Hall of Fame slugger Reggie Jackson recently told his friend Jerry Richardson, the owner of the Carolina Panthers, to soften the confrontational public posture Richardson had taken in the run-up to the league's work stoppage.

 If Richardson were less of "a hawk" on the owners' dispute with the players association, Jackson said he told him, it would go a long way toward making the owners' position more palatable to football fans. A Panthers spokesman confirmed that Richardson and Jackson have spoken with each other on several occasions about the collective-bargaining process.

—Mike Sielski

Brett Gardner led off and Derek Jeter batted second in the team's spring-training game Monday against the Tampa Bay Rays. "We're kind of playing with it right now," manager Joe Girardi said. If Jeter were to remain the team's leadoff hitter, as he was for much of last season, Girardi's preference would be to have rightfielder Nick Swisher bat second. He hit 29 home runs last season, often batting out of the No 2 spot. "It's nice to have someone who can hit the ball out of the ballpark,'' Girardi said.

—M.S.

Just when Jason Isringhausen seemed like a lock to make the Mets' opening day roster, a sore elbow has put his status in question.

 Isringhausen, who is coming off of a third reconstructive elbow surgery, was treated for inflammation in the joint Monday. The reliever said it isn't serious and plans to play catch Tuesday. 

But Mets general manager Sandy Alderson said the team would have to take it into consideration in deciding whether Isringhausen will make the team.

—Brian Costa

Rutgers women's basketball team, which defeated Louisiana Tech in the first round of the NCAA tournament on Sunday, will face Texas A&M in the second round on Tuesday in Shreveport, La. The game tips off at 9:40 p.m. Texas A&M, the No. 2 seed in the Dallas region, beat Rutgers 79-50 in December at Madison Square Garden. Aggies forward Danielle Adams torched Rutgers for 24 points and 12 rebounds in that matchup.

On Sunday in their first-round, 75-51 win over the Lady Techsters, Rutgers, the No. 7 seed, was led by April Sykes's 22 points. 

—Kevin Clark