Conservatives in Wisconsin are getting nervous that three Republican state senators may defect on the collective-bargaining reform vote. It's still anyone's guess as to when that vote will take place because Democrats remain in exile to prevent the necessary quorum. But Republicans in the Senate hold a 19-14 majority, so GOP Gov. Scott Walker can afford to lose no more than two Republican senators on this pivotal vote.

On Wednesday, Republicans held a "unity" press conference that was attended by all but one senator, Dale Schultz. But a new Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll showing that 62% of respondents oppose curtailing collective-bargaining rights for public-sector workers over health care, pensions or other benefits suggests that the GOP position may be losing some support among independent voters. Meanwhile, the unions have turned up the heat by launching recall efforts against at least five of the GOP senators. Conservative groups have initiated recalls against five of the missing 14 Democratic senators.

The unions have said they will go along with cuts in benefits but not the restrictions on collective bargaining. Mr. Schultz has offered up a compromise that would reinstate collective bargaining for benefits after 2013. Gov. Walker has refused the plan, saying that it would make money-saving gains short-lived as unions will surely conspire to recapture lost benefits when the political alignment in Madison tilts back in their favor.

Teachers unions put out a statement arguing that collective bargaining helps kids and preserves the "middle class." Mary Bell of the Wisconsin Education Association Council declared that collective bargaining "protects the safety of our schools and class sizes for our children." But a study by the MacIver Institute shot down that talking point, noting that "most of their contracts do not contain any language pertaining to class sizes," which in many districts are determined by law.

House Republicans have tried to buck up their Senate brethren by pointing out that if the union reforms are not fully implemented, the extra costs to school districts and towns could require property taxes to rise next year by as much as $1,000 on middle-class families.

"Republicans can't turn back in Wisconsin," says Mark Mix of the National Right to Work Foundation. "This will only embolden the unions and weaken efforts at reform all over the country." It's foolish to believe that backing down will satisfy the unions. If history is any guide, more than 90% of union money will be used to defeat Republicans no matter what happens.

To read more stories like this one, please subscribe to Political Diary.