A board member installed at a California company by  Raj Rajaratnam fed the Galleon Group founder secret details about its impending acquisition by another firm, prosecutors alleged.

Mr. Rajaratnam used the confidential information he had obtained about PeopleSupport Inc., a provider of outsourcing services, to make trades in a friend's account ahead of the deal's closing when the share price was low, jurors were told Thursday at the insider-trading trial of the hedge-fund founder.

Mr. Rajaratnam is facing 14 counts of conspiracy and securities fraud. His lawyer,  John Dowd, has contended he did nothing wrong and traded stocks, including PeopleSupport's, based on legitimate research.

Prosecutors played secretly recorded tapes of Mr. Rajaratnam's conversations with the friend, former  Intel Corp.
INTC


0.10
%




 employee  Rajiv Goel. Mr. Goel, whose lawyer declined to comment, pleaded guilty last year to conspiracy and securities fraud and is expected to testify against Mr. Rajaratnam later in the trial.

In one of those calls, Mr. Rajaratnam revealed that he had obtained details about PeopleSupport's purchase by the Aegis BPO division of Essar Group, an Indian conglomerate, because "one of our guys is on the board."

In a July 30, 2008, phone call with Mr. Goel that the government played for the jury, Mr. Rajaratnam revealed the exact share price at which PeopleSupport's stock would be purchased in the Essar deal. Two days earlier, that detail had been given to PeopleSupport directors including  Krish Panu, who was nominated previously by Galleon, which owned about 25% of the company.

"So the Ruias made a firm bid now," Mr. Rajaratnam said in the call, referring to the brothers that ran Essar Group. "In the amount, $12.25."

"Oh, wonderful, wonderful, thanks," replied Mr. Goel. 

Prosecutors have said Mr. Rajaratnam made trades in Mr. Goel's investment account as a way of compensating him for inside information about Intel, where he worked in the treasury department. 

The jury also heard a May 2, 2008, call in which Mr. Panu, the director chosen by Mr. Rajaratnam, extensively discussed PeopleSupport board activity with him, including a planned trip to India by then-chairman and chief executive  Lance Rosenzweig to pursue a possible sale of the company. Mr. Panu couldn't be reached to comment.

A spokesman for Aegis Communications Group LLC declined to comment, saying the events occurred before the acquisition. 

At the time in late July that Mr. Rajaratnam knew the purchase price negotiated with Essar, details of the acquisition, code-named Project Easter, were confidential, said Mr. Rosenzweig, who testified as a witness for the government on Thursday. The acquisition became public in a news release on Aug. 4, five days after Mr. Rajaratnam's conversation, Mr. Rosenzweig said.

Mr. Rajaratnam also spoke with Mr. Goel on Oct. 7, 2008, as PeopleSupport's share price dropped in the wake of its public announcement that the Essar wanted to delay closing on the merger. Behind closed doors, the parties were revising the agreement in confidential discussions to which Mr. Panu was privy, Mr. Rosenzweig told the jury.

In his call that afternoon with Mr. Goel, which was played for the jury, Mr. Rajaratnam appeared to know some of the details that hadn't yet been announced.

"We know that they're gonna put $41 million in escrow," Mr. Rajaratnam said, referring to a provision that had been discussed, according to board records presented by prosecutors, but never materialized. "And I know they're gonna close October 31st."

Mr. Rajaratnam said he couldn't purchase PeopleSupport stock because the company had created a "poison pill" to limit Galleon's ownership. But Mr. Rajaratnam told Mr. Goel he was purchasing 30,000 shares in Mr. Goel's Charles Schwab account.

"I thought it was an opportunity for me to buy for you, right?" he said. "Because I'm 100% sure, right?" 

 Write to  Michael Rothfeld at michael.rothfeld@wsj.com 