TORONTO--Major west coast ports haven't had much operational impact from Japan's earthquake and tsunami Friday. 

Ports in Vancouver, Seattle and Portland all reported no change in marine operations, and the Port of Los Angeles only closed briefly Friday as the tsunami wave came ashore. 

However, Tokyo-based NYK Group has temporarily suspended service on its Japan-China Express shipping service, according to a posting on its corporate website. The posting didn't state a reason for the suspension and NYK's agents in Long Beach and Oakland, Calif., were unavailable for comment. The Japan-China Express calls on Sendai, a city of 1 million that was among the hardest hit during the earthquake and tsunami. 

The service usually calls on one Chinese port and four in Japan before steaming to Long Beach and then Oakland on a 22-day schedule. 

The west coast ports of Canada and the U.S. are key hubs for Japanese trade to and from North America and beyond, and port operators and customers will be watching closely for any effect to volumes and shipping routes related to the catastrophe. 

In the immediate aftermath of the disaster, some manufacturers and analysts have worried about the short-term drying up of orders from Japan as it wrestles with failed communications networks and the scope of the catastrophe. As plants across Japan slowed or shuttered operations, worry over supply-chain disruptions have also mounted. In the longer term, orders could increase as Japan ramps up imports related to rebuilding efforts. 

Prior to the NYK Group announcement, officials with the ports of Los Angeles, Portland and Seattle had said shippers had not announced any changes to their schedules. 

Meanwhile, Port Metro Vancouver said it was working closely with Canadian government officials to assess any longer-term effect to port customers and users. 

Much of the grain and lumber that leaves the U.S. for Japan is exported from ports on the Columbia River and damage to Japan's northern ports "could potentially impact some bulk shipments," said Port of Portland spokesman Josh Thomas. 

About 15% of the containers that cross the docks at the Port of Seattle are bound to or from Japan, said spokesman Peter McGraw. 

Vancouver port said its top export cargos to Japan include metallurgical coal, specialty crops and forest products. The top import cargos include auto parts, household goods and electronics, the port said. 

No one from the Port of Long Beach, the nation's second-largest container port, was available to comment.

 Write to  Steven D. Jones at steve-d.jones@dowjones.com 