Born in 1951, Mark McDonald is a product of the 1950s. More importantly, the 1950s are now a product of Mr. McDonald.

With his two partners, Ralph Cutler and Mark Isaacson, Mr. McDonald, at his first gallery Fifty/50, basically invented the collecting market for "midcentury modern" design. On Thursday, Mr. McDonald, the only surviving partner, is selling his own collection of design at Sotheby's New York, including items from Fifty/50's "NFS" (Not for Sale) collection, a group of iconic pieces the owners kept in the back office as educational tools for serious new collectors. (A preview of the sale opens today.) 

There will be 148 lots, with a total presale estimate of $1 million to $1.5 million. The small sale is a virtual primer on classic American modern design and special interests of Mr. McDonald's such as Scandinavian art glass.

In 1983, when Fifty/50 opened on lower Broadway in Manhattan, selling its high-style postwar look to an A-list of creative types—Julian Schnabel, Mary Boone, David Byrne, Diane Keaton—designers like Ray and Charles Eames and George Nelson were not household names. Mr. McDonald and his partners made them as famous as their clients. 

Mr. McDonald has had three galleries since Fifty/50 closed in 1993: Gansevoort Gallery in Manhattan's meat-packing district, and two in Hudson, N.Y., including his current one. 

"He's one of the most influential guys in my career," said James Zemaitis, senior vice president in the Sotheby's 20th Century Design Department, who at 42, is too young to have gone to Fifty/50 when he was of acquiring age. "This collection is not the most valuable in market terms, but in strength of examples of work, like Tapio Wirkkala's 'Leaf' platters, you have good, best and unbelievably rare."

Sitting on a Verner Panton "Cone" chair in his apartment on Fourth Avenue in Manhattan, Mr. McDonald recalled his nearly 30 years as a dealer and talked about the future. 

Mr. McDonald is a man who sold an Isamu Noguchi design—the "Radio Nurse," a wireless baby monitor introduced by Zenith in 1937 in response to the Lindbergh kidnapping—back to Mr. Noguchi, who didn't have one and needed it for his museum in Long Island City. 

And he's had lunch at "the house" in Santa Monica with Ray Eames, who objected to the unpopulist prices he was getting for the furniture. The Eameses were Fifty/50's opening exhibit in 1983. The Library of Congress's retrospective rolled through in 1997. 

"I still love stuff," Mr. McDonald said, of his decision to sell his own. "But I want to be a bit more fluid. I don't want there to be things I have to worry about." Sitting next to a red daybed designed by George Nelson was a tote bag filled with modernist midcentury jewelry that Mr. McDonald was taking to a design show. 

Jewelry, which he says is an important, still under-appreciated market, is an increasing focus. He also advises the Peter S. Reed Foundation, which makes grants to emerging artists, on the decorative arts.

Here, Mr. McDonald answers questions about design, the next names to know, where to shop and "the big check." 

 One of the best places to view midcentury design is in Columbus, Ind., where [local industrialist] J. Irwin Miller commissioned buildings by a number of notable architects: Eero Saarinen, I.M. Pei, Robert Venturi, Cesar Pelli, Richard Meier and others. Six of the buildings, built between 1942 and 1965, are National Historic Landmarks. And Miller's own house was designed by Saarinen, with interiors by Alexander Girard, and landscape design by Dan Kiley. The Indianapolis Museum of Art gives tours.  imamuseum.org  

 There's a market rapidly being discovered for 20th-century jewelers who made "sculpture to wear." Sam Kramer, Art Smith, Peter Macchiarini, Margaret DePatta, Paul Lobel, Ed Wiener, Alexander Calder, Harry Bertoia. It's a very small market, not a lot of buyers, but it's getting expensive. The Museum of Art and Design in New York has great collection to see. The Museum of Fine Arts in Boston now has one too, as does Houston—a big dealer in jewelry from the '60s, '70s and '80s gave her collection to them. 

 Some contemporary designers whose work I've recommended for grants include: June Schwartz, who works in enamel; jewelry designer Lisa Gralnick; a glassmaker, Beth Lipman; and a furniture and product designer, Paul Loebach.  lisagralnick.com,   bethlipman.com , paulloebach.com  

 A designer worth taking a fresh look at is Ettore Sottsass [founder of the postmodern Memphis Group]. He was so prolific and worked in so many different mediums over six decades. He has become a lot more interesting over the years, in retrospect.

 I've always been scared to do the Art Basel shows. At Design Miami this year, there were maybe 14 dealers. Only four had vintage things. Ten didn't—it was contemporary design, limited editions, right off the presses, young designers, famous in 15 minutes kind of thing. In 10 or 15 years, there's going to be a re-evaluation of all this, and some of those things aren't going to be worth much at all. 

 For great design shopping, you must go to Stockholm. And Helsinki and Copenhagen. In Stockholm, I visit Jacksons, Modernity and the auction house Bukowskis. In Helsinki, the Aero gallery and the auction house Hagelstam. In Copenhagen, the shop Dansk Mobelkunst and the auction house Bruun Rasmussen. jacksons.se, modernity.se, bukoskis.com,aerodesignfurniture.fi, hagelstam.fi, dmk.dk, bruun-rasmussen.dk 

 My advice to collectors of anything: Condition is still worth a premium—it's everything. Something in great condition will still do tremendously better, when it's being sold, than something that's been refinished. 

 I'm sad to give up: The Eames chest of drawers, a transition design between modular pieces produced for the 1941 "Organic Design in Home Furnishings" competition at the Museum of Modern Art and the storage-unit series manufactured by Herman Miller in the 1950s. Also the red Henningsen lamp, which came from Poulsen, the manufacturer's, collection. Best condition, earliest version. I get a big check—I can buy some new things.

—Edited from an interview by William L. Hamilton