When  Mario Procida, the son of a Bronx contractor, was getting his architecture degree at UCLA in the early 1980s he fell in love with the work of  Richard Meier, one of the world's leading modernists.

"I thought he was one of the best architects in the world," Mr. Procida recalls.

Little did Mr. Procida know that their futures would entwine many years later with a Brooklyn condominium project whose timing made it financially precarious and whose design made it one of the most controversial in the borough.

Mr. Procida, who expanded into luxury condos in Manhattan and Brooklyn after helping rebuild the South Bronx in the 1980s and '90s, led the group that developed On Prospect Park, a glass and steel tower overlooking Grand Army Plaza. They chose Mr. Meier to design it.

When construction began in 2005, the 15-story tower was hailed as a sign that sophisticated residential architecture as well as breathtaking condo prices were moving deeper into Brooklyn. In late 2008, when it chalked up its first sale just weeks after Lehman Brothers collapsed, it became yet another symbol of the plummeting housing market.

Today, as the city's luxury market shows signs of recovering, On Prospect Park has achieved an important milestone, with 52 of its 96 units sold, or more than half of the building, according to city records. Mr. Procida puts the number sold at more than 60%, which means at least six additional sales have yet to be recorded with the city's Finance Department.

To be sure, the improved sales volume shouldn't be confused with raging success. Steep price discounts were necessary and, after four years of sales, more than a third of the building remains unsold. In an interview, Mr. Procida acknowledged that he and his partners needed to restructure the $100 million in debt from PB Capital Corp. of Germany that financed On Prospect Park.

The project ended up costing well in excess of that amount, said Mr. Procida, who declined to be more precise. Asked if he would break even with On Prospect Park, Mr. Procida, would only smile tightly and say, "I prefer not to discuss it."

But Mr. Procida and his partner  Louis Greco's ability to retain control of the project, and keep it afloat amid the downturn is striking given that the sales program began in 2006. 

Developers of hundreds of other poorly timed condo projects throughout the country have long ago been pushed out by creditors.

By just barely squeaking by, On Prospect Park is emblematic of the city's housing sales market: an improvement over the rest of the country but still anemic. "There's always light at the end of the tunnel, as long as you keep walking," Mr. Procida said.

Mr. Procida is an unlikely luxury-condo pioneer. After graduating from architecture school in 1983, he returned to the family business, which his father moved to the Bronx in the 1970s. Back then, the area was synonymous with urban blight and famously toured by then-President  Jimmy Carter, who promised to clean it up.

The family business, Procida Construction, was perfectly positioned in the mid-1980s when then-Mayor  Ed Koch sought to fulfill that promise by launching one of the most ambitious affordable-housing programs the nation had ever seen. 

His administration committed $5.1 billion to building "affordable" and middle-income housing in partnership with nonprofit and private entities, with the goal of resuscitating some of the city's most downtrodden neighborhoods.

For 10 years, Procida Construction built hundreds of affordable housing projects in the South Bronx with local nonprofits such as the Mid Bronx Desperadoes and Nos Quedamos ("We stay," in Spanish), including the 256-unit, low-rise Melrose Court. "At the end of the day, Mario will tell you, 'I'm a street kid from the Bronx...not a highfalutin guy,' " says developer  Carlton Brown, COO of Full Spectrum NY and a long-time family friend.

Procida Construction has kept building throughout the downturn and last year took in about $75 million in revenue.

Mr. Procida began getting into luxury-condo development about 10 years ago when he met Mr. Greco and the late  Lewis Horowitz, who were launching the be@ brand of residential housing, designed to appeal to young working professionals. At the time, they were about to purchase a site at the corner of Boerum and State streets in Downtown Brooklyn, which they called Boulevard East. It was the first of the be@ projects and ended up selling out quickly. (The "be" in "be@" is derived from the first initials of Boulevard East).

"It was a good chemistry," Mr. Procida said. "We brought in additional construction capacity and additional capital capacity, and additional development capacity. So it worked."

Their company, SDS Procida, went on to build be@Clinton West, be@William Street and, finally, be@schermerhorn. The three also developed the Distinctive Properties series, a higher-end group of loft-like condo developments that includes On Prospect Park, and, most recently, the Dillon on West 53rd Street.

Paying about $10 million, they assembled the On Prospect Park site in 2005, in partnership with  Sheldon Gordon, another friend of Mr. Procida's. Mr. Gordon, in turn, suggested they hire his friend Richard Meier, who by that time had achieved legendary standing in the modernist architectural world.

Best known for designing the Getty Center in Los Angeles, Mr. Meier also had created a mini sensation in the Manhattan residential market with his design of condos on Perry Street in Greenwich Village, widely credited with kick-starting the glass-walled apartment craze in New York City.

Mr. Procida and his group exported the design to Grand Army Plaza. Today it contrasts dramatically with the other architecture on the Plaza, notably the Soldiers' and Sailors' Memorial Arch, dedicated in 1892, and the landmark central branch of the Brooklyn Public Library, which opened in 1941. The dissonance with brownstone Brooklyn has outraged some neighbors.

The design's supporters, however, argue that, like the arch and library, it's a reflection of the times in which it was built. "What do you people want in 2010, the Acropolis?" wrote a commenter named CommentQueen in one of the many online debates on the subject.

Good or bad, the design was no match for the downturn. The price of the first condo that sold, a fifth-floor unit that closed Dec. 23, 2008, was an impressive $3.2 million. 

A unit in the same line on the 10th floor sold one year ago for $1.57 million.

"When late '07 hit, all projections on almost anything went out the window," Mr. Procida said.

Critics of the design say that its glass facade has contributed to its problems by making it very clear to the outside world just how slow sales have been. But Mr. Procida insists the design is working in his favor, especially given the unparalleled light, air and views of the city it offers to buyers.

Indeed, other glass-walled condominiums also have been developed in Williamsburg and other neighborhoods. "We actually think from a massing standpoint, it's highly contextual, and from an aesthetic standpoint, it's classic," Mr. Procida said. "We could have taken an easy way out and built a fairly run-of-the-mill residential property. We chose, for a variety of reasons not to go that way."