Workers from the hardest hit European Union economies have been forced to seek opportunities elsewhere. Some have given up on the Continent completely, heading for further far-flung climes in emerging Asian economies, South America and Australia. 

"There is a sense of closed horizons among the younger generation in Greece and elsewhere in Europe," says Gerassimos Moschonas, associate professor of comparative politics at Panteion University in Athens. 

"We have gone from a period of high expectations to a period of negative expectations. This pessimism will have a very negative effect on future growth. If young, talented people go away, I don't think they will come back that easily."

Here are some of their stories:

For some professionals like Marian Delgado, a 31-year old engineer from Burgos in northern Spain, the time has come to pack up and go. 

"Ever since I graduated from university in 2005 I had a steady work coming my way," Ms. Delgado says. "I even had to turn down many projects. But things have gotten progressively worse since the collapse of the real-estate market here in Spain." 

Ms. Delgado is now working on what she believes is her last infrastructure project in the country before heading abroad to seek work. 

"Brazil looks attractive since there will be a lot of new projects in the run-up to the Olympics [in 2016]. Even Eastern Europe has more opportunities at the moment so that's also a possibility. I don't have a family so it's easy for me to grab my bags and head there."

  Pau Quevedo, a 31-year old economist from Madrid, said he was forced to leave Spain because of the economic downturn. He eventually found work in Berlin and a girlfriend. "I have now found a relationship and my perspective of Europe has widened," he says. However, he has encountered problems in his new home. "You need to sort social security, you discover your degree is not as valuable elsewhere," Mr. Quevedo says. "Sometimes, prospective employers haven't heard of companies I have worked for in Spain although they are a big deal there."

For Mr. Quevedo, the frustration of not being able to find a job may have put him off returning to Spain for some time.  

"I had no problem leaving my country. All of a sudden I was in a sector where all my friends were being made redundant, even those with two degrees and three languages. It's been horrible."

José Ramón Pin, a professor at the IESE Business School in Madrid, says Spanish taxpayers are pouring money into the public coffers to pay for university graduates, before students take those skills elsewhere on graduation. 

"In the long run, a lack of young professionals willing to spend and invest in Spain will have a negative impact on economic growth," he says, before pointing to an unexpected upside. "On the other hand, in the short term, emigration reduces unemployment figures and it frees up benefits funds."

Eleni Sardi, a 26-year old Greek lawyer, is another example of someone who has been forced to leave her country. 

She came to London in 2009 from Athens. Frustrated by the lack of job offers at home, she decided to pursue an M.A. in media studies at the University of Warwick in central England. After completing the course, she found a position in London. But unlike previous generations of Greeks who generally spend a couple of years abroad and then go back, she has no such plans. "Many more people my age have realized how bad things are back home and have started to leave," she said. "We feel our generation, which hasn't really been out in the work force, is paying for someone else's mistakes.

"I left Greece when there were already signs that things were not going to go well at all. Greek people usually leave the country to do a master's and then usually come back after a few years but I don't see myself going back in the next five to seven years. Not until things start to improve.

"But at the moment friends back home tell me they can't find a job and this lowers your self-esteem. Everyone keeps talking about how poor they all are."

In 2007, just before the global downturn, some 67,300 more people entered Ireland than left it, as the country became a magnet for people from Eastern Europe and older Irish people in Britain returned home.  

But in 2010, the country experienced net migration of minus 34,500, despite the fact that 30,800 immigrants entered the country. Some 14,500 left for the U.K., 24,900 to the EU's 27 member states and 2,800 to the U.S.

In January, the Economic and Social Research Institute, a Dublin-based research body, said the country is now losing an estimated 1,000 people a week to emigration. 

The ESRI warned that austerity measures in the country, which represent a cut of about 10% of gross domestic product, will represent a "lost decade" for jobs.

Some Irish have traveled to the other side of the world to find work and, in some cases, love.  Kieran Groarke, a 32-year-old draftsman from County Cork, left Ireland in February 2009 just a couple of months after being made redundant by a company he worked for five years. 

Next May, he is coming back home with his New Zealand girlfriend but only to renew his visa and hopefully head back to Wellington. "I think I made the right decision to leave at the time. My friends, many of them who are unemployed, are telling me it's better to stay away from Ireland. They say the mood is very low." 

  Barry Ryan, a 27-year-old Irishman from County Cork with a Ph.D. in Italian, left his home country in 2009. 

"I lost my job in March 2009 and was on the dole for three months before finding a job in England as a correspondent for a cycling magazine. ... The future seems quite less secure now than five years ago. People tell me 'don't come back here. It's terrible' but I wonder if it has to do with a general Irish pessimism and a sense that things are better elsewhere."

 Write to  Javier Espinoza at javier.espinoza@wsj.com 