The dividend yield on the U.S. stock market has plummeted to dismal levels.

At the dawn of the new year, the market will pay you back around 1.7% of its value in annual dividends. That's one of the lowest levels in the world—and a fraction of the 4.3% historical average. 

A lot of people on Wall Street will tell you not to worry about this too much. After all, they'll say, today's dividends are just one part of your future returns. You'll also make money through dividend growth and capital gains.

And the dividend yield itself is a misleading figure, they'll argue, because it doesn't count all the money that companies are returning to investors through stock buybacks.

Reasonable points. In theory.

But what they're telling you may not be as important as what they're leaving out.

Bottom line: Investors ignore the dividend yield at their peril. And today's low yield may be an ominous signal for anyone investing for the long term.

Why?

Let's look first at the money you are likely to make from dividend growth and capital gains.

The best historical analysis of stock-market returns is probably that compiled by professors  Elroy Dimson, Paul Marsh and  Mike Staunton at the London Business School, and published in the annual Credit Suisse Global Investment Returns Sourcebook. They looked at returns from the U.S. and 18 overseas countries from 1900 through 2009.

The key finding? Investors made the lion's share of their returns from the dividend yield—not from dividend growth, or from the capital gains derived from rising stock prices. In total, the yield accounted for about three-quarters of investors' long-term returns.

Now let's look at the second issue: stock buybacks.

In theory, these should be wonderful for investors. When a company spends money buying back some of its stock, it reduces the number of outstanding shares. Those that remain should be worth proportionately more as a result. Ultimately, if, say,  Exxon Mobil
XOM


0.23
%




 just kept buying back its stock, eventually some little old lady in Dubuque would be left with the last remaining share and, therefore, 100% ownership of the company. She would be worth knowing.

The most recent news on stock buybacks sounds pretty bullish. Standard & Poor's reports that in the third quarter, members of the S&P 500 index increased the amount they spent on stock buybacks by 128% from a year earlier.

In total, they spent a thumping $80 billion. That's the fifth straight quarter in a row that they increased buybacks. (We await fourth-quarter data.) Two hundred and sixty-one companies bought back stock in the quarter, up from 195 a year earlier.

But there's just one problem.

While companies are buying back their stock, they are also issuing new shares. Many of those are new stock and options for executives and senior staff

For stockholders, what the corporate treasury department giveth, the executive compensation committee taketh away. 

Bottom line? While the companies were buying in stock, the number of shares outstanding actually went up. So stockholders got diluted. Each share was worth proportionately less, not more.

According to Standard & Poor's, between Oct. 31, 2009, and Oct. 31, 2010, the outstanding, fully-diluted share capital of the S&P 500 rose 7.6%.

Some of that came from new stock issued by stricken banks.

And even when you exclude the financials, the overall number still rose by 1%.

S&P economist  Howard Silverblatt says the number of companies actually reducing their stock count has been relatively small, maybe a few dozen.

The phenomenon isn't new. Standard & Poor's says that over the past 10 years, members of the S&P 500 spent the gigantic sum of $2.7 trillion buying back stock. That's 40% more than all the money they spent on dividends.

Yet during that time the fully diluted issued share capital of the S&P 500, including stock options, actually went up, by 3.6%. 

So much for buybacks.

To some observers, it's no surprise that over that period, ordinary investors suffered dismal returns, while insiders at many corporations coined it as never before.

"Stock-option programs have been responsible for a massive wealth transfer from the retirement accounts of middle-class America to the corporate elite over the past decade or so," says  Albert Meyer, portfolio manager of the  Mirzam Capital Appreciation mutual fund and a long-standing hawk on corporate governance. He says this "perfectly explains why shareholders have suffered a lost decade."

Does today's dismal yield guarantee poor returns ahead? Of course not. History may offer a guide, but the future is always unknowable. 

Prof. Marsh at the London Business School cautions that you can't rely on the dividend yield alone to try to time the market. Nonetheless, some things seem reasonably clear for any long-term investor: Dividends matter. They may be the one aspect of your return that you can rely on. And right now they are very thin on the ground. 

 Write to  Brett Arends at brett.arends@wsj.com 