Asian stocks climbed Friday, with shares in Tokyo adding to their weekly gains as hopes for reconstruction and news of resumed production at some manufacturers overrode concerns about the effects of earthquake and tsunami on corporate results.

Chinese banks rallied to boost stocks in Shanghai and Hong Kong after Bank of China Ltd. reported robust results.

"A strong set of leads from both Europe and Wall Street yesterday has paved the way for an upbeat finish to the week in Asian trade," said Harley Salt, head of sales trading at IG Markets. "Traders are turning their attention to the implications surrounding the rebuilding of Japan and this will without doubt see demand for raw materials increase as a result."

The Shanghai Composite index added 1.1% to 2977.81 and Hong Kong's Hang Seng index rose 1.1% to 23158.67. South Korea's Kospi climbed 0.9% to 2054.04, Australia's S&P/ASX 200 gained 0.9% to 4742.60, Taiwan's Taiex expanded 0.4% to 8610.39 and India's Sensex rose 2.5% to 18815.64.

Dow Jones Industrial Average futures were up 29 points in screen trade.

Japan's Nikkei Stock Average ended the week at 9536.13, with a 1.1% advance on Friday lifting its weekly gain to 3.6%. The Nikkei sank more than 10% last week on a wave of selling after the earthquake and tsunami that struck the nation on March 11.

Despite the improved sentiment, Toshiyuki Kanayama, market analyst at Monex, said investors will be wary of taking on heavy positions given the fluid situation at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear complex.

Focus also turned to potential changes to post-earthquake earnings guidance.

"Individual companies are slowly putting out forecast changes, but information is coming out piecemeal and it will take some to assess the full impact on the economy," said Hideo Arimura, senior fund manager at Mizuho Asset Management.

However, Nomura analyst Seiichiro Iwasawa wrote in a report that investors appear to have already priced in a 20% or so fall in Japanese corporate profits for next financial year as a whole, and therefore it made "no sense to get additionally worked up about problems with electricity supply" in the wake of the destruction caused by the earthquake.

Toyota Motor rose 1.9% after saying Thursday it will resume production of three hybrid models in Japan on Monday, while Nissan Motor gained 1.5%, retracing some of the previous session's 4.6% drop. Nissan began production of some parts earlier this week and assembly of some vehicles on Thursday.

Sony jumped 3.3% after Deutsche Bank upgraded the stock rating to buy from hold, citing an improving profit outlook and undervalued shares.

Tokyo Electric Power, which owns the Fukushima nuclear plant, fell 6.2%.

Gains for technology-related stocks in the U.S. overnight also served to bolster regional semiconductor companies.

Elpida Memory Inc. climbed 3.2% in Tokyo, while Samsung Electronics Co. jumped 3.4% and Hynix Semiconductor Inc. added 2.8% in Seoul, partly supported by hopes they will benefit from Japanese rivals' troubles in the aftermath of the earthquake and tsunami.

Banking stocks sparkled in Hong Kong after Bank of China Ltd. and BOC Hong Kong Holdings Ltd. both reported better-than-expected 2010 results Thursday.

Li Shaojun, an analyst with Minsheng Securities, said the banking sector will likely post strong 2010 earnings as lenders' interest margins rose after China began a cycle of interest-rate increases last year. "The small banks' earnings will be even better than Bank of China's," he added.

Bank of China climbed 2.6%, BOC Hong Kong added 2.1% and Industrial & Commercial Bank of China Ltd. rose 1.9% in Hong Kong; in Shanghai, Bank of China gained 1.8%, while ICBC climbed 1.1%.

But earnings-related news wasn't all good, and Hong Kong-listed merchandise-sourcing company Li & Fung Ltd. plunged 9.1% after reporting 2010 earnings Thursday that fell short of expectations.

Elsewhere in the region, New Zealand's NZX 50 ended little changed, while Philippine and Singapore's Straits Times index both finished the day 0.9% higher. Indonesian shares closed down 0.2%. Thailand's SET rose 0.3%.

In foreign-exchange trade, the euro moved in a narrow range against the U.S. dollar, showing resilience in the face of the euro-zone debt crisis. Standard & Poor's Ratings Services cut Portugal's credit rating by two notches to BBB and remained on watch for further downgrades a day after Prime Minister Jose Socrates resigned, following the opposition parties' rejection of an austerity plan.

"The downgrade is not a surprise following the failure of the Portuguese parliament to pass the package of austerity measures," said Barclays Capital in a note to clients. "Without signs of contagion to systemically important Spain, the events in Portugal are not likely to become a major driver of the euro/dollar," it added.

The single currency was fetching $1.4156 from $1.4177 late Thursday in New York, and 짜114.76 from 짜114.76. The dollar was at 짜81.08 compared with 짜80.97.

Lead Japanese government bond futures were off 0.12 at 139.80 points, weighed by the Nikkei's rise and losses for U.S. Treasurys on Thursday. The 10-year cash JGB yield was up 0.015 percentage point at 1.220%.

Spot gold was at $1,433.60 per troy ounce, up $2.80 from its New York settlement Thursday. May Nymex crude-oil futures were down 20 cents at $105.40 per barrel on Globex.



 Write to  Shri Navaratnam at shri.navaratnam@dowjones.com 