TOKYO—Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan named an experienced assistant to replace Seiji Maehara as foreign minister, opting for stability in foreign policy ahead of a meeting delegates from the Group of Eight leading nations. 

The appointment of State Secretary for Foreign Affairs Takeaki Matsumoto was announced by Chief Cabinet Secretary Yukio Edano, who had been filling in as foreign minister since Monday, when Mr. Maehara formally resigned from the position for violating a campaign finance law. 

Mr. Matsumoto, a fourth-term lower house member in Mr. Kan's Democratic Party of Japan, takes office less than a week before the G-8 foreign ministers' meeting in Paris, a factor that many observers expected would influence Mr. Kan's decision. Looking to shore up his increasingly fragile administration after a series of setbacks, Mr. Kan opted for foreign-policy stability by choosing Mr. Maehara's deputy. 

The appointment may also at least partially help to repair Mr. Kan's relations with a rebel group within his ruling party. The group is loyal to former leader Ichiro Ozawa, a party heavyweight now facing trial over a political fund-raising scandal. Mr. Matsumoto served as chairman of the party's Policy Research Committee when Mr. Ozawa was party leader and is considered to have close ties with Mr. Ozawa's supporters. 

Mr. Matsumoto said in an upper house parliamentary committee meeting Wednesday that he will carry forward Mr. Maehara's efforts to promote the exporting of infrastructure technology such as power facilities and high-speed rail. 

Mr. Matsumoto is a former banker and comes from a long political dynasty. He is the great-great-grandson of Japan's first prime minister, Hirofumi Ito. 

The resignation of Mr. Maehara, a rising star in the ruling party, is the latest in a series of setbacks for Mr. Kan, who is struggling to keep his party together and fight increasingly harsh criticism from opposition parties looking to derail his administration. 

With a support rate below 20% and little chance of the opposition support he needs to issue bonds to fund the budget deficit, Mr. Kan will either have to step down or call an early election, most political analysts predict. 