WASHINGTON — President Barack Obama is considering appointing Clinton administration Commerce Secretary  William Daley as his next chief of staff or to some other senior post at the White House, according to people familiar with the selection process.



No personnel decisions have been made, and Mr. Daley, the brother of retiring Chicago Mayor  Richard Daley, may remain in his job as a senior executive of J.P. Morgan Chase, people familiar with the process said.

Mr. Daley's addition to the White House staff, it if happens, would broaden the presence of prominent officials from the Clinton administration as Mr. Obama's presidency enters a new phase likely to be marked by clashes with resurgent Republicans, as was Mr. Clinton's time in office.

Mr. Obama's new budget director,  Jacob Lew, worked with Republicans in the late 1990s to reach a balanced budget accord when he served as Mr. Clinton's last budget director. The top candidate to be Mr. Obama's next National Economic Council director,  Gene Sperling, held the NEC post in the latter years of the Clinton White House.

Mr. Daley's appointment would be an even more dramatic gesture. A fierce free trade advocate, he is seen as a champion of business-friendly policies. 

Any further legislative achievements this term will require a level of bipartisanship never achieved in the Obama administration , now that the GOP is taking control of the House. Mr. Daley has been an advocate of moving policies to the center in search of common ground.

Mr. Daley was a close adviser to Mr. Obama during the 2008 presidential campaign and was mentioned early for possible positions before falling off the short lists.

White House press secretary  Robert Gibbs said he would "not comment on personnel speculation." Officials familiar with the deliberations said it is not even decided whether Mr. Obama will seek a new chief of staff or make his interim chief, long-time aide Pete Rouse, permanent.

 Write to  Jonathan Weisman at jonathan.weisman@wsj.com 