JERUSALEM—Israel is losing hope it can settle the outlines of a final peace accord with the Palestinians in coming months and instead is considering plans that would offer them a provisional state with temporary borders, according to several officials familiar with the deliberations. 

The Palestinians have rejected such interim solutions in the past, and leaders in the West Bank said Thursday they would do so again. But Israeli officials said they felt pressed to make an offer to satisfy Western concerns that a prolonged stalemate in Israeli peace talks with the Palestinians would boost the appeal of Islamist forces vying for power across the Middle East.

Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has been pointing to popular uprisings in Egypt and elsewhere as a warning of the risks of making peace with leaders who may not last.

But in the coming weeks he is expected to make a policy speech aimed at breaking the deadlock with the Palestinians, the longest in nearly two decades of U.S.-brokered peace efforts, the officials said. They added that Mr. Netanyahu and senior ministers were discussing various proposals among themselves and with the Obama administration and other international mediators.

U.S. and European Union officials declined to comment, saying they had yet to hear a concrete Israeli proposal.

Israeli and Palestinian negotiators have held just one round of direct talks in the past 28 months. President Barack Obama launched the round in September, with the goal of a framework accord on all core issues of the conflict within a year. The talks broke off three weeks later, after Israel's 10-month partial moratorium on construction in West Bank settlements expired.

The Palestinians declined to resume the talks unless settlement building stops. Israeli officials said the wave of popular uprisings across the Middle East has emboldened the Jewish state's adversaries and stiffened the Palestinian resolve. 

Palestinian leaders in the West Bank said they may seek recognition of statehood at the U.N. General Assembly in September, a step that would bring no real change on the ground but increase Israel's isolation.

Israeli officials say a new peace proposal could blunt that campaign.

"We have to take the initiative, something that can be seen as the next step in a phased approach toward the goal of the international community—two states side by side," said a senior Israeli official.

Members of Mr. Netanyahu's conservative-led government have advanced several proposals, including a drawing of provisional borders that would define the two states during final-status negotiations. 

Those negotiations would aim to set definitive borders and resolve the contentious questions of how many Palestinian refugees may live in Israel and who would control predominately Arab eastern Jerusalem and its holy sites.

Foreign Minister Avigdor Lieberman is working on a plan for a Palestinian state with temporary borders covering nearly half the West Bank. A similar proposal by Shaul Mofaz, a former defense minister now serving in parliament, would give the provisional state 60% of the West Bank and all of the Gaza Strip. Israel withdrew from Gaza in 2005.

National Security Minister Dan Meridor has proposed that Israel unilaterally freeze settlement construction outside the large West Bank settler communities it expects to keep under a final accord—a step that would involve a unilateral setting of temporary borders. 

Yasser Abed Rabbo, secretary-general of the Palestine Liberation Organization, said on Thursday the Palestinians wouldn't sign any interim accord with Israel. 

Palestinian leaders have long argued that interim territorial concessions would weaken their power to close a deal on other key issues.

"Our top priority is an end to the occupation of our lands…including East Jerusalem and a just solution for the refugees," Mr. Abed Rabbo said.

Yossi Beilin, a leftist Israeli politician and former peace negotiator, said the Palestinians might soften their position if the Obama administration could manage to broker a deal for a provisional state on up to 80% of the West Bank and enforce a timetable for a final peace accord.

"Obama needs to find the right wording to satisfy the Palestinians and not get into a conflict with Israel," he said. 

But Mouin Rabbani, a Palestinian analyst based in Jordan, said the upheavals in the region have left Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas uncertain of continued Arab backing to settle for less than a state on all the land Israel captured in East Jerusalem, the West Bank and Gaza in the 1967 Middle East War. 

 The idea of a provisional Palestinian state is controversial in Israel as well. Tzipi Livni, Israel's center-left opposition leader, called it a "mini-solution meant to prevent inevitable decisions" on the core issues. 

On the right, Mr. Netanyahu would face resistance to any limitation on Israel's settlements. He is resisting pressure to approve large settlement projects that the West would condemn, although Jerusalem's city hall recently approved 14 new housing units that will widen the foothold of Jewish settlers in a largely Palestinian neighborhood.

—Joshua Mitnick contributed to this article.

 Write to  Richard Boudreaux at richard.boudreaux@wsj.com 