There's hardcore porn and softcore porn, and then there's the Bauman Rare Books catalog, which lands on my doorstep several times a year. If your heart races at the contours of a first edition of "The Great Gatsby," with the almost impossible to find dust jacket, or an autographed copy of Hemingway's "The Sun Also Rises," then the Bauman catalog is the equivalent of Playboy, Penthouse and maybe the New York Review of Books all rolled into one.



But Bauman, which has an atmospheric gallery on Madison Avenue and 54th Street that looks like  Henry Higgins' library, with books soaring to the ceiling, may have outdone itself this time. Its latest catalog is titled "100 Great Books and Autographs" and includes such nuggets as the Federalist Papers, two volumes bound in one and in "contemporary full sheep, custom chemise and full morocco clamshell box." No need to concern yourself if you have no idea what they're talking about, but to book lovers that's basically equivalent to what  Annette Bening's glittery  Naeem Khan gown or  Cate Blanchett's Givenchy couture at this year's Oscars is to fashionistas. Oh yeah, and the price is $260,000. For the book. I don't know what the dresses cost.

If Hamilton, Madison and Jay's seminal political essays fall slightly outside your price range, perhaps you'll be tempted by  Oscar Wilde's "The Importance of Being Earnest." It's one of only 100 signed copies of a limited first edition, and available for a mere $52,000. Or if you're struggling to make ends meet, how about a first edition of  Ian Fleming's "Moonraker," at $12,500? (Actually, it may be too late: I've been told both have sold.)

"It's a comprehensive collection of what we call high spots," explained  Justin McShea, one of Bauman's experts. "They're the best, biggest, most important books in a particular field."

Physical books may seem to be passé, but Mr. McShea said that isn't so. "Digitalization is increasing interest in rare and fine books," he reported. "People see them as more and more exotic every day."

I discovered Bauman through my father, a book collector. Like me, he couldn't afford to shop there. But also like me, he loved to get the catalog. And he had a practice, which he inculcated in me, of clipping the description and price Bauman was asking and sticking it in his own copy of the same book. It's sort of like during World War II, when GI's taped pin-ups of  Veronica Lake or  Betty Grable inside their lockers. 

Who knows if the book is actually worth that much money. Due diligence would suggest you subtract the markup that goes to pay the rent on Bauman's sumptuous shops not only in Manhattan, but also its Philadelphia headquarters and outpost in Las Vegas, and its team of catalogers and restorers, and its marketing department. But it's fun to imagine that the faded volume gathering dust on your bookshelf is actually beating the stock market (though Mr. McShea cautions against buying books as a hedge against inflation).

"We really don't sell our books as investments," he explained. "It's a very conservative market—slow but steady."

Not that slow, if Bauman's values are to be believed. I'll give you an example with one of my own books, "The Great Gatsby," alas without that extremely rare dust jacket. That theirs has helps explain its $168,000 price tag. Or as Mr. McShea put it: "The most expensive piece of paper ever printed. It's commonly regarded as the rarest dust jacket in 20th-century literature." 

I think it's kind of ugly, but maybe that's just sour grapes because my copy came without. Legend has it that Fitzgerald was so smitten by the cover's enigmatic feminine eyes and lips that he wrote them into the plot (the cover was produced months before the book was published). You can also tell that it's a first-issue jacket, Mr. McShea added, because the "j" in " jay Gatsby" was mistakenly printed lowercase and hand-corrected.

I bought my copy, with its iconic dedication—"Once Again to ZELDA"—from a bookshop in Princeton, N.J., in the late '60s, when I was a teenager. I knew I'd gotten a bargain even then because I found the volume buried in the store's stacks and remember the owner's startled reaction when he saw the price he'd penciled in, probably years earlier—$10. 

My first Gatsby catalog tear sheet, as per my father's instructions, came in 1972 (he instructed me not only to clip the price but also to note the year), when the identical book was on sale for $60. By 1974, another seller had it for $130. In 1997, it was worth $1,500, according to one of my strips of paper. And by 2008, Bauman was selling a copy in a custom clamshell box for $7,000.

"This is one of the few modern novels we're able to sell without the jacket," Mr. McShea told me.

He brought out some other "high spots" from Bauman's inventory, locked behind a glass case at the front of the store. There was a first edition of  Walt Whitman's "Leaves of Grass," one of only 795 copies in the original gilt cloth binding and with an illustration of the poet in shirtsleeves. "Whitman couldn't find a publisher so he convinced these two brothers in Brooklyn who specialized in legal documents to publish the first edition," Mr. McShea explained. 

It can be yours for $175,000.

He also produced a first edition of "Moby-Dick," the dour reception it received when it was published in 1851 giving hope to all authors for whom immortality seems slow at coming. "The book was remaindered," Mr. McShea said. "And a bunch of copies were destroyed at a fire in the Harper & Brothers warehouse by the Brooklyn Bridge." Hence the price tag—$62,000. 

Finally, there was Lewis and Clark's 1814 "History of the Expedition," with the rare folding map of their route, all for $225,000. "You can pretty much subtract a zero if the map is missing," Mr. McShea said.

Subtract two zeros and I'll take it. I'll even throw in my "Gatsby."

— ralph.gardner@wsj.com 