PARIS—France's Front National chose Marine Le Pen to succeed her father as leader, as the right-wing party tries to rejuvenate its populist message ahead of next year's presidential election.

Ms. Le Pen on Sunday became the party's second leader since it was formed 38 years ago by her father Jean-Marie Le Pen, and immediately promised to oppose immigration and globalization, as well as seize back powers from the European Union. 

The state "must take up economic and social patriotism without compunction," she told the FN congress after winning its presidency. "At a time when the crisis and globalization are raging, when everything is collapsing, there is still the state," she added.

Ms. Le Pen's election as FN president presents a challenge for France's two biggest political parties—President Nicolas Sarkozy's center-right Union pour un Mouvement Populaire, or UMP, and the Socialist Party. 

Her stance, against immigration and for harsher law-and-order measures, could win votes from the UMP, which under Mr. Sarkozy's presidency led a ban against face-covering veils in public. "France is not a caliphate," or Islamic state, Ms. Le Pen reminded her audience Sunday.

Her attacks on economic liberalism, meanwhile, could attract people who usually vote Socialist. She criticized "the commercialization of our culture, the unchecked reign of money."

Mr. Le Pen built the party into an electoral force in the 1980s, when it won representation in France's national assembly. It later lost the seats, but in the 2002 presidential election, Mr. Le Pen beat out the Socialist Party's candidate to reach the final round against the then-sitting president, Jacques Chirac, who won the final vote easily.

But Mr. Le Pen was tainted by statements that made him look racist—something he denies being. He described the Holocaust as a "detail" of history and complained that there were too many nonwhite players in France's national football team.

Ms. Le Pen, in appearances over the past few months, has tried to deliver the FN's traditional populism while avoiding that kind of controversy. She said in a December television appearance that she thought Nazism was an "abomination."

Other politicians said they weren't convinced by her attempts to clean up the FN's image.

"It's still the same extreme right," said Labor Minister Xavier Bertrand, a member of the UMP. The UMP should "answer the preoccupations, the major questions of our fellow citizens: security, the fight against clandestine immigration, reaffirming the value of work," he told Europe 1 radio.

Ségolène Royal, the Socialist presidential candidate in 2007, who wants to stand again for the party in 2012, said on TV that Ms. Le Pen would be a "more credible and dangerous candidate than her father." She said the FN would to benefit from "Nicolas Sarkozy's betrayal of all his promises … the impoverishment of the French … and the European crisis."

Ms. Le Pen, 42 years old, won 68% of the vote in an election at an FN convention in Tours, central France, easily beating the other candidate, longtime party No. 2 Bruno Gollnisch.

 Write to  Sebastian Moffett at sebastian.moffett@wsj.com 