  (See Corrections & Amplifications item below.)  

  AT&T Inc.'s proposed $39 billion acquisition of T-Mobile USA is as much a wager on the political environment in Washington as it is a bet on the future of the U.S. wireless market.

The phone giant's proposed acquisition represents a challenge to the Obama administration Justice Department, which has signaled it will police mergers more aggressively than under the prior Republican administration.

It also comes as the Federal Communications Commission, which also can effectively veto the deal, is wrestling with how to widen access to mobile broadband services, and preparing to issue a report that raises fresh concerns about competitiveness in the wireless market. 

On AT&T's side of the ledger is a long history as one of the top-spending lobbying operations and campaign contributors in Washington, ties to influential lawmakers and policy makers in both parties, and the backing of the Communications Workers of America, the union that represents thousands of AT&T workers.

Since 1989, AT&T has been the top corporate donor to members of Congress, shelling out more than $46 million in campaign contributions to both Republicans and Democrats, according to the Center for Responsive Politics. Last year, the company spent $15.4 million on lobbying in Washington. It had 93 lobbyists working on its behalf, federal lobbying records show.

The head of the Justice Department's antitrust division,  Christine Varney, promised early in her tenure to more aggressively review mergers to assure they don't hurt competition. Before taking her current job, Ms. Varney was a partner at the law firm Hogan & Hartson, and specialized in technology antitrust matters.

But so far, the Obama Justice Department hasn't blocked a large, high-profile deal outright. Two controversial deals—Ticketmaster's acquisition of Live Nation Inc. and  Comcast Corp.'s purchase of NBC-Universal—were both allowed to proceed, albeit with significant conditions. 

Antitrust lawyers say AT&T's bid is riskier because it's largely a "horizontal" deal in which a company buys a direct competitor. The deals for Live Nation and NBCU were largely "vertical" deals involving companies operating at different stages of the distribution chain.

"This is the standard horizontal merger where, unless they can spinoff enough market share, I would expect a challenge," said Spencer Waller, an antitrust law professor at Loyola University Chicago

The deal faces a "massive regulatory review," said  John Briggs, an antitrust lawyer at Axinn, Veltrop & Harkrider. He gave it "a 50-50 of not getting through." 

A Justice Department spokeswoman declined to comment.

AT&T appears confident it'll win in the end. It agreed to pay a $3 billion breakup fee to Deutsche Telecom AG if it has to abandon the purchase. AT&T has a track record of securing approval for its deals—including the combination of SBC Communications and AT&T in 2005. In 2006, AT&T won approval for its $85.8 billion takeover of BellSouth.

"They wouldn't be putting down a $39 billion bet unless they thought they had a story" to tell about the consumer benefits, said  Mark Popofsky, a former Justice Department official who now chairs the antitrust practice at law firm Ropes & Gray. 

AT&T is draping its case for the deal in red, white and blue – stating in a presentation to investors that the deal represents "an American company investing in America." The company also says the merger would help the FCC achieve its goals of expanding wireless broadband service.

AT&T says the merger will create large "efficiencies" that should drive down costs for consumers – even as it assures Wall Street that the deal will result in higher wireless profit margins.

Much will depend on how the Justice Department looks at the wireless market. Opponents of the deal argue that the deal will create a national duopoly of Verizon and AT&T, because it eliminates the fourth-largest carrier and leaves the third, Sprint, trailing so far behind. 

AT&T is emphasizing local—not national—competition. 

"Traditionally analysis has been local, city by city," said  Bernard Nigro, an antitrust lawyer at Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver & Jacobson. "There is a question whether the [antitrust] division will also look at national issues."

For the first time last year, the FCC released an annual report on wireless competition which didn't find that there was "effective competition" in the U.S. This year's report is expected to go further and raise concerns about the ability of smaller providers to compete.

The agency has already made some efforts to help smaller wireless companies. When Harbinger Capital Partners acquired satellite wireless provider SkyTerra Communications (later redubbed LightSquared) last spring, it had to agree to seek FCC approval before leasing any of its airwaves to the two largest U.S. wireless providers—Verizon and AT&T.

In April, the FCC is also expected to approve new rules on data roaming that would require large providers like AT&T and Verizon to offer data service to customers of smaller providers at reasonable rates. The FCC has similar rules on phone calls, but not on data.

The FCC eliminated spectrum caps in 2003 after concluding that the wireless marketplace was so competitive that such limits were no longer needed. Consumer groups and smaller, rural wireless carriers have asked the FCC several times over the subsequent years to reinstate the caps, as AT&T and Verizon Wireless have gobbled up much of the airwaves that have been auctioned off by the FCC in recent years.

FCC merger reviews of deals this size can take upwards of a year to complete, as the agency spends months gathering data and reviewing whether the deal is the public interest. The Justice Department's antitrust division will review the deal simultaneously and the two agencies generally try to coordinate the announcement of their decisions.

Democrats on Capitol Hill are already planning to hold hearings about the deal and the impact it could have on consumers and competitors. Wisconsin Sen.  Herb Kohl, the Democratic chairman of the Senate Antitrust, Competition Policy and Consumer Rights Subcommittee, released a statement hours after the T-Mobile acquisition was announced saying his committee will "take a close look" at the deal. 

House Judiciary Committee Chairman Lamar Smith (R-Texas) on Monday announced his panel will hold hearings on the merger. "The proposed AT&T and T-Mobile merger raises important questions about competition in the telecom industry and the effect on American consumers," Mr. Smith said in a statement.

AT&T's Washington office is run by Republicans. But the company has established close relationships with FCC Chairman  Julius Genachowski and members of the Obama administration. 

The head of AT&T's Washington office,  James Cicconi, served as a key ally to Mr. Genachowski during the contentious debate last year over new "net neutrality" rules the agency imposed on broadband providers. Unlike rival Verizon, AT&T supported the FCC's new rules, which prohibit broadband providers from deliberately slowing or blocking legal Internet traffic.

An FCC spokesman said Mr. Genachowski had no comment on the pending transaction.

  William Daley, the new White House chief of staff, previously served as president of SBC Communications, the telecommunications giant that merged with AT&T in 2005. Mr. Daley hasn't worked for the company for years. But the administration is working to repair relations with business leaders as the 2012 presidential election cycle heats up.

 Write to  Amy Schatz at Amy.Schatz@wsj.com and Thomas Catan at thomas.catan@wsj.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications:  The Federal Communications Commission's report on wireless competition in 2010 didn't take a position on whether the wireless industry was competitive. This article incorrectly states the agency had found the wireless market wasn't competitive.