SAN'A, Yemen—Yemen's opposition turned its focus to the country's rural areas Monday, organizing demonstrations in southern and central provinces that drew thousands—unusually large gatherings for these mountainous, hard-to-reach areas. 

Over 3,000 opposition supporters gathered in the town of Maweya in Taiz province, in southern Yemen, condemning alleged oppression by the ruling party of President Ali Abdullah Saleh, according to eyewitnesses. And in Dhammar province , in central Al-Hada district, the opposition was able to gather more than 1,500 followers, in a district considered a stronghold for the ruling party. 

Monday's protests are much smaller than demonstrations that drew thousands to the streets of San'a, the capital, and other urban centers late last week. Opposition leaders said they were now targeting rural areas, where loyalties to tribal and local authorities often outweigh any allegiance to Mr. Saleh's central government. They have promised country-wide demonstrations on Thursday. 

Yemen is just one of several Arab countries, including Algeria, Jordan and Sudan, recently wracked by protests on the heels of demonstrations that ousted Tunisia's long-time president earlier this month. In recent days, tens of thousands of Egyptian protesters have clashed with state-security forces across Egypt, threatening President Hosni Mubarak's grip on power.

Yemen's Mr. Saleh has been a crucial ally of the U.S. in its fight against terrorism. Washington and allied capitals have ratcheted up aid recently in the wake of several international terror plots orchestrated by Yemen's al Qaeda affiliate, including the Christmas Day 2009 attempted bombing of a Detroit-bound airliner and a thwarted attempt to ship explosives to the U.S. aboard cargo planes late last year. 

Ahmed Othman, an official of the opposition umbrella, the Joint Meeting Parties, or JMP, in Taiz, said that dialogue with the current regime appeared useless, and he insisted that protests won't stop. "The ruling party is never serious about dialogue, that is why we are convinced that we must continue peaceful protests," said Mr. Othman.

Mr. Saleh's ruling party continued Monday to call the opposition JMP to the table, promising to take up long-stalled negotiations over political reform.

"Every time the opposition escalates, we call them for dialogue. The government wants to solve standing problems, but it seems that JMP does not want dialogue," said governmental spokesperson  Tareq Al-Shami.