Which is more important to a police investigation, logic or intuition? Is a murder best solved like an algebra problem? Or is a cop better off following his hunch? Such are the questions posed in Keigo Higashino's "The Devotion of Suspect X" (Minotaur, 298 pages, $24.99), a Japanese best seller now translated into English (by Alexander O. Smith, with Elye J. Alexander). 

Yasuko, a single mother of a teenage daughter, has the bad luck to kill her abusive ex- husband in her own apartment. But she has the apparent good fortune to live next door to a brilliant math teacher, who volunteers to cover up the crime. What they need, he says, is a perfect plan based on perfect logic. 

This imperturbable neighbor was known as "Ishigami the Buddha" at university—where, as it happens, he was friends with an assistant professor of physics who now serves as an unofficial helper to the police team investigating the death. Will "Detective Galileo" (as the cops nickname the physicist) be able to outwit "The Buddha," who has thought this problem through to its many possible conclusions? It all hinges on a typical mathematical conundrum, "Galileo" explains: "whether it's more difficult to think of the solution to a problem yourself or to ascertain if someone else's answer . . . is correct." "That's mathematics?" the detective responds. "Sounds more like philosophy."

Whether it amounts to math, philosophy, psychology or cosmology, "The Devotion of Suspect X" is an elegant literary experiment. It suggests, among much else, that a lot of bad behavior is forgiven in the name of genius—and then even a genius can push the envelope just so far before it breaks. 

Wesley Stace's dazzling "Charles Jessold, Considered as a Murderer" (Picador, 389 pages, $15) unfolds in England before, during and after World War I and then in the early 1950s. Its title character is a young composer of talent, personal magnetism and dangerous self-indulgence. We learn early on how, on the eve of the 1923 debut of his anticipated opera masterpiece, he died violently—as did his wife and her apparent lover. The rest of the book is a first-person account, by the composer's close friend and champion, of what led up to those dire events and of what followed them.

This third work by Mr. Stace (who also records music under the name John Wesley Harding) is a bravura chronicle. It starts in an era when English symphonists made pilgrimages to rural villages to "catch" authentic folk songs and ends a generation or two beyond the atonal crossroads. The book is full of marvelous scenes and memorable set pieces, from the country shire to the concert hall and drawing room, and is peopled with individualized types, from silver-voiced farmers to acid-tongued journalists.

Here, for instance, the narrator sketches a great diva: "An immediate vision of the singer in full throttle presented itself to me, her perfect posture, her throat as deep, dark and infinite as the Blackwall Tunnel, upper lip lifted and pursed revealing dazzling teeth, bottom lip loose, quivering, nostrils wide like a Grand National winner."

Throughout, the prose is itself musical—and rich with erudition and wordplay. (The composer, noting that his gin cocktail is overdiluted, complains that "the tonic is a little dominant.") "When I tell a story," the narrator says at one point, "it remains told." Just so. 

Rural England circa 1950 is the setting for the lighter-toned "A Red Herring Without Mustard" (Delacorte, 399 pages, $23), the third mystery by Alan Bradley to be narrated by 11-year-old Flavia de Luce: chemistry prodigy, amateur detective and mischievous bane of her two elder sisters and their distracted, upper-class, philatelic, cash-strapped widower-father. 

Flavia starts this adventure by accidentally setting fire to a gypsy fortune-teller's tent at a village fête. To make amends, she insists that the woman park her caravan on the grounds of the dilapidated de Luce estate. There the woman suffers a violent attack by persons unknown; no sooner has she been taken to the hospital than the corpse of a local poacher is found in the de Luce front-yard fountain, a lobster-fork from the de Luce kitchen piercing his head: "Death by family silver," Flavia notes. 

As usual, the youngest de Luce walks, skips and trots a self-drawn line between helping the local police inspector ("How I adored this man!") and sorting everything out on her own. Trying to solve the current puzzles, she researches distant local events and also her own poignant family history. This idiosyncratic young heroine continues to charm. 

Also an engaging personality, in his own contemporary way, is Carter Ross, the New Jersey investigative reporter narrating Brad Parks's "Eyes of the Innocent" (Minotaur, 294 pages, $24.99), a capable follow-up to this author's award- winning debut mystery (which also featured newspaperman Ross). Carter's specialty is the "BBI" story, he says: "Boring But Important." Of his latest such feature ("a piece about patronage hiring in a nearby county government"), he notes: "The thirteen people who actually bothered to read it . . . were very impressed. To everyone else who picked up our Sunday paper, I suspect it was merely an impediment on the way to sudoku." 

But things get more urgent when Ross grabs a story on the deaths of two youngsters in a house fire. From kids home alone to mortgage-rate resets to a vanished city councilman to homicide, the piece keeps growing. Mr. Parks, himself a former newspaperman, knows this turf well. In the course of showing Ross nailing down the story, he has a lot of fun with office politics, Ross's love life, and the desire that a put-upon reporter may sometimes feel to have a conversation with a sympathetic Coke machine. 

—Mr. Nolan's mystery reviews appear regularly in the books pages of the Weekend Journal. 