  Ursula M. Burns, the chairman and chief executive officer at  Xerox Corp.
XRX


-0.38
%




, upgraded her job title last year, and now she has upgraded her Manhattan apartment as well, property records show. 

Ms. Burns paid $8.15 million to purchase a five-bedroom penthouse, with a library and separate dining room at the Brompton, a new condominium on East 85th Street at Third Avenue. 

A few weeks earlier she sold another, smaller Manhattan apartment, a three-bedroom condo at the Beekman Regent on East 51st Street for $2.15 million, taking a loss of $350,000 on the transaction.

Two years ago, Ms. Burns was named the chief executive at Xerox, based in Stamford, Conn., and last spring she was named to the additional post of chairman, succeeding  Anne M. Mulcahy. 

Ms. Burns, who rose through the ranks at Xerox, is the first black woman to head a Fortune 500 company. A Xerox spokesman declined to comment on the purchase.

Ms. Burns also has a home in New Canaan, Conn. Ms. Burns's total compensation rose to $11.2 million in 2009 from $6.7 million the year before, according to a Xerox financial filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission last year. 

  Michael Spodek, a broker at Corcoran Group who had the listing, said the apartment, with a 35-foot-long entrance gallery and 12-foot ceilings, had the best layout in the building. It also featured views extending from the Empire State Building to the East River.

It was designed to be the largest and most impressive in the building he said, though subsequently other apartments were combined to create larger layouts.

"We called it the 'Wow' apartment," he said. 

The transaction was one of only a few resales so far in the building. The prior owners of the condo,  Jerry Francesco, who ran a business that provides support services to dialysis patients, and his wife, Lucille, closed on their purchase in April 2009 for just over $8 million. 

They put it back on the market a year later, resulting in the purchase by Ms. Burns.

"Our plans changed, that's all," Ms. Francesco said. She declined to comment further.