The Village Vanguard

178 Seventh Ave. South (212) 255-4037

Through Sunday 

Terell Stafford has long been acknowledged as one of the outstanding trumpeters on the scene—as a sideman and soloist—but for years I've been waiting for him to make a major statement as a bandleader. That breakthrough comes with his latest album, "This Side of Strayhorn," a perfect project for him in that his skills at working in different styles of jazz are perfectly aligned with the uncategorizable nature of  Billy Strayhorn's music. Strayhorn wrote soaring, heartfelt melodies with the harmonic sophistication of a classically trained composer. The outstanding new arrangements for quintet, written by pianist  Bruce Barth and co-starring saxophonist  Tim Warfield, show that this music, belongs to all time—as if we didn't already know it. This is the first new release I've heard this season that immediately makes it to my annual top 10 list.

Strayhorn (1915-1967) is usually classified as a Johnny-come-lately to the swing era, but generationally as well as musically speaking, his works are as well suited to beboppers and modernists as they are to big band and swing players. And this is Mr. Stafford's forte: He works equally well in both classic and modern styles, and further establishes that as far as Strayhorn's music goes, any perceived differences between classic and modern are irrelevant.

Mr. Barth's charts don't so much split the difference as much as ignore it. The playing of Mr. Warfield, on both tenor and soprano sax, speaks to John Coltrane's love of Strayhorn's tunes (as on "Lush Life" and "My Little Brown Book"), while Mr. Barth's own piano solos reveal a hitherto unnoticed admiration for both Red Garland and Erroll Garner. What's especially remarkable is that the arrangements serve as imaginative recastings of classic and offbeat Strayhorniana as well as trumpet showpieces for the leader.

"U.M.M.G. (Upper Manhattan Medical Group)" was an inspired choice to begin the late set on opening night (the early show, it's pleasing to report, was broadcast by WBGO and is now available as streaming audio on that station's website). The classic Ellington Orchestra recording begins with Clark Terry, and Mr. Stafford's new rendition sounds like a direct follow-up to that famous solo; the new treatment roughly follows the outlines of the original, with the ensemble joining in about 16 bars in, but is much more of a feature for Mr. Stafford's expressive playing. "Multicolored Blue" was originally done as a vocal ballad by the big band, but Mr. Stafford and Mr. Barth treat it like the bluest of the blues, with the trumpeter growling into a cup mute. The midnight crowd responded as if to a stripper twirling round a pole, yet this was a blues more intimate than carnal.

Even as reed players double on different saxes (like Mr. Warfield switching from tenor to soprano on "Johnny Come Lately"), Mr. Stafford takes advantage of all the sonic options open to trumpeters: from open bell to cup mute to plunger mute on "Little Brown Book," and then to flugelhorn on "Daydream." A lot of jazz players have a tendency to rush ballads so much that they revert into medium-tempo bop numbers–Mr. Warfield did this on "Brown Book," but on "Day Dream," a blissful duet between Mr. Stafford and Mr. Barth, the tempo stayed slow and romantic.

It was a nearly perfect set that ended with "Johnny Come Lately," which began with the rousing melody rearranged into a contrapuntal, pointillistic pattern (with bass support from Peter Washington), and centering around a percussion solo by Dana Hall. You didn't actually hear the tune stated clearly until the concluding tutti, at which point it was no less welcome. I have no idea how long it took Messrs. Stafford and Barth to put all this together, but it was well worth it: This is an extraordinary band playing extraordinary music.

Feinstein's at Loews Regency 

540 Park Ave., (212) 339-4095

Friday and Saturday

One man's  Shirley Partridge is another man's Marion the Librarian—and still another's Lulu, the fallen angel. Nearing 77, Shirley Jones sounds best when she stays in the lower register, but the attraction isn't so much the voice as the lady herself. We feel like we already know her from her classic performances in three iconic movie musicals (and 30 other films) and one unforgettable (not necessarily a compliment) TV series. Accordingly, her one-woman show feels like 90 minutes spent with an old friend. The lion's share of the songs are by her mentor  Richard Rodgers, delivered most movingly when she equates  Julie Jordan's plight in "Carousel"—a marriage to a ne'er do well—with her own relationship with the roguish  Jack Cassidy. "What's The Use of Wondrin'?" she ponders, "If he's good or if he's bad?" Indeed.

Le Poisson Rouge

158 Bleecker St., (212) 228-4854

Friday

The outrageous music of Juan García Esquivel (1918-2002) sounds like the love child of  Stan Kenton and  Spike Jones: over-the-top brass extroversion enhanced by zany musical asides, crazy chanting choirs and stereo sound effects. The cult of Esquivel mushroomed in the CD era as the original albums were reissued and even remixed, but Mr. Ho's Orchestrotica represents an almost unprecedented attempt to play the music live, an enterprise that requires a payroll of no less than 22 musicians. This music is deliciously demented and entertaining in equal parts.

The Metropolitan Room

34 W. 22nd St., (212) 206-0440

Friday, plus March 25-26

In order to celebrate the whole of the Great American Songbook, from the first "modern" songs circa 1911 (beginning with "Some of These Days") up through contemporary writers ( Susan Werner's satirically self-absorbed "Movie of My Life"), singer Jennifer Sheehan filters it through the lens of autobiography. This may be the only unnecessary aspect of her set: that she feels the need to tell us why a 26-year-old woman would be attracted to songs written before her grandparents were born. Obviously Gershwin, Kern, and company hold up so well—and Ms. Sheehan sings them so expertly—that no explanation is required, any more than a contemporary pianist should explain why he plays Beethoven. 

Jazz Standard

116 E. 27th between Park and Lexington, (212) 576-2232

Through Sunday

The inspired Brazilian percussionist Duduka Da Fonseca currently has a lot of big number celebrations on his plate, starting with his 60th birthday on March 31. 2011 also marks the 25th anniversary of one of the best Brazilian jazz groups of the modern era, Trio da Paz, in which he co-stars with guitarist Romero Lubambo and bassist Nilson Matta; next year, his "other" band, the Duduka Da Fonseca Quintet featuring clarinetist Anat Cohen (as heard on the excellent "Samba Jazz in Black and White") will reach the decade mark. Mr. Da Fonseca is presenting both ensembles this weekend, along with a lively assortment of guest stars spread over the three nights, including the exciting trumpeter Claudio Roditi, the brilliant pianist Kenny Barron and the excellent Brazilian singer Maucha Adnet. Like all of Mr. da Fonseca's music, it will be festive and introspective at the same time.

