  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.90
%




's iPad 2 landed in the hands of faithful fans and enterprising individuals on Friday, capping a day of excitement that saw lines form across the country in anticipation of the new version of the tablet computer.

Shortly after 5 p.m. ET, Alex Shumilov, who flew in from Moscow on Thursday to buy the new device, stepped out of Apple's marquee store on Fifth Avenue in Manhattan and posed with two white iPad 2's. He said his friends gave him cash and sent him to New York to be the first Russian to buy an iPad 2. 

"It was awesome inside," said Mr. Shumilov, who plans to sell the iPads for as much as four times their value in Russia. "I feel great." 

Apple started sales of the device at 5 p.m. in each time zone across the country, causing lines to spring up in the afternoon. About 400 people showed up at the flagship New York store as the clock approached 5 p.m. Similarly, the lines lengthened to four city blocks at the company's flagship store in San Francisco as the work day came to its end. 

In San Francisco, Kurt Collins, an internet entrepreneur, said waiting in line for Apple launches was a tradition.

"I've done it for years," said Mr. Collins, clutching a 16-gigabyte version that has wireless capability. "I've been coming since the first iPhone was launched," he added, referring to the Apple smartphone that was launched in 2007.

Released less than a year ago, the original iPad raised eyebrows among some skeptics as to whether it would sell. Since then, the Cupertino, Calif.-based Apple has sold more than 14 million units of the touch-screen iPad tablet computers and caught its competitors flat-footed.

  Dell Inc., Motorola Mobility Holdings Inc.
MMI


-1.22
%




 and Samsung Electronics Co. have launched tablet computers running  Google Inc.'s Android operating system.  Hewlett-Packard Co.
HPQ


0.15
%




,  Research In Motion Ltd. and others have also announced similar devices. But the iPad has continued to dominate the market, representing nearly three-quarters of the tablet-computer market over the holiday quarter, according to market researcher International Data Corp.

The newest version of the iPad is more powerful and about a third thinner and 15% lighter than the original model. It comes with a camera in the front and back, which can be used for taking photos, video and video-conferencing.

The iPad has become a new driver of Apple's spectacular growth, generating 17% of the company's $26.7 billion in first-quarter revenue. The device also has helped boost Apple's shares 47% since its debut April 3.

Though Apple will likely lose some share this year because of new competition, analysts expect it to continue to keep most of the market.

Gene Munster, an analyst at  Piper Jaffray & Co.
PJC


-2.19
%




, said in a note that lines for the launch were longer than expected. He forecast that Apple could sell 400,000 to 500,000 iPad 2's on its first day of sales, significantly more than the 300,000 units the company sold on the launch of the original. Apple will reach one million in unit sales for the iPad 2 faster than the 28 days it took the first generation, Munster forecast. 

In addition to fans, individuals looking to profit from highly coveted positions joined the lines. Amanda Foote, a 20-year-old college student, got outside the Fifth Avenue Apple store at 5 p.m. on Wednesday and posted her seat on Craigslist and other listing websites. "I'm trying to go home to Florida," she said. "And I want to go see Lady Gaga in concert."

Ms. Foote eventually sold her spot for $900 in cash to  Hazem Sayed, developer of the iPhone and iPad application AskLocal, an application that allows users to "check in" at random locations, where people nearby can post comments or advice. Mr. Sayed said he planned to get people in line to use the app throughout the day.

In San Francisco, a company called TaskRabbit Inc., which runs errands for clients, had several runners waiting in line. One of the runners, Joshua Leavitt, said the going rate was $60 to $70 to stand in line until the iPad went on sale and another $10 to $15 to complete the transaction for them.

Some of those waiting were genuine Apple fans. Behind Ms. Foote in the New York queue were cousins Brian Ceballo and Joseph Cruz, who were the second and third people in line. They skipped school and got to the store an hour after Foote. Mr. Ceballo, 17 years old, said he has owned every iPhone but waited for this version of the iPad before deciding to purchase one. He planned to buy two 32-gigabyte iPads running on  AT&T Inc.
T


-0.83
%




's 3G network, and give one as a gift.

Not all stores had big lines. There were no lines at  Best Buy Co.
BBY


-0.33
%




, AT&T Wireless and Verizon Wireless locations in San Francisco early in the day, though several Verizon locations sported modest queues just before the device went on sale. 

At 8 a.m. PT at the Apple store in San Francisco's hip Marina district, just three people waited for the device's debut. 

Jay Lison, sitting at the store in a beach chair, said his job as a personal assistant gave him the time to camp out in front of the location, where a security guard stood just inside of the doors. Mr. Lison said he was buying the new iPad as a birthday gift for his mother, who already had an original iPad.

"I just want to make sure she got one on the first day," said Mr. Lison, who doesn't own one of the devices himself.

Those who didn't want to stand in line had the option of ordering the iPad 2 online, which began at 1 a.m., but, by midday Friday, shipping for all of the models were delayed by two to three weeks.

How well the iPad 2 sells in the initial days will likely be a good barometer of sales when it launches in 26 other markets, including the U.K., Japan, France, Germany and Mexico on March 25. Apple said it will roll out the tablet computer in more markets in coming months.

Kuo Ming-Chi with Concord Securities in Taiwan estimated that Apple's manufacturing partner in China will have 4.5 million to five million iPad 2s ready by the end of March and three million to four million more units in April.

Meanwhile, many current iPad users put their old iPads up for sale in anticipation of the new one. Second Rotation Inc.'s online electronics resale site, Gazelle.com, said nearly 10,000 people have traded in their used iPads. Offers on the site range from $300 to $500, depending on the model and condition.

—Andrew Morse and Ian Sherr contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Roger Cheng at roger.cheng@dowjones.com and Yukari Iwatani Kane at yukari.iwatani@wsj.com 