Hong Kong's blowout performance last year in attracting companies going public has set the bar dauntingly high for 2011. But while the numbers may not prove as lofty in the year to come, bankers here remain optimistic that business will keep flowing into China's chief center for overseas fund raising.

For a second year running, the Stock Exchange of Hong Kong topped the list of global venues for new share offerings by raising $57.16 billion, according to data provider Dealogic. That put it well ahead of New York, at No. 2 with $34.9 billion. It's also more than twice the $26.81 billion that Hong Kong raised in 2009. Shenzhen ranked No. 3 in IPO volume last year, thanks to the launch of its secondary market, while Shanghai was No. 4.

As the only Chinese exchange fully open to foreign investors, Hong Kong has benefited as global investors shift more funds toward China and other emerging markets in search of better returns than they can find in the developed world.

Two megadeals helped give Hong Kong the crown.  Agricultural Bank of China Ltd. launched the world's biggest IPO in July, raising US$22.1 billion, US$12 billion of it in Hong Kong and the rest in Shanghai. In October,  AIA Group Ltd.
AAGIY


-1.05
%




, the Asian life-insurance arm of  American International Group Inc.,
AIG


0.30
%




 raised US$20.5 billion in Hong Kong, making it the second-largest listing globally this year.

Nothing like those giants is expected for now in 2011. Still, "markets willing, there will be as many IPOs," says  Todd Marin, head of investment banking in the Asian-Pacific region for J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. Without offerings like AgBank and AIA to boost the numbers, the amount of money raised may be lower but "the backlog suggests just as active a year as last year," he adds. In 2010, Hong Kong launched 87 IPOs, compared with 83 done in New York.

Market turbulence, already rearing its head toward the end of 2010, could darken that outlook. Even while some offerings squeaked through in December, others were falling by the wayside. The IPO window could slam shut if, say, the worries over the financial health of some euro-zone governments deepen or China's inflation problem turns uglier. An eruption of further tensions on the Korean peninsula also would throw markets for a loop.

But for now, Hong Kong bankers and their clients are pushing forward with plans to tap global capital, with several themes likely to dominate.

Mainland Chinese corporations will remain as important for Hong Kong as ever. Among them, bankers say two insurers, Taikang Life Insurance Co. and New China Life Insurance Co., could launch Hong Kong offerings worth $3 billion to $4 billion each sometime in 2011, likely making them among the biggest deals of the year. Both companies couldn't be reached Friday but previously have declined comment on possible Hong Kong listing plans.

  Huaneng Renewables Corp.
0958


-3.03
%




, the wind-power unit of China Huaneng Group, is already waiting in the wings, and may come to market in the first quarter after scrapping plans in December to raise up to US$1.28 billion in a Hong Kong IPO.

  Jonathan Penkin, Goldman Sachs Group Inc.'s co-head of equity capital markets for Asia ex-Japan, says that multinationals spinning off their Asian businesses will be another important theme.

In 2010, the prime example off that was AIA. In 2011, another likely candidate is MGM China Holdings Ltd.,  MGM Resorts International's
MGM


0.37
%




 joint venture with a daughter of Macau gambling tycoon  Stanley Ho, which hopes to raise as much as $500 million as soon as in the first quarter of 2011.

Last year, Hong Kong scored big with foreign listings. Russian aluminum maker United Co.  Rusal,
0486


4.68
%




 French cosmetics firm L'Occitane International SA and Mongolia Mining Corp., a coal producer, were among those that tapped into global demand for variations on the China and Asian growth stories, and bankers expect that trend to continue.

"If a foreign company listing in Hong Kong has a meaningful portion of its sales from China, or least a well-articulated China strategy, then a listing has commercial logic," says  Matthew Koder, UBS Investment Bank's global capital markets head.

One much-mentioned candidate is Prada Group, the Italian luxury goods maker, though the company itself has cautioned that it's still unsure of its listing plans. Bankers believe a Prada IPO could spark other European luxury-goods companies to consider a Hong Kong listing to leverage their popularity with Asian consumers.

Another source of business could be Chinese companies already trading on other exchanges. "Companies with Chinese assets that currently list in Singapore, Frankfurt or New York may also look to relist in Hong Kong to address liquidity and low valuation concerns," says Mr. Penkin. Chinese drug maker  Sihuan Pharmaceutical Holdings Group Ltd.
0460


-1.34
%




 demonstrated the potential upside for making such a move when it delisted its shares from Singapore, where they traded at just five times expected annual earnings a share. In October, a Hong Kong offering valued the shares at 26.7 times the company's forecast 2011 earnings. They ended the year up about 23% from their offer price. 

One listing certain to grab attention if it goes through is that of a real-estate investment trust controlled by billionaire businessman  Li Ka-shing's property flagship,  Cheung Kong Holdings Ltd.
0001


0.18
%




 That's because it's the first known example of a company that wants to issue shares in Hong Kong that are denominated in China's currency, the yuan.

Trading in the yuan, also known as the renminbi, took off in Hong Kong this past year after China eased some of the restrictions on its capital controls and took steps to encourage the use of yuan to settle trades previously conducted in dollars. Issuance of yuan bonds in Hong Kong, nicknamed "dim sum bonds," has also taken off, more than doubling last year to $5.36 billion, according to Dealogic.

Bankers and the Hong Kong exchange hope stocks could soon be the offshore-yuan market's next big thing. 

—Nisha Gopalan and Alison Tudor contributed to this article.

 Write to  Peter Stein at peter.stein@wsj.com 