Japan's nuclear crisis is all my fault.

Whenever I write something nice about an industry, its dark side emerges and all hell breaks loose. This is just my luck.

And so it went with  Gerald Grandey, chief executive of one of the world's largest uranium-mining companies.

Mr. Grandey was once a long-haired lawyer who sued to block construction of nuclear power plants in the 1970s. But he morphed into the CEO of Saskatoon, Saskatchewan-based  Cameco Corp. and one of the nuclear-power industry's leading evangelists.

We met at a Denver restaurant, and Mr. Grandey preached of a "global nuclear renaissance."

Nations growing more concerned about carbon emissions and the price of oil would increasingly turn to nuclear power, Mr. Grandey explained. He claimed it was safer and easier on the environment. And that years after Three Mile Island and Chernobyl, the public's "irrational fears" of radiation were dissipating.

So I wrote a column about Mr. Grandey, which can be found on my blog, tellittoal.com. It was headlined, "All he is saying, is give nukes a chance," and first ran on Feb. 22 as Cameco's stock was trading near a 52-week high.

Less than three weeks later, KA-BOOM! Japanese nuke plants exploding on TV. Media coverage overtaking the more tragic earthquake and tsunami disasters. Mad runs on potassium iodide in Japan and even here.

How was I supposed to know? There hadn't been a nuclear accident on this scale in decades.

I should have mentioned that nuclear power is perfectly safe until one day when it is not.

I should have written that people fear radiation because a) it is invisible and b) governments and big corporations lie about it.

I should have reminded readers that the public-relations cycle of most industrial accidents goes like this: No need to panic. We have it under control. Whoops, it's worse than we thought. Whoops, we don't have it under control. OK, you can panic now. Whoops.

I called Mr. Grandey last week to apologize for writing nice things about him, and possibly causing a nuclear meltdown and an ensuing plunge in Cameco stock. But Mr. Grandey said I needn't fret because the "global nuclear renaissance" is still on. It's just taking a pause as the industry learns a few safety lessons from some extraordinary circumstances.

"The worst has happened when I tried to reassure you that it was unlikely," he conceded.

"The worst has happened times four...but...there've been zero fatalities. Measurable radiation, but not health-threatening. And we still don't have anything that compares to what happens with other forms of energy delivery: coal, offshore oil platforms, and what's going on in Libya, which happens to be related to oil."

Only months ago, people were saying we should stop drilling because of what Big Oil did to the Gulf of Mexico. And how many coal-mine collapses have we watched on TV? But we still need power.

"When the dust settles, pardon the pun, people will reflect, and they will weigh risks and benefits," Mr. Grandey said.

But I'm not going to argue that he still has a point. I don't want anything else to happen.