Fort Lee, on the New Jersey side of the George Washington Bridge, emerged as the center of the nation's early film industry, which used the area's dramatic cliffs along the Hudson River as a favorite filming site. 

A century later, those picturesque bluffs and Hudson views remain a draw for commuters seeking affordable real estate with easy access across the bridge or via ferry to jobs in Manhattan.

"I run ads that say, why live in Manhattan when you can look at it for a 10th of the price?" says  Michele Kolsky Assatly, a broker in Coldwell Banker's Fort Lee office. "We are the bedroom of Manhattan."

Local real estate includes both condos and co-ops with river views—appealing to young professionals and empty-nesters—and million-dollar houses near the waterfront. The median sales price for houses, co-ops and condos in Fort Lee in the fourth quarter was $477,500, compared with a median sales price of $490,000 in the same period in 2009, according to StreetEasy.com.

The borough's population of 36,000 is remarkably diverse. Some 57% of the residents in the Bergen County community speak a language other than English at home, according to 2005-09 Census estimates. 

Fort Lee's sizable Asian community, spurred by a rapid increase in the Korean population, has brought Asian restaurants and shops to the area. "We have everybody living here, every nationality," Ms. Kolsky Assatly says.

Some of the area's buildings have converted in recent years from rentals to condominiums, such as the Palisades, a luxury complex with a 41-story tower as well as townhouses. According to the New Jersey Multiple Listing Service, units for resale in the Palisades include a three-bedroom, three-bathroom unit with an asking price of $1.05 million and a one-bedroom condo listed for $209,000. 

Waterfront property is at a premium in Fort Lee, where most available land has already been developed. Recently, however, the borough of Fort Lee reached an agreement with two developers to build on a long-vacant 16-acre site near the entrance to the George Washington Bridge. 

One of the site's two sections, to be known as Hudson Lights, will include 165,000 square feet of retail, as many as 475 residential units and at least three restaurants. The other half will have two high-rise apartment buildings, a park and a movie theater. 

"There isn't anything like this—this is going to supersede any of the other developments in the area," says  Karen DeMarco, of Larry Kahn Real Estate. "What they're doing here is going to be like a little metropolis; it's going to be a little city within a city."

 Parks: The borough includes 11 local parks, encompassing more than 36 acres of open space. Palisades Interstate Park, which in New Jersey is a 12-mile-long, half-mile-wide expanse along the cliffs beside the Hudson River with 30 miles of hiking trails, passes through Fort Lee. The cliff-top 33-acre Fort Lee Historic Park, on a Revolutionary War fort site named for Gen. Charles Lee from whom the borough also takes its name, offers educational programs as well as bridge and river views. 

 Schools: The Fort Lee Board of Education includes four elementary schools, a middle school and a high school, with a total enrollment of more than 3,500 students. 

In the 2009-10 school year, 82% of high-school students were proficient or advanced in math, and 93% in language arts, according to state data. All of the high school's students graduated, and 97% continued on to higher education. In the district's elementary schools, 73.4% were proficient in language-arts literacy, and 89.1% in math, state data show. 

Local private schools include Christ the Teacher, a Catholic school with about 300 students in grades pre-K through eight.

 Shopping: The Shops at Riverside Mall in Hackensack, with stores including Bloomingdales, Barnes & Noble and Pottery Barn, is about 10 minutes away. Big-box stores such as Target and Bed Bath & Beyond are in nearby Edgewater, as is the Mitsuwa Marketplace, a massive Japanese grocery store with both fresh and prepared foods, including sushi.

 Dining: Ethnic restaurants line Main Street in downtown Fort Lee. The area has become a destination for its many Korean restaurants, such as So Kong Dong and Madangsui. Hiram's Roadstand, a hot-dog and hamburger joint with outdoor seating, has been a local fixture for decades. The popular Italian restaurant Grissini is in nearby Englewood Cliffs.

 Entertainment: Most residents travel to Manhattan or Hoboken for night-life options. The Bergen Performing Arts Center, a not-for-profit cultural and music venue, is nearby in Englewood. The Fort Lee Film Commission sponsors screenings and outdoor movies.