Eighteen universities submitted proposals to build an applied science school in the city, officials with the Bloomberg administration said Thursday.

In December, the city began reaching out to higher-education institutions and urged them to build an applied science and engineering campus in New York. The Bloomberg administration said it could provide capital investments for the new school and would offer five different sites throughout the five boroughs for the proposed campus. 

Schools including Stanford University, Carnegie Mellon University and Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, sent in detailed proposals of their visions for the campus, city officials said. Some schools are eying private locations in the city to build the campus other than the five city-owned spots that have been offered, they said. 

It's still early in the city's two-step selection process. After reviewing the initial applicants, the city will issue a request for proposal. Schools will then submit more specific plans. The final institution will be selected by the end of the year. 

"There's a lot of work to be done, but you can close your eyes and imagine a lot of exciting things for New York," said  Robert K. Steel, deputy mayor for economic development. 

A number of local institutions prepared plans for a campus, including Columbia University, City University of New York, New York University and Cooper Union. Steiner Studios, the film and television studio in the Brooklyn Navy Yard, also submitted a joint proposal with Carnegie Mellon. 

Stanford was among the first elite school that said it would consider applying. On Thursday, the school said it proposes to begin construction by 2013 and to finish by 2015. Initially, the school would aim to have 440 graduate students for the 2015-2016 school year. Later, the school says it could accommodate 2,200 students and 100 faculty members. 

Several universities prepared joint proposals. NYU, Carnegie Mellon, CUNY, the University of Toronto and  International Business Machines Corp.
IBM


-0.01
%




 teamed up for a proposal. Columbia and CUNY also submitted a separate joint proposal. 

Other schools include the University of Chicago, the University of Warwick in the U.K., Purdue University and Technion-Israel Institute of Technology in Israel.

Cost will be a major challenge. A new city campus will likely cost hundreds of millions of dollars, said  Seth Pinsky, president of the city's Economic Development Corp. While the city could offer some city land and "seed investments," the majority would have to be paid for by the selected university and its partners. 

"There are very serious academic institutions that are willing to undertake an effort such as that," Mr. Pinsky said. 

 Write to  Joseph De Avila at joseph.deavila@wsj.com 