On June 3, 1877, Augustus Saint-Gaudens sailed for France with his bride of two days, Augusta "Gussie" Homer. They were on their way to a honeymoon in Paris and the start of work on his first major commission.

Saint-Gaudens was part of a wave of talented, aspiring Americans who since the late 1820s had voyaged to Paris. They were men and women ambitious to excel in work that mattered greatly to them, and they saw time in Paris, the experience of Paris, as essential to achieving that dream.

Two years earlier, the sculptor, then 29 and living in New York, had learned of plans to create a memorial in New York to Adm. David Glasgow Farragut—"Damn the Torpedoes" Farragut, the Civil War hero of the Battle of Mobile Bay. It would be New York's first monument to the Civil War. Saint-Gaudens applied to the selection committee at once, and contacted everyone he knew who might put in a word for him. He got the commission.

Paris was essential to its successful execution, Saint-Gaudens felt, not only because what he called the "art current" ran stronger there, but because sculpture as an art form was taken more seriously than at home, and experienced craftsmen—plaster molders, foundrymen and the like—were plentiful. The project at hand was greater and more challenging by far than anything he had ever undertaken, and he would need the best help he could get.

His inspiration for the design was the taller-than-life marble "St. George" by Donatello, which he had seen in Florence and never forgotten. The effect of that figure, of a man standing in repose yet clearly ready to take on the world, was just what he hoped to attain with his Farragut.

Saint-Gaudens began with a clay study of a nude two feet high. "Don't leave any serious study to struggle with in the big," was one of his working rules. It was in the small-scale model that the most serious attentions must be focused, "the whole ensemble together in the small," he liked to say.

The procedure was then to enlarge it to life-size. Once work was complete, it would serve as the model for still another clay statue of more than eight feet in height. A plaster mold would then be made of that, from which a plaster statue would be cast. That, in turn, would be cast in bronze.

The finished work had to convey the reality and importance of a singular personality. It had to be more than "a good likeness." It had to express the character of the man.

Richard Watson Gilder, the editor of Scribner's Monthly and a friend of Saint-Gaudens's, was short like Farragut. On a visit to Paris during the winter of 1878-79, he agreed to pose for the legs. Still Saint-Gaudens fretted. "He has been very much bothered by one of Farragut's legs, and has been working on it for weeks. He is not satisfied yet," Gussie wrote in a letter home. 

The admiral's buttons and braid, his cap, sword, all had to be true to fact and a natural part of him, like his stance. Greater still was the importance of the face. And the whole work, unlike a portrait on canvas, had to look right from every angle. 

Through the whole slow, drawn-out process, the great volume of clay had to be kept constantly moist. If it were allowed to dry out, the statue would crack. In December 1879 came the coldest winter since 1870. Two large coal stoves had to be kept burning in the studio, the temperature of the clay surface carefully monitored day and night to prevent it from freezing.

By the last week of January 1880, the work in clay was nearly done. The Admiral stood 8 feet 3 inches tall, his legs apart, the left leg slightly back from the right. He stood as if on deck at sea braced for whatever was to come, chin up, eyes straight ahead. The flap of his long double-breasted coat seemed to blow open with the wind. And while due attention was paid to the details, there was an overall simplicity that conveyed great inner strength, no less than the presence of an actual mortal being, for all the figure's immense size. The intent, weather-beaten face said the most. The look on the face, like the latent power in the stance, left no doubt that this was a man in command.

Casting the statue in plaster was scheduled to begin on Monday, Feb. 9. "There are nineteen great bags of plaster here," Gussie reported from the studio, "and any quantity of bars of iron and they will all go into the statue. They will be four days making the mold and then . . . the plaster statue will be cast."

Then there was an accident. In the process of getting the statue free from the scaffolding, it slipped and landed hard, cracking one of the troublesome legs. Saint-Gaudens went to work, and the damage was repaired. 

By the middle of May 1880, the plaster statue was ready to be cast in bronze. Taking part in the whole process day after day at the foundry, Saint-Gaudens became a nervous wreck. Two weeks later, when the lower half of the statue was cast, again something went wrong and it had to be done all over again at considerable expense.

When at last the whole cast was done, the statue's entire surface had to be expertly finished. Finally the completed work—weighing 900 pounds—had to be carefully packed up, shipped by rail to Le Havre and sent to New York. It was the largest work of sculpture in bronze by an American ever shipped from France until then.

The grand unveiling took place at Madison Square on the afternoon of May 25, 1881. A Marine band played, sailors marched. Ten thousand people stood in the hot sun to watch. Seated on the speakers' platform were Saint-Gaudens and his wife. It was his first experience with public acclaim. 

The monument was a stunning success. The critics were exuberant, the whole art world electrified. 

For Saint-Gaudens and Gussie, those three years in Paris had been as difficult, productive and as happy as any they had known. Now, with Saint-Gaudens's brilliant debut as an artist, he had achieved recognition such as he had dreamed of. 

Further, he had established himself as an artist capable of doing justice to the memory of the Civil War. In time he would sculpt six of the most remarkable public monuments to the war ever created. And another of these, like the Farragut, would be made in Paris.

—Mr. McCullough is the author of "John Adams" and "1776." This essay is adapted from his new book, "The Greater Journey: Americans in Paris" (Simon & Schuster). 