LONDON—U.K. Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg on Sunday shrugged off suggestions that he step down as leader of the Liberal Democrats in the wake of his party's humiliating losses in local elections and voters' rejection of the party's plan to reform the U.K.'s electoral system. 

Mr. Clegg promised a "louder Lib Dem voice in government," saying he believed voters needed to hear about his party's successes in being "a moderating influence" as a junior partner in its coalition with the Conservative Party. 

Speaking on the BBC's  Andrew Marr show, Mr. Clegg said the Liberal Democrats were committed to remaining in the coalition in the long-term interests of the country. 

The deputy prime minister's comments come after his party lost more than 700 seats in local elections late last week. 

In addition, the referendum on electoral reform saw almost 68% of voters opt to keep the current system—known as "first past the post," where the candidate with the most votes wins—and rejecting the alternative vote system, or AV, in which voters rank candidates in order of preference. 

The referendum result is a major blow for the Liberal Democrats, who had demanded the vote as a key condition for joining Prime Minister David Cameron's Conservative Party in the coalition government. 

 Mr. Clegg has been blamed for the Lib Dems' poor result in the elections and referendum, with some party members calling on him to resign, and he has been criticized for having a cozy relationship with Mr. Cameron and the Conservatives. 

When asked on the Andrew Marr show whether he would switch to the Conservative Party, he said: "I am not a Conservative. I will never, never, never be a Conservative. I will be carried out in my coffin as a card-carrying Liberal Democrat." 

The bitterly fought referendum campaign, which saw the Lib Dems and Conservatives in opposing camps, exacerbated tensions within the coalition. 

On Saturday, Business Secretary Vince Cable, a senior Liberal Democrat lawmaker, described the Conservatives' conduct during the campaign as "ruthless, calculating and very tribal." 

Mr. Clegg on Sunday began the task of reasserting his party's individual identity and credibility in the eyes of the public by asserting that there needed to be "significant changes" to the planned revamp of the National Health System or he would block the legislation. 

The government isn't working on any specific new policies designed to shore up support for the listing Lib Dem party, but there has been acknowledgment that a change is needed in the way government is portrayed, according to a person familiar with the matter. The Lib Dems will be looking to carve out a more separate identity from the coalition.

That is likely to bring arguments between the two parties that may have once been behind close doors more in the public, this person said. While once government needed to show unity in order to reassure bond markets that the coalition, and therefore its fiscal reduction program, was stable, now there is less need to keep things under wraps, this person said.

—Alistair MacDonald contributed to this article.

 Write to  Ainsley Thomson at ainsley.thomson@dowjones.com 