Getting lost at this month's Tefaf, the world's leading art and antiques fair, could be fun. 

Who knows what's around the corner among the more than 30,000 works covering the past 7,000 years: an ancient Greek idol, a splendid medieval manuscript, a Rembrandt portrait, a rarely seen Impressionist painting, an Andy Warhol attention-getter or a 21st-century up-and-coming ceramist?

I lost my way one year looking for works by Pablo Picasso, Joan Miró and other modern masters, and ended up fascinated by Chinese snuff bottles, medieval door locks and tribal masks. Some 260 dealers from 16 countries offer a boggling array of museum-class paintings, sculptures, drawings, photography, prints, furniture, porcelain, glass, metalwork, jewelry and other precious items.

This annual magnet for collectors opens next Friday and runs until March 27 at the Maastricht Exhibition & Congress Centre in the southern Dutch city, nestled between Belgium and Germany. Although off-the-beaten track compared with the art capitals of New York, London or Paris, the fair last year attracted more than 74,000 collectors and art professionals from around the globe, among them representatives from 225 major museums in Europe, the U.S., Asia and Australia.

"Tefaf is a yearly pilgrimage," says Wim Pijbes, director of the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam.

The fair, which began in 1975 as a small event organized by dealers in Old Masters paintings, continually expands its global reach. This year, many more visitors are expected to come from China, says Tefaf Chairman Ben Janssens. "There's a lot of Asian art at the fair. We have 22 Asian art dealers. But it is not only that attracting the Chinese. There is also growing Chinese interest in Impressionist paintings and in jewelry," Mr. Janssens notes. He also expects more collectors from South America, where awareness of what the fair has to offer is increasing, particularly in the new international collector areas of Argentina, Uruguay and Brazil.

The success of recent sales at leading international auction houses shows that the art market has recovered from the financial-market downturn, and, says Sotheby's President Bill Ruprecht, "positive momentum continues." Auctions are the barometer of the market as their sales are public. At galleries, sales aren't disclosed. 

"Today's evident demand for quality works gives me a very positive feeling on the eve of the fair," Mr. Janssens says. To ensure that collectors get the quality they pay for, the fair has a rigorous vetting system. There are 168 international experts in 29 specialist committees who scrutinize each object to ensure the authenticity and condition of everything exhibited. Such care is essential. "Enormously knowledgeable people come to Tefaf," says Tim Jefferies of London's Hamiltons Gallery.

When Wim Pijbes, managing director of Amsterdam's Rijksmuseum was asked to curate this year's Tefaf loan exhibition, he asked himself: "What is Tefaf?"

His answer: "Tefaf is a hunting ground." This is not a museum, but a fair where collectors look for their prey, he explains.

So he came up with the idea of a show themed "The Happy Hunter," featuring works on paper from the late 15th century. These Old Master prints depict people at the hunt thoroughly enjoying life, not dissimilar to the collectors pursuing objects of desire at Tefaf, Mr. Pijbes says, adding that the hunting instinct "hasn't changed much in hundreds of years." (Mr. Pijbes himself is an avid collector of African tribal art.)

The Rijksmuseum, the Netherland's biggest museum for art and history, is home to one of the world's most important collections of works on paper, with more than 700,000 pieces. From this collection, Mr. Pijbes has chosen 20 to 30 prints centered around hunting that he considers the best. "We have hundreds and hundreds of works with a hunting theme," he notes of the pastime's popularity in European art.

The loan exhibition's top star will be the Master of the Amsterdam Cabinet, so called because the name of this artist is unknown. The centerpoint of the exhibition will be the Amsterdam Master's etching "Stag Hunt" (circa 1485-1490), a scene of hunters happily blowing their horns and gleeful dogs in hot pursuit.

"The hunters and the landscape are so real," says Mr. Pijbes. "The artist's quality is incredible."

Old Master prints are an intimate art form, he says. The small-sized works can be held in your hands, unlike larger paintings that hang on the wall, allowing a private dialog with the artist. "There is a one-to-one relationship," Mr. Pijbes adds.

Bent on making an impression, dealers often hoard their best works for the fair, and considerable effort goes into an aesthetic presentation of pieces at their booths. The halls and corridors are decorated with great floral displays. This year around 67,500 carnations, 54,000 tulips and 22,500 mixed anemones and buttercups will decorate the exhibition center.

Jeff Koons will add verve to the show with the American artist's BMW art car, which is being exhibited prominently in the main hall by Tefaf organizers and isn't for sale. The BMW M3 GT2 has been completely covered with colorful stripes on a black background by Mr. Koons, who says he wanted to show the power under the hood of these cars and his desire to connect to that power. 

It is the 17th car in a series painted by artists for BMW, including Andy Warhol, Roy Lichtenstein and Robert Rauschenberg.

As for what to wear, forget stilettos that look most attractive when sipping a glass of champagne at the invitation-only preview. Put on your walking shoes, as there is a load of ground to cover. There's no dress code. Some collectors turn up in their Sunday best, and others in their comfortable blue jeans and sneakers.

 Old Masters remain a major strength of the event. A highlight this year will be "Portrait of a Man with Arms Akimbo" (1658) by Rembrandt at New York's Otto Naumann gallery. Priced at $47 million (€33.6 million), the exotically dressed subject of the boldly painted picture is unknown. The gallery bought the work from Las Vegas casino owner Steve Wynn, who had acquired it at a Christie's auction in London in 2009 for £20.2 million.

London's Johnny Van Haeften will have an eye-catcher in "Mankind's Eternal Dilemma—the Choice between Vice and Virtue" (1633) by Dutch master Frans Francken the Younger. The monumental canvas is filled with demons and angels. At its center stands Minerva, goddess of wisdom, armed with lance, breastplate and helmet. Her sacred bird, the owl, looks down into the shadowy underworld where a grimacing Satan, astride a dragon, presides over the entrance to Hell (price: $14 million).

"Old Masters have held their value through hundreds of years," says Mr. Van Haeften. "Supply is diminishing through flood, fire and theft, and works are disappearing into museums."

To go with the Dutch Old Master paintings, a very rare collection of 17th-18th century table silver created in Maastricht will be on offer from the Hague gallery A. Aardewerk. "This collection has not been seen in public for 33 years," says dealer Emiel Aardewerk. The pieces will be sold individually, beginning at €3,500 for a toothpick holder.

Among the most exquisite items on sale will be medieval illuminated manuscripts. Les Enluminures gallery of Paris will bring "The Katherina Hours," a devotional book illuminated in Tours, France, between 1485 and 1490, with 30 miniature paintings by the Master of Jean Charpentier (price: $575,000). The identity of Katherina is unknown, but her name is mentioned several times in the manuscript. Another important "Book of Hours" was illuminated with 40 miniatures between 1495 and 1510 in Lyon, France, by Guillaume II Le Roy, who was a popular artist at the French court (price: $250,000).

A highlight from London's Dickinson gallery will be the Impressionist painting "Woman Picking Flowers" (circa 1874) by Pierre-Auguste Renoir (price: $15 million). It depicts in a field of flowers the pretty first wife of Claude Monet, Camille, who died tragically young at the age of 32. As the story goes, Monet's second wife jealously destroyed all material related to her predecessor that she could find.

London's Lowell Libson gallery will show a group of notable landscapes by Thomas Gainsborough, including "Wooded Landscape with Horseman" (circa 1762), a delicate watercolor priced at around €350,000.

The ancient art corner is always worth a visit. Rupert Wace Ancient Art of London will have one of the oldest works of art to be exhibited at Tefaf this year in a 7,000-year-old Greek female idol (price: €1.2 million). The little figure, which represents fertility, is "incredibly rare," says Mr. Wace. In its simple form and line, Mr. Wace suggests that the idol epitomizes what appeals to the modern eye in ancient art. "We are seeing increasing crossover buying by collectors of modern and contemporary art," he adds.

Paris dealer Anthony J.P. Meyer always has one of the most exotic stands, with his generous displays of Oceanic art. This year, Mr. Meyer has published a 40-page catalog for Tefaf with works on offer from the Pacific islands. The cover pictures a fascinating, squatting figure holding a small ancestor head in both hands from the Solomon Islands. The late-19th-early-20th-century figure adorned a canoe's prow (priced in the six figures). Mr. Meyer has been coming to Tefaf for 14 years where, he says, "there is an incomparable clientele with an intense desire to go away with rare pieces."

The roaring leopards at U.K. dealer in Chinese art Cohen & Cohen probably will get second looks. The large, crouching Chinese porcelain leopards with bared fangs ready for the kill from 1720 are priced at £3.5 million. If your taste is for gentler animals, an exceedingly rare pair of spotted, seated deer from around 1750 is priced at £300,000.

There will be plenty of contemporary color on the stand of London glass and ceramics dealer Adrian Sassoon. Colin Reid's compressed glass object saturated with a striking blue from 2010 is priced around €14,500; and one saturated with red from 2011, at around €22,000. A gorgeous brooch with blue stones bursting like flower buds out of a golden plant from 2009 by Jacqueline Ryan is priced at €11,500.

 Write to  Margaret Studer at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 