TRIPOLI, Libya—Four days into foreign strikes against Col. Moammar Gadhafi's military, some residents of Libya's largest city expressed fear and a weary exasperation, with some venturing to say their leader must go. 

 "The regime must be bad if it brought us to this stage," said one Tripoli resident, Mohammed, referring to the airstrikes. "If we have gotten this far, then there is no going back."

Aside from demonstrators at the noisy pro-Gadhafi rallies that have become a staple of the Gadhafi government's daily tours for visiting journalists, residents of Libya's capital are circumspect about discussing with outsiders their aspirations for their country. As the government strikes out at signs of dissent in this city of two million people, most of those who agreed to be interviewed Tuesday did so on the condition that their names and personal details be withheld.

Tripoli residents appeared to be divided: There were those who wanted Col. Gadhafi, their leader of more than four decades, to stay in power—either because they say they support him, or because they fear the vacuum his ouster could bring. Others express a hope the government would be sufficiently weakened by strikes to embolden people to rise up once more.

A taxi driver, who has a day job as a clerk in a government institution, said he and many colleagues have largely stopped going to work. He fretted about a future without Col. Gadhafi and whether the country could be held together given the deepening rift between Tripoli in the west, and the rebel-held east.

"The big question is who will come after Gadhafi," he said.

As he drove down the central Sidi Street, most shops were closed. One side was blocked by a small group of chanting Gadhafi supporters. Looking on, clad in military fatigues and an armband, was a member of the revolutionary committees—local cells of zealous regime followers who have in recent weeks served as armed militias to enforce Col. Gadhafi's rule.

A poster plastered on a parked car showed a collage of photos from the Iraq war. "No to foreign intervention," it read. "Libyans beware lest you become like these people."

In front of the shuttered United Nations offices, fewer than a dozen people were protesting the allied airstrikes. 

Sharing the taxi driver's concerns over a prolonged standoff was Naval Col. Abdel-Bassit Ali, who was present as reporters surveyed destruction at a Tripoli naval shipyard, where allied attacks Monday night incinerated hangars that naval officers said had housed missiles, missile carriers and launchers.

"We hope there will be a peaceful solution to the crisis, for which every Libyan has paid a heavy toll," Col. Ali said after dismissing an official minder from the media department of Libya's foreign ministry in order to conduct a private conversation. 



In a rare break from delivering the official message, Col. Ali said it would be hard for airstrikes to dislodge Col. Gadhafi's entrenched regime. "Very difficult," he said. "Sending rockets won't change the regime. It's the wrong idea."

Before he could be asked how the government could be changed, Col. Ali took his leave, bidding his visitor to return under "better circumstances."

Another resident, who had taken part in demonstrations in Tripoli last month before they were violently suppressed, said airstrikes could allow rebels in the east to advance as far west as Sirte, Col. Gadhafi's hometown, and then unite with rebels besieged by government forces in Misrata, closer to the capital. Should that happen, this person said, people in Tripoli could find the courage to rise up once more against Col. Gadhafi.

"The will of the people will prevail in the end," this person said. "But the question is how much blood must be shed in the process."

He and another friend said they welcomed the airstrikes because they could help topple Col. Gadhafi, who has "given us no other option" than to seek the West's help in dislodging him. Both were staunchly opposed to any intervention by foreign ground troops because it would be viewed as occupation by most.

It will take deep courage for Tripoli's residents to openly defy Col. Gadhafi's regime again. Protesters who gathered in several Tripoli neighborhoods in February were mowed down by security forces' bullets. Fatalities are believed to number in the dozens but the final count remains unknown. The Justice Ministry said security forces have arrested thousands of what it says are hooligans, criminals, saboteurs and al Qaeda collaborators.

Tripoli is now ringed by government forces. The Internet has largely been shut down. Armed revolutionary committee loyalists police neighborhoods, and outside mosques, which in the past served as starting points for anti-government protests, newly posted leaflets instruct people to report "destructive or suspicious elements."

"Tripoli now is a big prison," said one resident.

Residents have also started showing signs of fear and panic amid bombing raids by international warplanes.

In a major downtown supermarket, shoppers filled carts with emergency supplies. One man threw nine large blocks of Danish cheese into his cart. Another grabbed several cans of tuna, emptying the shelf behind him. There was little talk. "May God protect us," said one shopper, hurrying to the exit.

At one gas station in central Tripoli, a line of cars stretched for nearly a mile as residents waited to fill their tanks.

The value of the Libyan dinar has dropped precipitously this month. Money changers said Tuesday's rate was 2.3 dinars per U.S. dollar, double the rate earlier in the month. Banks stopped giving out cash two days ago, according to one money changer.

 Write to  Sam Dagher at sam.dagher@wsj.com 