NEW DELHI – The pace of food inflation in India returned to double digits after a two-week gap, driven by costlier vegetables and fruits, and a senior central banker said rising global crude oil prices is a risk to inflation management. 

The wholesale price index for food articles rose 10.05% from a year earlier in the week ended March 12, compared with a 9.42% gain in the previous week, according to government data issued Thursday. The index rose 0.4% week-on-week to 179.6 from 178.8. 

Food inflation in Asia's third-largest economy has been high for more than a year due to strong demand and choked supplies following unseasonal rains last year. But, the pace has slowed significantly since reaching more than 18% in late December, as the government takes steps to improve supplies and arrival of fresh farm produce. 

Authorities are now more concerned about recent global developments, which they fear could drive up commodity, especially energy, prices. 

Continuing political unrest in the Middle East and North Africa have pushed crude-oil prices to more than $100 a barrel. Also, the demand for fossil fuel from Japan could increase due to damages to its nuclear power plants following a devastating earthquake and tsunami. 

Though food inflation is still high, it has come down, Reserve Bank of India Deputy Governor  Subir Gokarn told ET NOW news channel. "Oil prices have been firming up through the year, but that process seems to have intensified given the global developments," he added. 

Bond prices fell after the government released the food-inflation data and the central bank comments. The most traded 8.13% 2022 fell to 100.40 rupees from 100.49 rupees before the data release. 

According to government data, nonfood articles index rose 3.3% to 190.3 in the reporting week from 184.3 in the earlier week, while the gauge on fuel products remained unchanged from the previous week at 157.9. 

Mr. Gokarn said a reversal in nonfood manufacturing inflation is a cause of concern for the central bank. 

Nonfood manufactured products inflation—an indicator of demand-side pressure in the economy—accelerated sharply from 4.8% in January to 6.1% in February, according to data released earlier. 

"For us, that suggested that the ability of producers to pass on pricing power was still strong and, from an inflation-management viewpoint, that was not a particularly good sign," he said. "So, our interest rate actions were driven by that consideration and the likelihood that this pass-through pressure is still persistent ... the need to be watchful on the monetary stance is still there." 

At its mid-quarter review last week, the RBI raised it key policy rates by 25 basis points and increased its March-end inflation forecast to 8% from 7%. This was the eighth rate increase by the central bank in one year as it struggles to control inflation. 

Mr. Gokarn, however, said high crude-oil prices may also threaten economic growth. "We can't be unconscious or insensitive to the risks to growth, both global and domestic, as we look ahead." 

 Write to  Subhadip Sircar at subhadip.sircar@dowjones.com and Abhrajit Gangopadhyay at Abhrajit.gangopadhyay@dowjones.com 