WASHINGTON—U.S. lawmakers are moving fast to try to block the Obama administration from regulating greenhouse gases. 

It has been just one day since the start of the new Congress and lawmakers have already introduced at least four bills to cripple or altogether block the administration from working on greenhouse-gas standards. 

Sen. Jay Rockefeller (D., W.Va.) got the ball rolling in the U.S. Senate Thursday with a bill that prevents the Environmental Protection Agency from enforcing its greenhouse-gas requirements for two years. 

Mr. Rockefeller introduced a similar piece of legislation last year, saying that Congress should be the government body to develop a global-warming policy—and not the EPA. He gathered dozens of supporters but his bill was never brought to the floor for a vote. 

Meanwhile, in the House, Marsha Blackburn (R., Tenn.) proposed a bill Wednesday that blocks the EPA from regulating carbon dioxide and other greenhouse-gas emissions under the Clean Air Act. 

Rep. Ted Poe (R., Texas) introduced legislation that same day that prevents the EPA from receiving funding for any type of cap-and-trade program for greenhouse gases. 

On Thursday, Rep. Shelley Moore Capito (R., W.Va.) announced a bill to suspend the EPA's work on greenhouse gases for two years. 

"I cannot imagine an issue more timely or more relevant to the West Virginia economy than preventing the EPA's regulatory overreach from killing jobs and raising energy prices across the board," Ms. Capito said. 

The incoming chairman of the House's powerful energy committee—and, therefore, one of the most influential lawmakers in developing legislation on greenhouse gases—has not yet proposed any bills. 

In a Dec. 28 op-ed in The Wall Street Journal, Rep. Fred Upton (R., Mich.) said he wanted to stop the EPA from enforcing its greenhouse-gas rules until the courts have ruled on lawsuits that seek to overturn them. 

The EPA's efforts to reduce greenhouse-gas pollution from power plants, oil refiners and other major sources of the emissions have been widely criticized since they were introduced last year. 

Environmental groups were nevertheless surprised at the speed with which lawmakers introduced bills to stop the EPA. 

"Banning or delaying the EPA...would be nothing less than a dream come true for industries that would put profits ahead of our health and too many House members seem willing to do just that," said Franz Matzner, a legislative director at the Natural Resources Defense Council. 

 Write to  Tennille Tracy at tennille.tracy@dowjones.com 