Why do humans adore the NCAA basketball tournament so? Here it comes again: three weeks of March Madness, a record 68 teams, surely a few buzzer beaters, a Cinderella or two, style-deficient coaches dressing in the dark, CBS announcer Gus Johnson yelping like a wild boar is gnawing his ankle, and, fingers crossed, another Louisville male cheerleader grabbing a basketball and lobbing it jubilantly to the heavens, almost costing Rick Pitino a win.

It is a feast, exquisitely portioned. Hardcore college-basketball fans love the NCAA men's tournament—as do those frisky college kids, with their body paint and crippling student loans—but the Madness also seduces sports dilettantes, because it's a reasonable and satisfying viewing commitment. Plus: illicit betting! Who hasn't at one point joined the office pool, forked over $10—a strictly hypothetical $10, of course—made a string of ill-informed guesses, and hoped for the best? And later watched that office pool won by the sports-phobic guy in HR who picked Butler to go deep because his downstairs neighbor bought a bulldog puppy?

Then there are the games—relentless in the first week, often coming down to the final seconds, a blast of upsets and celebratory piles on the court. Goliaths tumble, Davids advance, unknown schools thrust into the national spotlight, that corn-syrupy "One Shining Moment" montage, Charles Barkley's going to be causing trouble with CBS this year…plus there was already that insane Princeton-Harvard playoff…can someone please explain why anyone cares that there's an NFL lockout right now?

What kind of March Madness fan are you? Do you gorge on the whole event, or will you blow it off until the Final Four in Houston April 2-4? Will you also clear space for the women's tournament, which concludes April 5 in Indianapolis? 

Can't decide? Here are a few categories of tournament fans: 

Views tournament as opportunity to relive misspent college youth. Starts drinking cheap beer again, spends hours on couch, blows off reading the assigned Faulkner. Loves picking big-time programs and famous conferences, no matter how bracket-destroying. Quotes John Wooden; has at least one pet named Izzo. Can do an elaborate impression in the living room of N.C. State's 1983 upset over Houston, playing the parts of Dereck Whittenburg, Lorenzo Charles and the late Jim Valvano. 

 Recognize them by: Autographed photo of Denny Crum; exasperated spouse.

Very smart and completely locked in. Doesn't skip the regular season, like most sensible people do. Disregards emotion and regional loyalty. Worships the statistical wisdom of Dean Oliver (the "Four Factors") and treasures Ken Pomeroy (kenpom.com). Laughs at schmucks who rely on crude instruments like won-loss records, strength of schedule and RPI. Can tell you who runs the slowest offense in the country. Very dangerous to run into in the office kitchen. 

 Recognize them by: Head burrowed into laptop; annual vacation to Sloan Sports Analytics conference at M.I.T.

Pays zero attention to college basketball until right now. Considers regular season and conference championships a waste of time. Not absolutely wrong. Infamous for picking all the No. 1 seeds to advance to the Final Four. Thinks they're the only person in the office pool employing this genius strategy. Always knocked out by the first round.

 Recognize them by: Overconfidence; plagiarizing Jay Bilas in emails to friends.

Going totally bonkers because alma mater has qualified for the tournament for the first time in years. Reconnecting with old roommates on Facebook, having serious discussions of renting an RV and driving to the regional finals and onto Houston. (Never will actually rent the RV.) Example: picks Boston University to win it all, because as a BU alum, how horrible would they feel if BU actually won it all, and they cool-headedly went with Kansas? Early office-pool roadkill.

 Recognize them by: Bubbly enthusiasm; freshly purchased school sweatshirt

Attended perennial power. Went to Final Four twice while in school. Still hits two or three games a year. Has "a guy in Houston" who will "take care of things" if alma mater makes it there. Hotel rooms on hold. Confident on the outside, a little anxious on the inside. Once saw Christian Laettner in an airport.

 Recognize them by: the Duke diploma.

Thinks March Madness was better back in 1985. Or 1974. Or 1997. Or 2006. Rants passionately about corruption of Division I system, corrupt programs, repeat offenders, scoundrel coaches, predatory agents, best players leaving early for the NBA. Wistful for short-shorts and the four-corners offense. Vows to not watch one second of this year's tournament but secretly rooting for LIU Blackbirds. Repeatedly caught in office watching it online, screaming like an 8-year-old.

 Recognize them by: Maravich LSU jersey; tattered copy of John McPhee's "A Sense of Where You Are."

Ignores college basketball and sports in general. Only attended one sporting event in whole life: New England Tea Men-Fort Lauderdale Strikers NASL game in 1978, and left at halftime. Couldn't pronounce "Krzyzewski" if given three years to practice. Fills out bracket in 45 seconds. Actually asks what "seeds" mean and if "Jimmer" is a "person or a town." Wins office pool in a landslide.

 Recognize them by: "Team Edward" T-shirt; huge wad of cash on April 5.

—See Jason Gay's daily Greater New York sports columns at WSJ.com/NYSports