LONDON—The euro zone's annual rate of inflation rose above the European Central Bank's medium-term target for the first time in more than two years in December, driven by fuel, food, alcohol and tobacco prices, official data showed Friday. 

The figures are likely to fuel concerns that interest rates could rise sooner than expected after ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet warned Thursday that inflation may increase in the short term but should moderate later this year. 

Consumer prices rose 0.6% from November, pushing the year-to-year rate up to 2.2% from 1.9% the previous month, the highest annual rate since October 2008 when it stood at 3.2%, the European Union's Eurostat statistics agency said. 

The annual rate is in line with the preliminary estimate published Jan. 4 and the market consensus from a survey of economists last week. The monthly gain also matched expectations. 

  Peter Vanden Houte, an economist at ING, said he didn't expect an ECB interest-rate rise this year because the economic recovery was still too fragile and inflationary pressures weren't worrisome yet. 

"That said, we have to admit that the probability of a first rate hike before the end of the year has increased," he said in a note. 

The euro firmed Thursday after Mr. Trichet said risks to the medium-term forecast for price developments were still broadly balanced but they could move to the upside. 

The ECB chief said he and his fellow policy makers were "permanently alert" about risks to price stability. Inflation may pick up in the coming months due to food and energy price rises, but the consumer-price index should moderate later this year, he said. 

on Friday, Deutsche Bundesbank President  Axel Weber warned that inflation in the euro zone may not be as short-lived as currently assumed, and also stressed that banks should be allowed to fail as taxpayers won't agree to bail them out a second time. 

Mr. Weber, a member of the European Central Bank's governing council, told a university audience that "risks to the medium-term outlook for inflation, which are so far still broadly balanced, could well move to the upside." 

He said that the assumption of a moderation in price pressures is as yet only an assumption. "We've seen in the past that, particularly in strong recoveries, over time that assumption turned out not to be warranted," Mr. Weber said. "For me, the continuation and fulfillment of that assumption is key." 

Jürgen Stark, another ECB policy maker, reinforced the message Thursday, saying the latest pickup of euro-zone inflation above the ECB's 2% ceiling was likely to be a temporary phenomenon but the central bank would monitor price developments very closely. 

Eurostat said the rising cost of fuels for transport had the largest impact on the headline annual rate of inflation, accounting for 0.58 percentage point of the overall rise. Higher heating oil prices accounted for 0.19 percentage point of the increase. 

Among the main components of inflation, energy prices were 11% higher than in December 2009, the sharpest rise since September 2008. 

Elsewhere, food prices rose 1.8% on a year-to-year basis, the strongest gain since February 2009, while alcohol and tobacco costs jumped 3.6%, the sharpest annual increase since last June. Housing costs rose 3.8%, the largest percentage gain since November 2008, while transport costs gained 5.2%, the sharpest rise since May last year. 

Core inflation, which strips out energy, food, alcohol and tobacco prices, rose 0.4% from the previous month and was stable at 1.1% for a third consecutive month in December. 

"Looking forward, headline inflation should remain around these levels until spring, printing 2.2%, 2.3% when energy-price base effects begin to drag it back below 2%,"  Eoin O'Callaghan, an economist at BNP Paribas, said in a note. "For the year as a whole we have a 1.8% average and the risks are to the upside given the persistent rally in soft commodities and oil prices." 

Other euro-zone data showed the bloc unexpectedly posted a slight trade deficit in November as imports rose more rapidly than exports, though it's unclear what caused the surge in imports. 

 Eurostat said the 16 countries that then used the euro had a combined deficit in their trade in goods with the rest of the word of €400 million ($534.0 million). Economists last week estimated that the region would have a trade surplus of €1.8 billion. 

The euro zone had a surplus of €4.7 billion in October, a figure that was lowered from a previous estimate of €5.2 billion. In November 2009, the euro zone had a trade surplus of €3.1 billion. 

Exports in November rose to €140.9 billion, from €139.6 billion in October, but imports rose more sharply, to €141.3 billion from €134.9 billion. 

On a seasonally-adjusted basis, exports rose by 0.2% from October, while imports rose by a very large 4.4%. The increase in exports could reflect a pickup in domestic demand within the currency area, rising prices for energy imports, or a combination of the two. 

Figures for the 10 months to October suggest higher energy prices could be a factor, with the euro zone's deficit on its trade in energy rising to €206.1 billion, from €165.3 billion in the first 10 months of 2009. 

Germany continued to have by far the largest trade surplus in the currency area. In the first 10 months of this year, it exported €127.6 billion more than it imported, up from €110.4 billion in the same period of 2009. 

Ireland's trade surplus also widened, to €36.2 billion from €33.0 billion. 

However, a number of euro-zone nations that have seen their cost of borrowing soar because investors are concerned about their ability to repay large debts continued to run big trade deficits. 

Over the first 10 months, Spain's deficit increased to €42.6 billion from €38.90 billion, and Portugal's deficit increased to €16.4 billion from €16.0 billion. Italy's deficit surged to €21.2 billion from €4.7 billion. 

During the first 10 months, the euro zone's trade surplus with the U.S. rose to €44.9 billion from €30.5 billion in the same period of 2009 as its exports increased by 18% while its imports from the U.S. rose by 9%. 

The euro zone's deficit with China widened to €94.3 billion from €74.7 billion, despite a 38% increase in exports. 