 Q: Is tax-preparation software, such as TurboTax, for preparing 2010 tax returns current with the last-minute tax-law changes enacted late last year? You recently wrote about these last-minute tax changes and reported that the Internal Revenue Service says it needs time to "reprogram its computers" to accommodate these changes. And, as a result, the IRS has said it won't be able to accept returns until mid-February from taxpayers who itemize their deductions and who file certain other types of returns. 

—C.L., Palatine, Ill.

 A: Yes, says Julie Miller, a spokeswoman for TurboTax, the nation's top-selling tax-preparation software program. "TurboTax software is up-to-date with all the tax-law changes" approved at the end of last year, she says.

Taxpayers who itemize their deductions on Schedule A "can prepare their return now with TurboTax, claim all the deductions and credits to which they are entitled and then [electronically file] their returns," says Ms. Miller. She adds that TurboTax will hold the returns until the IRS begins accepting returns for Schedule A filers sometime in mid-February.

Ms. Miller also says TurboTax "will notify you when the software submits your return, and you'll receive a notification when the IRS accepts your return." In addition, TurboTax is "enabling customers to file their state return separately so they can get their state refund quickly."

According to the IRS, "many major software providers" have announced "they will accept these impacted returns immediately." The software providers will hold onto the returns and e-file them after the IRS opens its gates in mid-February for the delayed forms.

IRS officials say most taxpayers won't be affected by the delays our reader is asking about. Based on historical filing patterns, the IRS expects the delay will impact about nine million taxpayers. In 2010, the IRS received more than 141 million tax returns.

Who will be affected by the delay? Generally, taxpayers who itemize their deductions by using Schedule A, those who claim the higher-education tuition and fees deduction, or those who claim the educator-expense deduction, according to the IRS.

—Send your questions to us at askdowjones.sunday03@wsj.com and include your name, address and telephone number. Questions may be edited; we regret that we cannot answer every letter.