 Levels of radioactivity from Japan's damaged Fukushima Daiichi nuclear complex may be above government limits for infants in some areas outside the plant's 20-kilometer evacuation zone, according to the latest estimate to fuel an international debate over how close civilians should be allowed to the plant. 

The new estimate, by a state-funded monitoring body, came as fears over Tokyo's tap water eased. Thursday's tests also showed radioactive material in a major plant supplying water to the capital has fallen to below the level the government says could pose long-term health risks to infants. 



 Three workers sustained the most serious radiation exposure yet confirmed at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear-power plant. Two of the workers were sent to a hospital for treatment on their feet or legs.  

Meanwhile, restoring electricity to the control rooms and cooling systems resumed at the plant, which continued to emit smoke or steam at some locations.

Tokyo Electric Power, the plant's operator, said that it intended to restart the cooling system of reactor No. 3 as early as Friday to cool the reactor core. Until the system goes back online, Tepco plans to continue its operation to pump seawater into the reactor and the storage pool that holds spent fuel. 



 European leaders gathered to negotiate the details of the euro zone's bailout funds even as one of the bloc's most troubled members, Portugal, lurched closer to needing a rescue itself. 

European Union leaders have said for weeks that a two-day summit under way in Brussels would seal a "grand bargain" on measures to combat Europe's persistent sovereign debt crisis. 



 Portuguese President Aníbal Cavaco Silva will begin meetings Friday with the leaders of all the political parties represented in parliament, the first step of a process that is expected to lead to early elections after Prime Minister José Sócrates handed in his resignation Wednesday when opposition parties voted down an austerity package. 

The failure to pass the measure pushed already high government borrowing costs to unaffordable levels and threatened to force Portugal to seek a bailout. 

Fitch Ratings downgraded Portuguese debt two notches, saying it assumes the country can't maintain affordable market access and sees a higher risk of it needing multilateral support. 



The euro zone's economic recovery slowed in March, according to a survey of purchasing managers at manufacturers and service providers. 



Moody's said the U.K. budget indicates the government is tackling the current economic and fiscal challenges with plans to significantly reduce its budget deficit and levels of debt. 



U.K. retail sales fell back sharply in February, suggesting consumer spending continues to be a weak spot in the U.K. economy as Britons struggle against inflation and rising unemployment. 



 Advertising giant WPP and media group United Business Media are set to switch their headquarters back to the U.K. from Ireland after the U.K.'s move to reduce corporate taxes. 



French Prime Minister François Fillon requested the country's nuclear-safety agency Autorité de Sureté Nucléaire to conduct an audit of France's 19 nuclear plants and 58 nuclear reactors.



German Chancellor Angela Merkel said she would seek to secure an agreement for the country to spread its contributions to the euro zone's permanent bailout fund over five years instead of the three- to four-year timeline European Union leaders had been discussing. 



The Bank of Finland said Finland's gross domestic product will grow close to 4% this year, due to a substantial carry-over effect from accelerated growth in output in 2010. GDP will grow 3.9% this year, 2.7% in 2012 and 2.5% in 2013, the central bank said. 



 Ukrainian prosecutors charged former President Leonid Kuchma, who led the country from 1994 to 2005, in the murder of an investigative journalist 10½ years ago, but he could avoid jail time even if convicted of involvement in post-Soviet Ukraine's most notorious crime.  

A Russian woman detained last year by British authorities on suspicion of spying has made her debut as a host on a Kremlin-funded television channel. Ekaterina Zatuliveter appeared in a Russia Today news broadcast, commenting on planned protest rallies in London against British military intervention in Libya.



 Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke will hold public press conferences four times a year, in the central bank's latest move to boost transparency and improve communications after its policies came under attack.  



The Obama administration rejected the idea of a tax holiday for U.S. multinationals' overseas income, criticizing a plan being floated by some House Republicans and multinational companies for a stand-alone relief measure. 



 New rules allow investigators to hold domestic-terror suspects longer than others without giving them a warning of their rights to remain silent and to have an attorney present for questioning, significantly expanding exceptions to the instructions that have governed the handling of criminal suspects for more than four decades. 



China may not be able to meet sharply rising food demand from its domestic resources, a senior Chinese agriculture official said, indicating room for further growth in imports. 



Scientists from North and South Korea will meet March 29 near the border between the two countries to discuss volcanic activity at Mt. Baektu, which lies at the far north of the peninsula, in a rare sign of cooperation. 



The Philippine central bank raised overnight rates by 25 basis points, a move intended to head off mounting price pressures, which threaten to push inflation beyond the 3%-5% target range this year.



 Military assessments suggested strikes on the ground forces of Libyan leader Col. Moammar Gadhafi have failed to loosen their siege of the city of Misrata, as officials said an agreement was reached to hand command of the military operation to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. 

Military commanders have said the focus of U.S. and coalition air patrols had shifted from only enforcing a no-fly zone to hitting the regime's ground forces where they are poised to attack civilians.

Turkey's parliament approved sending ships to join a NATO operation to enforce a U.N.-sanctioned arms embargo, though the Islamic-leaning government has criticized the Western-led air raids.



 Yemeni President Ali Abdullah Saleh and the country's top general are hashing out a political settlement in which both men would resign from their positions within days in favor of a civilian-led transitional government, according to three people familiar with the situation. 



 In Syria, protesters and President Bashar al-Assad's government are preparing for a pivotal day on Friday which hinges on whether people are ready to join the regional unrest, or if they stay at home. 



 Bahrain gave its sternest warning yet to Iran to keep out of its affairs, saying an escalation in the two countries' dispute over Bahrain's recent crackdown on political unrest could even lead to "conflict." 

 A trickle of rocket attacks by Gaza militants on Israeli cities maintained almost a week of tension, though Israel limited its fire in an apparent effort to avoid a broader conflict. 