LONDON—The U.K. welcomed what it said was a "significant change" in the U.S. position on no-fly zones over Libya after a week of frustration from Britain and France at what they saw as foot-dragging by other nations on the issue. 

Susan Rice, U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, on Wednesday night said the U.S. believed preparations should be made for military action that goes beyond a no-fly zone to protect Libyans under threat from forces loyal to Col. Moammar Gadhafi.

"The situation on the ground has evolved and… a no-fly zone has inherent limitations in terms of protection of civilians," Ms. Rice said.

The British and, in particular, France have led the charge to impose a no-fly zone over Libya. 



On Thursday, U.K. Foreign Office minister Alistair Burt said that there has been a "significant change" in the position of the White House. 

"They realize that something needs to be done beyond the isolation and the warnings that have already effectively been given by the international community," he told the British Broadcasting Corp.

Earlier this week, French Foreign Minister Alain Juppé underscored his country's frustrations for U.S. procrastination on defining its position on Libya.

"What about American power," he asked a French Parliamentary committee on Tuesday. 

Prime Minister David Cameron has expressed frustration over the U.N., but British officials have consistently denied that there is any anger with the U.S. over its more cautious approach.

A Downing Street spokesman said that Mr. Cameron had on Wednesday night called around a "number of Arab leaders" in a bid to get greater Arab participation in support for a UN resolution. 

There is also a measure of division within the U.K. itself, with more aggressive language coming from Prime Minister Cameron and more caution from military officials. Some military officers say that military commitment in Libya would make it harder to react to situations in strategically more important countries, like Bahrain and Iran.

"We are monitoring the situation and continuing with planning but we are not going to jump into what is essentially a civil war in Africa," said one senior British official earlier this week.