TOKYO—As northern Japan continues to reel from the March 11 earthquake and tsunami, some activity in this city continues as always. 

The Omotesando and Ginza districts, Tokyo's fanciest retail areas, were busy with shoppers this weekend, though the sidewalks were less crowded than is typical. Japanese department stores and boutiques, such as Comme des Garçons and Issey Miyake, were open for business as usual. 

Not so many European shops.

Consumers approached Louis Vuitton's doors, only to see a darkened interior. Citing electrical outages and concern for its workers' families, the luxury luggage chain had closed 23 of its 57 stores across Japan since last Monday, according to a customer-service representative in Japan. The chain, a unit of  LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton, tentatively planned to open its stores Tuesday.

Louis Vuitton wasn't alone among high-tone European brands. Prada, Chanel, Cartier, Gucci, Bulgari, Missoni and Dior were just some of the foreign shops with darkened windows this weekend in Omotesando and Ginza.

A mass shutdown of this sort is rare in Tokyo—a mecca of luxury shops that usually close just one day a year, New Year's. Of course, never before has this earthquake-prone country recorded a 9.0-magnitude temblor.

The tendency of European shops to shut down is no small matter. The penetration of luxury-goods in Japan is high: 40% of working-age Japanese adults buy at least one luxury item a year, compared with 2% in China, according to Boston Consulting Group luxury-goods analyst  Jean-Marc Bellaïche. Japan is second only to the U.S. in sales of expensive fashion and accessories, and accounts for 11% of the €168 billion ($238 billion) global market, according to Italian luxury-goods trade group Altagamma. 

But amid a shrinking, aging population and an economy burdened by heavy debt, luxury-goods companies have been reeling in Japan for years. That 11% market share represents a drop from 16% in 2003. 

Japanese consumers, who long equated high prices with excellent quality, in recent years have embraced value. Fast-fashion purveyors, such as Forever 21of the U.S. and Sweden's Hennes & Mauritz, have been expanding.

Before the earthquake, many luxury-goods executives had been confident that the worst was over in Japan and that the market would start growing again. Gucci posted slight sales growth in Japan at the end of last year. Louis Vuitton recently opened a new store in Osaka and renovated its Omotesando boutique.

But with shortages of food and other necessities developing even hundreds of kilometers from the earthquake's epicenter, consumer desire for nonessential products, especially luxury goods, is likely to decline. The effects of the earthquake and tsunami are expected to have a negative impact on consumer confidence and the Japanese luxury market at least through the first half, said  Brian Salsberg, head of the consumer and retail practice in Japan for consulting firm McKinsey &Co. Reflecting such views, shares of luxury companies, such as France's LVMH and Britain's  Burberry
BURBY


-2.69
%




 PLC, fell last week.

"No matter what city you are in, buying that 'must have' handbag is about the last thing on the minds of most Japanese consumers today," Mr. Salsberg said. 

—Paul Sonne  contributed to this article.