Gripes over pay have erupted into internal spats between  UBS AG investment-banking chief  Carsten Kengeter and his deal makers, contributing to an exodus from the Swiss bank and questions about its commitment to the operation.

On early morning conference calls, Mr. Kengeter has told senior bankers that he was done with their complaints about pay. "You just don't get it," he told thousands of bankers on more than one recent call, according to bankers who were on the call.

See a list of more than 80 bankers that have left UBS since 2006, and where they have gone.

"He told us that bankers are spoiled children and we're the ones who messed this place up," said one senior banker who recently left the firm. "You would get off the calls and think, 'how can I stay here any longer?'"

UBS declined to make Mr. Kengeter available to comment. A bank spokeswoman said, "UBS is fully committed to its U.S. investment-banking business and has the global resources of the firm supporting its future growth."

But many bankers appear to be souring on the Swiss lender. Low pay, albeit by Wall Street standards, sagging morale and a disconnect between UBS headquarters in Zurich and the New York-based investment-banking unit have caused an exodus of talent, according to interviews with about 15 current and former employees and others in the banking industry.

Those departures have accelerated in recent weeks. In the last three months, at least 13 senior U.S. bankers have left UBS, including  Kevin Cox, an industrials banker and former head of the firm's Americas investment-banking unit, who quit this month.

Since the financial crisis peaked in 2008, UBS has lost more than 40 senior U.S. bankers of the managing-director rank and several more junior bankers, based on an informal tally of departures that were made public. Bitterness abounds among many current and former UBS bankers, who are angered by what they see as a deliberate attempt to starve the operation.

One senior UBS banking official acknowledged that attrition has been higher than expected in the bank's managing-director ranks. He said the Swiss bank is committed to its investment-banking division, including its U.S. operations.

The bank appointed 38-year-old  Aryeh Bourkoff, known in media-banking circles, to Americas investment-banking chief. It also hired a new head of Americas technology banking last year,  Mark Zanoli, from J.P. Morgan Chase & Co.

It is discussing more senior hires, and on Monday said technology banker  Adam Frisch is rejoining the firm from  Morgan Stanley.
MS


-0.03
%






The official said Mr. Kengeter wants to expand the investment bank, but is willing to send a tough message.

One of two storied Swiss financial institutions, UBS is the world's largest private bank by assets, managing $450 billion in client money. But UBS was hit hard during the financial crisis by soured trades on subprime mortgages. The bank also faced a U.S. government tax-evasion probe. Since then, its investment-banking rank in global mergers and acquisitions fell from fourth to ninth, according to data provider Dealogic. Its global revenue ranking also fell from fifth to ninth.

Banker pay suffered, as it did across Wall Street. In March, the bank said its overall 2010 banker bonus pool of 4.32 billion Swiss francs ($4.84 billion) was 10% lower than in 2009, including a substantial amount in deferred pay. Mr. Kengeter's 2010 bonus fell 29% to 9.3 million francs, while UBS Chief Executive  Oswald Grübel relinquished his bonus.

In comparison, Credit Suisse Group said it cut its 2010 bonus pool 27% to just over five billion francs.

Toward the end of last year, senior UBS executives frequently held what one banker dubbed "appeasement conference calls," imploring bankers not to leave and asking them to "trust us" because "everything was going to be OK," according to people who have been on those calls. 

Despite the pleas, bankers keep leaving the firm. The latest big name is Mr. Cox, who is joining  Citigroup Inc.
C


0.98
%




 after being demoted in March. 

People close to both Mr. Cox and current co-global banking chief  Jimmy Neissa said both of them tried to make the pitch for more resources to their bosses in Switzerland.

"He stood up for his team and he was punished for it," said a former colleague of Mr. Cox.

The senior UBS official denied that employees would be squeezed out because they spoke their mind, and said Mr. Kengeter is a straight shooter who welcomes a robust dialogue.

Other recent departures include senior bankers responsible for UBS's clients in the metals and mining, power, energy, health-care and technology industries. The bleeding of personnel at senior and midlevels leaves some analysts and employees fretting about the investment bank's future.

There are many empty cubicles on some floors at UBS offices in Midtown Manhattan, the people said. Some of the corner offices where sector heads sat also are unoccupied. 

The senior UBS official denied this and said the bank actually is struggling to find enough space for employees.

Some analysts and former employees believe the investment-banking business should be shrunk to advisory services that can aid the profitable wealth-management operations. Others have suggested its brokerage, advisory and underwriting units should be sold.

"I don't think the U.S. investment-banking business has much more than the end of the year if they don't show improvement," said  Kian Abouhossein, an analyst at J.P. Morgan Cazenove. "This is the year they need to show progress." 

But the senior UBS official called those scenarios rubbish. He said the U.S. business is core to UBS's success.

 Write to  Gina Chon at gina.chon@wsj.com and Anupreeta Das at anupreeta.das@wsj.com 