Bank stocks rocketed out of the financial crisis in 2009, helping to ignite a bull market that has lasted more than two years. 

But in the past year, they have lagged the broader U.S. market. While the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index has risen 15.6%, a widely watched measure of bank stocks, the KBW Bank Index, has fallen 10%. 

Now, as the economy moves from recovery mode to full-fledged expansion, some market strategists and advisers say bank stocks should outperform once again. 

"As the economy improves, we're seeing capital-markets activity picking up, credit trends improving dramatically, problem loans and delinquencies falling, and loan demand picking up—all the classic signs of an early-stage recovery," says  William Tanona, a bank-stock analyst at  UBS AG. 

The case for bank stocks has three main prongs. First and foremost, banks look cheap. On average, bank stocks trade at just 0.9 times their book value per share, while their average for the seven years before the meltdown of 2008 was about two times, Mr. Tanona says. 

While current valuations reflect investors' fears about new regulations and higher capital requirements, Mr. Tanona says multiples should rise "once asset quality normalizes and firms adjust for all the regulatory, legal and capital requirements." 

  J.J. Schenkelberg, an investment adviser at CLS Investments LLC in Omaha, Neb., says her firm has put about $50 million of its $8 billion of client assets into an exchange-traded fund tracking the KBW Bank Index because the stocks are "quite attractively valued" based on their price-to-book ratio. "With these types of valuations, they are still overly punished" for the financial system's near-meltdown, she says. 

The prospect of rising interest rates in the next few years also bodes well for banks, say some strategists. In that scenario, banks' so-called net interest margin, a measure of the money banks earn by making loans, would increase, says analyst  Chris Kotowski of Oppenheimer & Co. That's because, in a rising-rate environment, banks can usually raise the rate on their loans faster than they have to raise the rates on their deposits. 

Some banks also say they can reinvest some of their assets more profitably once rates rise and regulators loosen controls over their reserves. Two of the largest banks by assets, Bank of America Corp. and  J.P. Morgan Chase
JPM


0.22
%




 & Co., "are both positively positioned for rising rates," Mr. Tanona says. Others say  Citigroup Inc.
C


0.98
%




 is, too. 

At  Wells Fargo
WFC


0.93
%




 & Co., redeploying just half of a $100 billion short-term cash trove could boost pretax profits by $880 million a year, analyst  Chris Mutascio of  Stifel Financial Corp.
SF


-0.28
%




 told Wells executives on a conference call last month. "I would not disagree with your math," replied Wells Chief Financial Officer  Tim Sloan. 

Other potential beneficiaries of rising rates include  Bank of New York Mellon Corp.
BK


0.33
%




,  Charles Schwab Corp.
SCHW


-0.36
%




, and  Federated Investors Inc.,
FII


-0.15
%




 all of which would be able to recapture fees waived due to rock-bottom interest yields on money-market funds. "These companies automatically get a benefit when rates go up," says  Frederick Cannon, director of research at Keefe, Bruyette & Woods. 

As profits improve, banks are likely to boost their dividend payments, say analysts. Banks slashed their payments during the financial crisis to preserve capital. Now that the crisis has ebbed, regulators are allowing banks to return more cash to shareholders. Nineteen banks have raised their payouts so far in the second quarter, on top of the 39 that did so earlier in the year. Among those that did so after regulators approved their capital plans: J.P. Morgan Chase, Wells Fargo and  U.S. Bancorp.
USB


3.76
%




 

As a result, while the KBW Bank Stock Index currently yields about 0.9%, KBW's Mr. Cannon expects it to increase to 1.9% over the next year. He says that, in turn, should attract buyers to the stocks. 

Not all banks are likely to boost their payments at the same time. Investors were surprised in March when one bank, BofA, saw its dividend plan rejected by regulators. 

The banking sector isn't a cakewalk these days. Some analysts warn that banks must adjust to a new lending reality that includes a retreat from the wild-west days of mortgages with zero down payments, no income documentation and other loose lending standards. 

"It will take banks years to adapt" to an environment of mortgages with 20% down payments, says bank analyst  Nancy Bush, a consultant with SNL Financial Corp. 

One drag on banks' loan growth in recent years has been the need to shed legacy portfolios of toxic assets they either inherited from previous management, in the case of Citigroup, or acquired in acquisitions, in the case of J.P. Morgan Chase, Wells Fargo and BofA. One bank with a big slug of for-sale assets, Citigroup, is only about halfway through that runoff.

Still,  Todd Green, chief investment officer at Alesco Advisors LLC in Rochester, N.Y., which owns $15 million of the same KBW bank fund, the  SPDR KBW Bank
KBE


0.57
%




 ETF, expects bank stocks to rally as lenders reinstate or raise their dividends, mergers pick up and valuations bounce off their recent lows.

Bank stocks, he says, represent "an attractive opportunity in this market to buy high-quality companies at low prices, in an industry that's essential to the functioning of capitalism in the U.S." 

 Write to  Randall Smith at randall.smith@wsj.com 