When the Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. real-estate engine was chugging during the boom years, the firm teamed up with developer LCOR Inc. on dozens of projects.

Now, as real-estate development begins to stir in a few markets, Lehman's bankruptcy estate is preparing to put its equity stake in about 10 of those projects on the block, according to people familiar with the matter.

The buyer of Lehman's stakes also likely would step into the investment bank's old role as LCOR's financial partner in future developments, these people said.

The makeup of the package being sold by Lehman isn't yet clear, and neither is the estimated price the package will fetch. Representatives of Lehman and LCOR declined to comment.

The estate's preliminary plans to put the package on the block now reflect the heightened interest among lenders and investors for new construction in key markets such as New York and Washington, especially in the apartment sector. Last week, for example, apartment landlord Archstone—another entity part-owned by the Lehman estate—and Houston developer Hines broke ground on a long-delayed, $700 million mixed-use project in downtown Washington after securing equity financing from the real-estate arm of the Qatari Investment Authority.

The planned sale also comes as the Lehman estate steps up its effort to sell the bankrupt investment bank's huge portfolio of commercial real estate. "We would expect, over the next six to 12 months, to have a much more aggressive disposition strategy, particularly on the strategic real-estate assets,"  Bryan Marsal, Lehman's chief executive, said in bankruptcy court on Jan. 13, according to a transcript. "You're going to see some major transactions coming before this court."

LCOR, a developer based in Berwyn, Pa., for years partnered with Lehman on about 30 projects, from Terminal 4 at New York's John F. Kennedy International Airport to the $850 million mixed-use project at the White Flint Metrorail station in Washington's Maryland suburbs. After Lehman's collapse in 2008, the investment bank continued to invest in some of LCOR's projects to keep construction going and preserve value for creditors. 

But now, Lehman is looking to sell its interest in a large chunk of those projects to a buyer that also could secure a role as LCOR's partner in future development, people familiar with the matter say. The buyer could be a pension fund, an overseas sovereign-wealth fund or even a very wealthy individual, and could use the partnership with LCOR to get access to a development pipeline that could prove profitable if the economic rebound continues. 

Last year, in a separate deal, Lehman and LCOR sold their share of the company that runs Terminal 4 to the owner of Amsterdam's Schiphol airport. 

LCOR has its roots in national developer Lincoln Property Co.  Eric Eichler, LCOR's chairman, was Lincoln's Northeast regional partner before forming Linpro Co. in 1978. LCOR, formed in 1992, acquired Linpro's assets.

Despite Lehman's travails, LCOR has been forging ahead with preparations for new development, buying a site last month in the Williamsburg neighborhood of Brooklyn, N.Y., for an apartment project and planning a mixed-use development at the commuter-rail station in Hoboken, N.J. At the White Flint station in North Bethesda, Md., the company is building a 400,000-square-foot headquarters annex for the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission. 

The Lehman estate, meanwhile, has been slow to wind down the huge real-estate portfolio that the investment bank built up during the property boom, betting that it can maximize value for creditors by holding on to and, in some cases, doubling down on assets. For example, Lehman reinvested $263 million last year in a group of office buildings in Rosslyn, Va. 

But expectations are rising that Lehman will find a way to sell more of its real-estate holdings this year, with property values up from their lows and creditors waiting to be paid back. Apartment landlord Archstone, which was taken private in 2007 in a $22 billion buyout largely financed by Lehman, could go public this year. In California and elsewhere, Lehman is looking for joint-venture partners to help develop its $1 billion land portfolio.

 Write to  Anton Troianovski at anton.troianovski@wsj.com 