A lot of planning goes into every visit to the World Economic Forum, the annual gathering of movers and shakers at the stunning Swiss ski resort of Davos. Which clients to meet, which events to sponsor, which parties to attend. 

However, the world's business leaders appear to have spent very little time worrying about what to wear. 

Some of us are wasting hours a day changing from snow boots or green rubber boots to more elegant shoes and back again, in order to rush through Davos's snowy streets from a meeting in one hotel to lunch at another. 

But the world's top executives didn't get where they are today by fussing with footwear. Instead, they have come up with a simple strategic solution—stick with a favorite business suit, dark grey or black, and shelve the shoes. Instead, a weird range of snow boots, sneakers, climbing shoes and hiking boots is on display in the halls and meeting rooms of Davos, as bankers debate the dangers of excessive regulation and economists worry about slow growth and rising inflation. 

The dark suit/snow shoe combination isn't a good look, but what it lacks in style it makes up for in practicality. But why stop there? Having dispensed with the formal footwear, why not go the whole hog and don winter leisure wear appropriate to a Swiss ski resort? 

The reason is partly that the Davos crowd is conservative, as well as practical. It doesn't seem to have occurred to delegates that this was an option. 

Furthermore, it isn't really necessary, since the temperature is warmer than New York even though the ground is permanently snowy. A warm overcoat, and perhaps a hat, suffice, once foot comfort is assured.

Nevertheless, there are interesting nuances to be detected in the choice of footwear. The more conservative, or perhaps the more aesthetically inclined, have donned short but sturdy boots which, when worn with a suit, could pass for shoes unless subjected to close examination. Others are shameless, ordaring, pairing formal suits with robust hiking boots or shiny running shoes. 

Since executives are almost always clad in identical uniforms, the choice of sturdy boots for a risk-averse banker, or running shoes for a nimble chief executives may be revealing. 