One way crime novels become classics is by channeling the social concerns of the day. Raymond Chandler's novels were indictments of moral corruption, pre- and post-World War II, while Dashiell Hammett countered Jazz Age excess with a decided anti-capitalist bent. These works offered a window into how the world really works, not how we wish it did.

Today crime fiction has become slicker and more divorced from reality. Serial killers and cartoonish bogeymen are prominent, and the best-seller lists are dominated by escapist phenomena like Stieg Larsson's Millennium trilogy. What's needed is a strong course of noir shock treatment. The novels of Jean Patrick-Manchette, which three decades after their publication in France have only recently begun to be translated into English, are a good start. 

France's mystery industry was similarly calcified in the early 1970s, when Manchette's lean, spare romans noirs first appeared. The country was still struggling to politically integrate a generation forged in the fire of the 1968 protests. The charismatic robber-murderer Jacques Mesrine was Public Enemy No. 1. But the crime genre was dominated by formulaic policiers. 

Into this void stepped Manchette (1942-95), who presented a bleak vision of a French society corrupt to its core. The capitalistic world is a cruel joke, and his characters are both unwitting victims and entirely complicit. Money is a blot on the landscape, but the lack of it isn't much better. The body counts are shockingly high, but it is those who have to keep living who are punished the most.

After a checkered literary apprenticeship that involved movie novelizations, ghostwriting and a pseudonymously written erotic novel, Manchette turned to the crime genre and would make it his own in 10 novels between 1971 and 1981. (He suffered from crippling agoraphobia for most of the 1980s and published only journalism.) The new translation of 1977's "Fatale" (New York Review Books, 100 pages, $12.95) is only the third available in English—following the 2002 City Lights issues of "Three to Kill" (1976) and "The Prone Gunman" (1981). They give the reader a taste for more.

Manchette steeped himself in the works of American noir masters such as Hammett, Chandler and James M. Cain. He was fluent in English, thanks to a thriller-loving Scots grandmother, and for years he worked as a translator of figures like Donald Westlake, Ross Thomas and Robert Bloch. The influence is clear: Manchette skillfully subverts typical noir situations, such as the family man who walks away when danger strikes ("Three to Kill"), the solitary figure who snuffs out small-town corruption ("Fatale") and the retired killer drafted for one last assignment against his will ("The Prone Gunman"). 

All Manchette's novels have a political subtext (the author cut his ideological teeth writing Trotskyite tracts). Early on in "Three to Kill," the suburban protagonist, Georges Gerfaut, sees a pretty wall poster with the words "home sweet home" inscribed in "large, pale, pink frilly letters," followed by a screed about corporate oligarchy. This is a prelude to Gerfaut's coming confrontation with elements of society he would prefer to ignore: Soon he is on the run from killers and about to turn into one himself. 

In "Fatale," the seemingly sleepy provincial town of Bléville turns out to be full of money-hungry (and murderously minded) townsfolk. The novel's hitwoman anti-heroine, who calls herself Aimée Joubert, targets the town for her biggest score: fleecing 20 million francs from several citizens so that she can leave the assassin's world behind her in the same efficient manner in which she removed herself from an abusive marriage. 

In doing so she thoroughly infiltrates Bléville society, eating in their cafes, attending dances and listening to petty grievances. But Aimée realizes too late that she has underestimated her quarry and one person in particular—the jocular, corpulent Baron Jules, recently released from psychiatric care and prone to embarrassing behavioral spectacles. By dropping her guard at a point of climactic violence, she sets the stage for her downfall. Where Hammett's Continental Op arrived to clean up Poisonville, Aimée succumbs to Bléville's rot.

Manchette's disdain for the corruption, stupidity and arrogance of French society inspires much dark comedy. Perhaps the most startling example comes in "Fatale," when a dead child is deployed as gallows humor. While Aimée talks with a local woman about egg-and-spoon races (a means of passing time as she stakes out potential victims), the woman absent-mindedly forces food into her baby's mouth. When the child vomits, the woman cries: "You disgusting little brat!"

As Aimée detaches herself from her interlocutor, Manchette reveals, in an almost casual manner, that "by this time the baby was dead, though its mother had not yet noticed this fact." When she does, we see the change from a distance, an abrupt change to "mad, endless wailing" and the mother "beating herself about the head with her fists." Played this way, the scene reads like something out of the works of Jean-Paul Sartre, or the nouveau romans of Alain Robbe-Grillet. 

If this bleak existential comedy seems far from political themes per se, it perhaps reflects Manchette's understanding of what his form could and couldn't do. Ultimately he believed, as he wrote in a 1976 essay, that noir was "characterized by the absence or weakness of the class struggle and its replacement by individual action (which is, incidentally, hopeless)." Taken together, Manchette's final three novels are an exploration of this dual triumph and degradation of the self.

To "win" in Manchette's world is merely to escape with a shred of dignity still intact. In "The Prone Gunman," Martin Terrier—as lethal an assassin as Aimée Joubert, likewise determined to leave the business—is barely left with that. He undertakes "one last job" with the dream of reuniting with his long-abandoned first love, but when he finds her in flagrante delicto, what little romanticism left within him is destroyed. The novel ends with a description of Terrier sleeping quietly: "In his sleep, he has just assumed the prone firing position."

These would be Manchette's final published words as a crime novelist. He died in 1995, of metastatic pancreatic cancer, at the too-young age of 53. His unfinished thriller "La Princesse du Sang," set in Castro's Cuba, was published posthumously a year later. But for the most part, Manchette's legacy has been preserved by writers of mainland Europe for whom he set the tone, like France's Thierry Jonquet and Didier Daeninickx and England's own bard of noir Derek Raymond (aka Robin Cook). Perhaps the renewed chance to read Manchette in English will similarly provoke a new generation of crime writers to douse their work in acid-washed reality.

—Ms. Weinman writes for the Los Angeles Times, NPR.org, the National Post and other publications.