 The real return on cash since early 1973 is less than 2% annually, while the average annual increase in oil prices over that period was 4.5%. The Intelligent Investor column in Saturday's Business & Finance section incorrectly stated that the average annual increase in oil prices underperformed the return on cash after inflation.



 The International Atomic Energy Agency has received information about a possible military dimension to Iran's nuclear activities. It hasn't concluded that Iran is seeking nuclear weapons. The headline on an article about Iran's nuclear program on the Middle East pages in some Feb. 26 editions incorrectly stated the agency had reached that conclusion.

 An email from  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.90
%




 Chief Executive  Steve Jobs cited in a March 4 Marketplace article about Web-video formats was sent to Free Software Foundation Europe. The article incorrectly said that it was sent to the Free Software Foundation, an independent sister organization.



   Angel Bennett  is director of marketing for  FLIR Systems.
FLIR


-0.69
%




 A front-page article Monday about acronym-filled advertisements in Washington, D.C., incorrectly gave her job title as head of government relations.



   Jim Trees  was retired from his post as chief executive of New York investment firm Fischer, Francis Trees & Watts when he died. A Private Properties item in the Friday Journal section of March 4 suggested that he was still CEO at the time of his death.



 Captions identifying spring-collections styles using lace on the cover of Saturday's Off Duty section were incorrect in some editions. The caption on the upper-left side of the page under "Traditional" should have read: From top: Dolce & Gabbana, Ralph Lauren, Oscar de la Renta, L'Wren Scott. The caption on the lower-right side under "Subversive" should have read: From left: Balenciaga, Jean Paul Gaultier.



 Actress  Sophia Loren's last name was incorrectly given as Lauren in a March 3 Personal Journal article about Milan's fashion week.

 The first name of  Peter Sutherland, chairman of the court of governors of the London School of Economics, was omitted in a March 4 article on the Middle East pages about Sir Howard Davies's resignation as director of LSE.



 The surname of  Rob Donham, the mayor of Windham, Ohio, was misspelled as Dunham in a photo caption accompanying a U.S. News article Monday about oil companies buying drilling leases in eastern Ohio. 



 The first name of  Elisabeth Prueitt, co-owner of Tartine Bakery & Cafe in San Francisco, was misspelled as Elizabeth in the Bits & Bites feature in Saturday's Off Duty section.