I'm a republican (of the French rather than the American variety), which means that on today's royal wedding day I will be 7,000 miles away with a self-imposed news blackout that will last at least until Monday. Much good will that do me, since the coverage and the post-match analysis will last for years. As much as I would prefer to live in a country where birth does not confer automatic tax, property and employment privileges, one cannot ignore the dilemma that must have faced the 1,900 guests in advance of their attendance of this simple, intimate celebration of two people's love for one another: What to give as a wedding present? I know they asked for donations to be made to worthwhile causes (very "right on"). But really—who is going to do just that? If offering good wedding gift is your only chance to scramble up the greasy social pole, are you really going to leave it all to chance and charity?

If one has unlimited funds the question of what to give is not as perplexing as one might imagine. It's also possible that via indulgent gifting one might hint at the direction we would like to see the happy couple take. I'm leaving out fashion here because I'm fully expecting that Princess Catherine will spend at least a decade toying with her style before she finds her feet (we are not dealing with Carolyn Bessette Kennedy here). Ultimately, one's choice of wedding dress designer means very little, though the aforementioned bride made a savvy choice with Narciso Rodriguez, as did the last royal bride, the now Duchess of Cornwall, with designer Anna Valentine. But I digress. Here are my suggestions for those of you attending the wedding and planning to utter that time honored excuse "We rushed out and left the gift on the kitchen table. We will get it to you when you return from honeymoon." 

Only in prototype form right now, but Mini is seriously considering this option (it's being tested by "opinion formers" in the U.S., U.K. and Germany as you read). What better example to set than buzzing around town in something that is powered by lithium ion batteries, has no carbon emissions and will achieve a range of around 120 miles on a single charge? No imported fuel dependency, no silly "noddy car" image issues, plus there's the added advantage of that British/German confluence, which, ahem, has worked so well for the royals in the past…

I know, I said no fashion, but what we really want from these two is downright modernization. This is not his father's nor his mother's trench (remember those pics?). It's Christopher Baileys anarchic, cool twist on a great British institution. With Angela Ahrendts at the helm, Burberry is the perfect example of an established firm that has looked to the future and won plaudits from the fashion police and the stock market in turn. Not a bad example to follow and couldn't be a better brand to promote. His: Burberry Prorsum menswear khaki green bonded cotton twill double breasted heritage trench (£1,395). Hers: Burberry Prorsum bonded nappa studded biker trench (£4,995).

One hopes that at some point there will be some patronage of the arts proper? It's not enough to have some decent Titians, Mantegna's and Van Dycks hanging on the walls at the palace (and, yes, I know there's a Freud) what's required with all these recent cuts in government subsidies of the arts is some serious hefting behind modern British works. Hence the suggestion of David Hockney's "Peter Schlesinger with Polaroid Camera," a nostalgic take by Hockney on the ex younger lover with whom he lived for some time in Los Angeles during the late 60s. Hockney, indisputably one of Britain's greatest living artists, has long worked with photography and painting as a means of examining the lens through which he and we view life. Given that the couple are already subject to life through the lens, this is a poignant take on lost love by one of the art world's favorite sons. Of course you'd have to commit to paying at the very least the Sotheby's estimate of $2.5 to $3.5 million (likely, given the interest, to go for higher), and it would be a very late gift, given that the sale is on May 10 at Sotheby's New York.

If she really did have elocution lessons (and I'm not saying she did), then surely she's had some equine tuition too? Royalty can't be saddle shy. John Lobb will make your boots to order, discussing everything from leather to shape and specifics on heels, buckles, laces etc. The process which includes measuring by the Master Lastmaker and the carving by hand of one's own wooden last, can take up to two months. Fans say its worth it and attest to Lobb's being the most comfortable boots on the planet. In any case, if she doesn't take to Polo, our new royal can wear these as fashion items, given her predilection for tucking her tight jeans into her boots. From €2,000. www.johnlobb.com/en/shoes/bespoke

I'll bet even Wills's "people" don't know about this place. Cocodimama is on the deeply unfashionable island of Eleuthera in the deeply fashionable Bahamas islands (Harbour Island equals Notting Hill on Sea). Unspoiled, deserted beach, pink and white sands, aquamarine blue waters, cool bar overlooking the water and restaurant serving great food. Granted, they'd have to take over the whole place, but there are only 12 rooms. If they get bored, they can always water taxi over to the aforementioned HI and visit with 2nd cousin, HI resident and former royal bridesmaid India Hicks. She's 68th in line to the throne, so no threat to the new Princess C. www.cocodimama.com

Probably currently some creaky old number passed down from grandmama. Irish born designer Joseph Walsh falls into the "I don't know how he does it" category. Self taught, his work manages to be sensually stunning and technically brilliant at the same time. His "Enigmum" canopy bed was constructed by stripping olive ash and oak into thin layers and then reconstructing them into what he describes as '"free form compositions.. a unique collaboration between man and material." The concept here is cocooning, but one could imagine pretty much anything happening in this £95,000 number.  www.josephwalshstudio.com

Craft is no longer a dirty word associated with colored tights and paisley print wearing pottery teachers. But it could still do with the royal seal of approval. Britain still has some of the world's best craftsmen in the form of cabinet and furniture makers, and there are enough new talents emerging for it to again become a legitimate industry. Nobody represents the modern face of the movement better than Gareth Neal. His American walnut "Anne" console table marries the past in the form of the classical leg of a 1730s Queen Anne table with a contemporary exterior. Neal works with a combination of traditional craftsmanship and CNC technology (Computer Numerical Control), using a computer-controlled cutting head mounted onto a saw blade, which, in the case of this table, slowly cuts away the solid walnut leg to reveal the form of a traditional Queen Ann leg within. (£10,000.) www.garethneal.co.uk

Maybe it's just the naturalized American in me; but I have visions of the loving couple throwing Camelot-style banquets complete with chic modern china, glass and silverware and proper food (not the conventional soup and rubber pheasant). Ceramicist Peter Ting already has royal connections, having created a state gift to the president of Brazil from Queen Elizabeth II and worked with the Prince of Wales on state gifts and "Topiary design" for the Orchard Room at Highgrove. Ting is then a natural candidate to provide the royal dinner service. His Constellation Manhattan is the fruit of several years of work, researching the archives at Royal Crown Derby and reinterpreting the original Chinese blue, red and gold Imari patterns in modern, haphazard form. Ting is far too discrete to give much away but he concedes that "there are too many bland dinner services in the world. With Constellation I want to engage the end user and allow them to be playful." (£47,000 for the 64-piece set.) www.peterting.com