Dangerous levels of radiation found some 25 miles from Japan's damaged nuclear facility raise questions about U.S. emergency-response plans that call for evacuating residents only within a 10-mile radius of such a disaster here.



Just one of the U.S.'s 104 commercial nuclear reactors is within 10 miles of a densely populated city—the Three Mile Island facility near Harrisburg, Pa. But 29 are within 25 miles of such metropolitan areas. And almost half of the nuclear reactors in the U.S. are within 50 miles of a metropolitan area with more than 500,000 people.

Fifty miles was the evacuation zone recommended last week by the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission for Americans near Japan's Fukushima Daiichi plant. That was far beyond the 12-mile evacuation zone Japanese officials had advised.

The U.S. advisory set off a measure of panic in Japan and prompted world-wide discussion about whether officials there were taking proper precautions.

The recommendation for Americans in Japan takes into account circumstances that wouldn't necessarily apply in the U.S., such as the U.S. government's limited ability to help its citizens abroad, said  Michael Golay, a nuclear science professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The NRC didn't respond to requests for comment.



See what 10-mile and 50-mile evacuation zones around U.S. nuclear power plants would look like, and the population that would be affected.

Mr. Golay said he doubted that it would be possible to evacuate a 50-mile radius in and around an urban area in the U.S.. "We're certainly not prepared for it," he said.

The Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works is planning a hearing in mid-April on safety issues related to nuclear plants, including emergency preparedness. 

Concerns over evacuation plans have come up before. A nuclear plant on New York's Long Island was scrapped in 1989 over concerns that it would be impossible to evacuate the area.

The NRC is responding to concerned local and state officials about whether events in Japan have changed assumptions about plant safety, including the 10-mile evacuation zone, which is based on a 1978 federal report on the dangers of a meltdown.

  Robert P. Astorino, the top elected official in New York's Westchester County, sent a letter to an NRC official Friday seeking clarification on what the commission's recommendation for a 50-mile evacuation in Japan meant for his community, home to two nuclear reactors at the Indian Point Energy Center. 

About 20 million people live within 50 miles of Indian Point, which is 35 miles from Midtown Manhattan.

In a conference call Monday, the NRC assured Mr. Astorino the 10-mile emergency zone surrounding the plant was sufficient, but said federal officials continued to review whether changes were warranted, said  Ned McCormack, a Westchester County spokesman. 

The NRC and the Environmental Protection Agency said late Tuesday that a plume of radiation stretching 25 miles northwest of the Fukushima Daiichi plant would have exposed people to more radiation in an hour than a chest X-ray. Experts say that a level of radiation greater than a chest X-ray every hour, when sustained for three days, is dangerous.

  Jim Steets, a spokesman for  Entergy Corp.
ETR


-0.55
%




, which operates Indian Point, said he believed it would be possible to evacuate beyond a 10-mile radius if necessary, but that the plant's current plan doesn't address that possibility. The company might revisit the matter, he said.

On Tuesday, New York Gov.  Andrew Cuomo said the NRC had pledged to make Indian Point its "first and top priority" in a review of seismic risk at 27 nuclear plants across the U.S.

After the Three Mile Island partial meltdown in 1979—the worst nuclear incident in U.S. history and the only to prompt an evacuation—the official evacuation was aimed only at 3,400 pregnant women and children, said  Don Zeigler, a geography professor at Old Dominion University. But some 144,000 people in a 40-mile radius fled, in what is known as a "shadow evacuation."

A shadow evacuation is one of the factors officials at the San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station, 45 miles southeast of Long Beach, Calif., consider in their emergency plans, said  Sara Kaminske, chairwoman of a planning committee there. 

"Our job as emergency managers is to get people out of harm's way," said Ms. Kaminske. 

In an evacuation, she said, sheriff's deputies would set up barricades at pre-established highway entry points to control traffic, then officials would sound sirens and alert residents by phone, email and text messages.