Chris Steineger, a state senator in Kansas, has a plan to cut back government. It starts with his job.

Looking to slash expenses in a time of fiscal straits, Mr. Steineger last month introduced a bill that would reduce the state's legislature to 30 senators from 40 and to 90 representatives from 125.

"Every legislator thinks he or she is so important that we could not possibly get by with fewer of us," said Mr. Steineger, a Republican. "You just simply don't need this many people to make the decisions we make."

Mr. Steineger isn't alone. With states facing big budget deficits and governors proposing deep cuts to education and state medical care, legislators around the country are suggesting they share the pain by reducing their ranks.

In Pennsylvania, state Sen. Elder Vogel, a Republican, introduced a bill that would reduce the state Senate to 30 seats from 50; the state House would fall to 121 representatives from 203. Maine's legislature also would shrink if the state adopts a law introduced by Portland Democratic Rep. Jon Hinck. Minnesota lawmakers have introduced a proposal to shrink their legislature.

Lawmakers offer several arguments for smaller government. In many states, the number of legislators was set in an era before email or even the interstate highway system, which have both made it much easier to see constituents and learn their opinions on state issues. And while legislators' salaries and benefits are a relatively small budget item—the Maine proposal would shave no more than $2.5 million from the state's $6 billion annual budget—getting rid of a few senators and representatives is an important symbolic gesture when states are cutting back on everything from road work to public schools.

"I would like people to understand that we are prepared to take cuts as well as dish them out, and I'm fairly confident we can do that without harming representative democracy in Maine," said Mr. Hinck.

In the recent past, such measures have rarely made it beyond the desks of the legislators who float them. In many cases—such as Maine—shrinking the legislature requires a constitutional amendment that needs backing from a supermajority of lawmakers. A flurry of cuts went through in the 1960s and 1970s, but since 1990 only four states—Idaho, North Dakota, Rhode Island and Wyoming—have decreased the size of their legislatures, according to the National Conference of State Legislatures. 

Legislators and political observers, though, say the latest wave of proposals is more likely to gain traction, given states' looming debt troubles and the desire of both parties to show their willingness to shrink government. 

A precedent exists for shrinking the legislature during times of financial stress: To save money during the Great Depression, Nebraska jettisoned its second legislative chamber and has had a unicameral Legislature since 1937.

Also, with the 2010 Census recently completed, states are getting ready to redraw the Congressional districts. In many states, lawmakers revise state legislative districts around the same time.

"If it's going to occur, it's going to occur now when [states are] looking at redistricting and reapportionment," said Brenda Erickson, a senior research analyst at the National Conference of State Legislatures.

Proposals to shrink state legislatures still face significant opposition. In Connecticut, state Rep. Linda Schofield, a Democrat, recently got a chilly reception to her proposed legislation to cut in half the state's 36-member Senate as well as its 151-member House.

Connecticut has 187 legislators—67 more than California, the nation's largest state, according to research from her office. Even that level is a reduction: Over the past few decades, Connecticut has twice reduced the size of its General Assembly, from 330 in 1960. Ms. Schofield's bill would also increase state legislators' terms from the current two years to four years, saving an estimated $20.5 million in public election dollars every two years.

State Rep. Russ Morin, a Democrat who is co-chairman of the committee that must consider the bill before it moves to a broader vote, said Ms. Schofield's proposal won't be going anywhere this year. "There just was not any support at all from either side of the aisle to move forward with it," he said.

Connecticut's part-time lawmakers earn $28,000 annually and also work day jobs. Mr. Morin, who serves as a staff representative for a public-employee union, said he doesn't think legislators could handle more responsibility.

"If I had double the constituents I had now, there's no way I could work another job," he said. With fewer legislators, "I don't think you could get the average guy [to do the job], which is what I still think people want."

Still, Ms. Schofield said her proposal has received almost universal applause from voters. One of them, Robert Swanson, of Windsor, Conn., wrote her a letter commending the idea. Mr. Swanson, a retired sales representative for a metals company, said in an interview, "We might accomplish a lot more if we had fewer legislators. You'd have less opinions." 

—Keith Johnson contributed to this article.

 Write to  Conor Dougherty at conor.dougherty@wsj.com 