Forgive the Mets if they felt like they'd hopped in Marty McFly's DeLorean and taken a ride back to what was supposed to be the future. 

As recently as 2008, when they were still regarded as realistic contenders in the National League East, outfielder Carlos Beltran and shortstop Jose Reyes were two of the most dynamic parts of the core of a team that was expected to remain among the league's elite. The Mets, of course, have since fallen from that perch, and one of the reasons for their decline was a series of serious injuries to Reyes and Beltran. 

In a 5-2 victory Thursday over the San Francisco Giants, the pair seemed those dynamic players again, as they have for much of this otherwise ugly Mets season. Reyes drilled a two-run triple in the second inning and Beltran slugged a two-run home run in the fifth to back a strong outing by starting pitcher Mike Pelfrey (2-3), who went 7 2/3 innings and allowed just one earned run.

Reyes is now hitting .313 and has stolen 11 bases. His fine play this season has been less surprising than Beltran's. After appearing in only 36 games in 2009 with leg problems and spending time on the disabled list last year because of a thyroid condition and a strained oblique, Reyes did manage to bat .282, steal 30 bases and make the NL All-Star team for the third time.

Beltran, on the other hand, had been a shadow of himself last season; hobbled by chronic knee pain and multiple surgeries, he didn't return to the team until the All-Star break and hit just .255, his lowest average in his six seasons as a Met.

His spring training this year began with questions, as well, as he developed tendinitis in his left knee. Yet Beltran has started 19 straight games and has again become a formidable hitter in the middle of the Mets' lineup. He's batting .292, and his on-base-plus-slugging mark of .913 is second on the team to first baseman Ike Davis. 

"About a week ago, he said, 'Put me in the lineup, and I'll tell you when I can't play,'" Mets manager Terry Collins said. "So we've done that, and he hasn't said a word. He's gone out there and swung the bat great. He's run the bases great. I would say he's healthy."

A minor trend also has aided Beltran's renaissance. Through Thursday's victory, the Mets had 352 plate appearances against left-handed pitchers this season, the most of any team in the division.

 Because the tendinitis developed in Beltran's left knee this spring, it's been easier for him to bat right-handed; in that stance, he can plant firmly on his healthier knee. It's no coincidence, then, that he has hit four of his five home runs while batting right-handed.

Although Reyes and Beltran have returned to form, the Mets are still 13-18 and eight games out of first place. "It's not about two guys," Beltran said. "It's about 25 guys going out there and playing the game hard and finding a way to win ballgames. That's how I see it."

Closer Francisco Rodriguez, who tightroped his way to his seventh save by loading the bases in the ninth inning Thursday, pointed out that the Mets have been without two other key offensive players for much of this season: outfielders Jason Bay and Angel Pagan. (Bay had missed time with an strained rib cage; Pagan is on the disabled list with a left oblique injury.)

Their absences, Rodriguez said, have muted the impact of Reyes and Beltran. "That's a big difference," he said. "We're supposed to be better. We've just got to pick them up."

 Write to  Mike Sielski at mike.sielski@wsj.com 