NEW DELHI --India's Rural Electrification Corp. has said it plans to raise $1.5 billion through bonds and loans in various currencies in the current financial year, which began April 1, to hedge against fluctuations in the foreign-exchange market. 

The growth momentum in Asia's third-largest economy has boosted demand for retail and corporate loans. Demand for credit from the infrastructure sector, especially the power segment, is driving the profits of companies such as state-run Rural Electrification, which lends to electricity projects in villages. 

The lender plans to raise about $750 million by August, including $200 million in Samurai bonds and $200 million via bonds denominated in Swiss Francs, said H.D. Khunteta, the company's interim chairman. The issues would have an option to retain another up to $100 million if the bonds are oversubscribed, he added. 

"We are waiting for RBI [Reserve Bank of India] approval for raising these bonds," Mr. Khunteta said. "We want to maintain a basket of different foreign currencies. It will help us in hedging." 

Recent hikes in key rates by the central bank and a cash crunch in the banking system have pushed local borrowing costs higher than offshore rates, raising the gap between local and overseas credit costs. This has led Indian companies to increasingly seek options to raise money abroad. 

Also, volatility in global currencies due to uncertainties in the advanced economies has prompted companies like Rural Electrification to diversify their currency exposure and mitigate risks. 

Nomura Holdings Inc., Mitsubishi UFJ Morgan Stanley Securities Co., Deutsche Bank AG and Barclays will manage the Samurai bond issue, Khunteta said. The lender has also appointed UBS AG, Credit Suisse Group AG, Deutsche Bank AG and RBS for its issue of bonds denominated in the Swiss Franc. 

The company plans to borrow another $300 million from Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ Ltd. and is looking for yen-denominated loans, he said. 

Mr. Khunteta said it is looking to raise 15 billion rupees ($332 million) through a private placement of bonds with India's largest insurer, Life Insurance Corp. of India. 

Rural Electrification had raised $1.2 billion in the last fiscal year through bonds and loans, he said. 