It was a miracle that actress Victoria Clark, who plays Mother Superior in the musical "Sister Act," found Mother Dolores Hart. 

Two decades ago, Mother Dolores, a Hollywood actress turned Benedictine nun, was pursued by screenwriter Paul Rudnick for inspiration on what would become the 1992 movie "Sister Act." Mr. Rudnick never found her, and though her life bears resemblance to that of the main character in the film (and now the musical), Deloris Van Cartier, she did not, in fact, provide that inspiration. But 20 years later, who would have thought it possible that "Sister Act" would come calling again, and this time, Mother Delores's life would play that inspirational role—but for an entirely different character in the story. 

"Not only had I found the right order, but I found the exact same convent and the very person that had helped inspire the movie," said Ms. Clark, who, while doing research for her role of Mother Superior in the musical, had no idea that Mr. Rudnick had visited the Abbey of Regina Laudis in Bethlehem, Conn., where Mother Dolores has lived for nearly 50 years. "It's really coming full circle." 

A striking ingénue with bright blue eyes that still pop against her now monochromatic garb , Mother Dolores once starred opposite Elvis Presley in "Loving You" (1957) and "King Creole" (1958), and later alongside Connie Francis in the spring-break romp "Where the Boys Are" (1960). But at 24 years old, Mother Delores disavowed celebrity and broke off her engagement to fiancé Donald Robinson. Following a promotional event for her last feature film, 1963's "Come Fly With Me," she asked to be driven to the abbey. 

On Saturday night, Mother Delores and a few of her fellow sisters, all dressed in their habits and veils, came to see "Sister Act" on Broadway. They were there to support Ms. Clark, who just earned her second Tony nomination for her work in "Sister Act." (Mother Dolores herself earned a Tony nod in 1959 for her role "The Pleasure of His Company.")

"I think people are going to find a great solace in your presentation when they come," Mother Dolores told Ms. Clark after the performance. "Whether they can explain it or not, they're going to know it in their heart."

During initial rehearsals for "Sister Act," Ms. Clark found herself struggling with her character, a staunch Catholic with God as her only friend overseeing a chorus of singing nuns led by a disguised lounge singer. Just days before previews began, Ms. Clark was in panic mode. While the movie is set in Reno in the early 1990s, the musical takes place in Philadelphia during the late 1970s. "I was trying to figure out what order our nuns could possibly be," she said. "The writers, it wasn't really essential for them to know, but it was essential for me to know. I've got to talk to someone that really knows what this life is like." 

Call it divine intervention, but she happened to find Mother Dolores, and discovered that the nun knew what it takes to create a part. "She is my secret weapon—she is the person that gave me the courage to go ahead and make my character real," said Ms. Clark, adding that she benefited both from Mother Dolores's notes on acting and faith.

It was a little more than a month ago that the two met before evening prayers at the monastery. "She said, 'Do me a favor, don't make her pious.' So we talked about humanity," said Ms. Clark. "She was trying to teach us about how God wants our humanity, not our divinity."

Mother Dolores's battle with peripheral neuropathy, a disorder of the nervous system, had prevented her from meeting Mr. Rudnick two decades ago, and she said she doesn't remember much about the film version of "Sister Act." But she was certainly pleased with the musical adaptation, and posed for pictures with Ms. Clark after the show.

Upon meeting Patina Miller, who plays the title role of Deloris Van Cartier in the show, she said, "The thing we miss all the time is that God wants us to be fully human. And I think that's what the show has really caught so beautifully." 