In 2007,  Credit Suisse Group sold $163.5 million in mortgage-backed securities backed by a virtually empty former Superfund site in North Miami, Fla. Investors didn't even blink at the $475 million appraisal of the property's value.

Now, city officials are moving to seize control of the 188-acre development site. The commercial mortgage-backed securities sold to investors are on track to become the second-biggest flop ever among such securities. Holders of the bonds likely will see little or no principal returned from the deal. 

Negotiations are ongoing, with the servicer overseeing the loan hoping to sell it to the city for $6.5 million. A lawyer for the servicer, Trimont Real Estate Advisors, said his client still could retrieve value, but declined to say how much. 

The development, named Biscayne Landing, is an unusually painful example of overly bullish underwriting used in some CMBS deals near the crest of the real-estate market.

North Miami's move to terminate the lease on the property as soon as this week, citing multiple missed debt payments, shows how much some bubble-era deals still are inflicting pain on investors and lenders. CMBS delinquencies reached a record of 9.39% in February, according to data set to be released Wednesday by Trepp LLC.

Meanwhile, the market for such securities is coming back to life, and with virtually the same structure that helped overheat the commercial real-estate market. Analysts estimate U.S. banks are expected to sell about $40 billion to $50 billion in loans as CMBS this year, up from about $11 billion in 2010.

Analysts said the commercial loans being made now are generally conservative compared with 2007. But loan standards have become less stringent in recent months.

"Transaction structures are becoming more complex and underwriting standards are loosening somewhat," analysts at Standard & Poor's wrote last week about new CMBS deals.

During the boom, CMBS became one of the most popular forms of real-estate finance, with investment banks making loans and then packaging them as securities then sold to investors. 

By and large, such loans were backed by properties already generating cash flow that could be used to pay interest. By 2006 and 2007, though, the real-estate market was so frothy that banks began securitizing loans based on bets that rents or property values would rise. At Biscayne Landing, lenders took the unusual step of basing repayments on projections by developers of what they would eventually build and sell.

"It's just a perfect example of what people were permitted to do back then," said  Manus Clancy, managing director at Trepp. 

In 2009, Credit Suisse effectively closed the unit that made the Biscayne Landing loan. Late last year, the Swiss bank restaffed the commercial mortgage-backed securities unit.  Ben Aitkenhead, who leads the operation, said it would act "prudently," focusing on stable loans and avoiding risky ventures such as land loans.

The two bankers who oversaw the Credit Suisse unit that made the Biscayne Landing loan,  Anthony Orso and  Michael Lehrman, now lead a similar operation at Cantor Fitzgerald. The investment bank and brokerage firm was one of the first to form a new CMBS unit as the market rebounded. They declined to comment.

Biscayne Landing's developer, South Florida-based Boca Developers, envisioned that the real-estate market would support 5,000 condominiums on the site, transforming it into a city within a city with a "Town Center" lined by townhouses and retail shops.

The property sits next to mangroves but is on a former landfill and federal Superfund site. The tract borders a sewage-treatment plant and strip mall. Instead of owning the site, Boca signed a 200-year lease with North Miami, to which the company also pledged $10 million toward a new Olympic sports-training facility. 

The project won a $233 million loan in 2007 from Credit Suisse. Of that amount, $163.5 million was sold as commercial mortgage-backed securities. Credit Suisse sold $35 million of the debt to New York Life Insurance Co. and held the rest.

Investors expected to get their money back as Boca developed the project and paid down the land loan with separate construction loans for the condo towers.

According to a project document reviewed by The Wall Street Journal, Credit Suisse projected that the entire 10-million-square-foot project would be completed by 2015. 

After the bubble burst, no towers were built, real-estate values shriveled, and Boca agreed to turn over the project to lenders. The servicer overseeing the loan hasn't found a buyer, and the city is moving to terminate the lease this week, although talks are continuing. 

  Brian Street, co-founder of Boca, said the loan was underwritten with "conservative" standards, allowing for a modest drop in property values. Other lenders offered similar loan terms, and Boca didn't anticipate the lending market would collapse, he said.

"We saw this as a multibillion-dollar home run for us," he said. "No one could plan for the meltdown that we actually experienced."

 Write to  Eliot Brown at eliot.brown@wsj.com and Lingling Wei at lingling.wei@wsj.com 