 Authorities could take several months to establish the details of an alleged corporate espionage case at Renault, Chief Executive Carlos Ghosn said, adding that he was not sure where the information had been leaked to.  

A senior Ford executive said the auto maker is in preliminary talks with Chinese authorities about exporting more North American-built vehicles to China's fast-growing domestic market. The company started selling Canadian-built Edge crossovers in China earlier this month and said the initial sales response encouraged it to push for more exports. 

 General Motors hired consulting firm Alix Partners to speed up the turnaround of its troubled European Opel and Vauxhall brands, according to a person familiar with the matter. The U.S. auto maker isn't satisfied with the progress of the European restructuring, with the German plants in Kaiserslautern and Bochum facing particular scrutiny, the person said. 

GM and its China joint venture, Shanghai General Motors, signed a two-year agreement worth $900 million to export Cadillac, Buick and Chevrolet vehicles and components to China. 

 Air France-KLM is slated to release the findings of an independent review broadly critical of some of its past safety practices and internal safeguards. The conclusions, which cap a wide-ranging, yearlong assessment by an international panel of eight aviation experts hand-picked by senior Air France officials, according to people familiar with the issue, are expected to be unveiled Monday. 

 Cabin crew at British Airways voted to strike again as the two-year battle between the airline and its staff continues. The union which represents cabin crew fell short of announcing strike dates as it looks to downplay the move because public sympathy is waning.  

British Airways completed its merger with Spain's Iberia Lineas Aereas de Espana. Shares in both companies were suspended Friday, and the merged entity, International Consolidated Airlines Group, will begin trading in London and Madrid on Monday. 

 Industrial & Commercial Bank of China signed an agreement that would make it the first Beijing-controlled financial institution to acquire retail bank branches in the U.S., though regulators could still block the deal. ICBC agreed to acquire a majority stake in Bank of East Asia's U.S. subsidiary. 

U.S. distressed-debt specialist Lone Star is in talks with other lenders to take control of Japan's Tokyo Star Bank for the second time. The fund and other lenders are in discussions with the Japanese private equity fund, Advantage Partners, regarding about 170 billion yen ($2.06 billion) worth of loans that it took out to buy Tokyo Star, according to people familiar with the matter.

Bank of Montreal began settling transactions denominated in yuan for its North American corporate clients this past week after becoming the first Canadian lender to receive yuan-trade settlement permission from China's central bank. BMO said the new license, granted by the People's Bank of China, lets its corporate clients pay their China-based suppliers directly in the local currency. 

 Bank of America's fourth-quarter loss widened as charges and write-downs weighed heavily on the bottom line and revenue dropped. The U.S.'s biggest bank by assets, reported a loss of $1.24 billion, compared with a year-earlier loss of $194 million.  

Royal Bank of Scotland could save £100 million ($160 million) if it decides to leave an insurance program on bad assets this year. The bank joined the so-called asset-protection scheme in 2009 to protect it against toxic assets. 

General Electric said the economy is continuing to improve as it reported a better-than-expected 51% rise in fourth-quarter profit to $4.54 billion and its highest level of new orders since 2007. 

Spain's Actividades de Construcción y Servicios said it is another step closer to its goal of acquiring a controlling stake in German construction firm Hochtief. ACS said that after its extended two-week offer, which ended Jan. 18, it had 31.6% of Hochtief, an increase of about 960,000 shares.

Schlumberger's fourth-quarter profit rose 31% to $1.04 billion as surging global demand for energy fueled oil-field services, particularly among companies operating in North America. 

 French insurer AXA aims to double the number of its customers at its fledgling banking operation in France to 1.4 million and triple its balance sheet to €10 billion ($13.48 billion) by 2015 by investing €100 million in the next five years.  

China will levy an antidumping duty on imported X-ray security screening equipment from the European Union, effective Jan. 23, China's Commerce Ministry said. The ministry said the antidumping duty rate will range from 3.5%-71.8% and the duty will last for five years.

 A Paris court found former Vivendi top executives Jean-Marie Messier and Edgar Bronfman Jr. guilty of criminal charges related to the French media conglomerate's near-bankruptcy in 2002. The court fined Messier €150,000 ($204,225) and handed him a three-year suspended sentence for misleading investors and misusing company funds during his tenure as the company's chief executive officer. Bronfman, then the vice-chairman, was given a 15-month suspended sentence and fined €5 million for insider trading. 

 U.S. private equity group Mount Kellett Capital Management has bought a 20% stake in the operator of a Vietnamese mining project for $100 million. The Nui Phao mine, which is owned and operated by a unit of listed Vietnamese conglomerate Masan Group, is in Thai Nguyen province, located to the north of Hanoi.  

China Hongqiao Group, a Chinese aluminum producer, plans to raise as much as US$2.2 billion from an initial public offering ahead of its Hong Kong listing on Feb. 11, according to a person familiar with the situation. 

 Rio Tinto said the Australian Treasurer approved its takeover bid for Riversdale Mining, leaving the company with the task of wooing Riversdale's board to close the deal. This approval was the main regulatory hurdle the miner needed to clear its A$3.9 billion ($3.86 billion) offer for Riversdale.  

Novartis's multiple-sclerosis pill Gilenya won the backing of European drug regulators, paving the way for another key market launch of the potential blockbuster medicine. The European Medicines Agency's Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use recommended the orally taken drug be used in Europe at a 0.5-milligram daily dose to treat patients with highly active relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis. 

The same panel turned down two other pills for multiple sclerosis: Merck KGaA's Cladribine and Biogen Idec's Fampyra.

European drug regulators launched a review of French drugs giant Sanofi-Aventis's heart treatment Multaq following two cases of acute liver failure in patients taking the drug. The European Medicines Agency said its Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use will conduct the review. 

Delhaize Group, the Belgian supermarket operator, said it plans to spend €900 million ($1.23 billion) opening new stores and remodelling existing outlets, despite a tough retail environment which saw its same-store sales decline 0.8% in the fourth quarter. 

 Facebook raised $1 billion from investors in a deal arranged by Goldman Sachs that values the fast-growing company at $50 billion, in the social-networking company's largest funding to date. The cash came from a controversial private offering to Goldman's non-U.S. clients that closed Friday.  

 Google, fresh off announcing a management shake-up, will give a $100 million equity award to outgoing Chief Executive Eric Schmidt, who in April will be succeeded by company co-founder Larry Page.  

 Also, the internet giant said it is preparing to test a competing service that offers deals to local businesses such as restaurants, after failing to acquire daily-deals website Groupon. It is also working on a way to allow customers to pay for goods at local shops with their mobile phone, people familiar with the matter said. 

 Spain's Telefonica said it will widen its strategic partnership with China Unicom (Hong Kong), with each company investing $500 million to increase their cross shareholdings.  

Vodafone Group continues to believe material information has not been provided by Essar Group regarding the merger of its listed company with a privately held Essar holding unit, which in turn holds an indirect 11% stake in the British firm's Indian unit. 