HONG KONG—Pressure to allow expatriate Chinese dissidents to attend a memorial for a prominent pro-democracy politician in Hong Kong is emerging as another test of the former British colony's struggle to maintain freedoms under Chinese rule.

Szeto Wah, who died of cancer last week at the age of 79, was one of Hong Kong's most prominent pro-democracy activists and a key figure in helping smuggle activists overseas after the Chinese crackdown on the pro-democracy movement in Tiananmen Square in 1989.

The government of Hong Kong has embraced him—especially after he split with some supporters last summer to endorse a controversial compromise on the rules for the next round of elections for Hong Kong's government. The city's top officials issued public condolences after his death.

But now, the Hong Kong government finds itself under fire as pressure mounts to allow some of the most high-profile Tiananmen Square student leaders to attend mourning services at the end of the month for the person who saved them.

"I owe him my life," said Wuer Kaixi, a prominent student leader living in exile since "Uncle Wah," as he is known, helped smuggle him out of China, where he was a wanted man.

Mr. Wuer and his fellow Tiananmen Square protester Wang Dan have both applied to the Hong Kong government to be granted visas to attend the memorial services, he said. 

Neither has heard back, and the government has declined to comment on their cases.

Hong Kong has its own rules and a limited form of democracy but is a part of China and Beijing sets its foreign policy—including control of the borders.

At least on paper, Hong Kong has preserved many of the freedoms denied in the rest of China even after it was handed over from Britain to China in 1997. 

Under the principle of "one country, two systems," it was allowed free speech, and robust courts continue largely unfettered. Guaranteed freedoms and strong rule of law are credited with helping Hong Kong maintain its role as a global financial center and gateway to China. Some critics say those freedoms are beginning to erode.

"This casts a shadow on Hong Kong's free society," said  Joseph Cheng, a professor of political science at City University of Hong Kong. The decision to let dissidents attend the memorial is "made by Beijing. Beijing doesn't want to allow all these overseas pro-democracy types to come to Hong Kong and speak and attract a lot of attention. If they are in the U.S., nobody pays too much attention. If they come to Hong Kong, they attract a lot of attention."

Messrs. Wuer and Wang have said they will keep a low profile while in Hong Kong.

"They should all be allowed to come," Keith Chen, a 32-year-old banker who came to pay respects at a shrine set up next to the Hong Kong legislature's headquarters. "I came here today because [Mr. Szeto] has left so many milestones for democracy in Hong Kong. No one can replace him. He's like a godfather of democracy."

Hong Kong's pro-democracy camp is divided among a half-dozen parties. They vie for directly elected seats that make up half of the city's 60-member legislature. The rest are filled by people who represent industry, trade and professional groups and are generally pro-Beijing.

Hong Kong's top job, the chief executive, is chosen by a small circle of electors and vetted by Beijing. Reformists want a new chief executive and members of the legislature to be elected through universal suffrage.

Mr. Szeto was seen as one of the few who could unify the opposition and some worry about the next generation of leaders now that he is gone.

"Everything he did was for the public. Everything he did was for others. After he goes who will lead?" said Li Shouzhen, a 73-year-old volunteer at the memorial.

 Write to  Shai Oster at shai.oster@wsj.com 