Justine Henin announced her second and final retirement from tennis less than 24 hours before the women's semifinals at the Australian Open. Both Serena and Venus Williams are injured, and it's uncertain when they'll return. Caroline Wozniacki, the world No. 1 in theory, again proved to be something less in practice.

Women's tennis has had no shortage of bad news in recent years, and at first glance, this year's Australian Open seemed like no exception. Yet here's the amazing truth about the women's game at the season's first Grand Slam: Things are actually looking up.

For the first time since Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal started their rivalry, it's the men, not the women, who delivered a dud at a Grand Slam event.

Indeed, if not for the women, this Australian Open would have been a snooze. Mr. Nadal, who could have become the first man to win four straight major titles since the days of the wooden racket, lost in straight sets after suffering an injury. Mr. Federer's pursuit of a 17th major title also ended with a straight-sets loss. The rest of the men's matches have lacked drama—even the five-setters have mostly been uneven and pockmarked with lopsided sets.

The ladies have come to the rescue. Their matches have been more competitive and more dramatic, and they've already made history, with Li Na becoming the first Chinese player, man or woman, to reach a Grand Slam singles final. Francesca Schiavone and Svetlana Kuznetsova played the longest women's Grand Slam singles match ever, at 4 hours and 44 minutes. And unlike the 11-hour festival of aces at Wimbledon last year between John Isner and Nicolas Mahut, the match included lots of wonderful tennis. Ms. Schiavone, the French Open champion whose charm is equal to her exuberant on-court style, saved six match points before prevailing 16-14 in the third set. 

"We are seeing the women playing really athletic tennis and playing really positive tennis," said Martina Navratilova, now a commentator for Tennis Channel.

It's off court, though, where the women have really shown up their male counterparts.

Kim Clijsters, who will play Ms. Li in the final, kicked off the fun by publicly embarrassing Todd Woodbridge, a former doubles player and now a television commentator, about a risqué text message (Mr. Woodbridge said Ms. Clijsters looked pregnant). Ms. Wozniacki, annoyed to hear that some journalists considered her boring, conducted a parody press conference and then took questions on global warming and what she looks for in a potential suitor, among other topics. Two days later she told reporters that she suffered a cut on her leg when she tried to help a stricken kangaroo in a nearby park. The news traveled the globe before she revealed it as a dupe. Ms. Li, who saved match point in the semifinals against Ms. Wozniacki, took her turn at comedy when she explained that she hadn't slept well the night before the match. Why? Because her husband, who is also her coach, wouldn't stop snoring.

But perhaps you prefer dancing to jokes. If so, Germany's Andrea Petkovic will teach you some new moves via YouTube. Or magic tricks? Agnieszka Radwanska, the wiry counter-puncher from Poland, snapped her racket in two earlier this tournament—on a return of serve.

Tracy Austin, the former No. 1, agreed that it has been a while since women's tennis was this much fun.

"So often I've felt like, 'We're really missing Serena and it's not quite what it used to be,'" she said. "Now these other personalities are coming forward. Li Na's interview was adorable. This is the first time a lot of people have seen her and she's funny."

One good tournament will not cure women's tennis of all its illnesses. Even after a poor showing, the men's game still has Messrs. Federer and Nadal, Novak Djokovic, who defeated Mr. Federer in the semifinals, and Andy Murray, who could become the first Brit to win a Grand Slam title since 1936. Mr. Murray is scheduled to play Spain's David Ferrer on Friday evening in Melbourne. Several other young talents impressed at this tournament, from Bulgaria's Grigor Dimitrov, whose flawless strokes remind one of a young Mr. Federer, to Canada's Milos Raonic, who might make volleying fashionable again.

Lindsay Davenport, who is Ms. Navratilova's TV colleague, was blunt about what the women's game needs most: an undisputed leader.

"We have to have at least one great champion," she said. "We've always had that in the history of women's tennis."

But Ms. Navratilova said there's cause for optimism—something fans of women's tennis haven't had in a long time.

"It doesn't happen overnight, but I think we have possibilities," she said.

—Nicolas Brulliard contributed to this article from Melbourne.