RAS JEDIR, Tunisia—Thousands of migrants fleeing chaos in Libya walked into Tunisia through the border checkpoint here on Thursday, as Tunisian authorities and relief organizations struggled to evacuate those who have already been waiting several days.

Milling around the checkpoint was an ocean of migrants—mainly Egyptians, but also Vietnamese, Bangladeshis and Malians—killing time by playing cards or chain-smoking.

"I waited for three days on the Libyan side, and I have been here for two days," said Egyptian Ayman Gallal, lying in a shelter made of suitcases and blankets, as black fumes from burning garbage swirled through the camp.

To help speed up the flow of migrants back to their homes, Tunisia and several European countries have launched a large-scale airlift operation. 

As many as 30 evacuation flights were scheduled to depart from nearby Djerba Airport on Thursday. 

To improve the conditions for those who can't leave immediately, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees is setting up a camp three miles from the border checkpoint. 

Excavators were still bulldozing land on Thursday, but hundreds of white tents already dotted the horizon.

The challenge, UNHCR officials said, was to make sure migrants don't settle here. 

"We have 18,000 people in this camp," said Ayman Gharaibeh, who leads the UNHCR operation here. 

"But about 10,000 to 12,000 more migrants cross the border every day," he added.

Tunisian authorities say some 90,000 foreigners have left Libya through Ras Jedir in a little more than a week.

On the Libyan side of the border, many of those trying to leave on Thursday said they felt threatened and caught up in an internal struggle. A group of Bangladeshi construction workers claimed they had been threatened and robbed of their possessions at knifepoint.

Those who came from the Tripoli area said they feared a looming battle between rebels and pro-government forces in Zawiya. "There could be a big problem in Zawiya," said Mohammed Dalwar, who is from Bangladesh. He and his co-workers wheeled suitcases and carried blankets.

After a brief interrogation by customs, they walked along unpaved paths toward the Tunisian border. A strong wind whipped up sand in their faces.

Ahead of them were a group of Vietnamese who worked for an Italian construction company in Misrata, east of Tripoli.

Three men from Eritrea said they were asylum seekers who had been staying in Tripoli hoping to get refuge in a European country but were returning home. "We are scared from the current situation in Libya," said Kamel Lahad. "One can't even go out of his home."

They and a group of about a dozen Ghanaians said they feared for their lives because antigovernment forces believe they are thugs for hire for the regime. 

"They suspect the president brought blacks, but we are innocent," said Mustafa Mohammed Aziz, one of the Ghanaians. His eyes were bloodshot and he wore a tracksuit emblazoned on the back with the Green Book—a symbol of Col. Moammar Gadhafi's regime. Mr. Aziz said he liked and respected the Libyan leader, but denied having been a mercenary.

Others, including an Egyptian man and an Algerian couple, said they didn't feel threatened by the unrest but were going home because of pressure from relatives who have been watching news about Libya on Arab channels.

Many of the fleeing workers said they were stopped at several checkpoints along the way to the border and had their cellphones confiscated by pro-regime forces who suspected they might be storing footage of recent events in Libya on their devices.

The flow of migrants is testing Tunisia's response capacity in the aftermath of the country's own uprisings that led to the downfall of its autocratic ruler in January.

Many Tunisian officials are new in their jobs, replacing predecessors who were seen as close allies of former President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali, and say they are struggling to learn their new jobs.

"Migrants started arriving en masse two days after my appointment last week," said Nabil Ferjani, governor of Médenine, a town near the border. 

"I meet with foreign ambassadors, I transformed a hall into a camp, I help as best as I can," he added.

In Ras Jedir, the plight of migrants was visible everywhere.

Mohamed Goro, a 40-year-old Malian, said he had to flee Tripoli because some Libyans thought he was a member of Col. Moammar Gadhafi's foreign legion and tried to beat him.

Shoid Uddin, from Bangladesh, said his employer at a construction company ordered him to leave Libya on the spot.

"He kept my passport and on the way, Libyan police took my phone and all my money," Mr. Uddin said. 

The migrants are almost all men, but Zouhir Chakhroun, a doctor who is heading the Tunisian national guard mission at the border checkpoint, says he has seen a few women.

"The camp had its first baby three days ago," he said. "An Egyptian."

—Sam Dagher contributed to this article.

 Write to  David Gauthier-Villars at David.Gauthier-Villars@wsj.com 