WASHINGTON—The Obama administration's effort to win Congressional ratification by July of a free-trade deal with South Korea is in jeopardy due to a stalemate with House Republicans on when to act on stalled trade pacts with Colombia and Panama.

House Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio) wants the pacts with Korea, Colombia and Panama to be considered together. 

President Barack Obama and his top trade negotiator, Ron Kirk, have been reluctant to agree to submit the three deals simultaneously. Mr. Obama and Mr. Kirk have said they want the South Korea treaty ratified by July 1, when a pact between Korea and the European Union takes force, potentially putting U.S. companies at a disadvantage.

The Colombia and Panama agreements were stalled by a Democratic-led Congress, and Republicans now say that unless they link them to South Korea—a deal the Obama administration wants—the two smaller pacts would likely be stalled indefinitely. 

The three pending deals are critical to Mr. Obama's trade agenda, which envisions doubling U.S. exports by 2015. The South Korea pact, worth $11 billion in U.S. exports, is the largest of the three deals by far.

Many union leaders and their Democratic allies in Congress have opposed all three trade deals. Mr. Kirk late last year negotiated changes in provisions of the South Korean pact related to auto trade that won the support of the United Auto Workers and  Ford Motor Co.
F


-0.34
%




 

The trade pact with Colombia has been stalled for years mostly over concerns among union leaders and some congressional Democrats over the Colombian government's treatment of union organizers. 

Administration trade officials say they made progress in meetings with the Colombian government last week toward resolving such concerns. 

Reaching agreement with Seoul on a provision granting more favorable treatment for U.S. automakers took six months. The Colombia pact is more fluid: The administration last month was still surveying trade union leaders on what would satisfy them in a revised agreement. 

An administration official declined Monday to give a time frame for resolving labor issues with Colombia, saying that also depended on Bogota. The official acknowledged the looming impasse, adding that the White House had stepped up its efforts to resolve them both with Colombia and with U.S. unions, whose leaders remain resistant to a Colombia deal. "In Korea we have already completed a strong agreement with broad support" from business and labor, the official said. "So we are eager to move it forward."

The Panama agreement, meanwhile, is being held up awaiting passage of Panamanian legislation dealing with tax inequities and labor protections. But the outstanding issues with the Colombia pact are seen by U.S. negotiators as more thorny. 

In an interview, Rep. Kevin Brady, (R., Texas), chairman of the Trade subcommittee of the House Ways and Means Committee, said he told the White House not to send the Korea pact to Congress for approval without the other two deals. Ways and Means is the likely first stop in the pact's ratification process.

The committee's chairman, Rep. Dave Camp, (R., Mich.) has said he wants to ratify the Korea, Colombia and Panama deals by July. 1.

 Write to  Elizabeth Williamson at elizabeth.williamson@wsj.com 