FRANKFURT—German inflation accelerated in January to its highest rate in over two years, adding to evidence that rising energy and commodity prices are pushing euro-zone inflation further above the European Central Bank's target.

Meanwhile, a top ECB official warned Thursday that rising costs of goods imported into the euro bloc, coupled with higher food and commodity prices, can't be dismissed by central bankers, stoking fears that the ECB may raise interest rates this year. The euro rose on the comments by ECB board member Lorenzo Bini Smaghi. Expectations of higher interest rates tend to push up a currency's exchange rate.

Annual consumer-price inflation in Germany rose to 1.9% in January from 1.7% in December. That is the highest annual gain since October 2008, when prices rose 2.4%, Germany's statistics office said. "As already seen during the course of 2010, the inflation rate in January was led by strong price increases for heating oil and fuel, but also for fruit and vegetables," the statistics office said.

Increases were more subdued than many economists had expected due to heavy postholiday discounts on clothing and lower prices for package holidays.

Still, analysts say the trend in Germany and throughout the euro zone is toward higher inflation as the effects of rising food, energy and raw materials prices filter through the economy. Consumers are already feeling the pinch. In a monthly survey from the European Commission, consumer inflation expectations rose to their highest level in more than two years. If workers are able to negotiate higher wages with employers in response to inflation, it could push prices even higher, in what the ECB calls "second-round" effects.

Inflation across the 17-member euro zone is already at a two-year high of 2.2%, above the ECB's target of just under 2%. Based on the German figures, inflation should rise again in January, economists say.

"If there is any euro-zone country where the risk of second-round effects from energy and food prices is imminent, then it is Germany," said ING Bank economist  Carsten Brzeski. "After 10 years of wage moderation, strong economic growth and dropping unemployment will lead to stronger wage growth this year, increasing the headache" for ECB officials, he says.

German labor union IG Metall is demanding a 6% wage increase for  Volkswagen AG
VLKAY


-2.24
%




 staff, in wage negotiations that affect around 100,000 workers.

ECB officials have elevated their anti-inflation rhetoric over the past two weeks, signaling they are willing to raise interest rates if inflationary pressures take hold despite economic weakness in the euro bloc's fragile periphery, including Ireland, Greece, Portugal and Spain.

Mr. Bini Smaghi escalated the tough talk. In a speech, he warned that commodity prices can be "expected" to grow in line with global economic growth rather than the more anemic pace of the euro area, while the benign disinflationary price effect of manufacturing goods imported from developing countries "seems to have ended, particularly in respect of products imported from China."

Core inflation, which excludes food and energy prices on the grounds that they are frequently volatile, is a concept that "is obviously losing its relevance in a global world," Mr. Bini Smaghi said. Core inflation shows an increase in the euro zone of just 1.1% in the past year, half of the overall rate of inflation.

Analysts say that if the ECB were to pay greater attention to core inflation, as the U.S. Federal Reserve does, it would send a signal that ECB officials are willing to look past higher commodity prices and keep interest rates low. But the ECB is offering no such reassurance.

"The ECB could have chosen the easy way out, hiding behind low core inflation rates in the euro zone and downplaying higher headline inflation rates, but they did not," Mr. Brzeski said. 

 Write to  Nina Koeppen at nina.koeppen@dowjones.com and Tom Fairless at tom.fairless@dowjones.com 