Hundreds of cicadas lived in the plane trees outside Jean-Henri Fabre's house in Provence. "Ah! Creature possessed," he despaired in 1879, soon after arriving there, "the plague of my dwelling, which I hoped would be so peaceful!" He thought hard about felling the trees. It would have been a particularly drastic step for the man whose captivating entomological writing had prompted Victor Hugo to dub him the Homer of insects. But Fabre had his limits.

In the end, though, Fabre left the cicada-laden trees intact. Relentless curiosity was the hallmark of this consummate naturalist, and so he soon began investigating the reason for the cicadas' "musical orgies." He decided that only an armchair entomologist ignorant of the ways of living animals could believe—as many did—that this racket was "a lovers' cantata." In 30 years, he had never observed a female insect seduced by a suitor's song. In all that time, he had seen no evidence that she could hear at all. 

In Fabre's "Social Life in the Insect World" (1910), you can read about the characteristically idiosyncratic experiment he devised to test the cicadas' hearing. "I borrowed the municipal artillery," Fabre wrote. "The two engines of detonation were placed at the foot of the plane-trees before my door." He and a few friends counted the number of cicadas they heard and tracked the "volume and rhythm of the song." Then the cannons were shot off "with a clap of thunder." The cicadas weren't in the least disturbed. If they were not actually deaf, Fabre wrote, they were certainly "very hard of hearing." They sing "for the pleasure of feeling themselves alive," he concluded. "I see only their peculiar means of expressing the joy of living, the universal joy which every species of animal expresses after its kind."

John Himmelman doesn't mention Fabre in "Cricket Radio," his engaging, knowledgeable portrait of "night-singing insects," which he clearly enjoys listening to much more than his predecessor did. This modern-day naturalist seeks them out in fields and backyards, on beaches, and at roadsides. But his interpretation of what he hears is decidedly less romantic. "There was no joy in their song. There were no celebrations; nor was there sadness or sorrow," he writes. "These players were throwing everything into propagating their species, and not by choice. They are hardwired to do so."

 By John Himmelman  Harvard, 254 pages, $22.95

"Cricket Radio" is the companion of a field guide to the night-singing insects of northeastern North America that Mr. Himmelman published, with the illustrator Michael DiGiorgio, in 2009. Where the field guide provided the "how" of locating and identifying these often inconspicuous animals, "Cricket Radio" offers Mr. Himmelman's answers to the "why" questions—why do insects sing and why should we listen to them?

His answer to the first question won't surprise anyone familiar with popular biology. Nature is a struggle for existence, and insects—like birds and many other animals—call to attract the best mate, to sound the alarm against predators and to claim their territory. Singing is functional behavior in the service of reproduction and species survival, Mr. Himmelman says: "It's what they do."

Nonetheless, he hears beauty and even philosophy in insect song—but he recognizes that the melancholy or joy he detects is a reflection of his own emotional state, not the animals'. We project our own yearnings and sensibilities because this is how humans are hardwired, he writes, programmed to "be stimulated by things not undertaken for our own edification."

There is little doubt that insect song has a reproductive function. But I'm not as certain as Mr. Himmelman that this is its sole purpose. It is routine these days to explain all kinds of animal behavior—even human sexual desire—by reference to simplified versions of natural selection. Desire is a telling example. It is true that heterosexual desire has a vital reproductive function. But reducing desire to its evolutionary effects doesn't tell us much about the epic and often confounding behaviors that it generates. As many biologists, philosophers and anthropologists have noted, there is an excess to these behaviors that surpasses their function—just as there often seems to be an excess to other related forms of animal communication and display, including birdsong and, for that matter, the songs of insects. These questions have generated a lively and important debate, and while reading "Cricket Radio" I wished that Mr. Himmelman had been more willing to consider what crickets and katydids might contribute to it.

The book's best moments describe Mr. Himmelman's auditory encounters. These why-we-should-listen sections are where his naturalist's knowledge and his passion for his subject move to the fore. "Cricket Radio" is filled with stories of collecting trips in which the author finds previously unseen animals or identifies a species far outside its known range. In these moments, Mr. Himmelman's enchantment with the entomological soundscape is so complete that he can turn the most unpromising site—his Connecticut backyard, for example—into an insect lover's terra incognita, shimmering with possibility.

Mr. Himmelman is keen to help us experience the intimate companionship of singing insects, a pleasure familiar to people in many parts of the world but less known in North America. "Cricket Radio" includes easy-to-follow instructions on how to locate, capture and keep many species at home. But if you fear suffering the fate of Jean-Henri Fabre, you might prefer to visit the author's website (cricketradiobroadcast.com), where you can listen to Mr. Himmelman's recordings of 52 species of North American insects singing their hearts out—until you click them off and go to sleep.

 Mr. Raffles teaches anthropology at The New School. His latest book, "Insectopedia" (Vintage), will be released in paperback later this month. 