NEW DELHI -- The Indian government is examining whether to remove four of six merchant bankers for state-run Steel Authority of India Ltd.'s follow-on public offering after they engaged in rival Tata Steel Ltd.'s recent share sale.

Steel Secretary P.K. Misra told Dow Jones Newswires Monday that a decision on the matter is likely in a day or two.

"We have sought the advice of the Department of Disinvestment on whether to remove the four bankers from handling SAIL's share sale due to a conflict of interest," he said.

SAIL, India's largest steelmaker by local output, has served notices on SBI Capital Markets Ltd., HSBC Securities and Capital Markets (India) Pvt. Ltd., Deutsche Equities (India) Pvt. Ltd. and Kotak Mahindra Capital Co., asking them to explain whether handling the share sales of two rival companies isn't a conflict of interest.

Last week, Tata Steel raised 34.77 billion rupees ($762.5 million) through a follow-on offering.

Mr. Misra said even if the four bankers were to be removed, it won't delay the share sale process as new managers can be hired shortly.

The share sale "is possible by the third week of February," he said, adding that the timing of the offering will depend on stock market conditions and how soon the dispute is resolved.

Separately, SAIL Chairman C.S. Verma said the timing of the share sale hasn't yet been finalized, but it will be before March-end.

The federal government plans to divest a 10% stake in SAIL, while the state-run company will issue additional shares worth 10% of the expanded equity base in two tranches.

Both tranches together are expected to raise a total of 180 billion rupees. The government now holds an 85.82% stake in the steelmaker.

While the federal government will use its share of the proceeds to finance social development projects, SAIL will use the funds to part-finance its expansion plan to almost double its production capacity to 23.46 million tons a year by March 31, 2013.

SAIL is among the several state-run companies in which the government plans to sell a part of its holding to raise 400 billion this financial year till March.

 Write to  Rajesh Roy at rajesh.roy@dowjones.com 