PARIS—Commercialism and modernism have created our current stereotype about the artist, whom we tend to view as a mixture of cunning entrepreneur and Romantic hero—Jeff Koons meets Vincent van Gogh. Move the parameters a bit and new categories emerge—or rather, re-emerge. 

For centuries, artists were, in effect, bureaucrats, trained at official art academies in the cunning statecraft of painting and sculpture. In the last century, the van Gogh precedent expanded outward to include a number of untrained mental patients, whose obsessive, primitive work, created in actual asylums and ignored by everyone but its creators, was named "art brut," or outsider art. The academic and the outsider meet up in the figure of 18th-century German-Austrian artist Franz Xaver Messerschmidt—establishment sculptor, reputed lunatic and unclassifiable star of the moment on two continents.

In the last decade or so of his life, Messerschmidt (1736-83) created a series of highly unusual busts, called "character heads," depicting extreme emotional or physical states and bearing odd, descriptive titles, coined by an anonymous cataloger, like "The Vexed Man," "The Incapable Bassoonist" and "Afflicted with Constipation." A product of Vienna's Academy of Fine Arts, he developed a rogue streak—prompted, according to some theories, by a nervous breakdown, or even outright psychosis—and left the Hapsburg court behind, completing his series in the provincial Austrian outpost of Pressburg, now Bratislava. Around 50 of these heads survive, and they show all the discipline of a classically trained artist, with all the feeling, or perhaps deflected insight, of a modern artist-madman. 

Unexhibited in Messerschmidt's lifetime, ignored for a century after his death and now highly valued works of what could called proto-Modernism, the busts were the subject of a broadly celebrated show this past fall at New York's Neue Galerie. The show has reached the Louvre in an expanded version, featuring some 30 works, and Parisians are showing up in droves.

A star of the Louvre show is Messerschmidt's first important commission: a traditional late-Baroque bust of Austrian Empress Maria Theresa, created in 1760. The bronze work, on loan from Vienna's Belvedere Palace, is a precise starting-point for the weird mastery, and downward professional spiral, that would come later. It is also crucial to know that monumental bronze was Messerschmidt's first material, which then gave way to the softer stone and metal alloys he used to capture the grimaces, yawns and apparent yearnings of his character heads.

Neue Galerie audiences felt a kinship with Messerschmidt's faces, rendered centuries ago but at home in the anguish and exaltation of a modern city. Parisian audiences, surrounded by the static splendor of the Louvre itself, have another experience waiting for them. Created in the dying days of the ancien régime, these character heads are sharp previews of revolutionary tumult, and an authentic, bracing corrective on the cold camouflage of French classicism.

 Until April 25  

  www.louvre.fr  