By Patrick O'Brian (1978)

This fifth of 20 historical novels in Patrick O'Brian's addictive Aubrey-Maturin series imagines a nightmare. As though staying afloat in seas as tall as skyscrapers and as powerful as locomotives is not daunting enough, Capt. Jack Aubrey and the H.M.S. Leopard face the larger Dutch man-of-war Waakzaamheid in the furious waters off the Cape of Good Hope; Aubrey is outgunned and outsped by a ship determined to sink him. The imperial beef between Holland and England in the early 19th century is expressed by the mad exchange of cannon fire between nine-pounders and stern chasers—war is deadly farce, as relentless as a horror movie. The two ships duel for days, through sleet and under moonlight, blazing away at each other, adjusting their aim for elevation as the ships rise to the crests and wallow in the troughs of mountainous seas. Finally the Leopard hits home, and Aubrey sees a "vast breaking wave with the Waakzaamheid broadside on its curl," mortally wounded, sinking in a "turmoil of black hull and white water." Six hundred sailors sunk.

Edited by Charles W. Domville-Fife (2007)

This revised edition of a collection of seamen's memories, first published in 1938, is enhanced by the addition of Robert Foulke's remarkably comprehensive essay on the life and literature of sail. The range of stories gathered by Charles W. Domville-Fife is vast, giving accounts of seasickness, noxious grub, the cruelty of bully mates, the sweat-soaked boredom of the doldrums, petty and festering quarrels that turn deadly, and the pure terror of being battered by squall-driven sleet in the latitudes of the Roaring Forties and below, unto the Howling Fifties and Screaming Sixties. Read Gerald Fort Buckle, aboard a ship named the Leyland Brothers, driven by gales from Cape Horn to the Antarctic Circle: "We had so much ice on board that the ship became completely enveloped. There was not a mast, spar, rope, or inch of the deck visible, and the life-lines were so coated with ice that it was about as much as one could do to get an arm over them."

By Rockwell Kent (1924)

Rockwell Kent CAMEhonestly by his best-known work, the extraordinary woodcut illustrations for a 1930 edition of "Moby-Dick." Early in the 1920s he had steered a sailing dory named Kathleen through the planet's most awful waters. In his account of the harrowing trip, "Voyaging: Southward From the Strait of Magellan," the woodcuts lavishly distributed through the story conspire with his bravura prose to refresh the derivation of "straitened" circumstances and convey the "spirit-stirring glamour of the terrible." Hail, fog and howling williwaws blasting through jagged seaside peaks accompany Kent as he sails into 300 miles of terror marked by such place-names as Famine Reach, Desolation Bay and Last Hope Inlet.

By Bruce Chatwin (1977)

Tierra del Fuego, the wild tip of Patagonia overlooking the Strait of Magellan, was called Fireland in English for the smoke signals that Magellan observed being used to summon natives to rob and repel aliens. "In Patagonia"—Bruce Chatwin's eclectic jamboree of storytelling, anthropology, legend and polemic—is hostile to the those European despoilers so reflexive in their contempt for "savages." The shore-dwelling Fuegian savages used a lexicon of more than 32,000 words that was a "labyrinth of the particular," Chatwin says, including names "as complex and precise as Linnaean Latin of everything that swam or sprouted, crawled or flew."

By Joshua Slocum (1900)

Here is the best book I know about sailing, not to mention danger, solitude, fear and forbearance. Joshua Slocum's three-year journey undertaken in 1895 was the first solo circumnavigation of the globe, but that achievement is incidental to the thrill of this story. Slocum had been at sea for 35 years as an ordinary seaman, mate and master before embarking on his adventure. In his life, he had suffered shipwreck and mutiny and been tried for murder. Alone in the Strait of Magellan, battered for weeks, he experienced an epiphany and came to appreciate nature's blank indifference. He learned, in a way he makes his readers experience, to accept with equanimity—relish, even—freak waves, foul currents and being blown back after inching forward, only to inch forward again.

—Mr. Wolff's "The Hard Way Around: The Passages of Joshua Slocum" was recently published by Knopf.