It's not exactly unusual to see Arab demonstrators waving banners that opine heatedly on the tactics employed by the Israeli military. But there was something unique about the one held by a crowd of antigovernment protestors in the Syrian city of Homs last week.

As thousands braved the brutal crackdown by members of President Bashar Assad's military that has killed hundreds of unarmed protestors, a small group boldly held up a sign that read, in Arabic: "We urge our heroic armed forces to use rubber bullets, just as the Israelis do."

The people of Homs are renowned for a mordant sense of humor in adversity, and this plea for a hint of self-restraint from their oppressors had more than a touch of irony about it.

But think for a moment what the sign represented, even as a drop of acid humor. Here was the Arab Street, that clichéd proxy for popular Middle East opinion, calling not for the destruction of Israel but for Arab rulers to behave more like Israelis.

For all the angst and uncertainty about the revolutions sweeping the Arab world, the mocking plea, captured in Arabic newspapers throughout the region, encapsulated better than anything the essential, hopeful truth about the events of the last few months.

For much of their modern history Arab leaders have blamed the Israelis—and their backers in the West—for most of their ills. If only Israel would end its illegal occupation of Palestine, they claimed, it would draw the poison from the Arab world's politics, freeing up Arab peoples to advance toward modernity. It's of a piece with a much longer self-exonerating narrative. For seven centuries the Arabs have laid the blame for their failures at the feet of others: Crusaders, Ottomans, Persians, British and French colonialists, Americans, Jews.

The Arab Spring has shattered this organizing mythology of Arab dysfunction. "For the first time, it is not about us," says a senior Western diplomat in the region. "For the first time in 700 years, it is not some outsider who is to blame."

Of course a single poster doesn't turn an Arab Spring into a Summer of Semitic Love. When the hurly-burly is done in the Middle East, with whatever consequences for the various regimes, you can rest assured that loathing of Israel will remain the constant. It is a reasonable worry that the unfolding unrest in the region will pose a renewed threat to the security of the Jewish state and those who support it. Israel's leaders and their allies in the U.S. and elsewhere feel an understandable chill in the events in the Arab world.

But there is much more reason for hope in what is happening on the streets of Tunis, Cairo and Damascus. As unpredictable as it may be in the short term, the Arab revolutionary moment promises something truly worth seizing: a chance to end centuries of corruption and oppression, to begin the task of building functioning, free, economically dynamic societies.

On a brief trip through the region last week it was impossible not to come away slightly exhilarated by the sense of possibility.

In Egypt, on the day after the death of Osama bin Laden, it was immediately clear how much has changed in the region. Though the al Qaeda leader's demise dominated the news, it was, for most Arabs, a story of oddly historical rather than current resonance. There was something fitting about the sight of the world's most notorious terrorist, in those now-famous home videos from Abbottabad, a prematurely gray-bearded man huddled in a blanket, watching himself over and over on television, a grotesque irrelevance to everyone but himself and his dwindling band of supporters.

"Before Jan. 25 Osama was very relevant. He led resistance to the world order. America was the ally of Mubarak, so bin Laden was the man who challenged that order. After Jan. 25 he was no longer relevant—the people themselves had challenged the order," says Mohamed Salmawy, a columnist and editor at al Ahram newspaper. 

The young Arabs who toppled Hosni Mubarak in Tahrir Square were more effective in 18 peaceful days of protest than bin Laden had been in 18 terrifying years of murder and mayhem. And yet there is risk, of course, that the radical Islamism that bin Laden represented may yet emerge strengthened by the revolution.

In bustling, chaotic Cairo, the Muslim Brotherhood, whose Islamist message was muffled for 30 years by Mubarak's regime, certainly has an Arab Spring in its step. The organization has moved up in the world, literally as well as figuratively, occupying shiny new headquarters in an uptown district that look for all the world like the home of a hedge fund in London's Mayfair—if you ignore the Brotherhood's signature green badge out front depicting crossed swords beneath a Koran.

The deputy leader Essam El Arian smilingly declines to offer any specifics on what the Brothers would actually do if they entered the government after this autumn's elections. And it's clear that the Brothers are not the wholly benign philanthropists some would have us believe. Their fraternal co-existence with Hamas in Gaza should attest to that.

But neither are they Khomeinists, as some fear, and Egypt is not Iran. The mood among their fiercest opponents in Egypt is: Bring them on. Let them try to sell a message of radical Islamism to the people who brought down the old regime in a secular revolution. 

"Excluding the Muslim Brotherhood is the best thing we can do to make them more powerful," says Hossam Bahgat, executive director of the Egyptian Institute for Personal Rights, one of the Tahrir Square protestors. 

Or as Jamal Khashoggi, a Saudi writer and broadcaster, puts it: "What do you think would happen if some Muslim Brother became minister of tourism and said something inflammatory that costs 50,000 jobs? The people will be in the streets." 

This hints at another reason for optimism about the Arab Spring. It promises to replace the ossified Arab conversation about exploitation, repression and religious struggle with that mainstay of discussion in democratic society—the thrilling banality of jobs, growth, housing, education.

How far will the revolutionary fervor reach? Alarmed at what had gone in Tunisia, Egypt and Libya, the less brittle Arab regimes have shored up their own defensive positions. In Saudi Arabia, the response might be termed "handout and crackdown." Tens of billions of oil dollars have been distributed to the people, while new rules restrict the freedom of expression that has been steadily rising in the kingdom.

But while there is no prospect of a Saudi revolution in anyone's near future, there are encouraging signs that even there, a country that for decades has toiled under the crushing medievalism of Wahhabist religious orthodoxy, change is coming. Driven by the modern social networking technology that helped to fuel discontent in Egypt, Tunisia and elsewhere, a babble of voices is now challenging the old order.

In Riyadh I met Eman al Nafjan, a 30-something whose Saudiwoman's Weblog is widely read. Her tweets—ironic observations on the stifling absurdities that Saudi women deal with daily—have more than 11,000 followers. 

Four decades ago, the literacy rate among Saudi women was just 5%. Today 60% of college students in the kingdom are women. It is simply impossible to imagine that this sort of social change, allied with technological advances, will not result in political change soon.

The tinder has been lit in the Middle East. No one knows how far and how fast the fire will burn. It will surely singe and perhaps even torch some of the West's own interests in the region. Its strategic implications could mean deeper tensions with Israel and with Iran, itself a regime warily at risk of a similar uprising.

But, after decades of skepticism in the West about the possibility and risks of popular rule in the Arab world, the way seems to be lit for democracy.

In Benghazi last week, anti-Gadhafi protestors were waving an assortment of flags—the old Libyan flag, the French tricolor. One of my colleagues asked why there were no American flags. It's easy to fashion tricolors, they explained—three pieces of cloth stitched together. The Stars and Stripes requires too many scarce materials in varied shapes and colors.

They used to burn the American flag on the Arab street. Now they only wish they had the fabric to create it. 