OTTAWA—The Canadian economy contracted unexpectedly in February, dragged down by a sagging manufacturing sector and shrinking at its sharpest pace since May 2009.

The weaker-than-expected performance underscores that while the country's economic recovery has appeared increasingly entrenched, it remains fragile. Prime Minister Stephen Harper has tried to frame the current federal, parliamentary election on May 2 as a referendum on the economic stewardship of his minority Conservative government. 

Gross domestic product, the sum total of goods and services produced in the country, fell 0.2% to C$1.26 trillion (US$1.32 trillion), marking the first decline in five months, Statistics Canada, the government statistics agency, said Friday.

The consensus call was for economic growth to come in flat, after growth of 0.5% in each of the two prior months. Those previous figures weren't revised. On a year-on-year basis, GDP grew 2.9% in February. 

The GDP data suggest first-quarter output may not meet the Bank of Canada's latest forecast of 4.2% growth. 

  Derek Holt, vice-president of economics at Scotia Capital, said Canadian GDP would need to expand 0.3% month-over-month in March to match the Bank of Canada's 4.2% forecast for first-quarter annualized growth. 

"The Canadian economy appears to be losing some steam," said  Diana Petramala, economist with TD Bank. She said the February drop can be attributed to the "sharp slowdown" in U.S. economic activity in the first three months of 2011. On Thursday, U.S. data indicated U.S. economic growth slowed to 1.8% annualized in the first quarter, although analysts suggested this was due to temporary factors such as surging energy prices and nasty winter weather.

The manufacturing sector shrank 1.6%, the sharpest decline since March 2009, during the depths of the global recession. This time, it was dragged down mainly by manufacturers of motor vehicles and parts, machinery and fabricated metal products.

As a result, overall output of goods-producing industries shrank 0.6%, the first decline since last September. 

Construction output edged up 0.1% from gains in non-residential building, and engineering and repair work. Mining and oil and natural-gas extraction was flat. Growth in mining and support services were offset by a decline in oil and gas extraction.

Wholesale trade shrank 1%, the most since May 2010, led by motor vehicle wholesalers. 

The declines in manufacturing and wholesale trade drove down transportation services. Overall output in transportation and warehousing declined 0.7%. Retail trade rebounded 0.6%. Output in the finance and insurance sector grew 0.2%.

 Write to  Nirmala Menon at Nirmala.Menon@dowjones.com 