LANCASTER, S.C.—House Republicans are preparing to propose a major shake-up of the Medicaid health-care program for the poor, a first step in their drive to overhaul federal entitlements, according to a member of the House Budget Committee.

Rep. Mick Mulvaney (R., S.C.) told constituents at a town hall meeting in Lancaster on Thursday that the committee soon would unveil a budget resolution for fiscal 2012 that recommends revamping Medicaid to allow states more latitude in spending federal money.

"We're getting ready to offer people the first real, substantive discussion on a major entitlement—Medicaid—in my lifetime," the congressman said.

Rep. Paul Ryan (R., Wis.), the budget committee chairman, is expected to release his budget proposal by the first week in April.

A spokesman for Mr. Ryan declined to comment on whether a Medicaid overhaul would be included in the GOP budget proposal, but he confirmed that Mr. Ryan's budget plan would call for entitlement savings and include some recommendations on how to achieve them.

With voters and lawmakers worried about high federal deficits, Congress has focused so far on making cuts to the one-third of the federal budget that is discretionary spending—programs such as defense, education and foreign aid that are funded by annual appropriations.

Some lawmakers say significant deficit reduction can only be accomplished by reining in entitlements, such as Medicaid, Medicare and Social Security. Republicans have been saying they will propose big reductions in those programs in the fiscal 2012 budget.

But increasingly, promises to make those savings have become a talking point in negotiations over a spending plan for the remaining months of 2011. With conservative activists disappointed that more spending cuts aren't being made in this year's budget, Republican leaders have been promising cuts will come to entitlement programs in 2012.

Currently, the federal government provides Medicaid funds to state governments to provide health care to lower-income people, but it sets criteria for how the money can be spent.

Under the House GOP plan, states would be given block grants to spend the money how they determined best, Mr. Mulvaney said. The money likely would still come with basic "strings attached," such as rules to ensure that it went to health care services for the poor, he said.

Even if the proposal were adopted by the House, it likely would run into resistance in the Democratic-controlled Senate and from the White House. While Democrats have spoken generally about overhauling entitlement programs, they would be almost certain to oppose moves to change the Medicaid program as Republicans are envisaging. Still, the plan would allow Republicans to make good on campaign promises to attempt to rein in spending. 

The proposal reflects a major departure from the current policy. Because it calls for a reduction in Medicaid spending, it could derail an expansion of Medicaid in 2014 that is a cornerstone of the new, Democratic-backed health-care law.

"This is yet another indication that a very significant part of the entitlement savings in the Ryan budget will come from severe cuts in health care for low- and moderate-income Americans,'' said Ellen Nissenbaum of the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, a liberal-leaning research group.

Mr. Mulvaney said that Republicans haven't identified a specific savings figure that could be realized from the proposed Medicaid overhaul.

Negotiators from the House, Senate and White House have been working this week to narrow differences between a House bill that would cut $61 billion from current spending over the remaining months of fiscal 2011 and Senate Democrats' plan to cut no more than the $10 billion.

Sen. Charles Schumer (D., N.Y.) said in a television interview Friday that both sides have moved closer on the overall spending figure, but that they were still at odds over which federal programs should be cut.

But Rep. Eric Cantor of Virginia, the No. 2 House Republican, Friday called Mr. Schumer's characterization "completely far-fetched,'' and he faulted Democrats for failing to produce a comprehensive alternative to Republicans' proposed budget cuts. 

 Write to  Corey Boles at corey.boles@dowjones.com 