Good news for parents who start twitching at the first note of "It's a Small World": Adventure outfitters have been busy introducing new, family-friendly adventure outings and resurrecting similar itineraries they cut during the recession. From a rafting trip in Costa Rica to a campout on the Galapagos Islands, here's a sampling of ways to keep your gang's adrenaline going. And you thought your wild days were over.

 Galapagos Up Close 

This primordial archipelago offers the chance to walk among penguins, giant tortoises and blue-footed boobies that have developed no fear of humans. But for intrepid travelers, the typical way to approach the Galapagos—via cruise ships that visit strictly controlled wildlife-viewing areas for short periods—leaves something to be desired. Row Adventures, which pioneered "land-based" Galapagos trips, has just introduced family departures that include two nights of camping out on a beach on San Cristobal Island and stays in small, locally owned hotels on Isabela and Santa Cruz. Sea kayaks are a primary means of getting around. Swimming with sea lions, snorkeling among fluorescent fish and hiking up a recently active volcano's still-steaming rim included. 

  From $3,890 per person for 10 days; children 7 and up recommended, $3,790; rowadventures.com  

 Tour de South of France 

Southwest France might not exactly qualify as an exotic destination, and the accommodations on this Backroads trip are fabulously cushy—two nights are spent in a 14th-century château with tennis court and heated pool. But it's definitely an active jaunt, with up to 42 miles a day of cycling along the Dordogne River, past walnut groves and ancient villages built into steep cliffs. Better still, your offspring can pedal as much (or as little) as they like, hopping into the backup shuttle at any time. En route, there's canoeing on the river and exploring caves filled with prehistoric paintings. 

  From $4,198 per person for six days including most meals; recommended for children ages 9 and up, with prices depending on age; backroads.com  

 Costa Rican Aqua Expedition 

Howler monkeys, eco-lodges and treetop zipline tours have made Costa Rica a must-do destination for nature-loving families. (It doesn't hurt that the Central American country is also easy to get to.) A new trip from paddling specialist O.A.R.S. adds on the excitement of whitewater rafting on Class III and IV rapids. Families take to the warm, celadon-colored Rio Pacuare on inflatable rafts that seat six plus a guide. The second half of the trip unfolds on the Caribbean side of the country, with leisurely kayaking along rain-forest creeks. On the last evening, a naturalist leads families to a secluded beach lapped by bioluminescent waves to watch 300-pound sea turtles lay their eggs in the sand. 

  From $1,899 per person for six days; children 14 and up; oars.com  

 Iceland on Foot  

Exploding geysers, erupting volcanoes and steaming rivers give this North Atlantic country a "Lord of the Rings" quality that appeals to kids (though they may find it a challenge to sound out the multisyllabic names—Eyjafjallajökull?). Butterfield & Robinson's 12-seat van does a 500-mile loop from hip Reykjavik, placing you at remote lodges for hikes through the rugged landscape. In the south coast Highlands, climb the volcanic crater of Mount Hekla, then relax in a river whose temperature hovers in the 80s. Ferry to the Westman Islands, where the largest puffin colony in the world flourishes and the ground is still warm from a volcanic eruption in 1973. Farther north on the Snaefellsnes Peninsula, waterfalls and caves await. 

  From $7,495 per person (from $5,996 per child) for seven days; ages 8 and up; butterfield.com  

 Thai Spice 

You can easily hole up in a fancy resort with forays off-site for elephant rides and visits to Buddhist temples. But this new family trip from REI Adventures promises a deeper cultural experience. A guide leads groups of no more than 16 from Bangkok north to Chiang Mai. Along the way families ride bamboo rafts, bike through rain forest, frolic in waterfalls, plant trees with local villagers, light rice-paper lanterns, participate in a daily alms-giving ritual, spend the night with a family in a mountain village and, yes, ride elephants. Not ready for vacation to end? Opt for the three-day extension in Phuket, for sea-kayaking and beach camping. 

  From $2,375 per person for 10 days including most meals; kids 8 and up, $2,175; rei.com  

 Southern Africa River Ramble 

Many consider Africa the ultimate adventure destination, but that doesn't mean it's not kid-appropriate. Austin-Lehman Adventures has an unusual, largely water-based journey through four countries. From Livingstone, Zambia, head to a collection of thatched cabanas on a lush private island on the Zambezi River—complete with rope swings and fishing rods. Mid-trip you're in Namibia climbing aboard a houseboat for three days of floating down the Zambezi and up the Chobe River to Botswana's Chobe National Park, where you'll see elephants, lions, zebras and giraffes. The final spritzing at trip's end comes courtesy of thundering Victoria Falls on the border of Zambia and Zimbabwe. 

  From $3,898 per person all-inclusive for nine days; children 7 and up; austinlehman.com  