After the Beatles packed it in, Paul McCartney put his worn Höfner bass in storage. Decades later, when he decided to play it again, Mr. McCartney flew the bass on the Concorde (in its own seat) and had it delivered to Flip Scipio for restoration. Looking at another battered Höfner just delivered to his shop, Mr. Scipio said, "I could make a career just out of fixing these." 

Many luthiers, as guitar-makers are known, grudgingly do repairs for steady income, putting their real efforts into the crafting of new instruments. The fix-it-up work can be a trap, taking all one's time and leaving the grand ambitions sidelined, like a would-be fashion designer sewing hems and cuffs at the dry-cleaners. 

Mr. Scipio, 52, embraces his work as a repairman, in part because it has introduced him to a rarified clientele: When guitarists such as Keith Richards, Carly Simon, or Ry Cooder are on tour and need a fractured axe fixed, Mr. Scipio is a go-to technician. 

The work also informs his guitar making. Rare and wonderful instruments come through his workshops in Brooklyn and Martha's Vineyard, Mass., which lets him study them from the inside out, examine the details of different builds and master different makers' little hidden tricks of construction. It's information he's used in making guitars for Paul Simon, Bruce Springsteen and Jackson Browne.

Mr. Scipio also knows how to listen to his clients to understand exactly what sort of sound they're looking for. A decade ago, Paul Simon wanted an electric guitar built to handle a special high tuning. Mr. Scipio took the body of an old Fender Stratocaster-shaped guitar body and fitted it with necks of different materials until he found the right resonance. 

Sensing he was on the right track, Mr. Scipio took the skeletal instrument to Mr. Simon without doing any finish work. "I really loved it," Mr. Simon told a documentarian making a film about Mr. Scipio. "I said stop right there. Just leave it the way it is because it's perfect in its sound." The singer used it to record the album "You're the One," even putting the guitar on the back cover of the CD.

Growing up outside Amsterdam in the town of Heiloo, Mr. Scipio said his school guidance counselor "made fun of me for wanting to be a guitar-maker." His father frowned on it as a fancy lacking respectability, but eventually sent his son off to San Diego, Calif., where famed craftsman Bozo Podunavac ran a school of lutherie. "For a while," Mr. Scipio said, "I was able to introduce myself by saying 'My name's Flip and I work for Bozo.' " 

• Flip Scipio's career was born of a youthful trauma. As a kid he had a student-model classical guitar he took everywhere until the instrument succumbed, with long cracks opening in the wood. One day Flip's father, an engineer, made the repairs by slathering the gaps with Bondo, a putty used in auto body repairs. After that, the son decided to learn how to fix and make guitars himself.

• As an instrument-maker, Mr. Scipio likes that guitars can take most any shape and no one bats an eye, as opposed to the rather more formalized expectations that greet makers of violins. "Guitars are sort of the wild west," he said. 

• Mr. Scipio set out to assemble instruments so that they could be disassembled without being destroyed. This is partly as a courtesy to the future repairman, but it also makes possible the mix-and-match exploration Mr. Scipio uses to find new electric-guitar sounds. 

He returned to Holland and opened a guitar-repair shop by the beach, but it was a nudist beach, and Mr. Scipio "didn't get much done." He eventually left to study instrument-making at the London College of Furniture.

When I recently visited his shop in a warehouse building in the Bushwick neighborhood of Brooklyn, Mr. Scipio was sanding the body of a flat-top acoustic guitar. He doesn't make a line of guitars. Each instrument is a one-off, and often his projects are quirky.

He made an archilaud (an oversized, wavy-sided Spanish lute) for Jackson Browne and a baritone guitar for singer/songwriter Leni Stern (who wanted a lower-pitched acoustic guitar so that her strumming wouldn't be in the same range as her singing). Bruce Springsteen challenged him to make an instrument that looked like his usual Fender Telecaster but sounded like a twangy old hollow-body Gretsch.

When it comes to electric guitars, Mr. Scipio is constantly experimenting, scavenging bits and pieces and assembling them until he hits on something that sings. "I'll put the square peg in the round hole and see what happens," he said. He will build, take apart, and rebuild an instrument half a dozen times. Mr. Scipio's electrics sell for anywhere from $3,000 to $12,000. 

With acoustics, Mr. Scipio follows an entirely different method (and charges from $10,000 to $20,000). He begins by drawing an intricate blueprint of the instrument he's going to build, looking for an overall shape with elegant lines and harmonious proportions.

He follows these specifications, but he makes plenty of adjustments along the way. Every piece of wood is different, and he has to tap at it, listening for spots that thud rather than ring. That's where he shaves away at the wood until the whole instrument rings true, which is his ultimate goal, whether the guitar is electric or acoustic.