NEW DELHI—General Electric Co. Chief Executive  Jeffrey Immelt said the U.S. conglomerate will offer technical assistance to the Japanese government as the country, ravaged by an earthquake last week, grappled with a new explosion Monday at a nuclear power plant. 

GE supplied reactor No. 1 at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant about 240 kilometers, or nearly 150 miles, from Tokyo, where concerns have been mounting after an explosion Saturday at the reactor following Friday's quake and tsunami. On Monday, there was a further explosion in the building housing the plant's reactor No. 3, supplied by  Toshiba Corp.
TOSYY


-2.05
%




 

In 4 p.m. trading on the New York Stock Exchange Monday, GE's shares fell 2.2%, or 44 cents to $19.92 apiece.

GE has kept engineers on standby in a Wilmington, N.C., command center, ready to provide assistance to Japanese engineers trying to keep the reactors at Fukushima Daiichi under control in the event GE's help is sought, GE spokesman  James Healy said Monday.

The battle to prevent a meltdown at the plant has suppliers of nuclear technology on edge, amid industry concerns that the dramatic images could set back what it had hoped would be a new wave of nuclear plant construction. The Japanese government and Mr. Immelt said the steel containers surrounding the reactors haven't been breached, a critical element in preventing an even worse situation. 

Meanwhile, GE defended the design of the now-stricken reactor it supplied to Japan 40 years ago, saying its containment system is safe and reliable. Fukushima-Daiichi's unit 1 is equipped with a GE boiling water reactor with a so-called Mark 1 containment system. 

"The BWR Mark 1 reactor is the industry's workhorse with a proven track record of safety and reliability for more than 40 years," said Michael Tetuan, spokesman for GE Hitachi Nuclear Energy. "There has never been a breach of a Mark 1 containment system."

GE and its joint-venture partner  Hitachi Ltd. of Japan have been scrambling to gain a foothold in the race to build nuclear power plants as a clean alternative to fossil fuels and a way to match growing global energy demands. While GE helped pioneer the industry, the GE-Hitachi venture has only won a handful of reactor deals for projects around the world.

One place the partners had hoped to win business was India. GE has been instrumental in supporting a landmark civilian nuclear energy deal between the U.S. and India, which was approved by the Indian Parliament in the summer of 2008. 

But the agreement became bogged down after India passed legislation that placed liability for nuclear accidents on equipment suppliers, something that nuclear-equipment suppliers and legal experts say is out of step with international conventions and other nations' laws, where operators typically are held responsible. 

The U.S. government has been working to alter the impact of the legislation, which several suppliers say is needed for them to consider selling equipment in India. But Japan's experience may embolden those in India who want suppliers to be held responsible. 

Japan's nuclear liability law holds the utilities that operate nuclear plants responsible for all damages. The law, however, contains an exception for cases where "the damage is caused by a grave natural disaster of an exceptional character."

Separately, Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh on Monday announced a review of nuclear reactors in the country in the wake of the problems in Japan. "The government attaches the highest importance to nuclear safety," Mr. Singh said.

India has 20 nuclear power reactors with a capacity of 4,780 megawatts that are operated by the state-run Nuclear Power Corp. of India Ltd. The country aims to expand its nuclear power generating capacity to 63,000 megawatts by 2032. 

The company's chairman,  S. K. Jain, said India's nuclear program will continue unhindered by the accidents in Japan. 

"We are watching the situation closely," Mr. Jain said. "Safety is the overriding parameter," he added. 

—-Andrew Dowell contributed to this article.

 Write to  Santanu Choudhury at santanu.choudhury@dowjones.com and Paul Beckett at paul.beckett@wsj.com 