'To be up to the eyebrows in a great work of literature is such happiness," William Maxwell once said. "I remember crying in Greek over the death of Socrates." Literature was an intimate affair for Maxwell, who served as the New Yorker's fiction editor between 1936 and 1975 and was himself a novelist of note. His tenderness toward books was matched by his tenderness toward their writers, as his voluminous correspondence attests: During and after his editorship, he regularly exchanged letters with New Yorker contributors John Cheever, John Updike and John O'Hara, to name only the Johns. "What There Is to Say We Have Said" is the third volume of his correspondence to appear in print, after collections devoted to Sylvia Townsend Warner and Frank O'Connor. This record of a 50-year friendship with Eudora Welty reveals Maxwell's great gentleness—and loyalty—as both editor and friend.

Maxwell lobbied for years to persuade his New Yorker colleagues to publish Welty's fiction. Then, like a good cop, he protected her from their brasher instincts—erasing their queries from her galleys before forwarding the proofs to her, for example. Like a good maid, he cleaned up her messes so graciously that his corrections come off nearly as compliments. And, possibly against the wishes of his co-workers at the fastidious magazine, he encouraged her to be artfully untidy: "Don't, if you can help it, remember the distinction between restrictive and non-restrictive clauses," he wrote in 1953, regarding revisions to "The Ponder Heart." Maxwell understood the effectiveness of informality—and the principle permeates a story that begins: "My Uncle Daniel's just like your uncle, if you've got one."

Welty's letters, too, often boast a happy haphazardness. After receiving a cake from Maxwell and his wife in 1955, she reported: "Sitting out in the backyard—afternoon, a white half-moon—and your fruit cake inside—me, not the moon, though that speaks for where it could aim at, in its excellence." Poetically chaotic, her sentence restructured itself as she wrote it, reflecting the unfolding moment of its composition.

These letters are, above all, mementoes of moments. In the introduction to "The Outermost Dream," a 1989 collection of his essays, Maxwell noted that a good correspondence tells "what happened—what people said and did and wore and ate and hoped for and were afraid of, and in detail after often unimaginable detail." For Maxwell and Welty, detail seemed as necessary to friendship as it was to fiction. Their letters brim with news about speeches and symphonies, bacon and bird-watching. Both set scenes with painterly flair: "He was huge and looked like a self-respecting pirate with very good gold teeth," Maxwell wrote of a cab driver. 

Each wanted to see what the other was seeing; literally and metaphorically, they enjoyed sharing the same perspective. "Is the view from there just as good? Will I get to see it?" asked Welty in 1965 when Maxwell moved apartments. The friends did manage to see each other, but rarely—Welty lived in Jackson, Miss., and Maxwell in New York—which may explain the slideshow of images lighting up their letters.

Like literary Monets, Maxwell and Welty maintained somewhat wearisome passions for depicting their gardens. When Maxwell consulted Welty on the arrangement of his roses in 1953, he displayed the obsessiveness of a groom seating guests at his wedding reception: "How does this sound to you? 2 climbing Mme. Edouard Herriot by the front wall, with the Eglantine moved to the far corner. Lady Hillingdon between Christopher Stone and the Grand Duchess Charlotte, May Wettern next to the Condesa de Sastago, and Donald Prior behind Frau Karl Drus[c]hki?"

This floral fanaticism almost calls for more judicious pruning on the part of the book's editor, Suzanne Marrs, who has provided the full text of nearly 350 letters rather than excerpting the most compelling parts. Yet the dullness of such passages also speaks to the former privacy of this now-public friendship, reminding us that we are on the outside looking in. It is only our closest friends, after all, who inquire after our rose bushes. The letters of gifted writers often come off as performances for the benefit of future readers rather than the actual recipients. Not so in this correspondence, whose occasional monotony signals great intimacy.

To be sure, familiarity enriched the writers' correspondence from the moment "Mr. Maxwell" and "Miss Welty" transformed into "Bill" and "Eudora," shortly after Maxwell first contacted her to request stories for the New Yorker in the early 1940s. They encouraged each other, worried about each other and even worried about worrying each other. "I am really all right and feel ashamed of sounding as if I weren't," Welty wrote after sharing concerns about an acquaintance's sickness. "Not my health but my friends' had me worried, but not to worry my friends with!" 

Of the two, Maxwell more readily shared personal revelations, and these letters permit us a few close glimpses of him—all more engaging than views of his garden. In a 1983 letter, he recalled his mother's brief disappearance during a childhood shopping expedition: "When I turned around and she wasn't there, it was as if a pit opened in front of me. What tears. There I was far from home. No mother. I sometimes wonder how I got through the remaining seventy years of my life." 

Some of Maxwell's most enduring fiction emerged from the death of his mother when he was 10. In so bleakly narrating this episode, Maxwell sounds like an adult version of Bunny, the inconsolable young protagonist of "They Came Like Swallows" (1937). And, in numerous ways, he was. 

The burden of memory added heft to all of Maxwell's best fiction—including "The Folded Leaf" (1945) and "Time Will Darken It" (1948)—and it weighs on his letters with startling constancy. In 1951, he confided: "A little remembering is all right but too much is a disease I am terribly prone to." Forty-five years later, presumably having forgotten his initial use of the metaphor, he wrote: "Remembering can be a kind of illness, and perhaps I have it."

Edited by Suzanne Marrs  Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 499 pages, $35

But it can be a gift, too: the stuff of literature as well as letters. In the early 1970s, soon after completing "The Optimist's Daughter," Welty sent Maxwell a picture of her youthful self reaching up to touch her grandmother's face. This novel, her most autobiographical work, is an elegy for her father that seems a counterpoint to Maxwell's writings about his mother. She named her protagonist Laurel Hand, a nod to the book's emphasis on gestures and (naturally) flowers. In the letter accompanying the photograph, she wrote: "I know it's what everything you've written is about, the gesture in it that's being so unconsciously made—it's what all I've written tries for now too, and I don't know what much more, what much else, there is, Bill, do you?"

Welty's letter points us toward a unified understanding of their work: Both writers describe the importance, as well as the imperfection, of human contact. In "The Optimist's Daughter," touch can endanger—Laurel's gravely ill father dies after his wife shakes him. In Maxwell's "So Long, See You Tomorrow" (1980), the protagonist both mourns his mother and obsesses over his failure to reach out to another boy who faces tragedy. For the rest of his life he not only suffers from his mother's silence but also berates himself for his own. In their work, Welty and Maxwell studied the failures of the intimacy that defined their own great friendship. 

Maxwell and Welty died in 2000 and 2001 respectively, and their readerships have been dwindling. In "The Outermost Dream," Maxwell wrote that letters could "hold oblivion at arms length." If so, we should be all the more grateful for volumes like "What There Is to Say We Have Said." These loving and revealing letters guide us back to the fiction of both authors, and, as Maxwell wrote Welty in 1980: "Good writers do not die. They simply pass into their works and go right on living."

—Ms. Deutsch's work has appeared in Time, the Times Literary Supplement, Poetry, and other publications.