ATLANTA—Georgia could soon allow the sale of alcohol on Sundays, ending a once-common ban that for many Americans now seems as quaint as a backyard still.

Supermarkets and other opponents have tried for years to change the law in Georgia, one of three states that still prohibits Sunday alcohol sales, a restriction imposed across the U.S. after the repeal of Prohibition. 

More recently, a coalition of Christian groups, conservative politicians and small liquor store owners have managed to keep Sundays dry.

But a state budget shortfall of as much as $2 billion this year, a lingering hangover from the recession, has persuaded leaders in the Republican-dominated state Senate to seek new revenues, including a seventh-day boost from the so-called sin tax levied on liquor, wine and beer sales.

As of last February, Georgia taxed spirits at the rate of $3.79 a gallon, table wine at $1.51 a gallon and beer at $1.01 a gallon, according to the nonpartisan Tax Foundation in Washington.

Lawmakers submitted a bill this week to grant cities and counties the authority to hold local votes to allow Sunday sales. Georgia's new governor, Republican Nathan Deal, said he wouldn't veto the legislation, a break from the position of former Gov. Sonny Perdue, his predecessor.

Several states in the last decade have lifted or modified bans on Sunday alcohol sales. Along with Georgia, only Indiana and Connecticut have such laws on all forms of alcohol, with bills now introduced in all three states to end the prohibition.

Since 2002, 14 states have loosened restrictions on Sunday spirits sales.

 Source: Distilled Spirits Council of the U.S.

Although Sunday sales have long pitted alcohol vendors against religious teetotalers, the fight in recent decades has been between large grocery and convenience store chains on one side, and family-owned liquor stores on the other. 

Chain stores, already open on Sunday, are looking to boost sales. Small liquor stores would have to pay for Sunday staffing, electricity and other costs to compete.

Opponents argue they would not benefit much from lifting the ban. "It will just take existing sales and reallocate them over seven days," said Jeff Walsh, president of Habersham Beverage Warehouse, a family-owned liquor store in Savannah.

Mr. Walsh, 56 years old, said that when Sunday sales were permitted in Michigan, where his parents owned liquor stores, it only meant more working hours and little extra revenue. He added that he was resigned to the Georgia ban being lifted, because legislators believe it will bring in extra tax revenue.

"Any plausible idea to plug that revenue hole will be considered," he said.

Senate Majority Leader Chip Rogers, a co-sponsor of the bill, said he expected it to pass this year. He called the ban "un-American," and said he supported letting people decide in their own communities whether to lift the ban. "Adults ought to be able to make this decision," he said.

Most Christian groups remain opposed to allowing the sale of alcohol on Sundays. Ray Newman, a lobbyist for the Georgia Baptist Convention, which represents 3,600 churches across the state, said he would argue against any expansion of alcohol sales, especially on "the Lord's day." But with Mr. Perdue out of office, he said, he expected the Sunday sales bill to pass.

Groups who support the lifting of the ban argue that Sunday sales would increase tax revenue. "It's a couple million bucks—when every governor is looking for that without raising taxes," said Frank Coleman of the Distilled Spirits Council of the United States, a group pushing Sunday sales.

If the bill becomes law, it is unknown how many communities would vote to lift the Sunday restriction, making it impossible for lawmakers to predict how much new revenue the change would generate.