LONDON—U.K. retail sales fell back sharply in February, suggesting consumer spending continues to be a weak spot in the U.K. economy as Britons struggle against inflation and rising unemployment. 

The Office for National Statistics said Thursday that retail sales volumes fell 0.8% in February from January, a bigger fall than expected, driven by falling sales at department stores and household goods retailers. 

Sales were up 1.3% from February 2010, again weaker than expected. The figures, along with very low readings for consumer confidence of late, add to concerns that the U.K. economy as a whole may have been weak in the first quarter of 2011. 

  James Knightley, economist at ING Groep NV, said the data suggest "the consumer sector will barely contribute to gross domestic product growth this year." 

"We doubt that other components will fill the growth gap," he said. Weak consumer spending, an key crutch for the U.K. economy, contributed to a surprise 0.6% drop in economic output in the final three months of 2010. 

Weakness in consumer spending, a key crutch for the U.K. economy, contributed to a surprise 0.6% drop in economic output in the final three months of 2010. Surveys have shown the U.K.'s services sector, which includes retail and makes up three-quarters of the economy, has struggled to grow in the first few months of 2011. 

Some Bank of England policy makers have suggested that if the economy continues to flounder in the first quarter of 2011, they may delay raising interest rates. 

Economists said February's weakness shows retailers were continuing to pass on a rise in the U.K.'s sales tax that came into effect Jan. 4. Sales in January were boosted by delayed spending, as shoppers returned after December's heavy snowfall. 

But the ONS said January's sales were less strong than previously thought. The estimate for month-to-month sales growth was lowered to 1.5% from 1.9% and the annual rate was cut to 5.1% from 5.3%. 

In February, sales at nonspecialized stores fell 3.2% on the month, the biggest drop in two years. Sales at household goods stores fell 2.5%, continuing a marked decline since the government raised the sales tax in January to 20% from 17.5%. Prices of these goods were up 4.8% in February alone, the biggest monthly rise since records began in 1988. 

The weakness in retail sales shows consumers are keeping their spending in check as joblessness continues to rise and inflation erodes their disposable income. Consumer prices rose 4.4% in the year to February, up from 4% in January and easily outpacing most recent surveys of wage growth. 

Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne sought to limit the squeeze on Britons' living standards a little in his budget Wednesday, announcing a tax cut on fuel that will more than offset the impact of January's sales tax rise. 

—Gary Stride contributed to this article.

 Write to  Ainsley Thomson at ainsley.thomson@dowjones.com 