 (See Corrections & Amplifications item below.) 

On Thursday night, some of the city's biggest players on Wall Street will meet on the basketball court for an event to raise money for Youth, I.N.C., an organization that provides training and mentorship to nonprofits serving New York City children.

Ted Virtue, 50 years old, CEO of private-equity firm MidOcean Partners LLP and co-chairman of the board of Youth, I.N.C., is supporting the Net Gain Basketball Tournament for NYC Youth with a $25,000 contribution. 

Tip-off for the event is 5:30 p.m. at New York University's Coles Sports Center, and the highlight of the evening is a hedge fund versus private equity all-star game. Mr. Virtue is the captain of the 10-man-deep private-equity team, which includes Larry Zimmerman of Piper Jaffray and Ronald E. Blaylock of GenNx360 Capital Partners. (The hedge-fund team has a bench of five players.)

"Last year the hedge-fund team won after a three-year reign for the private-equity team," says Mr. Virtue. "As captain of the private-equity team, we stepped up our recruiting this year and we're going to turn it around."

The remainder of the event is a tournament where two high-school basketball players are paired with three executives. There will be 20 teams in all, a blend of "wisdom and youth," says Mr. Virtue. "I will say that a lot of the people with wisdom are pretty slow and vertically challenged, so it makes for an interesting game," he says. 

The event will raise more than $550,000 for Youth, I.N.C. and will help fund court time for 17 local high schools that don't have basketball facilities. Having a home court means that the students can participate in and host games, a requirement to be involved with the city's Public School Athletic League.

The mission of Youth, I.N.C. is simple: Help the nonprofits that serve the city's children operate better by teaching them good business practices. Long-term, the purpose is to drive the growth and value of the organizations to achieve success. Youth, I.N.C. assists nonprofits in building a board, promoting their organization and in increasing their donor base. 

Presently, the organization is partnered with 43 children's nonprofits across the city, including nonprofits like Futures and Options, a career development organization, and Hour Children, a nonprofit that helps care for children whose mothers are in jail.

Mr. Virtue says the opportunity to use his business skills to help a nonprofit is key to his involvement in Youth, I.N.C. "I like where I can have a leveraged impact on my money and my time and this does it." 

 Write to  Melanie Grayce West at melanie.west@wsj.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications  Youth, I.N.C., a nonprofit, is currently partnered with 43 children's nonprofits in New York City. An earlier version of this column incorrectly said that the organization is partnered with 88 nonprofits.