ABU DHABI—More than 100 citizens of the United Arab Emirates have submitted a petition to their rulers demanding an elected parliament with legislative powers, the first sign of a political response in the country to the political changes sweeping across the Middle East.

"This is probably the first political petition in the history of the U.A.E.," said Ibtissam Ketbi, a political scientist who is the first of the petition's 133 signatories.

The petition, which is circulating by email and through an online link, demands a "comprehensive reform" of the country's Federal National Council, the country's quasi-parliament with no legislative powers. Half of the council's 40 members are appointed by the country's rulers; the other half are elected by a group of citizens, also selected by the rulers. 

"The Federal National Council should be given more authority—it should have legislative powers and powers of accountability too," Dr. Ketbi said. "Elections should be a right of every citizen."

The government introduced some modest political reforms in February, increasing the size of the appointed electoral college that chooses half of the council's members. Wednesday's petition said those reforms are "not acceptable to a broad spectrum of Emiratis."

Former members of the council are among those who have signed the petition.

The United Arab Emirates, the Arab Gulf's second largest-economy and a major crude-oil producer, enjoys one of the highest per capita incomes in the world and has escaped the wave of political turmoil that has unseated the rulers of Tunisia and Egypt, and led to protests in neighboring Bahrain and Oman. Citizens of the United Arab Emirates enjoy subsidized food and fuel prices, but unemployment is high among nationals and wealth is not evenly distributed. Abu Dhabi and Dubai, the two largest emirates, account for about 90% of the country's gross domestic product.

  Sheik Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahyan, the country's president, earlier this month ordered 5.7 billion U.A.E. dirhams ($1.55 billion) of spending on better water and electricity networks for poorer parts of the country.

At a panel discussion hosted by a research institute in Dubai last month, young Emiratis applauded when one panelist said Emiratis wanted to see a fully-elected parliament. Another panelist at the event, the young Emirati blogger Sultan Sooud Al Qassemi, said: "People say the youth of the Gulf aren't concerned or prepared...but they have the same ambitions as the young people elsewhere."

Meanwhile, a Facebook group called "The UAE Revolution" has set March 25 as the date for "a revolution against the era of Sheiks, a revolution against oppression and suppression of freedoms in the U.A.E., a revolution against those who have looted from the people of the U.A.E." It has over 2,700 members but it's not clear how many are Emiratis.

 Write to  Nour Malas at nour.malas@dowjones.com 