KIEV, Ukraine—Prosecutors opened an investigation of former President Leonid Kuchma in connection with the killing of a journalist in 2000, surprising critics who have questioned the will of President Viktor Yanukovych to pursue the high-profile case.

Ukraine's deputy general prosecutor, Renat Kuzmin, said Tuesday that Mr. Kuchma, 72 years old, has been barred from leaving the country while he is under investigation for "abuse of power and giving an illegal order…which led to the murder of the journalist." 

Mr. Kuchma was told to appear for questioning Wednesday morning, said his spokesman, who declined to comment further. Mr. Kuchma, who served for two terms from 1994 to 2005, has consistently denied involvement in the journalist's death.

The probe into the slaying of Georgy Gongadze, a critic of Mr. Kuchma, is seen as a test for Ukraine's current leaders, many of whom first rose to prominence during the former president's rule. 

Mr. Yanukovych entered national politics when Mr. Kuchma picked him as prime minister in 2002. The general prosecutor, Mr. Kuzmin's boss, was appointed by Mr. Yanukovych last November.

Tuesday's announcement came after a decade of pressure from Mr. Kuchma's opponents to investigate allegations of his involvement in the killing. 

Mr. Gongadze founded the investigative news website Ukrainska Pravda, which means Ukrainian Truth. He disappeared in September 2000, and his decapitated body was discovered two months later in woods outside Kiev.

An opposition politician at the end of 2000 released tapes allegedly made by a former Kuchma bodyguard, in which a man who sounds like Mr. Kuchma is heard ordering subordinates to "deal with" Mr. Gongadze. The authenticity of the tapes hasn't been proved conclusively. 

Mr. Kuzmin, the prosecutor, said the tapes would be considered as evidence in his investigation.

Three police officers are in prison for the killing, and a former police general is awaiting trial.

Prosecutors last September said former Interior Minister Yuri Kravchenko ordered the murder. He had been found shot dead at his home in 2005 in what investigators called a suicide shortly before prosecutors were planning to question him.

Valentyna Telychenko, a lawyer for Mr. Gongadze's widow—who has pushed for an investigation of Mr. Kuchma—said it was "too early to celebrate" Tuesday's announcement.

"Opening a criminal case does not mean there will be a thorough professional investigation," she said. She expressed disappointment that Mr. Kuzmin is investigating Mr. Kuchma's alleged abuse of power, rather than any alleged role in the murder. 

Political observers said the investigation could be aimed at damping Western criticism that criminal probes into former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko, now an opposition leader, and around a dozen of her allies appear politically motivated. "The prosecutor wants to show that there is no selective justice in Ukraine, that criminal cases can be opened not only against Tymoshenko, but also against Ukraine's former president, a political ally of Yanukovych," said Volodymyr Fesenko, a political analyst in Kiev.

The prosecutor's office has said its investigation is a legitimate part of a broad corruption probe.

Ms. Tymoshenko said on her Twitter page that Mr. Yanukovych "is not interested in Kuchma's head."

"It's a bluff and window dressing," she said, adding that the case would "come to nothing."

A spokeswoman for Mr. Yanukovych declined to comment.

 Write to  James Marson at j.r.marson@gmail.com 