It has become clear over the past few weeks that there are still things to be worked out on this Knicks team. On Monday, there was yet another addition to the growing list: closing games.

The Knicks once again faded down the stretch in their 96-86 loss to the Celtics on Monday night at the Garden. Undone by a string of bad shots and turnovers, they led by as many as 15 in the first half before the a veteran Celtics team exposed them as a team still in transition. The Celtics scored the game's final ten points.

The Knicks have now lost three straight games and are 7-9 since trading for Carmelo Anthony last month. 

The Celtics closed the game out with precision after a handful of Knick mistakes: They took the lead after Anthony missed a 20-footer and Paul Pierce lobbed the ball to Ray Allen for a layup that made it 84-82. From there, Kevin Garnett's long jumper at the end of the shot clock, directly in front of Anthony, gave the Celtics a 86-82 cushion. The game was beyond doubt with a minute left when Pierce's long jumper made it 92-86. On the next possession, Toney Douglas airballed a 3-pointer.

Knicks forward Amar'e Stoudemire scored 16 points with 11 rebounds, Anthony scored 22 points and Chauncey Billups scored 21—but with just three assists.

For the Celtics, Kevin Garnett had 24 points while Paul Pierce had 21. Rajon Rondo had 12 assists and added 13 points.

As it stands now, the Knicks, who came into the game in seventh place in the Eastern conference, could play these same Celtics in the playoffs.

The fact that the Knicks were facing a marquee opponent mattered little on Monday—they needed to take another step towards building the chemistry they've lacked, and the jury is still out. Players had vowed that they were playing against themselves and racing against time to find cohesion before it really mattered, in the playoffs. Coach Mike D'Antoni has called it open practice, and they got to test their chemistry against one the NBA's top teams on Monday night, though they failed to grab their biggest win since they beat the Heat in Miami last month.