Brian Cashman has long believed in prospect Jesus Montero and his ability to catch in the majors. Now outside observers are starting to come on board as well.

He now believes in prospects Andrew Brackman, and Austin Romine the same way—just as he once believed in Brett Gardner and Chien-Ming Wang.

Before they became established major leaguers, Wang and Gardner had many doubters, many who wondered if the prospects could blossom into the players they eventually became. Some of that, Cashman feels, is simply because they were Yankees. 

"For some reason the Yankee prospects can get a little bit of a cloud of doubt on them. I remember when Wang was coming through the system, I would talk about him being a potential number one, and you would hear the outside scouts saying, 'No way, no way, no way," Cashman said. "Well, Wang became a potential No. 1-type starter."

Contending teams like the Yankees routinely trade away their prospects for major league players. If those prospects don't pan out, the team is open to criticism that it is ''pumping up'' its prospects in order to gain maximum trade value. 

Montero is gradually making the transition from uncertain commodity to can't-miss prospect, but each new round of Yankee prospects is subject to a more critical eye than those on other teams, Cashman believes. 

"Maybe because we're in a bigger market, it's easier to talk about what they don't do rather than what they do do well," Cashman said. "I just find it interesting. I actually started putting it together, because it seems like with a lot of our guys, we'll say what we're seeing, and people will write the opposite, with sources, that are real," Cashman said. 

"I think Gardner was the most recent example," Cashman said. "When we were saying he's going to start in our outfield...and people were saying, 'No he's no more than a fourth outfielder.'" 

Gardner defied those expectations.

"We were saying, he's Jacoby Ellsbury without power," Cashman said. "And he's Jacoby Ellsbury without power. We said that for three years, but people said 'No, they're just trying to promote their prospects.'" 

Gardner isn't alone. Of the Yankee minor leaguers ranked 6-10 by Baseball America from 2005 to 2009, the Yankees have produced six major leaguers—Alfredo Aceves, Phil Coke, Tyler Clippard, Ross Ohlendorf, Melky Cabrera, and Gardner—and one star-caliber player in Wang, who finished second in the Cy Young voting in 2006. That compares favorably with Yankee benchmarks Boston and Philadelphia, who produced fewer regulars from their middle prospect ranks over that period. 

Most of the Yankee prospects mentioned above were dealt away by New York, and became starters after the Yankees traded them. Gardner and Wang were the best of the bunch, and Cashman guarded them zealously. 

Still, the players traded away established themselves in the majors, despite initial doubts about their long-term potential. 

Montero, a power-hitting catcher, underwent the same scrutiny in recent years but seems to have answered his doubters and has the inside track to win the Yankees' backup catcher job. Now it's up to others with question marks about them— like Andrew Brackman, Austin Romine and Eduardo Nunez— to beat the doubters. 