SHIROISHI, Miyagi Prefecture—In the aftermath of the massive earthquake and tsunami that hammered Japan, residents in the especially hard-hit northeastern regions are struggling to procure essential supplies such as food, water and gasoline.

Outside one supermarket in the town of Shiroishi, in the southern part of Miyagi Prefecture, customers tore through makeshift shelves selling pineapples, dried fruit and snacks. All the products were sold outside the store or just inside its entrance area—the interior was decimated by the Friday afternoon quake, the strongest ever recorded in Japan. 

Signs heralding the supermarket's grand re-opening ceremony a week earlier still hung outside the store—it had just been redesigned. Inside, upended shelves were visible through the closed doors. Food had spilled all over the floor. Lights and heat insulation dangled precariously from the ceiling.

Akihiro Sato, the store's manager, who had just moved to the area two weeks earlier to take over the new shop, said water, instant noodles, bread and bananas sold out first in the morning. The store had laid out 1,000 bottles of water, which were gone in less than two hours, he said.

Colliding plates under earth's surface make Asia Pacific one of the most tectonically active region on earth.

Nearly everything was sold out except for boxes of white-chocolate-covered almonds, selling for 50 yen (61 cents) each. Mr. Sato folded cardboard boxes that had been tossed aside by shoppers in their haste. 

"Without these things, people's lifestyles would fall apart," Mr. Sato said, in between orders barked at his employees. "We've been selling most of the things at a 30% to 40% discount," he said, "because our registers aren't working and it's easier with round numbers in terms of change."

The store will be open every morning until "we run out of things to sell," said Mr. Sato, noting that it will take at least a month before shoppers can go back inside the store to shop.

Nobu Kikuchi, an automotive tools shop owner, rode to the store on a bicycle, saving scarce gasoline. He said the damage in the area has been relatively light compared with coastal areas swamped by tsunami waves, but the lack of water and electricity worried him.

"Since the earthquake just happened yesterday, we still have some breathing room," said Mr. Kikuchi, who bought some groceries, including a pineapple. "In the days going forward, I'm also worried when we exhaust all the food."

Water was also a principal concern for the residents of Sukagawa in Fukushima prefecture. Outside a makeshift water distribution center on the grounds of a local elementary school, families were restricted to 10 liters of drinking water a day. 

Since the site opened late Friday, more than 500 families had received some water. A line of 200 people snaked along the sidewalk in front of a neighboring building.

"The water supply has been stopped and, of course, water is the most essential item for livelihood," said housewife Sachiyo Ando, who was waiting her turn with her teenage children. 

Another item in short supply is gasoline. Cars waiting to get to gas pumps jammed the side streets connecting Tokyo to Sendai, the northeastern Japanese city that saw some of the worst scenes of destruction. There is almost no gasoline in Miyagi prefecture, where Sendai is located, so some gas stations in neighboring Fukushima prefecture sometimes had more 100 cars queued.

Setsuko Kimura, a 67-year-old homemaker, and her daugher Yukie Takeda, said gasoline is more of a concern than food.

"We're getting no explanation about supplies, and so we have to be very careful with our driving," said Ms. Kimura, who spent last night huddled with her husband, a family friend, her daughter and son-in-law around a traditional low table designed for ground seating. They didn't want to be separated in case of another major quake. 

"We didn't sleep a wink last night because we were so scared. We fear nights the most because we don't know when the aftershocks will end," she said.

 Write to  Daisuke Wakabayashi at Daisuke.Wakabayashi@wsj.com 