The European Commission's bond issue for the bailout fund for Ireland was three times oversubscribed, the European Union's executive body said. The bond is a key test of investor support for the region's new sovereign-bailout mechanism, with proceeds earmarked for the EU's emergency funding program.

 The euro zone's private sector grew at a steady pace in December, with growth in Germany and France offsetting weakness in debt-laden Spain and Ireland, final results of a survey showed.  

Meanwhile, factory orders in the euro zone rose in October, and factory-gate prices posted their strongest annual gain for 25 months in November, driven by the rising cost of energy and intermediate goods 

 Portugal successfully sold €500 million ($664.9 million) of six-month treasury bills, but at sharply higher yields, as the week's most anticipated debt sale signalled that investors remain wary that the country may yet need a bailout. 

China's Vice Premier Li Keqiang reiterated Beijing's pledge to support crisis-ridden Spain in a meeting with Spanish Prime Minister Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero, hours after the two countries began signing $7.3 billion worth of deals. The contracts cover 16 sectors, including energy, banking, telecommunications, transport, and agriculture. 

Hungary rejected mounting calls from foreign politicians and media to limit its role during its six-month term at the helm of the European Union's presidency. Major Western European media outlets as well as the European Commission have expressed concerns about Hungary's new media law, which came into effect Jan. 1, the day Hungary took over the EU's presidency. 

 Poland's central-bank governor hinted that interest rates could start climbing here soon, while Romania held rates steady as central bankers across the region weigh the contrasting risks posed to their countries' fragile economies by hot money and mounting inflation.  

The number of U.K. companies going into administration declined 35% in 2010 compared with the previous year, but continued economic weakness means many more are still at risk, professional services firm Deloitte said. 

Eighteen months after U.K. politicians' abuse of expenses claims exploded into the country's biggest political scandal for a generation, parliament is still squabbling over how to police its lawmakers.

 In a new report, U.K. lawmakers raised serious doubts about whether the oil industry is prepared to tackle an oil spill similar to the Deepwater Horizon blowout should it occur in the North Sea, but stopped short of recommending a moratorium on drilling similar to that imposed in the U.S.  

 The Gulf of Mexico oil spill was an avoidable disaster that resulted from management failures by BP and its main contractors, and reflected "systemic failures" by the oil industry and its government regulators to deal with the risks of deepwater oil exploration, a presidential commission investigating the deadly accident has concluded. 

 Private-sector payrolls expanded at a very strong pace in December, according to new data. Private-sector jobs in the U.S. rose by 297,000 last month, according to a national employment report published by payroll giant Automatic Data Processing and consultancy Macroeconomic Advisers.  

 The White House, Congressional Republicans and business groups are moving from different directions toward a consensus that the U.S. corporate-tax code needs a fundamental overhaul. Specific proposals for retooling the complex corporate-tax system aren't on the table and the debate over the issue is sure to be lengthy and difficult.  

 White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs plans to leave his post in early February to become an outside adviser to President Barack Obama and his re-election campaign. 

 John Boehner, an Ohio Republican, was elected Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives Wednesday, completing a decade-long comeback after being cast from leadership when House republicans suffered election losses in the late-1990s.  

 Some of Japan's top corporate leaders predicted a mild economic recovery in the next fiscal year, led by growth in the U.S. and emerging markets, and they said the yen wasn't likely to rise sharply over the next 12 months. 

 A team of a popular Hong Kong restaurant chain and a stylish Tokyo sushi bar successfully bid a record 32.49 million yen, or almost $400,000, for a 324-kilogram bluefin tuna. 

The World Bank issued its first bond denominated in the Chinese yuan, borrowing 500 million yuan ($75.7 million) over two years. The triple-A-rated World Bank said in a statement that the decision to borrow in the Chinese currency signals its strong interest in supporting the growth of the yuan market. 

 China's central-bank chief said regulators will step up efforts to prevent systemic risks, in part by increasing capital requirements for big banks and adopting variable reserve requirements for individual lenders to adjust credit growth.  

Yuan appreciation won't resolve the U.S.'s trade imbalance with China, the Chinese vice commerce minister said, as the exchange rate has little effect on the major cause of its trade surplus with the U.S.: the import of materials used in goods that are then exported. 

 North Korea issued a vague invitation for talks with South Korea in a news statement that abstained from its usual harsh criticism of the South's government, but Seoul rejected it out of hand. 

In India, Hero Corporate Services said it has sent another two accounts department employees on leave after finding them in possible collusion with its suspended associate vice president of accounts and a Citibank branch executive in an alleged fraud case. 

State Bank of India will take suitable precautions to avoid possible U.S. sanctions due to any dealing with the blacklisted Hamburg-based European-Iranian Trade Bank, a senior finance ministry official said. New Delhi and Tehran have opened a temporary channel for oil-related transactions for January crude. 

India's largest buyer of Iranian crude is scouting for alternative supplies from the spot market to pre-empt a possible disruption in shipments from Iran after India's central bank closed a longstanding payment route for such transactions. 

 In Pakistan, the killer of a senior politician who spoke out against Pakistan's blasphemy laws had told others about the pending attack but had still been assigned to guard his victim. 

The flare-up in political turmoil in Pakistan following the assassination of a key ally of President Asif Ali Zardari won't have an immediate impact on the nation's credit ratings, Moody's said, but it warned that prolonged political instability and economic stagnation could lead to a banking crisis in the strife-torn South Asian nation.

 U.K. defense secretary Liam Fox appeared to dampen expectations at home that British troops could begin returning from Afghanistan this year, saying on a visit to the war-torn country that it would be "quite wrong" to make predictions on troop levels over the next 24 months.  

 Top American commanders are pushing for an increase in combat forces in Afghanistan to coincide with the spring fighting season, according to U.S. officials, in order to cement tentative security gains before White House-mandated troop reductions begin in July. 

Security forces in Kyrgyzstan have killed two suspected terrorists believed to have shot three policemen to death a day earlier. An official of the State Committee for National Security said another officer died in the operation against the insurgents in Arashan, about 15 kilometers (10 miles) south of the capital Bishkek.

Kuwait's embattled prime minister survived a no-confidence motion in parliament, as opposition lawmakers accusing the government of rolling back political freedoms failed to win enough votes to their cause in one of the West's key Middle East allies.

A French Foreign Ministry spokeswoman says an explosion has rocked France`s embassy in Mali's capital of Bamako. She said the cause of the explosion was not immediately clear, but it was not an accident and added she had no information about possible casualties or motives.

 Flooding in the coal-rich state of Queensland was expected to worsen as rainfall in the region continued unabated, adding to the economic impact of a disaster that has already cost billions of dollars in damage and lost exports from the state's mines.  