Pakistan's government reversed an unpopular fuel-price increase that contributed to the breakup of the ruling coalition, a move that eases political pressures but could derail an International Monetary Fund-sanctioned economic overhaul.

The rollback of the price increase of 9%, which had been introduced on Jan. 1, will further widen an already significant budget deficit, making it more difficult for the government to stem inflation, while furthering economic strife. 

The government is clinging to power after a coalition member abandoned the ruling coalition over the weekend, in part to protest the Jan. 1 increase. The defection took away the government's parliamentary majority.

The main opposition party, Pakistan Muslim League (N), demanded a rollback of the price increase in return for its decision not to seek to take down the government with a no-confidence motion.

The move, however, suggests that the government may be unable to get its fiscal affairs in order and put in place tax increases it had agreed to make as part of an IMF plan, said a Washington official. 

The IMF and its main backers, particularly the U.S., fear that if the government doesn't increase revenue, it faces the prospect of severe inflation, which could ultimately undermine growth. Pakistan will have to provide a subsidy to fund the energy-price decrease.

The IMF has also been pushing Pakistan to raise its value-added tax—though Islamabad is already six months late in making that move. The IMF and other international agencies haven't made any loan payments to Pakistan since May, other than flood-related aid, waiting for Pakistan to put in place the VAT and other tax measures.

An IMF spokeswoman was critical of the Pakistan action. "Energy subsidies consume a large part of the budget," she said. "They're inefficient and untargeted so that the bulk of the benefit of the energy subsidies goes to higher income individuals and large companies."

A condition of an IMF loan package, valued at $11 billion, was that Pakistan take steps to reduce its budget deficit, including removing subsidies on fuel.

The IMF already has withheld $3.5 billion of its loan package in an effort to pressure Pakistan to take action. The IMF last month issued a stern warning to Pakistan to take steps to narrow its budget deficit, according to a Pakistani official who has seen the missive.

Reversing the price rise will cost around $53.8 million a month in subsidies, according to a finance ministry official. 

He said the reverse will add 0.2 percentage point to the budget, which has already risen to 8% of gross domestic product, against a target of 4%.

Pakistan's government has few options, on both economic and political fronts. 

The government could cut expenses further—which would be bound to cause a domestic furor. Boosting the income tax could be tougher than either raising energy prices or value added taxes, because the income tax disproportionately hits influential wealthy Pakistanis.

An IMF team is expected to try to negotiate a fresh round of cuts and tax increases this month. The government currently has enough money in reserves so it doesn't face an immediate crisis in paying its bills, but with oil import bills increasing that financial cushion could evaporate quickly.

Opposition leader Chaudhry Nisar Ali welcomed Thursday's move, saying the government has "bowed to the will of the people and parliament."

Pakistan's political crisis further deepened after the assassination of the governor of Pakistan's most populous province this week. The official, Salmaan Taseer, was shot dead by his bodyguard, who later admitted he killed the governor over the governor's opposition to the country's blasphemy laws. 

"All political leadership has agreed that fuel prices should be reversed," Prime Minister Yousuf Raza Gilani told the National Assembly, the nation's parliament, as he announced a restoration of prices to the subsidized levels in place on Dec. 31, before the 9% increase took effect.

 Write to  Bob Davis at bob.davis@wsj.com 