Read the full  ECO:nomics report .

Few businesses are as deeply involved in as many environmental issues as  DuPont Co.
DD


-0.19
%




 The company's focus on chemicals, specialty plastics and industrial materials places it in the forefront of research and innovation in fields ranging from genetically modified crops and solar energy to plastics increasingly used in automotive powertrains.  Ellen J. Kullman, chairman and chief executive of DuPont, sat down with The Wall Street Journal's Alan Murray to discuss some of the biggest business and research challenges facing DuPont today.

Here are edited excerpts of that conversation. 

  MR. MURRAY: You run a company that is focused on innovation; that's been what you've talked about as an engineer yourself. Vinod Khosla raised a very interesting question. He said, I'm not worried about DuPont competing with my investments, because if someone doesn't do well at DuPont, their career will suffer, whereas in the venture-capital business we embrace failure.  

 MS. KULLMAN: Well, I think he should be worried, and I think he is worried, bravado aside. We are a 208-year-old company because we've reinvented ourselves. We've invented full classes of science over that time, and we're in the midst of a change again. There's just a tremendous sea change going on in technology, and DuPont is right at the forefront of it.

We hire tremendous capability in our people. But they don't have to go out and sell themselves to Wall Street, or figure out where that next $10 million is going. That's leadership's job. We allow our researchers to really focus on the science. They have guardrails, but it's a different model, right?

At the end of the day, the answer is applying science in unique ways that solve the problems we have in this world, which are growing.

  MR. MURRAY: You do your internal research and development, but you'll also acquire companies that have the technology that you think looks interesting. Can you tell us how the balance works out?  

 MS. KULLMAN: There's not a formula for it. We very specifically have capability in different areas. We'll buy companies, we'll partner with companies, joint-venture with them.

We venture a lot with our customers, because it's not what our science is and can do, it's what it does in their environment to create real value for their customers. So it is a very inclusive model.



  MR. MURRAY: How much do you spend on research and development, and as a percentage of revenue?  

 MS. KULLMAN: $1.6 billion last year. Revenue was $31.5 billion.





  MR. MURRAY: Give us a couple of examples of the most exciting innovations to come out of your research in the last few years.  

 MS. KULLMAN: Photovoltaics. That's an area that's moving very, very quickly. Tremendous innovation. We make metalized paste, Solamet, that goes into a lot of photovoltaics. It used to be that we'd bring out a new one every three years. Last week, at the Shanghai Photovoltaics Show, we showed four new ones. We're bringing a new one out about every six months, and that number is decreasing as well. That's why you're seeing efficiency rise in photovoltaics, because it's not only the cells themselves and the materials where there's a lot of innovation going on, but half the cost of solar is the installation and the localization of it.

Bill Ford, here, talked a lot about the automotive industry. We make high-temperature plastics. Your powertrain in your car has an amazing amount of plastics in it. When I really took a look at where plastics have gone over the last few years, it's amazing. If you can save a couple hundred pounds on a car, you can get one point of fuel economy.

We just brought out a new high-temperature nylon, Zytel, that was qualified by General Motors for a powertrain application in less than a year. And if you know the automotive cycle, it takes three to four years to get anything qualified. So a tremendous amount of change going on there.

You talked about biofuels. We're partnered with Danisco, and Genencor, here in the Bay area on a cellulosic ethanol joint venture using switchgrass. It uses [corn] cob right now. The demonstration unit is up and running. 

  MR. MURRAY: I know food is a very big part of your business, as well.  

 MS. KULLMAN: Agriculture, yes. You're going to have to double food production between now and 2050. And there is a lot of pressure on land use. You're going to have to get more out of what you have today. There are still vast stretches of this world that aren't even on hybrids. So the debate isn't about genetic modification versus not. The debate is: How do we get more out of what we have today? And there is a tremendous and a very diverse suite of technologies that can help that. Our Pioneer seed company is right there. Crop-protection chemicals. We just brought out a new insecticide that has set speed records going through regulatory regimes because it's very low toxicity. So there is a lot that science, a lot that innovation can bring to help feed the world.



  MR. MURRAY: You say the debate is not about genetic modification. But I think particularly in Europe it's a big issue. How do you deal with that?  

 MS. KULLMAN: It's about education. I think there's more misinformation out there than right information. We are working on that through a variety of partnerships with nongovernment organizations and with countries. There is more data, there have been more studies, than I have seen on any innovation in my life. The effect on us is nonexistent. It's been around for decades.





  MR. MURRAY: So how do you get the message out?   If the people who you have to educate perceive you as an interested party in the debate, how do you get the true message out about genetically modified… 

 MS. KULLMAN: Through a lot of partnerships. The World Economic Forum has a whole section on agriculture and has brought together DuPont, Monsanto, Syngenta, Dow, Nestlé, Unilever, a lot of interested parties. They've partnered in Tanzania. And the Gates Foundation is involved in several of these projects, to work locally to develop not only the agronomic capability but what happens to the crops once they're grown. That's where the Unilevers and the Nestlés come in. There are a lot of partnerships like that going on in sub-Saharan Africa, in India, in Indonesia.