LISBON—Portugal caretaker Prime Minister Jose Socrates met opposition leaders Wednesday to reach a consensus to negotiate a €80 billion bailout from the European Union and the International Monetary Fund, but none of the parties tabled a proposal. 

"In today's meetings, the government didn't gather any proposal with any concrete measures from the political parties for the negotiations," said government spokesman Pedro Silva Pereira. "Some parties have said they intend to present these proposals in due course." 

The meetings took place as European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso urged the country's divided politicians to agree with "utmost urgency" on the austerity measures that are likely to be attached to any external financial support program. 

EU finance ministers last week gave Portugal's politicians until mid-May to agree a detailed austerity program with the European Commission, the European Central Bank and the IMF. 

The cross-party talks are crucial because the EU wants to ensure that Portugal's next government will keep to the bailout terms to be negotiated over the next two to three weeks. 

Meanwhile, representatives from the EU and IMF continue to scrutinize the country's public accounts in Lisbon. Their work will be used to determine the terms of the bailout, which will be negotiated mainly between the government and EU authorities from Monday. 

Mr. Socrates resigned late last month after opposition legislators defeated his latest package of austerity measures. The prime minister's decision to step down sparked a political crisis that resulted in: early elections set for June 5; a surge in borrowing costs due to credit downgrades; and a formal request for an EU bailout to cover its financing needs. 

Portugal is looking to receive some of the aid before June, when it needs €10 billion—€4.9 billion of which to repay debt coming due. 

Mr. Pereira, the government spokesman, said the preliminary work with EU and IMF representatives had begun in "a climate of great cooperation." 

However, in a sign that the process won't run as smoothly as authorities hope, the country's main opposition leader and electoral front runner said his party will only participate in the negotiations if the administration of the departing prime minister, Mr. Socrates, opens its accounts to scrutiny. 

"What we don't need is skeletons in the closet when we know that they will have to come out over the next three years," said Pedro Passos Coelho, leader of the Social Democratic Party. 

In a letter sent to Mr. Socrates and EU officials, Mr. Passos Coelho also asked the government to update state revenue and spending forecasts, which he said are outdated after the government revised its budget deficit data to a wider 8.6% of gross domestic product. 

Following the meetings with Socrates, opposition leaders also urged European policy makers to design a package that fosters growth and doesn't focus exclusively on austerity measures. 

Portugal's economy has expanded modestly in recent years, rising by an annual average of 1% over the past decade, something economists blame on an inflexible labor market and years of cheap credit that gave little incentive for industries to evolve. 

"Any program must protect economic growth," said Paulo Portas, the leader of the country's second-largest opposition party, the Democratic and Social Center. "Without growth, there is no revenue. Without revenue, there is no deficit cut."

 Write to  Alex MacDonald at alex.macdonald@dowjones.com and Patricia Kowsmann at patricia.kowsmann@dowjones.com 