Chris Gethard, a pale, compact man with the trusting face of a child, looked up from his laptop. "This guy says he has a strong desire to be nude in front of people." He leaned forward and began typing. "Hi! Would you like to get naked tonight in front of 250 people? This is not a joke."

Mr. Gethard, 31, was in the lobby of the 30th Street training center where he teaches comedy improv classes. As friends and students passed him, they asked, "How's it going?"

"It's a train wreck," he replied. It was 4 p.m. on a Saturday—eight hours until showtime—and he had no material.

The Chris Gethard Show, billed as "the most bizarre and often saddest talk show in New York City," appears monthly at the Upright Citizens Brigade Theatre. "The show is at midnight on a Saturday, a slot where most shows are lucky to sell 50 or 75 tickets," said Shannon O'Neill, one of the Gethard Show's cast members and a former artistic director of the UCB Theatre. "Chris's show sells out every time." Nerdy and nihilistic, self-assured and self-loathing, the show is the fullest expression of Mr. Gethard's sensibility—to quote one of his recent Tweets, it's "a 50/50 mix of heartwarming and violent."

After 19 months at the Upright Citizens Brigade, the Chris Gethard Show is moving to public-access television. The finale "episode" at the UCB will be staged on Saturday.

Mr. Gethard develops each episode around a different theme: He has hired professional wrestlers, blasted unfunny comics with paintball guns, and welcomed Diddy as a special guest. At the start of each performance, Mr. Gethard recites some variation of the "Gethard Guarantee": "We hope tonight's show is funny; but if it fails, it will fail so fantastically that it will still be entertaining." 

In March, he set a new challenge for himself: he'd build the show from scratch in a single day, using nothing but props and people found on Craigslist. It proved to be as difficult as it sounds. "Male with very strong desire to be nude" corresponded enthusiastically all afternoon before disappearing without explanation. Negotiations with "34-year-old woman with breast milk to spare" stalled when she asked for $250. "5'10" Japanese-Caucasian dominatrix" was also out of the comedian's price range. Even the Free Stuff section yielded nothing.

But Craigslist is a nocturnal ecosystem. At around 7 p.m., things started looking up. Cast member Don Fanelli was dispatched to Roosevelt Island to pick up a box of old gardening magazines. Shannon O'Neill drove to Hell's Kitchen to meet a man named Tim whose ads offered dozens of excess belongings—cookbooks, Elmer's glue, a "very used" pillow. "This man clearly plans to murder me," Ms. O'Neill said as she rang the buzzer. Tim turned out to be a gentle middle-aged man in basketball shorts. "I simply can't bear to think of these things ending up in landfills," he said. He handed Ms. O'Neill plastic bags containing a wireless router and a United Nations flag, and she invited him to be a guest on the show that night. "Are you going to make a fool out of me?" he asked. "Not at all," she assured him.

Meanwhile, at the training center, Mr. Gethard had brokered a deal with an aspiring pastry chef: In exchange for a plug on Twitter, she would bake cupcakes for the audience. "This show is turning out to be way more wholesome than I was expecting," he said.

Mr. Gethard closed his laptop and began pacing around the training center, his arms cocked forward like a raptor's. "OK, we have the cupcake lady, we have Tim, we have the magazines." He stalked around the corner; when he came back, he had a show structure in mind. "What if it's like Medieval Times?" he said, referring to the chain of dinner theaters where actors compete in mock battles. "We could battle and win prizes for our section. The prizes are all this crap we got on Craigslist."

The cast brainstormed possible contests, eventually settling on an eating contest, a breath-holding contest, and a challenge called "Hulking Out," which involved ripping off a T-shirt as fast as possible. A stage manager raced to Kmart to buy the shirts, plastic buckets for dunking the performers' heads, and a box of Twinkies.

In the green room at the UCB Theatre just before midnight, Mr. Gethard looked relaxed for the first time all day. Tim, freshly showered and wearing a button-down shirt, sipped a Heineken and peered into the theater as the seats filled up. "This is not what I planned to be doing tonight," he said, smiling.

Mr. Gethard took the stage to enthusiastic applause. "We tried to find all kinds of dark s— to bring you guys tonight," he told the crowd. "But it turns out—and I never thought I'd say this—people on Craigslist are really good people."