PHILADELPHIA—One week, they're unwatchable. One week, they're unbeatable. So what to make of the Mets after one month of baseball?

Probably not much, given that they're only about one-sixth of the way through the season. But reading too much into what happens in April is a time-honored, New York tradition. So in that spirit, we present five things we are absolutely certain of on May 1. (Note: We reserve the right to be absolutely certain of the opposite a month from now.) 

 1. The Mets can beat a lot of teams in the National League—just not the ones that will end up in the playoffs.

The fact that the Mets (11-16 in April) lost seven games in a row and won six in a row last month has as much to do with their schedule as the way they played. The Colorado Rockies, who swept the Mets in four games, have emerged as one of the best teams in baseball. The Arizona Diamondbacks, whom the Mets swept in three games, are among the worst.

The good news: There are a lot of mediocre teams in the N.L. at the moment. Only four teams in the league entered Sunday with a winning record.

The bad news: The talent gap between the Mets and the elite teams in the league still appears significant, especially in the area of starting pitching. That the Mets lost to Roy Halladay and the Philadelphia Phillies on Saturday despite a fine outing from Jon Niese only underscored the point: Sometimes, even the Mets' best isn't enough.

 2. Under Sandy Alderson, accountability is king.

Consider some of the GM's recent moves: He cut Oliver Perez and Luis Castillo despite the Mets' owing them a combined $18 million. He designated for assignment second baseman Brad Emaus and reliever Blaine Boyer, both of whom struggled early. He even sent reliever D.J. Carrasco, whom he signed to a two-year deal last winter, to the minors last week.

The message? On his watch, neither past accomplishments nor contract status trump current performance. Granted, the moves involved mostly fringe players. But if anyone thought Alderson was too deliberative to act quickly, he dispelled that notion.

 3. Terry Collins has mellowed.

Be honest. If we told you a month ago that the Mets would lose 16 of their first 27 games, you would have expected Collins to lead the league in ejections and overturned food spreads. But he has been ejected only once so far and hasn't thrown any major tirades. In defeat, he has been a voice of reassurance and optimism. Where he has been tough on players, he has tried to do it privately.

Taking Daniel Murphy into the dugout tunnel, out of public view, to chastise him after a base-running mistake in Atlanta on April 16 was a good example. This approach won't appease angry fans, but it'll help him maintain credibility in the clubhouse in the long run.

 4. Mike Pelfrey has regressed.

No one has personified the Mets' early-season disappointment more than Pelfrey, whose 7.39 ERA is among the worst in the league. He has pitched into the seventh inning only once in six starts. 

No one could reasonably expect him to resemble Johan Santana. But the fact that he hasn't even resembled the pitcher who won 15 games and posted a 3.66 ERA in 2010 has been a major blow for the Mets.

 5. Jose Reyes and Carlos Beltran are elite players again.

It has been two years since both Reyes and Beltran looked this good and this healthy. Entering Sunday, they ranked second and third on the team, respectively, in on-base plus slugging percentage, with Beltran at .832 and Reyes at .780. If nothing else, their resurgence will help the Mets at the trade deadline.