A few weeks ago, a British tabloid reported that Real Madrid boss  Jose Mourinho would be returning to the Premier League at the end of the season. The point is not whether or not this will happen—Mourinho's contract runs through 2014, and he has given no indication, at least in public, that he will leave Real—but rather the two-page spread that ran alongside the story, under the headline "Which club will Jose choose?" The illustration listed the pros and cons of choosing Manchester United, Manchester City, Liverpool,  Tottenham Hotspur and Chelsea, the Portuguese manager's old club.

It was a bit like The Decision, last summer's sweepstakes for LeBron James, except Mourinho is not a free agent. While most basketball teams would have no trouble adding a player—especially someone like James—hiring a new manager is far from straightforward. There are incumbents to replace, and the repercussions resonate throughout the club. In other words, it's a huge change. 

Ordinarily, this seems like a buyer's market, if only because there are far more managers than clubs. But there is nothing ordinary about Mourinho or the adulation that surrounds him in certain quarters of the media. While logic dictates otherwise, it doesn't feel implausible for all of those five clubs to not only field his calls but to seriously consider bringing him on board, regardless of their current managers. (It's worth noting here that United, Chelsea and Tottenham could yet win the Champions League this season.) Real Madrid felt the same way last summer. After all, it paid an unprecedented $25 million in compensation to his old club, Inter, to persuade The Special One to skip town with two years left on his contract. 

Saturday night's "derby" game against crosstown rival Atletico Madrid offered some indication of how Mourinho earns his bacon. 

Barcelona, which leads La Liga, had beaten Getafe 2-1 earlier that day, extending the gap at the top of the standings to eight points, and Atletico was a classic banana-skin game. It's an underachieving and ill-assorted team that nevertheless boasts one of the best forward tandems in the game in  Sergio Aguero and  Diego Forlan, so it can raise its game on any given day. Throw in a hostile atmosphere at the packed Vicente Calderon Stadium, and there was plenty of potential for a Real letdown.

Mourinho, who doesn't usually tinker with exotic tactical schemes, threw a curveball by ditching the 4-2-3-1 formation Real has used most of the season in favor of what the Spanish call the "trivote": a 4-3-2-1 system with three, rather than two, defensive midfielders. This meant sacrificing an attacking winger like  Angel Di Maria, a $50 million summer acquisition, for another ballwinner in midfield. It's a move he's used before, much to the chagrin of purists, because it robs Real of creativity and attacking oomph. 

In fact, against Atletico, it worked perfectly. Real clogged the middle, forcing Atletico into wide areas and taking away Aguero and Forlan's quick one-twos. At the same time, the extra protection largely absolved Real's front three—Ronaldo,  Mesut Ozil and Karim Benzema—of defensive duties and allowed the fullbacks, Marcelo and  Sergio Ramos, to storm forward, providing additional width and pinning back Atletico on the wings. 

Real scored first with Benzema and added a second through Ozil, which was just as important. Few teams in the world are as adept at protecting and preserving a lead as Real. Mourinho's men have opened the scoring in 34 of 45 games this season, winning 32 and drawing just two, both in the Champions League. (Domestically, when scoring first, Real is 26-0-0.) Once Real scores, an air of inevitability sets in, and the team grows stronger. Which may explain why, even when Aguero halved the deficit with four minutes left, the final result never seemed in question.

Mourinho's ability to protect leads has long been one of his hallmarks. This year, he's added a knack for switching formations based on circumstance, and his players have bought into his changes. A comeback in the Liga race may be too tall an order, with only nine games to go. But what appears certain, if he proves the tabloids wrong and stays at the Santiago Bernabeu next season, is that he'll return a stronger, more complete coach.

On Thursday, the Football Association suspended Manchester United manager  Sir Alex Ferguson for five games for his criticism of referee  Martin Atkinson, who took charge of United's defeat at Chelsea on March 1. It was the fourth time Sir Alex has been banned for speaking out about match officials.

What does suspending a manager mean? Not very much, at least in England. 

He was still able to work with his players in training all week. He traveled with them to  Old Trafford for their clash with Bolton. He addressed them in the dressing room before the match and during halftime. He simply was not allowed to take his place on the bench during the game itself, but that did not stop him sitting in the stands and communicating with his assistants. In fact, television cameras showed him barking instructions into a somewhat-retro-looking white telephone—complete with a curly cord—throughout the 1-0 victory.

In short, nothing much changed, except for the fact that he was out of ear-shot of the referee and his assistants. 

As punishments go, FA coaching suspensions are a joke. Want something meaningful? Ban the coach from training sessions, which is where most of the work is done anyway. Or, at the very least, make him watch the game in the company of a chaperone who ensures that he has no contact with the players. If the FA isn't prepared to do that, then it should stick to fines—not that those, in an age of multi-million dollar salaries, are particularly meaningful, either.

—   Gabriele Marcotti is the world soccer columnist for The Times of London and a regular broadcaster for the BBC. 