  His Restaurants:  

The Corson Building and Sitka & Spruce

 What He Is Known For: 

Farm-driven cuisine and house-made condiments

Matt Dillon has cooked in restaurants since he was 13 but he makes it a point to strip away industry formalities at his two restaurants. 

"When you go out to eat, any dish can get picked apart no matter how good it is," says Mr. Dillon, 37, "but dining out is about the gathering." Mr. Dillon's newest venture, The Corson Building, occupies a 1906 home built by a stonemason. Multicourse dinners are served family style at a long wooden table and between courses, diners are encouraged to walk into the kitchen and to explore the grounds's chicken coop and vegetable garden. 

Mr. Dillon espouses a strong DIY ethos. He smokes sea trout and serves it with pickled beets, crème fraîche and dark bread (all made in-house). Mr. Dillon describes his food as "familiar." Though apparently straightforward, it is in fact involved. He and his team take steps to coax the most flavor out of each ingredient and elevate dishes with refined touches that reflect Mr. Dillon's fine dining background. Prior to opening Sitka & Spruce in 2006, he worked at a number of Seattle favorites, including two of Washington's most celebrated restaurants, the Dining Room at Salish Lodge & Spa and The Herbfarm. 

For his second of four Slow Food Fast contributions, Mr. Dillon has created a recipe that pairs delicately steamed halibut with sorrel. In this beautiful treatment, the steamed fillets puff and flake apart under a balanced cream and white wine sauce. Steaming, Mr. Dillon explains, is an underutilized technique that maintains the fish's delicacy. Steamed fish pulls apart gently because, unlike sautéed or grilled fish, "you are not shocking it," he says. Here, the resulting halibut is silky and luscious. 

As for the cream sauce, Mr. Dillon likes to add sorrel, a bright and citrusy herb that resembles spinach in texture. It "breaks down easily and takes on a creamy, soft texture as it cooks," he says. Used in this traditional French sauce, it adds brightness to the heavy cream. The sauce, balanced with white wine, garlic and lemon juice, brings everything together. Delicious in its own right, it coats the halibut in a natural and elegant manner.

Mr. Dillon recommends serving the fish with baby spring onions braised with thyme and butter. And if there's time, he also recommends marinating the fish, for at least 15 minutes, in a gentle salt-water bath instead of simply sprinkling salt on the fillets.

 Total Time: 25 minutes Serves: 4 

4 six-ounce halibut fillets, skin removed  Salt and pepper  3 tablespoons butter  3 cups sorrel, cleaned, stemmed and sliced into 3/4-inch strips  2 cloves garlic, sliced thin  1 tablespoon thyme leaves, roughly chopped  1/2 cup white wine  1/2 cup fish or vegetable stock  1/2 cup heavy cream, not ultrapasteurized  1/4 cup lemon juice

 What to do: 

 1. Set up steamer pan with water on the stove and season fish with salt. 

 2. Set a medium sauté pan over medium heat. Add half the butter and cook until foamy. Add sorrel, garlic and thyme and cook 2 minutes, or until garlic is translucent. 

 3. Add wine and let simmer for a minute. Add stock and turn heat up to medium-high. Cook 4-5 minutes, or until sauce reduces by half. 

 4. Add cream and cook 5 minutes, or until sauce reduces by a third, to about 1 cup. Add lemon juice and season with salt and pepper. Take off heat and swirl in remaining butter. 

 5. As sauce reduces, steam the fish. Bring water to a boil and lay the fish on top of the steamer. Cover and cook 5 minutes, or until halibut is just cooked through.

 6. To serve, plate the fillets and top with sorrel sauce.