Worries are emerging that a fresh wave of Ivory Coast cocoa supplies will be caught up in the country's escalating political crisis, keeping prices for the key chocolate ingredient high.

Adding to the concern, experts say, is the coming rainy season. Higher humidity levels increase the chances cocoa beans trapped in the West African country's warehouses will spoil.

A November presidential runoff in the Ivory Coast, which supplies about a third of the world's cocoa, has descended into a bloody conflict and has halted virtually all exports.

Alassane Ouattara, the internationally recognized winner of last year's election, imposed an export ban that is being tested by incumbent Laurent Gbagbo. Mr. Gbagbo is telling exporters that either they ship about 440,000 metric tons of cocoa, about 25% of the last harvest, or that cocoa will be seized.

Many multinational commodity firms have said they are complying with the ban.

Concerns over the Ivory Coast crisis drove cocoa prices on ICE Futures U.S. to above $3,700 a metric ton, a 34-year high, earlier this month, before the earthquake and tsunami in Japan sparked a selloff. Cocoa futures for May delivery rose 3.7% to settle Friday at $3,242 a ton.

Events this week will determine how deeply the crisis affects Europe's chocolate industry. Unlike in the U.S., which imports its cocoa from an array of countries, Europe is reliant on beans from the Ivory Coast.

"We are in a really critical situation," said  Jean-Marc Anga, executive director of the International Cocoa Organization, or ICCO.

Europe's candy makers may be approaching a supply crisis. Back in October, companies held cocoa stockpiles that covered needs for four or five months, according to the ICCO.

"Warehoused cocoa will likely rot unless warehouse managers and Ivorian small traders work together to smuggle the beans out of the country," said consultancy Eurasia Group.

E.U. sanctions prohibit the shipment of cocoa stockpiles from the country's ports. The closure of bank branches across the country may hinder the harvest of the 300,000-ton crop in April and May.

"Concerns now are being raised" that the quality and quantity of this upcoming crop will suffer if the political crisis isn't quickly resolved, said Kip Walk, head of cocoa at Blommer Chocolate Co., one of the world's largest cocoa processors selling to major candy makers.

Cocoa deliveries against the London March contract hit their highest point since 2006 this month as dealers scrambled to lay their hands on supplies.

The chief executive of Ghana's cocoa board said that even improving prospects for cocoa crops in other countries, including more than 800,000 tons from Ghana's farmers, may not be enough to meet world demand. 

Last year, Ivory Coast farmers shipped 1.2 million tons of beans.

"We can't really say that we can take the place of Cote D'Ivoire," said  Tony Fofie, the CEO. Indonesia and Ghana put together can't make up for the shortfall, "so it will still create a problem for manufacturers."

While there has been an increase of cocoa smuggled across Ivory Coast's northern border into Ghana, the cocoa board is taking measures to seize the beans, Mr. Fofie added.

—Neena Rai contributed to this article.