I'm especially proud of my traveling toiletry kit. It's a compact Air France "Le Club" bag that originally probably held a complimentary toothbrush and toothpaste, earplugs, socks, etc., for a business-class flyer. I stole it off my grandmother years ago and am constantly editing its contents to protect me from any threats, ranging from mosquito bites to nuclear war.

As you'd expect, it contains toothpaste, though not the tube original to the bag, a comb, sewing kit, tweezers and nail clippers. There's also cortisone cream for temporary relief against itching and chafing, a shoe mitten (because you never know when an occasion will arise where you'll need to make a good impression, even on vacation), matches and band-aids.

The challenge is to find all these items in the most diminutive size possible, the smaller the container the greater the variety of eventualities you'll be able to provision against. For example, there's my teeny, 5-milliliter sample size bottle of Dunhill Classic Cologne, which I refill from the daddy-size bottle in my medicine cabinet and that lasts me through several shaves. Obviously, I also carry a disposable razor. 

Then there's diarrhea pills, dental floss (intransigent food particles can destroy the most idyllic vacation), an electrical adapter, a miniature flashlight to read by in the middle of the night when I'm suffering jet lag but don't want to wake my wife, an eyeglass repair kit and a Swiss Army knife. 

I gave the latter a lot of thought. The knee-jerk reaction would be to buy one of those messianic ones that includes everything from a magnifying glass (I've already got that covered; the eyeglass repair kit includes one) to an espresso maker. But, frankly, how often do you really need a saw or a leather punch? You also don't want to invest too much of your income in a device that may well be confiscated by the TSA, as mine has been on several occasions. So I've opted for the stripped-down model known as "The Waiter." It limits itself to a single blade, a bottle opener, a corkscrew (arguably the most useful tool in anybody's arsenal) and a built-in plastic toothpick and metal tweezers, though the tweezers I find ineffectual.

But without a doubt, the items about which I'm most proud are the iodine pills that are going to protect me from radiation exposure. They were a gift a number of years ago from an old girlfriend who lives in Westchester near Indian Point and where, as I understand it, they were handing them out to the locals like tootsie pops or St. Joseph's aspirin, and for all I know still are.

The only problem, beside the fact that they're undoubtedly well past their expiration date, is that having children of her own she could afford to surrender only enough pills for me and not for my family, and not enough of them to protect me for very long, either. I'd hate to have my wife and kids standing there watching me popping pills as the radiation cloud passed overhead, knowing I'd be the only family member to survive. On the other hand, what would be the point of cutting them up and sharing them? It would be a nice gesture, but the dose wouldn't be potent enough to do any of us any good.

I realize this scenario remains highly theoretical, worst case. But after what's happened in Japan, the fact that Indian Point isn't getting any younger and that New York remains ground zero for every two-bit terrorist (and if you happen to be the sort of obsessive individual who travels with noise-canceling earplugs, pocket-size tissues and Q-tips in their own plastic sleeve), you'd frankly be irresponsible not to plan for Armageddon. 

So I decided to visit several local pharmacies. My goal was to score enough iodine pills, which are supposed to prevent the thyroid gland from absorbing harmful radiation, to avoid a scene with my wife and kids, and hopefully allow all of us to weather the nuclear cloud until it drifts off toward the Hamptons. 

The first place I visited was a Duane Reade, where the pharmacist, who shall go unnamed, was pretty dismissive, and didn't have any iodine pills for sale anyway. "When are you going to be exposed to radiation at that level?" he sniffed. "If that ever happened the government will be issuing them. You can save your money."

Yeah, right.

They didn't have any of the precious pills across the street at  CVS, either. But I bet your head would spin at how fast CVS would stockpile them if they heard Duane Reade was selling them next door. That's just the way things work in retail these days. 

Finally, I dropped by Caligor, a venerable Lexington Avenue pharmacy, where at least I was taken seriously. "We sold them out the first 10 minutes Monday morning," reported pharmacist  Gary Halpern. He added that customers had been calling from as far away as California. "I called the manufacturer," he reported. "They're not expecting any of the tablets until some time in April."

I wondered aloud whether Mr. Halpern had his own stash, and he seemed awfully sanguine. "I do have left over from 9/11," he confessed. "They probably expired. Truthfully, I don't think you're going to need them here."

By the way, he said the average prescription was one pill a day for 14 days, and costs about 20 bucks.

However, sensing my distress, he added that he might be able to locate some radiation badges, even though he didn't have any of those in stock at the moment, either. "They do have plenty of those," he stated cheerfully.

"Do they protect you against radiation exposure?" I asked.

The answer was no. "It turns color when you're exposed," the pharmacist explained. "Now you can panic."

 Write to  Ralph Gardner at ralph.gardner@wsj.com 