A class of widely prescribed drugs used to prevent and treat osteoporosis is indeed associated with an unusual type of thigh fracture, according to a large European study published Wednesday, but researchers found the overall risk was so small that the benefit of the drugs outweighed the danger.

The question of whether the drugs, called bisphosphonates, are associated with atypical femur fractures has been closely studied the past few years, in the wake of reports from orthopedic surgeons that they were seeing an increase in cases. These are severe fractures in which the thighbone snaps in two.

Experts aren't sure why some patients who use the drugs get these fractures, or whether the drugs themselves, genetic factors or other variables are at work. Studies of the issue have resulted in conflicting reports. Last October, the federal Food and Drug Administration announced a change in labeling on the drugs to reflect the possible risk of atypical fractures in patients taking bisphosphonates.

In the current study, published in the New England Journal of Medicine, researchers analyzed data from all 1.5 million women in Sweden who were age 55 or older in 2008. They obtained X-rays of 1,234 of the 1,271 women with fractures and found 59 who suffered the more unusual kind of fracture.

The women with atypical fractures were also compared with 263 controls with fractures in a similar location. The researchers found that 78% of the women with atypical fractures took bisphosphonates, compared with 10% of controls.

Nonetheless, the researchers concluded that atypical fractures remain a rare event, and that the benefits of using the drugs outweighed the risks.

Bisphosphonates, which include brands such as Actonel, Zometa and Boniva, are used mainly by post-menopausal women as a way to prevent fractures that are associated with osteoporosis. Some 36.5 million prescriptions were dispensed for the drugs in 2010, according to health-care information firm IMS Health, and total U.S. sales were more than $4.2 billion.

Per Aspenberg, a professor of orthopedic surgery at Linköping University in Sweden and a co-author of the study, said the findings indicated a patient's risk of fracture diminished by 70% after stopping the drugs for a year. Dr. Aspenberg said more research needed to be done.

Elizabeth Shane, a professor of medicine at Columbia University who chaired a task force on the issue, said the study reinforced the idea that the drugs should continue to be used in people at high risk for fractures. Risk factors include low bone density, a family history of osteoporosis or fractures, and alcohol and tobacco use.

Dr. Shane, who wasn't involved in Wednesday's study, said that researchers were trying to figure out why some people are at higher risk for uncommon fractures when taking the drugs. She said the American Society of Bone and Mineral Research, which convened the task force, was now working to set up a national registry of patients with these fractures in the hopes of getting answers.

 Write to  Amy Dockser Marcus at amy.marcus@wsj.com 