Some years back Saul Bellow stirred up a hornet's nest by asking, with his customary acerbity, who the Tolstoy of the Zulus was. Whether Bellow, as he later claimed, was simply drawing on his training as an anthropologist to make a distinction between pre- and post-literate traditions or, as was widely assumed, taking a dig at multicultural egalitarianism, his question remains a provocative one. The Zulus may not have yet produced a Tolstoy but, along with other South African peoples, they have produced notable writers, including the poet Benedict Vilakazi. 

As it happens, Vilakazi's poetry has been translated into English from the Zulu by Es'kia Mphahlele (1919-2008), another notable African writer whose literary achievement serves as a kind of answer to Bellow's question. Mphahlele's family origins were in not in the Zulu tribal regions of South Africa but in the northern Transvaal, near the border with current-day Zimbabwe, though he grew up in Pretoria and attended English-language schools. A South African critic once hailed Mphahlele (pronounced em-FAH-leh-leh) as the literary equivalent of Nelson Mandela. It is an odd claim, confusing realms, but it is true that Mphahlele, like Mr. Mandela, held to a consistent vision of an inclusive, multiracial nation. Long before Mr. Mandela's "rainbow nation" was a political reality, Mphahlele's writing captured the varied facets of the complex society into which he was born.

Among Mphahlele's best works are his marvelous autobiography, "Down Second Avenue" (1959), and his collection of cultural and political essays, "The African Image," published in London and New York in the early 1960s and banned in his native land. "In Corner B," now reissued by Penguin Classics, provides an impressive sampling of Mphahlele's work—incisive essays and virtuoso stories in particular. As Peter Thuynsma writes in his introduction: "Here is a spectrum of the warp and weft of being Black under legislated prejudice. Here one will find the Black South African sensibility at its most observant, at its most prescient."

 By Es'kia Mphahlele  (Penguin Classics, 237 pages, $15)

True, but it isn't just the "black" South African sensibility that is on display in Mphahlele's work. He routinely sees beyond the confines to which apartheid might have condemned him. In the story "The Living and the Dead," he oscillates between the contrasting viewpoints of a black man and his Afrikaner employer, capturing both characters with exquisite sensitivity. The Afrikaner is Stoffel Visser, a civil servant and thus part of the apartheid apparatus. Through a series of interactions with his house servant and the members of his family, Visser is led to think of his black underling as a human being and not merely an "abstraction." Mphahlele conveys the change of outlook in a subtle and understated way—and tracks its progress. After feeling the pull of real concern and emotion, Visser retreats, returning to his role as an upholder of apartheid at home and at work.

Elsewhere in "In Corner B" is a story titled "Mrs. Plum," about a do-gooding white liberal, in this case a woman rather too proud of her good intentions and inclined to patronize those she is trying to help. Again, Mphahlele's brushstrokes are lightly applied. Even in "Grieg on a Stolen Piano," a 1965 story that puts at its center an innocent man who is tortured by the police, Mphahlele avoids the kind of lurid, heavy-handed style that such a topic might inspire. Details of the incident itself do not appear: "They took him to the luggage van and questioned him. Nothing was found on him and he wouldn't talk. When eventually they figured they might have a corpse on the hands, they put him out on a station platform, battered, bleeding and dazed." The story prefigures what the police would later do—this time with fatal consequences—in the case of anti-apartheid activist Steven Biko, who was left shackled to die of such wounds in 1977.

By then Mphahlele had been in exile for more than 20 years. In the early 1950s he had honed his talent in the vibrant culture surrounding Drum, a glossy magazine, published in Johannesburg, that featured the work of black writers. But soon enough the apartheid government banned him from teaching, for having spoken out against an education reform that would shortchange black children. Though possessing a graduate degree in literature—a rarity among black South Africans in those days—he was denied the chance to pass along the fruits of his study.

Mphahlele's exile began in 1957. It took him first to Nigeria (where he felt as much an expatriate as an English colonial lingering in the half-light of empire), then to Paris (where he worked for the anticommunist Congress for Cultural Freedom) and finally to the U.S., where he taught at the University of Denver. In 1977, roughly a dozen years before Mr. Mandela's release from prison, Mphahlele decided to return to South Africa. It took courage to go back to the iniquities that still awaited him there, but his writing was too rooted in South Africa's culture for him to stay away longer. As he recalls in "My Experience as a Writer": "I was having to write out of new discontents or remembered hurts which I knew would still be the lot of those I had left behind. The element of immediacy was gone." Mr. Thuynsma, who studied with Mphahlele in Denver, says: "Returning to South Africa, even before Apartheid's demise, was simply inevitable."

Though it gave him a profound subject, one has to wonder how much the aridity of Mphahlele's native soil limited his ability to fulfill his artistic promise. At his best, he seems as talented as the two South African Nobel laureates, Nadine Gordimer and J.M. Coetzee. Sadly, South Africa—during apartheid and in the decades of segregation that preceded it—starved its nonwhite citizens of the opportunities that their favored compatriots enjoyed. Never mind Tolstoy. How many a "mute inglorious Milton" lived unsung in South Africa? We will never know.

 Mr. Rubin is the author of "Sarah Gertrude Millin: A South African Life." 