Lately there's been a rash of Twitter controversies involving professional athletes. Seems like hardly a day passes that a jock doesn't step into trouble by pecking out an opinion in 140 characters or less, infuriating teammates, fans, and especially talk-radio hosts with hours and hours of air time to fill. Some folks argue that athletes should avoid Twitter altogether for risk of losing credibility or endorsements or giving people the impression they have internal lives and think about subjects other than sports.

What if there were a sports place on Twitter where nothing controversial happened? A place where the judgment was solid, nothing offensive was said, no out-of-school tales were told and the language was G-rated? What if there were an athlete on Twitter you could proudly introduce to your children? What if someone like Derek Jeter had a Twitter account? 

 May 8: Just hit 2 awesome home runs. You know what that means, right? 2 awesome glasses of milk! 

 April 22: What's my favorite part of NYC? Gosh, I'd say it's a 5-way tie between Manhattan, Bronx, Brooklyn, Queens and Staten Island. 

 October 31: Bugs me when people ask "Trick or Treat?" Are they putting me on the spot? 

 May 9: Rescuing a cat caught in a tree. And then a dog caught in the EXACT SAME TREE. 

 March 5: Turned on the TV...Tom Hanks movie marathon! Don't bother me for at least 12 hours!

 May 4: Backstage at Paul Simon show! Edgy crowd, but fun. 

 April 13: Changing a couple car tires for strangers on the FDR. Don't worry: will still arrive 5 hours early to Stadium!

 May 5: Is there anything better than coming home to ten DVR'd episodes of "The Mentalist"?

 April 27: Enjoying coffee and my morning Journal, Times, Post, Daily News, and Newsday.

 April 15: Not to get all political, but I really do love sunshine. 

 May 3: Talking to a group of school kids about the health benefits of celery. 

 May 2: Pet peeve: when nosy people ask questions like, "Do you want crushed pepper?"

 April 25: If I were 007, I'd ask for it shaken AND stirred. 

 April 3: Anybody out there want to talk khakis?

 April 2: What's better than helping an old lady across the road? Helping two old ladies cross the road! And buying them each a car!

 May 10: Out in the city to buy a new mop.

 May 10: In line, buying mop.

 May 10: Mopping!

 Dec. 31: Vegas! Who wants to play some Uno?!?

 April 19: Seriously, I love the acting of Alec, Stephen, Daniel and Billy Baldwin equally.

 April 23: Wow OMG DO I LOOOVE pepperoni pizza!!!

 April 23: Dear friends PLEASE IGNORE last Tweet. my Twitter was HACKED!!! I love all pizza—every kind!

 May 4: I like comedy, just maybe not the avant garde comedy of Brian Williams.

 April 20: Working on a poem about Bud Selig.

 May 11: Thinking of letting my hair just GROW and GROW and GROW. Kidding! 

 May 12: A reader wants to know my least favorite person in baseball. I loathe to admit stuff like this in public, but my least favorite player is 

 May 12: Does each Tweet really have to be 140 characters or less? So that last one got cut off? 