Atlantic City is hoping a new tourism district will boost downtown investment and development. Some in real estate say they see business interest generated by the district but it's too soon to place bets on the effort.

A bill approved by the New Jersey Legislature this week creates a tourism district along Boardwalk and other sections of the city where the state will oversee various functions, including making zoning changes, the power to demolish buildings and some police and sanitation duties. 

The new district, part of a turnaround plan pushed by Gov.  Chris Christie, is intended to boost Atlantic City's declining fortunes and lift state tourism. The measures now are awaiting the governor's signature.

Backers say the legislation should encourage development in the nation's second largest gambling market.

"If you're looking to walk down the block and all you see are vacant lots and some beat-up buildings, you're probably not going to take that walk," said state Sen.  Jim Whelan, one of the bill's sponsors and a former Atlantic City mayor. 

"This whole effort is an attempt to confront that issue," he said.

But some major developers in the city for now are saying publicly only that they need to know more about how the district legislation will be implemented.

"A dedicated tourist district has merit, but exactly how it should be orchestrated we have not studied," said  Danielle Babcock, director of marketing for Cordish Co., which is a partner in running the Walk, an outlet shopping area in Atlantic City. 

Many in real estate are eager for change. In the past two years, the only commercial sales in Atlantic City have been three casino properties and an apartment complex, according to the Real Capital Analytics, which tracks real-estate transactions nationwide. 

By comparison, 11 properties sold in 2008—including several casinos sold by Harrah's Entertainment—and eight properties in 2007. 



Current Mayor  Lorenzo T. Langford and the Atlantic City Council opposed the legislation and said they may sue to block the plan approved by the legislature. 

But amid the debate leading up to the vote on the tourism district, some real-estate agents report seeing more interest in the city's properties.

  John Schultz, a former city councilman, owns an 80,000-square-foot office building downtown. Rents haven't risen, but he said he has rented four offices in the past three months—a huge jump over the past few years. 

Last year, commercial real-estate broker  Joshua Levin considering moving his office of almost 19 years out of downtown. But he said he has fielded enough calls the past few months that he has decided to stay put. 

"What we have is a lot of people studying the market," said Mr. Levin, who supported the creation of the tourism district. Although he hasn't booked any sales yet, he believes the tourism district as a light at the end of the tunnel.

The state-controlled Casino Reinvestment Development Authority will oversee the tourism district, which will cover the Marina district in addition to Boardwalk, the Walk and Bader Field, a 140-plus-acre defunct airport that is owned by the city.

The authority, which currently has fewer than 35 employees, first has to hire zoning and real-estate staff. The agency hopes to partner with the city on some services, such as planning and approval processes for new development, said  Thomas Carver, the authority's executive director. 

Funding for the expanded authority is linked to an Internet gambling bill that would allow casinos to offer online gaming. That bill, which also passed Monday and awaits the governor's signature, is expected to generate tens of millions of dollars in tax revenue, Mr. Whelan said.

Another measure approved by the legislature repeals numerous state regulations on the Atlantic City casinos. 

Before the legislature's vote Monday, the state Casino Control Commission reported that revenue at Atlantic City's 11 casinos fell nearly 10% in 2010 from 2009, the fourth consecutive year that revenue has fallen. 

Atlantic City's casinos have seen their business shrink by nearly a third in the past four years as slot parlors opened in near Philadelphia starting in 2006 and Pennsylvania and Delaware allowed table games last year.