FRANKFURT—The European Central Bank Thursday maintained its stark anti-inflation rhetoric, warning that "strong vigilance is warranted" to contain inflation risks. 

"It is essential that the recent rise in inflation does not give rise to broad-based inflationary pressures over the medium term," the ECB said it in its monthly bulletin. It reiterated that the current monetary-policy stance is "very accommodative," driving economic activity in the 17 countries that use the euro. 

The bulletin's editorial echoes remarks by ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet, who indicated at a news conference last week that the central bank may raise its benchmark rate as early as next month. 

"The governing council remains prepared to act in a firm and timely manner to ensure that upside risks to price stability over the medium term do not materialize," the ECB said in its bulletin. 

The urgency comes as the ECB's main refinancing rate—which has been at 1% since May 2009—is now less than half the rate of inflation in the euro zone, which stood at 2.4% in February. Inflation has been driven higher by rising prices for oil and other commodities. 

The ECB warned that energy inflation should remain at a "high level" for some time, before moderating later in the year, assuming that there are no further increases in crude-oil prices. 

"The effects of past increases in oil prices are still pending and are likely to impact on consumer prices in the coming months," the ECB said. "In particular, given the current levels of oil prices and the prices of oil-futures contracts, as well as the lagged relationship between gas and oil prices, consumer gas prices may rise further in the course of 2011." 

It wouldn't rule out a further acceleration in food inflation over the coming months. "The uncertainty surrounding this outlook is greater than usual," the ECB said, adding "this is due to their high level of sensitivity to weather conditions in different parts of the world, the size of critical crops in a number of areas and the increase in stockpiling to counter the uncertainty in supply—be it because of speculative motives to invest in food commodities as an asset, or because of food-security policies." 

 Write to  Nina Koeppen at nina.koeppen@dowjones.com 