Once again, I come to say goodbye.

Two and a half years ago, I stopped writing the Love & Money column the first time when my family was planning a move to Hong Kong, though that ultimately fell through.

I returned last July, when I left The Wall Street Journal for a new career as a newsletter writer. Now, I am stopping again.

It's not an easy decision to make. I've always treasured writing this column. I love that it has forced me to look at personal issues that I otherwise could (and once did) ignore. I love the smart feedback from readers -- whether nice or nasty. It pains me to know that I'll disappoint all those readers who tell me how much this column is an important part of their Sunday routine.

But in the end, I've concluded that I simply don't have the time to write the column -- as well as do justice to my new job and my family. I've feared for a while that something would have to give.

* * *

It's Monday evening, a little after 9 p.m., as I sit down to write this. Just as I finished the third sentence, Amy, my wife, popped her head into my home office to say that our son wants to see me before he goes to bed.

I leave writer mode and go watch a bit of golf with him on TV. But I can't stay long: I tell him I have far too many deadlines this week and that I need to complete everything before I take off Sunday for a business trip to South America.

He sighs; his dejection is apparent. He's 14 and doesn't care about my deadlines, hates all the travel that comes with my new job and resents the extra assignments that keep me busy when I am home. He wants more of me.

And I want more of him. I was raised by my grandparents, and I know what it's like not to have your father in your life as much as you wish. I feel terrible pulling myself off his bed when I'd be so content falling asleep next to him.

Such disappointments have shaped my family life over the past nine months. To cite one more example: A couple of weekends ago my son and Amy were making plans for the family to watch a movie when my 7-year-old daughter, talking to no one in particular, said wistfully, "Maybe Dad can join the family this time."

And then there's Amy's simple request: "I want my husband back."

It wasn't always like this. For 17 years, I worked for The Wall Street Journal, the last six from my home in South Louisiana. At times, I struggled to keep both my family and my editors happy. But I had no idea how much my life was in balance until I took my new job last summer. As both my son and Amy have told me, that's when everything started to go awry.

In part, that's a good thing: The job I began last summer has morphed into something bigger.

My original job description had me writing a weekly investment newsletter, contributing to a monthly newsletter and penning an item weekly for a daily e-letter.

Today, all of that remains on my plate -- and much more. I'm now the sole voice of the monthly newsletter and I'm in the process of beginning a third newsletter, and I'm responsible for four blog posts each week. And I edit and contribute to a weekly roundup my publisher and I write.

Though I try to stop working between 6 p.m. and 9 p.m. every day to spend time with the family, I often fail at that. I'm up well into the night writing, and the work routinely spills over into the weekends.

And then there's the travel. In the past seven months, I've spent 77 days -- or 2½ months -- away from home, often halfway around the world in Europe or Asia. That's hard on my kids because they're not accustomed to Dad being gone so long and so frequently.

It's hard on Amy because she didn't sign up for a nomadic husband. It puts the full job of parenting on her shoulders when she already has a full-time job running a specialty hospital. She legitimately resents working as hard as she has ever worked, and taking on the extra burdens while I roam the world.

* * *

I know all that sounds like whining. I don't mean it to. I'm incredibly lucky to have a job that's fun, intellectually interesting and well-paying. It is the most satisfying job I've ever had.

But ultimately, work is about making choices -- choices between earning money, job satisfaction and the demands of family. It's all a balancing act.

For me, things have been out of balance lately. I work a lot and make a nice bit of money. But I haven't done a good enough job in attending to my family.

Part of the solution is to curtail some of my travel, a discussion I've had with my publisher. But part of the solution is also cutting out secondary writing projects that consume my nights and weekends -- particularly Love & Money. In other words, on the balance scale, I need to make less money and spend more time with family.

It is hard to let go, no question about it. This column has been a part of my life for much of the past decade. I can only hope readers have learned half as much from reading it as I've learned from writing it.

But in the grand balance between work and family, you sometimes have to let go of things you love so you can embrace other things you love even more. And that's why, while I hate to leave, I nevertheless must say...goodbye.

—Jeff D. Opdyke writes about investing and finance from Baton Rouge, La. Email: lovemoney@wsj.com 