 New York  

If your idea of a good show is one in which the chorus boys are dressed up to look like cupcakes, confetti is dropped at 8:34 and "I Will Survive" is sung twice, read no further. "Priscilla Queen of the Desert" (no comma, please) is the musical for you. If, on the other hand, you have an old-fashioned yen for shows in which touching things happen to believable people and the songs have something to do with the plot, stay as far away as possible from the Palace Theatre. (Wyoming might be far enough.) Not only is "Priscilla" a sequin-encrusted dragfest without a heart, but it's one of the biggest missed opportunities in the recent history of Broadway, a pointless musical version of a sweet little movie out of which something smart—and, yes, touching—might easily have been made. Instead we get human cupcakes.

Let's go back to the movie for a moment. Released in 1994, "The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert" told of how three drag queens, one of them an aging transsexual played, amazingly enough, by Terence Stamp, traveled across the Australian desert in a run-down motor home, looking for love in all the wrong places. Despite a few overly obvious moments, it was a modest and poignant film not unworthy of "La cage aux folles," by which it was clearly inspired, and has since become something of a cult classic.

Turning "Priscilla" into a stage musical is so good an idea that one wonders why it took so long. But in doing so, Stephan Elliott (who wrote and directed the movie) and Allan Scott (who collaborated on the book) have leached out every bit of sentiment from the film, replacing it with brass-plated showbiz pseudo-feeling. What makes the movie work, by contrast, is that the plights of the three principal characters are genuinely felt: We are invited to identify with their struggle to make their way in an uncomprehending world. The musical numbers are clever and fun, but they're not the point of "Priscilla."

The reason why the stage version of "La cage aux folles" works is that it preserves this same distinction: You care about the characters, just as you do in the film. In the stage version of "Priscilla," you don't care about anything but the costumes, each set of which is gaudier and more preposterous than the one that preceded it. (Tim Chappel and Lizzy Gardiner, the designers, also did the costumes for the film.) It doesn't help, to put it mildly, that the "score" is a jukebox-style string of lip-sync classics like "What's Love Got to Do With It" and "Material Girl," with Jerome Kern's "A Fine Romance" and John Denver's "Thank God I'm a Country Boy" thrown in to confuse the issue. I don't much care for the warmed-over score that Jerry Herman contributed to "La Cage," but at least Mr. Herman made a good-faith effort to write musical numbers that reflect and amplify the show's underlying emotional current. The songs in "Priscilla," on the other hand, are mere occasions for ritual handclapping. As for Ross Coleman's choreography, you'll see better dances in theme parks.

The Palace Theatre

Nick Adams, Tony Sheldon and Will Swenson, the traveling drag queens of "Priscilla," mostly do their own singing and shouldn't, especially Mr. Swenson, who has no voice at all. He plays Tick, the central character, who is traveling from Sydney to Alice Springs to see his young son for the first time. Yes, I know, it's "La Cage" all over again, but in the film version of "Priscilla" this subplot is played straight, so to speak, and you don't feel manipulated by the payoff—not too much, anyway. On stage it's turned into the kind of mechanical plot twist that gives TV movies a bad name, and Mr. Swenson and Jessica Phillips, who plays his wife, don't even try to breathe the slightest semblance of life into the dialogue. It's as though Simon Phillips, the director, had told them, "O.K., kids, step on it, gotta get through the exposition. Now bring on the giant spangled shoe!"

It seems that in order to keep the tourists happy, the book of "Priscilla" has been toned down considerably from the version that played in Australia and in London's West End. If this is the family-friendly version, I tremble to think what kinds of parents were taking their kids to see it elsewhere. The sight gags are blatant, the jokes crass and stale: "I've had it up to here." "Ouch! Lucky old you."

Since there really isn't anything good about "Priscilla Queen of the Desert" except the costumes, the pit band and the hard-working chorus, I'll let it go at that. Especially seeing as how Broadway is already the home of two shows—the Menier Chocolate Factory's revival of "La Cage" and Brian Bedford's brilliant mounting of Oscar Wilde's "The Importance of Being Earnest"—in which drag is employed with supreme resourcefulness and theatricality, I suggest you stay home, rent the movie and save yourself a hundred bucks and 2½ hours' worth of noisy boredom.

 Mr. Teachout, the Journal's drama critic, blogs about theater and the other arts at www.terryteachout.com. Write to him at tteachout@wsj.com. 