Several Republicans say they will oppose the three-week spending bill House GOP leaders are offering Tuesday to avert a government shutdown, raising the pressure on both parties to reach a long-term spending deal.

Republican leaders remain confident the stopgap measure will pass, in part because they expect many Democrats to support it. But the rebellious GOP conservatives highlight a split within the party and an impatience to enact longer-term spending cuts quickly.

"Now is the time to draw a line in the sand," said freshman Rep. Tim Huelskamp (R., Kan.), one of those pledging a no vote.

At least eight Republicans say they will vote against the short-term funding measure, including Rep. Jim Jordan (R., Ohio), who heads the Republican Study Committee, a group of conservatives that makes up more than half of all House Republicans. With lawmakers just returning to Washington after a weekend break, it was unclear Monday how many lawmakers ultimately would oppose the bill. 

The Heritage Foundation, Club For Growth and the Family Research Council—three conservative groups—came out against any further short-term spending measures.

Legislation currently funding the government expires on Friday. A bill before Congress this week would extend funding until April 8 and cut $6 billion from 2010 spending levels.

But an increasing number of Republicans say they're losing patience while lawmakers try to reach agreement on a bill that funds the government until Sept. 30, the end of the fiscal year.

House Republicans want to cut spending in this year's budget by $61 billion below last year's level, while Democrats have agreed to about $10 billion in cuts.

Opposition to the three-week funding extension is far from unanimous. "It's the fringe right part of the tea party that doesn't want to be reasonable," said Rep. Michael Grimm (R., N.Y.). He noted that cuts are already being made and that the Senate and White House remain in Democratic hands. "Being unreasonable is not putting the country first. We can get too caught up in polarizing the nation and looking for extreme measures."

Republican leaders say they share the frustration of lawmakers who want significant spending cuts. But they also want to avoid a partial government shutdown and accuse Democrats of not negotiating seriously.

"Where is the other side?" said House Majority Leader Eric Cantor (R., Va.). "Where is the president? Where is [Senate Majority Leader] Harry Reid?" 

Some Republicans are also unhappy that the three-week spending bill does not include "riders," measures that are designed to advance policy goals rather than simply cut spending. Reps. Michele Bachmann (R., Minn.) and Steve King (R., Iowa), for example, vow to oppose any spending measure that does not de-fund President Barack Obama's health overhaul.

Republican defections are extending to the Senate. Sen. Marco Rubio (R., Fla.) posted a message on Red State, a leading conservative blog, saying he would oppose the three-week measure.

Democrats say the problem is the tea party faction. "These Republicans' decisions to abandon the three-week proposal negotiated by their own party's leadership suggests that tea party lawmakers are unwilling to accept anything short of the extreme cuts in the House budget," said Sen. Charles Schumer (D., N.Y.).

 Write to  Naftali Bendavid at naftali.bendavid@wsj.com 