Moody's Investors Service raised its credit-rating outlook on the Philippines to positive from stable, bringing into view a possible upgrade for the Southeast Asian nation and highlighting improving economic conditions in the region.

The move came a day after the government raised around $1.25 billion by selling a global peso bond, reducing its foreign-exchange risk and creating a new benchmark for 25-year debt for one of Asia's most aggressive sovereign borrowers. 

Moody's listed a number of encouraging signs for its decision to lift the outlook on its speculative-grade Ba3 foreign and local-currency bond ratings. It cited the country's improving external payments position and its successful monetary policy, which the agency said has anchored inflation expectations and helped to lower the government's cost of funding. 

Moody's said the stronger trade position has reduced the vulnerability of the government's finances to external shocks. Improved prospects for policies meant to overhaul the economy will likely have positive effects on government finances, investor sentiment and economic growth, the ratings company said. 

The Moody's move, which comes after Standard and Poor's upgraded the Philippines' credit rating to double-B from double-B-minus in November, offers another reminder of the improvement in Asia's ability to handle its debts in recent years. While the Japanese government's financial health has deteriorated, the credit positions of other nations in the region are improving because of strong economic growth and efforts by governments to push through reforms. 

The Moody's announcement gave a brief lift to the Philippine peso, but the dollar ended the day higher.

Finance Secretary Cesar Purisima said the decision underscores investor confidence in the country and said the government remains strongly committed to pursuing fiscal consolidation in the near term. "The government's pursuit of continued economic growth and fiscal consolidation is bearing fruit and the international credit rating agencies acknowledge this," Mr. Purisima said.

He said the government's newest bond was "priced at the tight end of the range" to yield 6.25% and attracted more than 160 investors. The government had sought to pay a yield of 6.25% to 6.375%.

By geographical allocation, 21% of the bonds went to investors in Asia, 46% to those in the U.S. and 33% in Europe. 

The bonds are peso-denominated but will be settled and payable in U.S. dollars. The conversion rate for the bonds at pricing was 43.777 Philippine pesos to a dollar. 

Moody's said it will examine the government's commitment to fiscal consolidation, something that will require restraining expenditure and increasing revenue. It said it will also watch to see if Manila can put into action its public-private partnership program for infrastructure development, a pillar of the economic agenda of President Benigno Aquino III's administration, noting that successful execution of associated projects would provide a bellwether for an improved business climate and economic growth prospects. 

Moody's said prospects for greater political stability following the clear outcome of the May presidential elections has added momentum to resilient economic growth by encouraging increased inflows of foreign direct investment and in boosting domestic consumer confidence. 

  Marcelo Ayes, senior vice president at Rizal Commercial Bank, said that while a rating outlook increase could lift Philippine assets in the near-term, the government must substantially improve tax collection efficiency to ensure higher economic growth. 

Moody's move "was expected but the government must show sustainability in tax collection because the pillars of the economy have only been [overseas Filipino] remittance and consumer confidence," he said.

Moody's last rating action on the Philippines was in July, 2009 when it upgraded the sovereign rating from B1 to Ba3 and assigned a stable outlook.

 Write to  Arran Scott at arran.scott@dowjones.com 