OAKLAND—Jean Quan, inaugurated as Oakland's 46th mayor on Monday, says she has a three-pronged plan for tackling the city's woes: grow its retail base, continue cutting the budget and increase marijuana revenue.

In an interview, the 61-year-old Democrat says bolstering city coffers is her top priority. To do that, she says she plans to reduce police-officer benefits and offer tax breaks to boutique shops opening in growing neighborhoods. In addition, she says she wants to increase the city's number of marijuana dispensaries to bolster tax receipts. Ms. Quan also plans to bid on contracts issued by neighboring cities wanting to outsource fire-department services, in what would be a first for Oakland.

"I may not have many friends after this year, because it's going to be tough," says Ms. Quan.

The new mayor is putting forth her plan for Oakland at a particularly challenging time. The city faces a $40 million budget deficit for the year ending June 30, 2012, amid plunging revenue. Over the past three years, Oakland has cut its budget by $170 million, straining relations with some employee unions. Some community groups are also at odds with the city over former Mayor Ron Dellums's perceived lack of community outreach. 

Ms. Quan "comes in at a tough time," says Dan Lindheim, Oakland city manager. The city has yet to name a successor. He says Oakland's revenue peaked in 2008 at $500 million, before falling to about $400 million in 2010. "It's a really bad economic environment, and residents don't have much confidence in the city's leadership," he says.

Already, some of Ms. Quan's plans are raising hackles—particularly her intention to cut police benefits. Last July, city leaders laid off 80 police officers after negotiations over police pensions broke down. Dominique Arotzarena, president of Oakland's police union, says the rocky relationship between the city and its officers needs to be repaired before Ms. Quan can expect any concessions. 

"We can't continue to be the city's whipping boy," says Mr. Arotzarena.

Gregory McConnell, president of the Jobs and Housing Coalition, an economic-advocacy group back by local businesses, says he is optimistic about Ms. Quan but worries some of her budget initiatives are insufficient to tackle the city's financial situation. Mr. McConnell says the push into marijuana is fraught with problems because of the lack of legal clarity. Retail development is a five-to-10-year process, adds Mr. McConnell, who was a major supporter of Don Perata, one of Ms. Quan's leading opponents in the mayoral race.

Whether Ms. Quan succeeds in helping turn Oakland around has implications for the Bay Area as whole. With 400,000 residents, Oakland is Alameda County's largest city by population; it also serves as a transportation hub for the region. Chronic unemployment and crime have plagued the city for years, and Ms. Quan's efforts at overcoming the dysfunction could help unlock millions in investment dollars.

Ms. Quan, an Oakland native, began her political career in 1990 with a bid for a seat on the Oakland School Board. She served three terms and then ran successfully for city council.

She has been readying herself for the battles ahead. Since winning the mayoral election in November, she says she has held informal meetings with city administrators and with the police department, including police chief Anthony Batts. 

She also formed a 24-person transition committee stocked with business leaders and community groups. Ms. Quan "wants fresh, actionable ideas that can be implemented swiftly and can help overcome some of the city's problems," says John Vann, an architect and a member of the transition team. 

In the interview, Ms. Quan says much of her early attention will focus on police-officer benefits. She wants officers to contribute 9% of their annual salaries to their pensions, instead of the current arrangement where officers pay nothing. Ms. Quan says she would rehire the 80 officers who were laid off if the police union agreed to the pension contributions.

Mr. Arotzarena contends Ms. Quan's push for the 9% annual contribution would yield just $6 million in savings for the city a year, which he says would have a small impact on the deficit. The two sides have yet to formally meet and discuss the measures.

Meanwhile, Ms. Quan says her retail push will be focused in Oakland's Uptown and Downtown neighborhoods, which have seen new restaurants and lounges open over the last three years. She says gains from her retail effort won't be felt for another year at least.

Meanwhile, Ms. Quan says she plans to balance the budget with budget cuts and layoffs, and wants to consolidate some departments and services, including school library programs. 

And in a sign of how accepted medical marijuana has become in California, she also wants to increase the number of dispensaries in the city to eight from four, which would bolster tax receipts by as much as $3 million. Last month, Oakland suspended a plan that would create four large-scale marijuana-growing facilities after county and federal law enforcement warned that the operations would violate laws. 

Ms. Quan says the city plans to work with its lawyers to navigate the legal questions and may scale down the size of the operations to ensure compliance.

"The same old way of doing things just won't cut it," says Ms. Quan. "We've got to dig our way out of this morass." 

 Write to  Bobby White at bobby.white@wsj.com 