Latvia's attempts to lure property investors by offering European Union residency rights to foreign investors from outside the EU have proved highly controversial and split opinion in the Baltic state.

Read the full Real Estate report.

While the scheme has indeed boosted foreign investment flows, not everybody is convinced either of its fairness to ordinary Latvians or its longer term economic benefits. 

The new law grants EU residency rights to those citizens outside the EU who acquire real estate worth at least €70,000 ($96,112). Latvia is already seeing the economic benefits of the scheme. According to figures published by the Citizens and Migration Affairs office, around €18 million ($24.7 million) has been invested in the country as a result of the new incentive. 

Unsurprisingly, the scheme has caused a stir in some political corners.  Roberts Zile, a Latvian member of the European Parliament, believes Latvia is in effect selling visas to non-EU citizens. "The amount foreign investors have to pay is relatively small whereas no incentives have been created for first-time buyers in Latvia," he says.

"This new law doesn't create any boom in the local property market. It only creates a small advantage for developers and some commercial banks." 

So far, the Latvian government has given 145 residency rights but it emphasizes the process is tough. "A residency permit will last for five years, but real estate owners must renew it every year and they must show they haven't sold the property or have acquired any debt or have unpaid bills," says  Andrejs Rjabcevs, spokesman for the office of Citizenship and Migration Affairs in Riga. 

Tough rules or not, some are also skeptical about the impact this measure could have in the country's property sector.  Aigars Smits, chairman of Arcor Real Estate in Riga, is skeptical: "Why would Latvia be so special to buy property?" he asks. "As far as I know, people can get a visa through other means. Many buyers and sellers are Russians so the money ends up circulating among them."

Incentives for foreign investors aren't new, explains  Liam Bailey, head of residential research at Knight Frank in London. "The only difference being that normally the bar to entry is much higher with a need to invest millions of pounds in the host country to have a fast-track placed on your application for residency," he says. "But in [Latvia's] case, it seems the entry level is much lower. I wouldn't be surprised if the EU doesn't ask some detailed questions on this."  