BOGOTÁ—A blast Wednesday in an underground coal mine in northeastern Colombia killed at least 21 miners and seriously injured six others, the latest in a string of disasters at small, lightly regulated mines that produce coal for Colombia's local market. 

The explosion was probably caused by combustible gases, officials said. It occurred at the mountainous La Preciosa mine, a two-hour drive south from the city of Cúcuta, which lies near the Venezuela border. 

The mine is the same one where 32 miners lost their lives in a 2007 accident. It is a locally owned mine, but officials said they don't know if ownership changed hands since 2007. 

Colombia ranks as one of the world's top coal exporters. Production destined for export markets is controlled by foreign firms including Alabama-based Drummond, Glencore International AG, BHP Billiton Ltd., and Xstrata PLC, which operate in open-pit coal mines. Small locally owned mining firms, meanwhile, continue to produce in underground mines, most of which have poor safety records.A lethal explosion in an underground coal mine in June of last year killed about 70 people and authorities estimate that a total of nearly 100 miners died last year in accidents. 

William Palacios, chief of operations for the civil defense corps in the state of Norte de Santander, said five lifeless bodies have been pulled from the mine along with six injured miners whose condition he described as "extremely serious." 

The rescued miners were near the entrance when the explosion occurred. Palacios said at least 16 other miners remain trapped further inside the mine and are presumed dead. 

"The blast was so intense that we believe those that haven't been pulled from the mine yet are probably dead," Mr. Palacios said. 

Rescue workers are creating ventilation outlets with hoses and other equipment before delving deeper into the mine to look for the remaining miners. They are worried gas may be building up again, which could lead to a second explosion, Mr. Palacios said. 

A miner speaking to a local television station near the site of the accident called the La Preciosa a "murderous" mine. 

Another miner, who witnessed the explosion from just outside the mine, told local Caracol television network the blast occurred shortly after 6 a.m. local time during a workers' shift change. 

"It began with a giant explosion and then there was lots of smoke," he said. "A group of [miners] who were sitting down, eating right near where the explosion occurred, they died immediately." 

The miner said his first day on the job was Monday but that he has no plans to continue working there. He said his brother-in-law, Manuel Aparicio, was among those killed. 

 Write to  Dan Molinski at Dan.Molinski@dowjones.com and Darcy Crowe at darcy.crowe@dowjones.com 