BEIJING—An official from China's new Internet regulator defended the nation's Internet controls from critics, saying they are in line with efforts elsewhere to protect privacy and block obscenity, gambling and other activities.

The unnamed official was quoted Thursday in a report from China's state-run Xinhua news agency that clarified the role of the new agency amid China's already crowded Internet regulatory landscape, saying the new State Internet Information Office will coordinate and streamline oversight and enforcement and will be run by officials from agencies already involved with Internet regulation.



The official said "untenable" remarks made by critics are intended to "tarnish the image of China," according to Xinhua, adding that China's policies are meant to safeguard information security and the development of the Chinese Internet amid an industry boom. "A small group of people have made irresponsible remarks about China's Internet regulations, disregarding basic fact," the official said. 

The office aims to deal with the "current bad environment of the Internet in China," which the person said included fake information, obscene and vulgar material and gambling. Many other nations have legislation in place to restrict similar activity, the official said.

China's censorship policies have become a growing source of tension in U.S.-China relations. The Obama administration has brought the issue of Internet freedom to the forefront, with U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton pledging to promote it and naming China as part of a global threat to the free flow of information. Chinese officials have pushed back, accusing the U.S. of using Internet freedom as pretext to interfere in China's internal affairs.

On Wednesday, U.S. Senator Richard Durbin (D, Ill.) wrote a letter to  Robin Li, chief executive of Chinese Internet search giant  Baidu Inc.
BIDU


-2.56
%




 expressing concerns that the company wasn't taking measures to safeguard human rights, including "freedom of expression and privacy," in light of speculation that it is planning to enter a partnership with Facebook Inc. to provide a social-networking service in China.

Mr. Durbin said he is working on legislation that would require companies to "take steps to protect human rights or face liability," and that Baidu would be subject to such legislation because its shares are traded in the U.S. 

Baidu spokesman  Kaiser Kuo declined to comment on Thursday, saying the company had just seen the senator's remarks and questions. Baidu is the most popular website in China, with more than three quarters share of the Web search market by revenue.

Chinese authorities, who use Web filtering technology to block overseas websites and require locally operated companies such as Baidu to keep prohibited content off their websites, have stepped up these efforts this year following unrest in the Middle East and in the wake of online calls to hold similar protests in China. 

Regulations are currently ordered and enforced by a number of government agencies, but Xinhua said China's new State Internet Information Office will play a supervisory role regarding managing content including Internet news, online games, and others, though the extent of how much it will streamline matters is unclear. The office will also investigate and punish what it considers illegal websites and supervise domain name and website registration.

The office will be based within the State Council Information Office, the propaganda arm of the central government. It will be headed by representatives from the SCIO; from the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, which regulates the technology and telecommunications sectors; and the Ministry of Public Security, the law-enforcement body.

An SCIO spokeswoman declined to give further details, referring questions to the Xinhua report.

Analysts say the move underscores a strong interest by the government to more closely regulate information flow and the Internet, which has become a booming business shaped by non-government owned companies despite the strict controls.

"In theory, effective centralized control should simplify the regulatory environment given the current situation of various agencies with overlapping and unclear mandates involved in managing the Internet," said  James Zimmerman, a Beijing-based lawyer with Squire Sanders & Dempsey and former chairman of the American Chamber of Commerce-China.

"However, I don't believe that the State Council's intent is to make the system more user-friendly or to divest all of the other agencies with jurisdiction over the Internet," he said. "This is really about consolidating certain key functions in an effort to better manage the government's public message and public image. Significant challenges remain for Internet companies."

—Helen Qu contributed to this article.

 Write to  Loretta Chao at loretta.chao@wsj.com 