TOKYO—Toshiba Corp. said Monday that its net profit for the three months through March doubled from a year earlier thanks to smaller restructuring costs, helping it to its first full-year profit in three years. 

But the company said its earnings in the fiscal fourth quarter were somewhat constrained by the impact of the massive earthquake and tsunami that struck northeastern Japan on March 11, which caused damage to production facilities and led to supply-chain problems nationwide. 

Toshiba, whose businesses include consumer electronics, chips and electric power, said its net profit for the fiscal fourth quarter rose to ¥97.66 billion ($1.21 billion) from ¥48.60 billion in the same period a year earlier. The growth was due mainly to the near-absence of restructuring costs that had weighed on the year-earlier figure, as well as proceeds from real-estate property sales, the company said. 

The company said the quake's impact lowered its revenue by ¥70 billion and operating profit by ¥9.7 billion in the January-March quarter. 

Operating profit for the quarter fell 9.8% to ¥98 billion from ¥108.65 billion a year earlier, while revenue fell 5.6% to ¥1.729 trillion from ¥1.831 trillion. 

For the full fiscal year ended March, Toshiba swung to a net profit of ¥137.85 billion from a loss of ¥19.74 billion a year earlier. It was the first black ink in three business years and compared with ¥127.41 billion in the year ended March 2008 before the demise of Lehman Brothers and the subsequent global economic downturn. 

Operating profit for the full fiscal year nearly doubled to ¥240.27 billion from ¥125.2 billion, while revenue rose 1.7% to ¥6.399 trillion. 

"Our flash memory business contributed a lot to our earnings," said Senior Executive Vice President Fumio Muraoka. 

Toshiba is one of the world's biggest suppliers of flash memory chips used in mobile devices such as smartphones and tablet computers, for which demand is booming. Its chip-business segment, which includes flash memory as well as other types of chips, posted an operating profit of ¥66.4 billion in the just-ended fiscal year, up sharply from ¥2.3 billion a year earlier. 

For the current fiscal year through March 2012, Toshiba forecasts a mild 1.6% rise in net profit to ¥140 billion, a 25% rise in operating profit to ¥300 billion and a 9.4% rise in revenue to ¥7 trillion. 

The company estimates the negative impact from the quake on its revenue for this fiscal year at ¥300 billion, but it expects that a growth in emerging markets will help offset the impact, Mr. Muraoka said. 

One of Toshiba's main businesses is nuclear power, and the company supplied some of the reactors at the stricken Fukushima Daiichi plant, where Japan is still struggling to cope with its worst nuclear-power disaster. Mr. Muraoka said that the accident may cause delays in some construction plans for nuclear plants due to the need for additional anti-quake measures and other safety features. 

Still, in the long run, the Fukushima accident is unlikely to change Toshiba's nuclear-power business plans, he added. 

Since the quake, a major issue facing many manufacturers is how to secure components and materials for their products. 

Analysts say the earthquake's impact on supply chains, though limited so far in the just-ended fiscal year, could become more prominent in the current fiscal year. 

Mr. Muraoka said that the quake's impact this fiscal year, including the temporary suspension of production facilities and disruption to supply chains, will likely show more in the earnings for the first half, but the pressure should ease in the second half. 

"The key is to ensure stable supplies of silicon wafers to produce flash memory chips," said SMBC Friend Research Center analyst Masao Banba. 

Toshiba's earnings are based on U.S. accounting standards. 