What are the big issues in technology today? To tell us, The Wall Street Journal Europe has recruited 25 leading lights in tech to participate in a unique project. The Tech Leader Group has offered its collective wisdom on the real tech issues facing businesses across Europe. Away from hype and passing fads, they show what's really giving them food for thought – and what they are doing about it. This unique gathering will be surveyed regularly by The Wall Street Journal Europe to offer an unrivaled view of how business is changing in the face of technological revolution.

 Dirk Jan van den Berg took office as president of the Netherlands' Delft University of Technology in March 2008, after a long career in the Dutch civil service. Delft University of Technology is the Netherlands' largest and oldest public technical university, with over 15,000 students. It is among the highest-ranked universities in the world in the field of technology.

Mr. van den Berg was born in 1953 in Hilversum in the Netherlands. He studied econometrics at the State University in Groningen before beginning an illustrious career in the Dutch civil service.

After holding several posts within the Ministry of Economic Affairs and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, he moved to New York as his country's ambassador to the United Nations. This was followed by a stint in Beijing as ambassador to China.

He served as president of the IDEA league, a network of European universities of science and technology in 2008 and 2009, and remains vice president of European Affairs of the IDEA League to this day. He is also a member of various international advisory and governmental boards related to higher education and research.

In his spare time, Mr. van den Berg is a keen photographer, having been inspired to take up the hobby in 2003, when he acquired his first digital SLR. "The introduction of the digital SLR… ended my everlasting frustration with unsatisfactory development and print work of photo laboratories during the analog days," he told the curators of the XYZ Gallery in Beijing, which hosted a retrospective of his photos of New York and Beijing in 2007. "I like my photographs to fit a template of diagonals and straights, probably reflecting a striving for rationality and order."

 Oliver Bussmann is chief information officer of SAP, the world's largest enterprise software company. Although he only joined the Germany-based technology giant late in 2009 he's become something of a social-media star thanks to his enthusiastic embrace of blogging and Twitter. It's not an activity that would have been expected of a senior executive of a business that, until recently, was seen as somewhat staid.

But he believes a modern CIO should engage with customers, analysts and other influencers of opinion outside the business as well as staff inside. The social media can provide effective tools for communication both inside and outside the enterprise.

His attitude, however, reflects the transformational role Mr Bussmann was brought in to perform which was partly to get the company using its own products internally, eating its own dog food or, as some within SAP prefer to describe it, drinking its own champagne. He got to work quickly, starting with a 100-day plan to benchmark all the business functions of the company which employs more than 50,000 people in over 50 countries.

He's gained a reputation for forward thinking, for instance, in creating IT networks which allow employees to access data using technology such as tablet computers and smartphones. It's an approach that takes advantage of growing consumer familiarity with lifestyle devices with capabilities that converge with those used by enterprise.

He has always looked for ways to improve efficiency. Prior to joining SAP, as regional CIO for North America of insurance giant Allianz, he led four business process transformations from 2006 to 2009 creating substantial cost savings. Before that he was managing director of IT for the private banking group of Deutsche Bank which he joined from IBM in Frankfurt where he began his career, rising rapidly to being manger of retail banking IT solutions.

 Eugene Buyakin, chief operating officer of computer security specialist Kaspersky Labs, joined the Moscow-based company in 1999, just two years after it was founded. The struggling start-up then just had a handful of staff, mostly scientists, notably, the founders Eugene Kaspersky and his then-wife Natalya.

Mr Buyakin, an economics graduate from the Moscow State University, brought much-needed financial skills to the organization. He'd already proved himself in the often-chaotic world of business which followed the collapse of communism and the break-up of the Soviet Union. At Russia's MKT Bank he'd been employed as a manager in the marketing department, but he rose quickly to become deputy of the board. He left to become finance director of the Rossiski Kredit Group.

When he joined Kaspersky Labs it was at the start of phenomenal growth for the company. This was made more challenging by the way it was following an almost untrodden path in the newly capitalist country. There was then no tradition of turning start-ups into global players.

By 2009 Kaspersky Labs' was sufficient to make it the first ever Russian business to be listed in the world's "Software Top 100". It entered at number 76, by virtue of almost doubling its revenues from 2008 to $360 million in 2009. Globally, only Google's software revenues grew faster over the same period.

Until recently Mr Buyakin appeared content to remain in the background with Mr. and Mrs. Kaspersky being the public face of the company which now employs more than 2,000 people world-wide.

But since January, when private equity group General Atlantic LLC took a 20% stake in the privately-owned company, his public profile has become higher. He was the one who announced to the media the company's intention to rise from being the fourth to being the world's third-largest vendor of antivirus software.

 Juan Luis Cebrián has been at the heart of the Spanish media for well over 40 years, through the transition to democracy at the end of the Franco dictatorship and, more recently, into the uncertain digital age. He is, or has been, a journalist, editor, novelist, academic and businessman.

It is as the co-founder and for 12 years editor of Spain's largest-selling daily newspaper, the left-leaning El Pais, Mr. Cebrián is best known. The paper was launched at the start of the uneasy transition to democracy. It was personally and politically challenging given that he had held senior media positions under the dictatorship.

The financial success of the paper enabled it to become the commercial platform for a huge global Spanish and Portuguese-language media empire, Prisa Group, with interests in television, radio, education, music, advertising as well as newspaper, book and magazine publishing. Mr.. Cebrián moved from the editor's chair in 1988 to become CEO of Prisa, a position he still holds despite recent difficulties.

As with other similar businesses worldwide it got caught up in the "perfect storm" of the credit crunch and income squeezed by falling audiences and advertising revenues moving to the Internet. The company was rescued in October 2010 through an investment led by the non-Spanish-speaking financiers Nicolas Berggruen and Martin Franklin.

Mr. Cebrián's latest book, "The Piano Player in the Brothel," examines the practice of journalism and its role as a protector of democracy in the face of the challenges of instantaneous electronic media. The title refers to the classic warning to a son from his father that any job is better than that of a journalist.

Mr. Cebrián has won numerous awards for journalism and is a Knight of the French Order of Arts and Letters. He graduated in journalism from the Complutense University of Madrid in 1963.

Süreyya Ciliv, 53, was appointed chief executive officer of Turkey's dominant mobile phone provider, Turkcell, on Jan. 9, 2007.

Turkcell enjoys a market share of 54% in its home country, operates in nine countries, and plans to expand into Western Europe this year, beginning with Germany, where it will offer a phone service with low international rates aimed at the country's large Turkish population.

With a young population, Turkey has experienced rapid growth in mobile telecommunications, although recent government caps on charges made a dent in last year's results for Turkcell, whose revenue fell by 0.7 billion liras in the last quarter from a year before. Mr. Ciliv has predicted single-digit growth for the current year, driven by increased demand for voice and mobile internet services.

Mr. Ciliv previously worked as Microsoft Turkey country manager from 1997 to 2000, and occupied a variety of management positions in Microsoft Global Sales, Marketing and Service Group in the U.S. between 2000 and 2007. Prior to 1997, Mr. Ciliv was the general manager and chairman of Novasoft Systems Inc., a company he established in Boston. Mr. Ciliv received his MBA from Harvard University in 1983 after successfully graduating with honors in industry and operations engineering and computer engineering from the University of Michigan in 1981.

Jean-Philippe Courtois, 49, leads global sales, marketing and services for Microsoft International, a territory that spans over 100 subsidiaries operating in over 240 countries outside the U.S. and Canada. As president of Microsoft International, Mr. Courtois drives strategic planning, global operations and key growth initiatives in developed and emerging markets.

His responsibilities also include Microsoft's world-wide public sector and communication sector businesses, which deliver strategic, high-value solutions to governments and telecommunications companies around the world.

Mr.. Courtois previously served as CEO and president of Microsoft Europe, Middle East and Africa (EMEA), where he led business planning and sales, marketing and services.

Under Mr. Courtois's leadership as president of Microsoft EMEA since 2000, the company's employee base in the region has grown to 12,000, and he successfully oversaw the acquisition of Navision, the largest Microsoft product development center outside of the U.S., and the first in Europe.

Before his role in EMEA, Courtois was vice president of world-wide customer marketing, based out of Microsoft's U.S. headquarters in Redmond, Wash. Courtois joined Microsoft in 1984 as a channel sales representative, and after holding several leadership positions rose to general manager for Microsoft France in 1994.

Mr.. Courtois sits on the Advisory Council of the European Policy Center and as well as on the Europe American Industry Council and is a board member of CSR (Corporate Social Responsibility) Europe. He also served as co-chairman of the World Economic Forum's Task Force for the Digital Divide.

Outside of Microsoft, Mr. Courtois is administrator for PlaNet Finance and Microsoft's official representative at the Institut Montaigne. He has served as co-chairman of the World Economic Forum's Global Digital Divide Initiative Task Force and on the European Commission Information and Communication Technology task force. He is currently an EU Ambassador for the Year of Creativity and Innovation in 2009.

A French national, Mr. Courtois obtained his diplôme des études commerciales supérieures from the Ecole Superieure de Commerce, Nice.

His passion for Aston Villa Football Club suggests a lingering fondness for the underachiever, but Chris Dedicoat's track record at Cisco reveals otherwise.

As President of European markets since 2004, Mr. Dedicoat's focus is, "People, people, people," both inside and outside the organization. Under Mr. Dedicoat's leadership, Cisco's European operations have not only maintained their position as the computer networking giant's biggest earner outside the U.S., but have increased reported customer satisfaction to record levels.

Speaking at the recent World Economic Forum in Davos, Mr. Dedicoat said, "Our strategy in Europe has been about innovation and productivity for the last thee years… In Europe you see some of the most competitive and innovative countries in the world."

Mr.. Dedicoat has helped focus Cisco's attention in Europe on encouraging and assisting with corporate systems' move to Cloud computing and teleconferencing, and in the last quarter of 2010, the company reported $10.8 billion in sales, a year-on-year increase of 27%. During that quarter, the London Organizing Committee announced its adoption of the Cisco Eos SaaS platform for the London 2012 Olympic Games and Paralympic Games.

Mr.. Dedicoat joined Cisco from Motorola in 1995 and subsequently held a variety of senior positions, including vice president and managing director of Cisco's U.K. and Ireland operation, and head of sales for EMEA. He holds an honorary doctorate from the University of Central England, awarded for his outstanding contribution to the field of engineering, and has a commercial pilot's license.

Warren East, 49, joined ARM from Texas Instruments in 1994 to set up ARM's consulting business. The company had been founded four years earlier as a joint venture between Apple, Acorn Computers and VSLI Technology. It is best known for its low-power processors, which are the brains in many of the world's mobile phones and entertainment systems. ARM does not manufacture its processors, but licenses their designs to clients world-wide.

Mr. East was Vice President, Business Operations from February 1998, and oversaw the company's expansion, which included new offices in Tokyo and Silicon Valley. In October 2000, he was appointed to the board as chief operating office and in October 2001 was appointed chief executive. By the end of the decade, over three billion ARM chips were being manufactured each year, with the company receiving a royalty on each device sold.

Last year, thanks in part to ARM-equipped devices such as the iPad, the company posted a 33% rise in revenue to £406.6 million, and pre-tax profit of £167.4 million, a rise of 73% on the year before.

The company's most recent venture is a not-for-profit engineering company, Linaro, formed jointly with partners including IBM, Samsung, Sony-Ericsson and Texas Instruments.

Mr. East is a chartered engineer, fellow of the Institution of Engineering and Technology, fellow of the Royal Academy of Engineering and a companion of the Chartered Management Institute. He is a non-executive director and chairman of the Audit Committee of De La Rue PLC.

Born in New York in 1955, senior vice president and chief technology officer Rich Green is responsible for defining Nokia's technology vision across hardware, software, user experience, cloud services, and developer program. Appointed in 2010, he leads a global team tasked with technical strategy and driving common technology architecture across the company to enable and attract a thriving ecosystem around Nokia's products and solutions.

The job is not without its challenges. Despite spending six times as much on research and development as Apple, Nokia has seen its once-dominant market share in Europe collapse as the company put money into developing software features that failed to capture the imagination of its customers. In a stark internal memo that was leaked online in February, CEO Stephen Elop acknowledged, "The first iPhone shipped in 2007, and we still don't have a product that is close to their experience." He later announced a tie-up with Microsoft to produce smartphones powered by Windows Mobile, rather than the Symbian system long favored by Nokia.

Prior to Nokia, Mr. Green served as executive vice president of the software division at Sun where he was responsible for all aspects of Sun's software business, including services, sales, product and business strategy, product development and more. Over his 19 years at Sun, he is credited with leading the evolution of the Unix-based operating system Solaris, leading the creation of JavaEE and JavaME and significantly expanding the role of Java across PC and mobile platforms.

Before his time at Nokia, Mr. Green also held senior roles at Cassatt Software and Nuance. Mr. Green has a bachelor and master's degrees from the State University of New York at Albany.

Mr.. Green lives in Portola Valley, Calif. In his spare time he enjoys automobile collecting and all things technology.

Herman Hauser, co-founder of Amadeus Capital Partners, is one of the pioneers of modern technology. A physicist with an entrepreneurial streak, he has been at the heart of a large proportion of commercialized science in Britain.

Most famously, in 1978 after developing a microprocessor for fruit machines with Chris Curry he launched Acorn Computers, one of the handful of companies that helped kick-start the global PC revolution. Although manufacture of its machines, including the BBC B. ceased long ago, its power-saving technology lives on through its spinoff, ARM Holdings, which licences its IP to be used in almost all the world's mobile phones and other devices such as MP3 players, digital cameras and iPads.

Mr. Hauser was also behind one of the precursors to the iPad, the Active Book, in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Then he set up an early Internet television service, NetChannel, which was sold to AOL. Since then he's been a founder or co-founder of a string of technology companies across many sectors from voice recognition to electronic share trading.

In 1997 he launched Amadeus, which now has over £470 million under management actively invested in about 40 companies in Europe and Israel at any one time. Mr. Hauser is or has been a nonexecutive director many of these companies. This has given him an unparalleled collection of business and academic connections that, combined with his rapid grasp of anything scientific, has enabled him to contribute an enormous amount to businesses simply by putting the right people in touch with each other.

Although he was born in Austria, he has spent most of his working life in England, specifically Cambridge where he first came at the age of 15 to learn English. He returned after studying physics at the University of Vienna to complete a doctorate at the Cavendish Laboratory in Cambridge. He speaks German, English, Italian and French.

In 2001, he was made an honorary CBE for "innovative service to the U.K. enterprise sector."

A veteran Dutch politician whose resolve has won her the nickname of "Steely Neelie," Neelie Kroes became the European Commission for the Digital Agenda at the European Commission in 2010, after nearly six years as European Commissioner for Competition.

Ms. Kroes was born in 1941 in Rotterdam, and was elected to the lower house of the Dutch Parliament in 1971, where she became spokeswoman for education. During a political career that lasted until 1989, Ms. Kroes occupied a variety of important posts, including Secretary of State for Transport, Public Works and Water Management. As a minister she was responsible for the privatization of the Post and Telephone Services, as well as the commissioning of the Betuwe Railway, the double-track freight railway that links the Netherlands and Germany.

After leaving politics, Ms Kroes served as a board member for a variety of companies, including Ballast Nedam, Nedlloyd, McDonald's Netherlands and Nederlandse Spoorwegen, the Dutch railway company.

She is also active in many cultural and social organizations. She is chairperson of Poets of all Nations, the Delta Psychiatric Hospital and on the board of the Rembrandt House Museum in Amsterdam.

Her current role at the European Commission brings together the business and political strands of her career history, and encompasses such policy areas as mobile telecommunications, broadband and software provision. Such is the importance of her role at the Commission that she has made the Forbes list of the world's 100 most powerful women five times in the last six years.

Ilja Laurs is the founder and CEO of GetJar, the world's largest mobile application store that is not tied to a particular manufacturer or system. GetJar makes mobile apps for all platforms (except iPhone) and quality control is by a peer review system, which makes the site a cross between Facebook and the app store.

Last year, the company was selected by Time magazine as one of the "10 Start-ups That Will Change Your Life." GetJar now has 350,000 registered software developers, and can automatically identify over 2,000 types of phone. As of December 2010, GetJar distributes over 80,000 mobile applications and serves over 100 million downloads per month. Apps are ranked by popularity, though developers can also purchase display space to make their app more prominent. The price paid is decided by an auction in which the second highest bid wins.

Since 2005 GetJar has provided global distribution and monetization services to 350,000 developers, from one-man shops to established brands such as Google, Yahoo!, Microsoft and Facebook.

Mr. Laurs was born in Lithuania in 1976, and embarked on his career as a serial entrepreneur in 1999. Before GetJar, he launched Lithuania's largest hotel reservation system LithuanianHotels.com, the mobile payment service MicroPay and the mobile games studio Gaxo Interactive.

Mr.. Laurs is passionate about high-definition and 3D photography, and maintains a blog of his favorite shots at www.geoglance.com 

Born in Ireland in 1965 but raised in Essex, England, Mike Lynch studied engineering at Cambridge University and earned a doctorate in mathematical computing. His Cambridge doctoral thesis is reportedly one of the most widely read pieces of research at the Cambridge University library. He is one of very few European academics to become a technology entrepreneur and is a pioneer of the Meaning Based Computing movement, which aims to help computers "understand" unstructured information. Mr. Lynch has founded a number of technology companies, including Autonomy, the U.K.'s largest software company by market capitalization and a member of the FTSE 100.

The aim of Autonomy is to make the random mountains of data acquired by corporations more readily accessible and searchable, using pattern-detecting algorithms that can match up -- for example -- telephone calls and emails.

Mr.. Lynch has held a number of advisory and board roles in the venture capital industry and is currently a nonexecutive director of the BBC.

He was named the Confederation of British Industry's Entrepreneur of the Year, the European Business Leaders Awards' Innovator of the Year for pioneering new approaches to search and information processing technology, and Management Today's Entrepreneur of the Year 2009. Dr Lynch won an IEE Award for Outstanding Achievement and was awarded an OBE for Services to Enterprise.

He is also a fellow of the Royal Academy of Engineering, a Lady Margaret Beaufort Fellow of Christ's College, Cambridge, and the author of a number of academic papers on the subject of Pattern Recognition and Signal Processing.

Barry Maloney, is the co-founder of Balderton Capital, one of Europe's most successful early-stage venture capital firms with experience of growing, selling and taking public companies on both sides of the Atlantic. It currently has about $1.9 billion under management. Mr. Maloney's reputation is built on a career which spans both the corporate and entrepreneurial.

For the last five years of the 1990s he was CEO of Esat Digifone, now O2 Ireland. At the time of European telecoms deregulation and and the first boom in internet provision, he was one of the pioneers. By the time he left the profitable company it had 900 employees, a million customers and revenues of IR £400 million.

As the first dot-com bubble burst in 2000 Mr. Maloney launched Benchmark Europe, the independently-managed transatlantic wing of U.S. early-stage finance specialist Benchmark Capital. In 2008 the two companies formally separated, although they remain closely linked, and the European business became Balderton Capital.

Under his leadership the firm's had spectacular successes including its 2006 investment of $15 million in social-networking website Bebo which brought a return of about $140 million less than two years later when it was bought by Time-Warner's internet arm AOL for $850 million in cash. Balderton has also been involved in many of the largest European tech exits of recent years including: online betting exchange Betfair, which floated for around $2 billion in October 2010; open source database MySQL, bought by Sun Microsystems for around $1 billion in 2008; and video rental and streaming company Lovefilm, acquired by Amazon in January 2011.

Before joining Esat Digifone, Mr. Maloney worked on global marketing for Xerox Corporation based in Palo Alto, Calif., and in a variety of roles for computer manufacturer Digital Equipment Corporation in Europe. He has an economics degree from University College Dublin.

Loic Le Meur is a serial entrepreneur and the personification of networking on and off line. He is best-known for having launched Le Web in 2004. It is now Europe's leading internet conference, bringing thousands of bloggers, start-up entrepreneurs and established online businesses from across the globe to his original home town of Paris every year.

Mr. Le Meur, however, is currently based in San Francisco where his apparently boundless energy is focused on the rapidly evolving social software application developer Seesmic.

He launched the company at the beginning of 2008 as a video blogging service, he called the "Twitter of video". It never really broke out of its niche.

So, in a dramatic change of direction, he turned Seesmic into an aggregation service. This allows users to keep up to date simultaneously with all their social media accounts including Twitter, Facebook and LinkedIn. They can do this from a computer desktop, internet browser or smartphone app.

There are other social media aggregators offering similar functions, but in September 2010 Mr. Le Meur found another way to take Seesmic in a new direction. He moved the company into the corporate space though a partnership with cloud CRM company Salesforce. Integrating Salesforce's Chatter internal enterprise social network with real-time consumer services through Seesmic will, both companies believe, create opportunities for collaboration that have not been tried before.

The agility of Seesmic reflects Mr. Le Meur's career as a serial entrepreneur. In 1996, while still an undergraduate, using a €10,000 student loan, he launched B2L one of France's early web agencies which he sold to BBDO in 2009. In 1997 he founded the country's first shared web hosting service Rapidsite France which was sold to France Telecom, followed by Tekora which created websites for SMEs and blogging pioneer Ublog which was acquired by Six Apart.

Mr. Le Meur completed his studies at the HEC School of Management in 1996.

Jass Sarai is the PricewaterhouseCooper U.K. Technology Sector Leader. In this role, Mr. Sarai leads the services PwC provides its clients within the sector ensuring that PwC provide insight, analysis and value to our clients helping them develop and implement strategies. Mr. Sarai has worked in the sector for over 12 years during which he has been based in Boston, United States and London. He has significant experience with high growth companies, SEC and U.K. listings and the issues facing companies as they grow rapidly in a market dominated by change. He is a regular host and speaker at industry events.

Philipp Schindler joined Google in 2005 and oversees the company's operations in Northern and Central Europe, including the UK, Ireland, the Benelux countries, Germany, Switzerland, Sweden, Denmark, Norway and Finland.

Before joining Google, Mr. Schindler was a senior vice president at AOL Germany, running the company's marketing and sales activities and serving as a member of their management board for six years. Within this capacity, Philipp was responsible for one of the largest marketing and sales budgets in the country, constantly innovating in the areas of direct marketing, traditional brand marketing, customer relationship management, business intelligence and data mining, and pricing. He developed a range of major sales partnerships and a number of internationally acknowledged marketing projects, winning several industry awards, such as the Golden Effie.

Previously he served as head of marketing at CompuServe in Germany, a subsidiary of AOL Inc., and also worked as an e-commerce and marketing specialist at the global AOL headquarters in the US Before joining AOL, Schindler was accepted into the top junior talent program of Bertelsmann AG, where he focused on new media activities within their global corporate strategy unit.

Mr.. Schindler earned a Diplom Kaufmann degree with distinction from the European Business School in Oestrich-Winkel, Germany. He is a scholar of Studienstiftung des deutschen Volkes and also serves on the jury of the German Marketing Award.

Ralf Schneider is chief information officer of Allianz Group, the second largest insurance and financial services organization in the world. He was promoted to the position in October 2010, 15 years after he first joined the company through its fast-track management development program. At the same time, Mr. Schneider also joined the Board of Management of Allianz Managed Operations and Services (AMOS), Allianz's shared services organization, being responsible for IT.

After a period as head of sales in Frankfurt for the Munich-based company he became head of e-business in 2000. It was the time of the dot-com boom and although direct selling of insurance policies over the Internet was in its infancy it was beginning to be seen as a threat to more traditional channels. Initially, Allianz was reluctant to start selling online.

When the board did decide to go ahead Mr. Schneider had to grapple with both the technological challenges of introducing web-based services and maintaining Allianz's strong agency network, which feared it could be undercut by the central portal. Now, a little over a decade later, the website is the established way for dealing with claims, sales and other interaction. Instead. he is dealing with semantic technology which can, without human intervention, proactively alert Allianz employees to the needs of customers and he's involved with the introduction of innovations such as smartphone apps.

At the same time as bringing in new products and services there is also a greater imperative, to cut costs. Mr. Schneider has shown IT can achieve both through a combination of communication and organization. In 2008 he collected the annual Handelsblatt Award for IT Strategy as CIO of Allianz Germany. The judges singled out Allianz for praise for the way it had been open about its own shortcomings.

Mr. Schneider has a degree in mathematics and graduated in 1992 from the University of Munich in computer science. He worked as a research assistant at the University of Munich and the University of Bremen before becoming a management consultant.

Kristian Segerstrale, 33, is chief executive officer and co-founder of Playfish, one of the largest and fastest growing social games companies in the world. As an experienced games entrepreneur, Mr. Segerstrale brings strategic vision and expertise in leadership of creative teams and corporate growth to the company. The company was sold to Electronic Arts in November 2009.

Prior to founding Playfish in late 2007, Mr. Segerstrale was a co-founder and later managing director of Europe, Middle East and Asia (EMEA) for Glu Mobile , a leading global publisher of mobile games. During his six-year tenure he successfully directed product development, sales, marketing and technology operations across Europe, and expanded Glu's reach by opening regional offices in France, Germany, Spain and Italy. Mr. Segerstrale also forged key licensor relationship across Europe with leading companies such as Konami, Celador and Codemasters among others.

Mr.. Segerstrale has been on the GDC Mobile advisory board since 2006 and was voted one of top-50 most influential executives in Mobile Entertainment in December 2006 in ME Magazine. Mr. Segerstrale, who was born in Finland, holds a master's of science degree in Economics from London School of Economics and an undergraduate degree in Economics from Cambridge University.

Joanna Shields, 48, is Facebook's Vice President for Europe, Middle East and Africa, where her goal is to turn the social networking site into the world's most valuable marketing and communications platform.

Graduating with an MBA from George Washington University in 1987, Ms Shields began her career in Silicon Valley the same year, and has created and nurtured several international technology businesses. Prior to joining Facebook Joanna served as President of AOL Social and Communications businesses. She joined AOL following its acquisition of Bebo, where she served as Chief Executive Officer and led the negotiations that culminated in the company's $850 million sale to AOL. AOL disposed of Bebo two years later, to Criterion Capital Partners, for an undisclosed price thought to be under $10 million.

Speaking to Fortune magazine about the original deal, Ms Shields said, "I go back to things my dad said: 'Your career is long and the business world is small. Always act with integrity. Never take the last dollar off the table.' In my dealings to sell Bebo, this advice was critical. You can always do a slightly better deal, but that incremental dollar or windfall is not worth creating an imbalance that affects the relationship."

Joanna grew Bebo from a small start-up to one of the world's leading social networks, and helped create a new business model for media companies to distribute and monetize their content. Bebo's first serialized drama, KateModern, was nominated for two BAFTA (the British Oscars) awards and generated over 70 million views.

Before Bebo, Joanna served as Managing Director of Strategic Partnerships for Google EMEA, responsible for building and scaling the company's Adsense syndication network in Europe, Middle East & Africa and establishing all content partnerships for Google Video, Google Books, Google Earth and Google Maps.

A strong believer in the connection between social networking and social impact, Joanna serves as a Trustee of Save the Children, and has recently started the global non-profit, KidsCode.org to promote digital knowledge and to encourage product development and coding skills in young people.

 Matthias Ummenhofer, European Investment Fund, is responsible for EIF's venture capital operations. Besides managing EIF's VC team, he is focussing on business development and shaping EIF's strategy in the early stage technology market.

Prior to joining EIF, Mr. Ummenhofer worked at European Investment Bank where he advised a member of the executive board and was involved in project financing transactions in the infrastructure sector. He has also worked in France as a consultant in the transportation and logistics sector and founded the research unit "Logistics & Environment" at the University of Aix-Marseille II. He was director for the "Environmental Application Division" of the Society of Logistics Engineers (Hyattsville, USA).

He holds a bachelor's in technical economics from the University of Karlsruhe, a master's in International Finance from the University of Aix-Marseille II, a DEA in Transport Economics and Logistics Management and a doctorate in business administration from the same school. He has lectured at business school and universities in several European countries and at the Kauffman Fellows Program in the U.S.

Joseph "Yossi" Vardi is generally regarded as the godfather of Israeli technology entrepreneurs. In 40 years, he has helped create over 60 companies. He has also had an illustrious career as a civil servant.

The early-stage investment that really put his name on the map was Mirablis, which in 1996 created the first instant messaging service on the Web, ICQ. At the time the start-up, co-founded by four young Israelis including Mr. Vardi's son Arik, was struggling to find anybody to put money into a company with no revenue stream.

But it quickly proved to be a shrewd investment when AOL bought Mirablis, for a sum believed to be around $400 million, 19 months after the launch of ICQ. It's a story that's credited with enthusing a whole generation of young Israeli technology entrepreneurs.

By the time Mirablis came along, Mr. Vardi was a seasoned entrepreneur having founded one of Israel's earliest software houses, Takam, some 27 years earlier at the age of 26. Since then he's been an angel to dozens of start-ups, a strategic advisor to Amazon and AOL as well as being a venture partner of one of the largest VC funds in Israel, Pitango. He has served on the board of many large state and private corporations.

As a civil servant he's been, amongst many roles, director general of Israel's Ministry of Development and its Ministry of Energy. He's been an advisor to the World Bank, the Bank of Israel and the United Nations Development Program. During peace negotiations with Jordan, Egypt, Syria and the Palestinians he has also acted in an advisory capacity.

Mr. Vardi is a graduate of Israel's Institute of Technology, the Technion. He has a bachelor's in industrial management engineering, an master's in operation research and a doctorate. He has won numerous awards as an entrepreneur.

Ben Verwaayen is CEO of Alcatel-Lucent, the French-American telecommunications equipment manufacturer. He joined at the end of 2008, two years after the company was formed by a merger, which was widely seen as problematic partly because of the national cultural differences between the two original businesses. As a Dutchman he was seen as something of a neutral.

Much of his time at Alcatel-Lucent has been restructuring to cope with intense competition and a fall-off in equipment orders from network owners. In February the company announced a new portfolio of products called "lightRadio" intended to meet the rapidly increasing demand for mobile bandwidth from smartphone and other device users. The company claims its innovative technology will expand network capacity, lower operating cost and reduce energy consumption.

It was not the first time he'd been brought in to run a company which journalists normally prefixed with the word "troubled". He was CEO of British telecom incumbent BT Group from 2002 to 2008 overseeing the sell-off of its mobile arm O2 to Spain's Telefonica, substantial overseas acquisitions and the decision to create the U.K.'s Internet protocol-based 21st Century Network.

Although questions have been raised since, particularly in relation to the activities of its overseas divisions, by the time Mr. Verwaayen left BT he had overseen 24 consecutive quarters of earnings growth. Before joining BT he had held a number of positions at Lucent over a period of 11 years. He came to Lucent from Dutch telecoms company KPN, where he worked after spending 13 years with ITT in Europe.

Mr. Verwaayen is also Chairman of the Confederation of British Industry Climate Change Board; an elected member of the World Economic Forum's Foundation Board; an Officer of the Order of Orange-Nassau, an Honorary Knight of the British Empire and a Chevalier de la Légion d 'Honneur. He has a graduate of the University of Utrecht, Holland.

Tim Watkins joined Huawei as the vice president of Huawei Western Europe in April 2009, after 16 years with the Canadian telecom specialist Nortel. He is responsible for sales and marketing in the Western European region, providing strategic guidance for further collaboration with leading European operators.

Established in Shenzhen, China, in 1988, Huawei has grown into one of the world's biggest mobile technology companies, with 110,000 employees worldwide and revenue in 2010 of $28 billion.

Worldwide, it has deal to supply hardware and services to 45 of the world's top 50 telecoms providers.

Since taking the reins at Huawei, Mr. Watkins has made expansion of the company's wireless business within Europe a priority. Last year, Huawei agreed a technology sharing deal with the wireless Internet specialist Option of Belgium. Under the terms of the deal, Huawei will acquire Option's wholly owned semiconductor company M4S for approximately €8 million. M4S is developing a state-of-the-art, next-generation Radio Frequency chipset to be used in devices.

"Huawei will continue to invest in Europe by collaborating with more local partners and sharing our innovative telecommunications technology, thus supporting the further growth of the telecom industry in Europe," Mr. Watkins said when the deal was signed in October last year.

As a leader, Mr. Watkins has stated that clarity of focus is the single most important facet he brings to the job.

Skype co-founder Niklas Zennström has succeeded in turning what seemed a fairly obscure technology into a collection of sometimes enormous businesses. More recently he has helped other entrepreneurs through the venture capital firm Atomico, which he launched in London in 2009.

The technology which underlies many of his companies is known as "peer-to-peer." Essentially, this means users provide part of their computing or networking capacity to help run a service.

He first used this, controversially, in 2001 when he co-founded Kazaa, a hugely popular Internet file-sharing service. It was the target of a number of lawsuits from the film and music industries.

After applying the technology to software distribution and paid digital content he had his biggest success with the Internet telephony service Skype which was sold to eBay for €2.1 billion in 2005.

He was also part of the consortium which bought it back in 2009 and he continues to sit on the board. Before that he helped start another company based on peer-to-peer, Joost, an Internet television service.

In 2006 he launched the investment group Atomico in London with an exclusive focus on innovative technology businesses. Its portfolio comprises over 40 investments including Finnish mobile game publisher which created the phenomenally successful "Angry Birds" franchise; Fon, a membership service where "Foneros" securely share their home Wi-Fi in return for free Wi-Fi access elsewhere and Fashiolista, a social media site where members share their fashion tastes.

Away from work Mr. Zennström is a skilled sailor, competing regularly in offshore races. In 2009 his team won the Rolex Fastnet Race and the Maxi Yacht World Championship. He is also an enthusiastic philanthropist, particularly in the fields of climate change and human rights.

He has degrees in business administration and engineering physics from the University of Uppsala in Sweden.

 Corrections & Amplifications  Ralf Schneider is chief information officer of Allianz Group. A previous version of this article incorrectly said he was CIO of Allianz Deutschland AG. He was promoted to the position in October 2010. At the same time, Mr. Schneider also joined the management board of Allianz Managed Operations and Services, Allianz's shared services organization, being responsible for information technology.  Turkcell has a market share of 54% in Turkey. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said they have a 16% share. 

See the full Tech Council report.