Paul McEuen, a Cornell physics professor, was on sabbatical seven years ago when he had an idea that could revolutionize his field. 

"I was thinking, 'What's the scariest thing that I could make with nanotechnology?' " he said. He came up with microcrawlers—tiny, spider-like robots. The machines have razor-sharp legs and can be programmed to spread a deadly virus or stage a coordinated attack.

Fortunately for those who fear a tiny robot uprising, Mr. McEuen was writing his first novel, "Spiral," and microcrawlers currently exist only in his fiction. 

"Spiral"—a nanoscience-fueled thriller about a molecular biologist's struggle to prevent a global bioterror attack—has turned the 47-year-old physicist into an unlikely publishing star. Foreign rights have sold in 17 countries, and publishers in Germany and the Netherlands were so enthusiastic that they published last fall, months ahead of the U.S. release. In Germany, "Spiral" appeared on the best-seller list.

Last March, producers at Chockstone Pictures, the company that adapted Cormac McCarthy's "The Road," optioned the movie rights; they hired screenwriter Robert Gordon ("Men in Black II").

Mr. McEuen, who signed a two-book deal with Dial Press, a Random House imprint, still spends most days fiddling with machines as tiny as a single molecule or atom. His creations include the world's thinnest drumhead, with a surface just one atom thick (researchers beat it with a high-frequency electrical pulse). He has made a transistor out of a single molecule, a breakthrough that could help engineers make ever-smaller electronic devices. Lately, he's been working with carbon nanotubes—minuscule cylinders made out of carbon molecules that can be used in optics and electronics—and graphene, a carbon sheet as thin as an atom.

Mr. McEuen drew on his research background while writing "Spiral," an endeavor that took seven years and some 15 drafts. "It's not really my first novel, it's been rewritten so many times," he said.

The novel opens on a U.S. battleship in the Pacific in 1946. A group of sailors have been quarantined with strange symptoms—low body temperature, paranoia, hallucinations and a fuzzy spiral-shaped growth in their mouths. Liam Connor, a fungal expert, is called in to assess the outbreak, and learns that the Japanese have created a virulent fungus at a secret biological weapons unit. Some six decades later, Connor, a Cornell biology professor, is found dead at the bottom of a gorge. His granddaughter and protégé suspect murder, and learn that he was researching uzumaki, the deadly fungus. The only clues that could help them stop a devastating biological attack are a glowing fungus and a riddle-like poem that Connor left behind. 

In the fast-paced thriller, Mr. McEuen let his inner geek shine, with details such as the formula for acceleration due to gravity (v2 = 2gh) and a description of a computer-chip transistor that's "a thousand times narrower than a human hair." 

Susan Kamil, the publisher of Random House and Dial Press, says Mr. McEuen's work reminded her of the late Michael Crichton's. After she bought the book in 2007, she and Mr. McEuen went through several additional drafts, streamlining the plot and cutting some extraneous science.

"He's a nanoscientist, so he's good at tinkering," Ms. Kamil said.

 Write to  Alexandra Alter at alexandra.alter@wsj.com 