PARIS—Fashion house Christian Dior sought to turn the page on  John Galliano on Friday, presenting his collection of fall-winter clothes in a way that carried little of its former designer's signature flair.

Instead, the French fashion house strove to re-evoke its rich history, sending old-style knickers, black-cashmere capes and dressing gowns down the runway. It dedicated the show to the "petites mains," seamstresses and craftsmen, behind the brand. A group of them took the traditional runway bow, before a standing ovation. 

Before the show, Dior Chief Executive  Sidney Toledano gave a somber speech recalling the house's history and rejecting the anti-Semitism that cost Mr. Galliano his job. "A new era starts tomorrow," Dior Chief Operating Officer  Serge Brunschwig said after the show.

Dior's challenge now will be to chart its future course—starting with choosing a new designer. Fashion houses such as Yves Saint Laurent, Valentino and Givenchy have stumbled after the departure of their founding designers. Though Mr. Galliano was the fifth designer at Dior's creative helm since its founding 64 years ago, over the past 15 years his flamboyant persona had become indelibly tied to the label.

Dior is expected to name a new designer within the next few weeks. The frontrunner is widely rumored to be  Riccardo Tisci, currently the designer of Givenchy. Dior declined to comment on Mr. Galliano's successor. Both Dior and Givenchy are part of LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton SA boss  Bernard Arnault's luxury-goods empire.

Dior cut ties with Mr. Galliano on Tuesday, after a video surfaced on the Internet appearing to show a seemingly drunk Mr. Galliano making a string of anti-Semitic remarks. Dior had suspended Mr. Galliano four days earlier after the designer was questioned by police about separate anti-Semitic remarks allegedly made during an argument in a Paris bar. 

Mr. Galliano, age 50, on Wednesday apologized in a statement for his behavior but denied making anti-Semitic or racist statements. Making anti-Semitic statements is a crime in France, punishable by up to six months in prison. He said in the statement that he would immediately seek help for his "failures." 

People close to Dior said the designer has been suffering from alcohol addiction and that it had impacted his ability to work.

Dior's new creative director will be responsible for a brand that last year made €826 million ($1.15 billion) in sales, a fraction of what LVMH's main Louis Vuitton brand makes, but enough to make it an important part of Mr. Arnault's empire. The designer will not only be responsible for couture and ready-to-wear collections, but will also set the image that trickles down to more affordable items such as Dior-branded lipstick and sunglasses.

"They handled it well. Enough. Now it's about the product," said one American retail executive, who asked not to be named.

Mr. Arnault has handled many designer transitions over the past 20 years, but none has been as sensitive as the Dior succession. LVMH has more commonly shown designers the door because their collections haven't made an impact, rather than for potential damage a designer had done to a brand.

Dior has a rich history to contend with. Mr. Galliano modernized the brand by referencing urban and youth culture via denim and leather motorcycle jackets in his early years at the label. Yet in recent years he has veered into historical territory, drawing on art and cinema from Christian Dior's era.

In his speech before the show, Mr. Toledano recalled the house's history. After World War II, Dior "sought to free women, to give them back their sparkle and joyfulness."

—Christina Binkley contributed to this article.

 Write to  Christina Passariello at christina.passariello@wsj.com 