In the partisan fight over taxing the rich, state "millionaire's taxes" have emerged as the latest and most hotly contested battleground. 

In New York, New Jersey, Maryland, Oregon and California, state governors are at war with legislatures over taxing their state's highest earners to plug revenue gaps. Advocates of the taxes say that with the wealthy riding the recovery of stock markets and global growth, and with less fortunate Americans facing unemployment and a housing slump, the top earners can best afford to foot the government's bills. Opponents say the taxes amount to a redistribution of wealth and encourage runaway government spending.

  The Saturday Essay: When Taxing the Rich Doesn't Pay 

Polls show that many voters support taxing the top 1% or 2% of earners in each state. A Marist Poll, for instance, found that 64% of New York voters support preserving New York's millionaire's tax, which hits residents of the state who earn $500,000 or more a year. 

"It's very high-powered money in that you can raise a lot of revenue without affecting many voters," said Donald J. Boyd, senior fellow at the nonpartisan Rockefeller Institute of Government. 

Yet so far, the calls for hiking taxes on top earners have fallen flat at governor's offices and state legislatures. 

In Maryland, Gov. Martin O'Malley, a Democrat, has argued against renewing a 0.75% additional tax on incomes above $1 million. The tax was enacted in 2008 and expired this past December. At that point, Maryland's top income-tax rate reverted to 5.5%. 

New Jersey's millionaire's tax, which raised the top rate to 10.75% from 8.97% for those making more than $1 million, was effective for 2009. When the legislature passed an extension in May 2010, Republican Gov. Chris Christie immediately vetoed it. This year lawmakers reintroduced legislation, but Gov. Christie has vowed to veto it if it passes.

California's top current rate of 10.3% includes an added 1% for taxpayers with incomes over $1 million. Democratic Gov. Jerry Brown has recently called for extending this tax for five years. An extension would require either a super-majority of legislators, which appears unlikely, or a public referendum, according to state tax expert David Brunori of Tax Analysts, a tax publisher. 

In New York, Gov. Andrew Cuomo, a Democrat, wants to allow the 8.97% rate on incomes over $500,000 to expire. A resolution in the state Senate supports the governor's plan, although some lawmakers have called for retaining the 8.97% rate on incomes over $1 million. 

In Congress last year, the House-passed health reform bill financed the measure in part by imposing a 5.4% surtax on those with incomes over $1 million, which was replaced by a Senate provision increasing hospital insurance taxes for affluent taxpayers, according to Clint Stretch at Deloitte Tax. In March, Rep. Jan Schakowsky (D., Ill.) sponsored a bill imposing a 45% top income tax rate on those earning more than $1 million and a 49% top rate on those earning more than $1 billion.

Though attractive to voters and many Democratic politicians, millionaire's taxes carry risks. Because the incomes of top earners are the most volatile, such taxes are among the most unstable sources of state revenue. "In general, if there were an edict from economists, it would be that states should strive for broad bases and low rates," Mr. Boyd said.

Some also argue that special taxes on the wealthy can drive the highest-earners to lower tax states. After Maryland passed its millionaire's tax, the number of residents with net taxable income of $1 million or more fell more than 30% to 4,910 in the 2008 tax year. Yet analysts say all but 2% of those million-dollar earners continued to live in Maryland, suggesting that the drop was mostly due to lower incomes during the recession.

"The problem is that, whether you have an increase or decrease in millionaires, it's difficult to prove that taxes were the cause," said David J. Rosen of New Jersey's Office of Legislative Services. 

 Write to  Robert Frank at robert.frank@wsj.com and Laura Saunders at laura.saunders@wsj.com 