The biggest private shareholder in  American International Group Inc.
AIG


0.77
%




 said Monday that he misjudged the price at which the U.S. might be willing to sell its shares in the giant insurer.

  Bruce Berkowitz, manager of the $17.5 billion  Fairholme Fund—which owns about $1.2 billion worth of AIG stock—said Monday he thinks the government will sell shares in AIG to the investing public at about $27 to $29, a price that would be less than what he paid for the bulk of his position.

"I was wrong," he said, suggesting that he earlier expected the government to part with its AIG shares at a price closer to the insurer's "book value," a measure of the company's assets minus liabilities.

AIG's book value was about $47.66 a share at the end of March, and its stock currently trades at a steep discount to that amount. AIG and U.S. Treasury officials declined to comment.

Shares of AIG hit a high of more than $50 in January, after adjusting for warrants the company issued, but lately have been swooning, partly in anticipation of a large share offering this month that will see the Treasury start selling its 92.1% stake in the bailed-out company.

On Monday, AIG shares tumbled to their lowest level since September 2010, falling $1, or 3.3%, to $29.70 in 4 p.m. New York Stock Exchange composite trading. The shares have fallen in 27 of the past 34 trading sessions and are down 38% this year.

"I ask you, guess where the public offering will come given the government is not in the business of making profits?" Mr. Berkowitz said, in a regularly scheduled shareholder call for his mutual funds. "My guess is around $27 to $29." A representative for Fairholme said Mr. Berkowitz wouldn't comment beyond his remarks on the call.

Government officials want to sell the shares at a profit but will be balancing that desire against their need to show that the U.S. is on a path to exiting from AIG completely over time. The Treasury effectively paid $47.5 billion in cash for about 1.66 billion AIG shares, making its break-even price about $28.70 a share. If the price most investors want to pay is lower than its break-even price, the government may choose to sell a smaller amount of shares initially.

If demand from investors turns out to be strong over the next two weeks, it would increase the odds the U.S. would make money on the sale, as officials anticipated last year when the stock was rallying. Some big investors, including sovereign-wealth funds, have already been contacted about the coming sale, and a few have expressed interest in buying some shares, according to a person familiar with the matter.

Mr. Berkowitz's Fairholme Fund owns about 2.3% of AIG, and only about $4.3 billion worth of AIG shares are held by investors other than the government. That pales in comparison to the nearly $50 billion worth of shares held by the U.S. government.

Because so few AIG shares trade on a daily basis, company and government officials think the stock price doesn't represent what a large number of investors think AIG is worth, according to people familiar with the matter. As the government starts selling its stake and more shares trade daily, the price may become more reflective of the company's value, they say.

The Fairholme Fund has been one of the best-performing mutual funds of any kind over the past decade. But it has struggled of late because of poorly performing investments in AIG and other financial names, such as Bank of America Corp.

Mr. Berkowitz began amassing AIG shares during the first quarter of 2010, according to FactSet, when it traded in a range of roughly $22 to $34. And for months, the investment looked smart.

The fund held 40.4 million shares at the end of February, the most recent data available from Fairholme.

The AIG stock, coupled with investments in AIG debt and other securities, brought Fairholme's position in the company to more than 9% of the fund's assets. The bulk of Mr. Berkowitz's AIG purchases came during the second and fourth quarters of 2010, according to data from FactSet.

With AIG shares now moving below $30, Mr. Berkowitz acknowledged he miscalculated. "I found it very hard to believe the government would sell its stake below book value, and right now AIG is trading at two-thirds of book value."

Unlike AIG, stocks of some large property and casualty insurers that compete with it are trading near their book values. AIG's return on equity, a measure of its profitability, is also much lower than its peers'.

The insurer last week said it aims to boost its return on equity to more than 10% over the next five years, from about 6% currently.

 Write to  Tom Lauricella at tom.lauricella@wsj.com and Serena Ng at serena.ng@wsj.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications  The Fairholme Fund held 40.4 million shares of AIG common stock at the end of February, the most recent data available. A previous version of this article incorrectly cited November holdings of 37.5 million shares as the most recent data available.