Two days before a team of American commandos killed Osama bin Laden, German officers arrested three of his suspected followers as they were allegedly preparing to detonate a chemical bomb in a crowded area near Düsseldorf. The authorities had been tracking them for months using new counterterrorism powers, which include wiretapping homes and cars, monitoring financial transactions, and infecting computers with Trojan horse-type viruses that enable internet surveillance. 

By all appearances this was an impressive victory against terror. It shows just how far Germany has come in the past decade. But it also shows how little room there can be for complacency, with or without bin Laden's living inspiration.

As in the U.S., Europe's greatest weaknesses in the fight against terrorists are the very values that double as its virtues: The presumption of innocence, religious pluralism, freedom of expression, and—particularly in Germany—a near-sacrosanct right to privacy. 

Germans were the first Europeans to reconsider the extent to which that liberal dispensation remained viable after the attacks of September 11, which were carried out in large part by resident aliens living in Hamburg. The 9/11 Commission report includes a special section on "the Hamburg contingent," which included Mohamed Atta, Ramzi Binalshibh, Marwan al Shehhi, and Ziad Jarrah, describing them as "four aspiring jihadists from Germany" who arrived in Kandahar in late 1999 and were eagerly taken in by Al Qaeda's leaders for their "fluency in English and familiarity with life in the West." 

In late 2001, Berlin began tightening its antiterror laws and giving its security services greater leeway in going after terrorism suspects. The government sanctioned some digital and physical profiling, expanded the authorities' access to other forms of personal data, and revoked religious groups' exemptions from investigations and surveillance.

Yet these moves have been deeply unpopular with segments of the German public. Despite a number of notable antiterror successes, Germany remains a European hub for jihadis, and its law-enforcement officials are still hampered by stricter constraints and closer oversight than their peers elsewhere. German officials have estimated that up to 1,000 residents are potential recruits to jihad. When one such jihadi, Kosovo-born German resident Arid Uka, murdered two American soldiers at Frankfurt Airport in March, prosecutors cited German privacy laws to explain why Uka had not been under surveillance despite his online links to radical groups. Berlin is now debating whether to scrap its post-9/11 measures, which are due to expire at the end of the year. 

The story is broadly similar elsewhere in Europe. Britain had already given its police sweeping stop-and-search powers before 9/11, and law enforcement's options against suspected terrorists have only become more robust since then. On Monday five Londoners, reportedly of Bangladeshi origin, were detained after they were spotted filming near a nuclear power plant in Northern England. Though they were released yesterday without charges, their case illustrates the vigilance—and, after bin Laden's death, palpable nervousness—of Britain's security services.

Yet as in Germany, many Britons are deeply uncomfortable with the new security measures. David Cameron's year-old government has rolled back some of Britain's post-9/11 anti-terror measures, lowering the maximum time that detainees may be held without charge to 14 days from 28. Authorities also still have little power to go after Muslim leaders who preach radicalism, so long as they are not directly preaching violence.

One case in point is the East London Mosque, which caused outrage in 2009 when it allowed an outside group to broadcast a video sermon by Anwar al-Awlaki, al Qaeda's U.S.-born star recruiter linked to some of the 9/11 hijackers as well as, more recently, Fort Hood shooter Nidal Malik Hasan and Times Square bomber Faisal Shahzad. The video was then followed by a live question-and-answer session with the cleric. But as the mosque offered in a Nov. 2010 statement, it had contacted the police ahead of time and "they did not raise any objection to the event going ahead, nor was any concern expressed about the inclusion of a video of Anwar al-Awlaki."

The Netherlands, France, Belgium, and most other countries in Western Europe have similarly tightened antiterror laws since 9/11—precisely because they all harbor increasingly radical Muslim populations. Britain's Richard Reid, Germany's Ahmed Sidiqui and France's Naamen Meziche are just a few of the headline-grabbers, but Western officials have told the Journal that CIA drone strikes over Pakistan's tribal areas have killed European jihadists along with Arabs. U.S. troops routinely report from Afghanistan that their enemy includes Muslims from Europe.

Europe today presents, on balance, a far more difficult environment for jihadists to plot and carry out their attacks than it did 10 years ago. That's the result of better intelligence and police work—and of an Islamist movement that finds itself running for cover in former sanctuaries such as Afghanistan, Pakistan and elsewhere. 

For now, the obvious need is to make sure there's no let-up in the domestic effort against terror. But the deeper challenge for European leaders is to match the work of their security services with a broader ideological effort to combat extremism. Nicolas Sarkozy has made a start with the French ban on burqas and niqabs. Both Mr. Cameron and Angela Merkel have been outspoken in their criticism of multiculturalism, which in practice has meant a dangerous tolerance for radical and illiberal sentiments. 

These are good beginnings. In the end, the key is to persuade the broad majority of Europeans that true liberalism must have some regard for its own survival. We trust that's not a hard case to make.