Unless your team has Ozzie Smith doing backflips at shortstop, defense is decidedly un-sexy. All the home runs the Yankees hit have been much more effective at grabbing headlines than the steady defense they have played under manager Joe Girardi. 

There's no question the Yankees in the past few years have been a premier defensive club, and they returned nearly the exact same team as last season—plus Russell Martin, Andruw Jones and Eric Chavez, all former Gold Glove winners. 

"We have guys—I mean, we have 16 Gold Gloves on the bench. I heard that the other day," marveled Alex Rodriguez.

So why, statistically speaking, are these Yankees so defensively mediocre so far?

While defensive metrics remain a work in progress, it's still possible to get a sense of who's good and who's not—and the Yankees, for all their hallowed glovemen, rank in the middle of the pack in every major team defensive category. 

One of the best ways to measure team defense is defensive efficiency—a measure of how often balls in play are converted to outs. It accounts for range, errors and strong fielding all at once. Last season, the Yankees were the fifth-best defensive team by efficiency, converting 72% of balls in play into outs. This season, they're further behind—the Yankees are a middle-of-the-pack 18th in defensive efficiency to this point, converting 71% of balls in play into outs. 

The four best defensive teams in baseball by efficiency rating are the Tampa Bay Rays, Anaheim Angels, Florida Marlins and Texas Rangers. Not coincidentally, all four are fighting for their division leads. Meanwhile the Yankees are making errors at an uncharacteristic rate. 

Say what you will about Derek Jeter's range, but when it comes to the balls he does get to, he's consistently sure-handed. He sets the tone for a Yankee team that last season was baseball's best at avoiding errors, making only 69 all season. This year they sit in the middle of the pack, tied for 18th-best in the majors. New York's 22 errors puts them on pace for roughly 100 this year. 

If you break the numbers down a bit, however, the picture improves. Six of the errors are by pitchers—three by CC Sabathia and two by A.J. Burnett. Another three came courtesy of new catcher Martin, all of which were throwing errors. The major culprit is backup shortstop Eduardo Nunez, who has looked uncomfortable in the field and has made five errors already. Take away the pitchers and Nunez, and the Yankee regulars are as steady as ever. 

Judging by the Ultimate Zone Rating statistic on the website Fangraphs.com, some of the key Yankees are actually excelling in the field. Derek Jeter's range ratings are better than last season, and Rodriguez, two years removed from hip surgery, is exhibiting range statistics that are the best of his career at third base. That's no illusion, Girardi said.

"I think he has moved better at third base this year than I've seen in a couple years," Girardi said. "Some plays going in, some plays going to his right, some plays going to his left."

It's on bunt plays where Rodriguez' improvement is most visible, Girardi said. "Some of the plays that he's made on bunts, a lot of times you're throwing off one leg there. I think he's definitely more comfortable and feels better," he said. 

Meanwhile, outfielders Brett Gardner and Curtis Granderson are posting strong fielding statistics and making flashy plays, while Chavez and Jones have played well in the field. 

The drop in defensive efficiency should be largely attributable to the errors, which, coming from rookie backups and veteran pitchers, aren't necessarily the kind worth panicking about. 