Mark Richard grew up in the 1960s in southern Virginia, where his Cajun parents landed after struggling to make a go of it in Louisiana, Texas and Kansas. The doctors had told Mark's parents that he was "different," as he relates in his affecting memoir, "House of Prayer No. 2." Indeed, he was. The boy not only suffered from severe hip ailments; he also bit people at parties and had visions of angels.

Not that he was particularly religious. If anything, he was hostile to religion as a child. During an early stint at Crippled Children's Hospital in Richmond, he noticed a sign with Jesus' words "Suffer the little children to come unto me" painted in big letters. Misunderstanding it, he wondered: "What kind of jerk would want little children to suffer?" The boy had plenty of time to wonder, with months at home in full-body casts recovering from surgery. At one point his doctors simply nailed his hips to other bones, only to remove the nails later. ("It's not so much the pain, it's the squeaking of the nails.") The experience, though, gave him no new appreciation of Christ's crucifixion.

Much of "House of Prayer No. 2" is about a writer's maturation and his slow arrival at religious belief. Mr. Richard tells his story with vivid, second-person prose. ("At the hospital they strip you naked and scrub you with tar-smelling delousing soup.") The approach provides a narrative distance uncommon to memoirs, one that invites the reader to share in the writer's experiences.

Thus we're taken through a Southern childhood marked by copperhead snakes, fried bread and eccentric neighbors. Mr. Richard's mother was homesick for Louisiana and often depressed; his father was an alcoholic and a perfectionist; his own ailments were a constant misery—and yet he didn't see himself as a victim. Mr. Richard's time in the hospital showed him much worse suffering. (After checking in, he figured out that he had been given a "dead kid's bed.") Back home he saw that many poor children in Virginia's lowlands had it far worse.

An unlikely job as a teenager at a radio station led him into producing a Gospel show that made him wish he were a true believer. But he was more of a hell-raiser: "The first time you are arrested it is for assaulting a police officer." (The officer didn't appreciate being shot with a water pistol.) His best friend's father, a preacher, got him out of jail and told him that the end of pride is the beginning of forgiveness. "The Preacher says that he is a sinner, that his witness is that of one beggar telling another where to find bread."

But Mr. Richard wasn't ready to start looking yet. His doctors told him that he would be in a wheelchair by the time he was 30 (they were wrong), and so he decided to experience as much of life as he could before becoming incapacitated. Often having to use crutches or a cane, he plunged into a routine of drinking, womanizing, and working at one job and then soon another—a deck hand on a scallop trawler, a military reporter, a private investigator, a house painter.

 By Mark Richard  Doubleday, 201 pages, $23.95

Then he embarked on the most unlikely job of the bunch: trying to make a living as a writer. He moved to New York in the 1980s and cobbled together $2,000 to spend on a renowned fiction-writing course taught by editor and writer Gordon Lish. The two had a combative relationship, but the course was a transformative experience. Mr. Richard's first short-story collection, "The Ice at the Bottom of the World" (1989), won the PEN/Hemingway award for debut fiction. More books and university teaching jobs followed. This section of "House of Prayer No. 2," recounting the author's success, is inevitably less compelling than the earlier tales of struggle and illness. But Mr. Richard's descriptions of finally becoming a grown-up—of finding God and of falling in love with a woman he has known for years—provide some of the book's most satisfying moments.

"One morning you are lying on the extra bed on the sunporch, where she's been letting you stay," he writes of the budding romance, "and you can see her through the open door in her office wearing a pair of her father's old pajamas, with her feet up, drinking coffee and smoking a cigarette, reading the sports page, and you think, Her." They married and went on to have three sons—one of whom suffers from the same chronic affliction as his father. Mr. Richard came to see his own childhood as "a kind of God's redemptive grace" that prepared him to parent a boy with physical handicaps. 

He felt a "call to ministry" and made a few failed runs at seminary. In the end, the call manifested itself in a beautiful demonstration of love in action. On a visit with his mother in Virginia—his father left her years earlier—Mr. Richard became deeply involved in the construction of a new sanctuary for a Pentecostal church called House of Prayer No. 2, where his mother's face was often the only white one in the congregation. Mother and son began attending together.

The German theologian Oswald Bayer once said that "self-forgetfulness" is the gift of faith. As Mr. Richard abandons his pride and self-reliance, "House of Prayer No. 2" becomes less about him and more about the transcendental. It's a liberating demonstration of the power of faith, showing beggars where the bread is.

—Mrs. Hemingway is a writer in Washington, D.C.