Landlord  Joseph Moinian has successfully fended off a bid to wrest control of his 3 Columbus Circle Manhattan office tower, as he reached a deal last week to block a takeover attempt by mogul  Stephen Ross, chairman of Related Cos., according to people familiar with the matter.

Mr. Moinian, in a partnership with landlord SL Green, paid a Related-Deutsche Bank venture more than $270 million to relinquish control of a $250 million mortgage on Mr. Moinian's property, multiple people involved with the deal said, people said.

Mr. Moinian and SL Green will have 50-50 control of the property while Mr. Moinian will own slightly more than 50% of the building, people said. The deal values the property at about $500 million.

The agreement puts to an end a high-profile battle between two prominent New York City developers--one that was closely watched in the industry given the unusually aggressive action by Mr. Ross. 

This summer, Related, in a venture with Deutsche Bank, bought the mortgage on Mr. Moinian's property for about face value with the intent of foreclosing, demolishing the building, and putting a tower anchored by a Nordstrom in its place. That seemed a likely outcome because the development was under severe financial distress.

Mr. Moinian, facing debt woes throughout his portfolio, was effectively bailed out by SL Green in the fall, with the Manhattan firm agreeing to put up the necessary funds to pay off the troubled mortgage and take it off of the hands of Related and Deutsche Bank. Under the terms of the new deal, SL Green will pay off the debt with a short-term bridge loan, people said. 

While the takeover attempt failed, the deal hands Related and partner Deutsche Bank a gain, with the duo taking in more than $20 million over the face value on a loan that lasted less than six months. 

Still, the outcome is significantly less than the Related venture had sought, as it asked in court for a pre-payment penalty of $54 million from Mr. Moinian. The money ultimately paid to Related likely includes millions in interest payments that have accrued in recent months. 

The litigation had put pressure on Mr. Moinian, given that he had difficulty continuing renovations on 3 Columbus Circle before he reached a resolution over the payments to Related. In court, his lawyer,  Stephen Meister, likened the presence of Mr. Ross to a cancerous tumor, requesting a "Ross-ectomy" that removed him from the mortgage. 

While the deal marks the exit of Related, Deutsche Bank is planning to stay in the deal as a mortgage holder, people involved said, along with SL Green.