JAKARTA—Bank Indonesia kept its overnight benchmark rate at 6.75%, but it said it remains ready to raise borrowing costs and would allow the rupiah to appreciate to curb inflation. 

"The decision (not to raise interest rates) doesn't change Bank Indonesia's tight monetary policy bias in order to rein in inflationary pressures that remain high," the central bank said after its monthly rate-review meeting. "Bank Indonesia will continue to watch inflation, and will adjust the BI rate in a measured manner if necessary."

Thirteen of 17 regional economists polled by Dow Jones Newswires expected Bank Indonesia to keep the benchmark rate steady after raising it by 0.25 percentage point last month. The other four economists forecast a 0.25-percentage-point rate increase this week. 

The official Statistics Agency said Tuesday that the consumer price index, which is used to gauge inflation in the country, rose 6.84% on-year in February, compared with 7.02% in January. However, annual core inflation—which excludes volatile food prices and costs controlled by the government—accelerated to 4.36% from January's 4.18% rise. 

Bank of America Merrill Lynch economist Hak Bin Chua, who had forecasted Bank Indonesia to pause this month, expects it to resume tightening with a 0.25-percentage-point next month given higher core inflation and rising global oil prices. 

Meanwhile, OCBC economist Gundy Cahyadi, who was among those who expected an increase, said Bank Indonesia's lack of consistency in guiding the market could be a point of concern. 

The initial reactions in the local financial markets were positive. The dollar was down to 8,785 rupiah, the lowest since June 2007, after news of the rate decision hit the market, compared with 8,790 rupiah earlier and 8,805 rupiah late Thursday. Nearing the close of the domestic market, however, the dollar rebounded to 8,790 rupiah, with four dealers suspecting Bank Indonesia to have bought around $100 million in total to slow the dollar's fall. 

Indonesian shares extended gains and ended up 1.4%, led by buying in most bank and consumer-related stocks. 

Bank Indonesia said that it remains optimistic that inflation this year will be contained within its 4%-6% target and 3.5%-5.5% next year after it implements a raft of measures including raising the mandatory funds commercial banks have to keep with the central bank to absorb excess liquidity. 

The central bank said that the rupiah's recent appreciation hasn't hurt its exports, another justification to let local unit appreciate further. 

Still, Bank Indonesia Gov. Darmin Nasution underlined that the central bank won't allow the currency to excessively appreciate. 

Earlier in the day, Statistics Agency Chairman Rusman Heriawan said inflationary pressures are easing as the country enters its main harvest season. However, some economists and fund managers still expect inflation expectations to remain high, even if the headline figure eases. 

"The onset of the harvest season is likely to dampen headline inflation. But core inflation would pick up further as growth stays strong and inflation expectations get further stoked," HSBC economist Wellian Wiranto said. 

 --Joko Hariyanto and Andreas Ismar contributed to this article.  

 Write to  Farida Husna at farida.husna@dowjones.com 