GREENVILLE, S.C.—The first debate of the Republican presidential race featured a series of spirited exchanges, with five largely lesser-known candidates taking shots at President Barack Obama on foreign policy and the new health-care law while showing differences among themselves.

Read about the potential Republican presidential contenders.

Just days after Mr. Obama scored one of the biggest triumphs of his presidency with the killing of Osama bin Laden, several of the candidates laid into Mr. Obama for actions taken elsewhere in the world. 

Former Minnesota Gov. Tim Pawlenty congratulated Mr. Obama on the bin Laden killing but complained that the president had deferred to allies in the intervention in Libya. "If he said [Libyan leader] Moammar Gadhafi must go, he needs to maintain the options to make Gadhafi go. And he didn't do that," Mr. Pawlenty said.

Former Pennsylvania Sen. Rick Santorum said the favorable parts of Mr. Obama's foreign policy were continuations of policies laid out by his predecessor, George W. Bush. Otherwise, Mr. Obama has "gotten it wrong every single time,'' he said, citing the president's policies toward Libya, Iran and other countries.

The debate had all the pomp of a nationally televised forum, but the dearth of contestants and the lack of big names illustrated how tentative the Republican race remains.

Joining Messrs. Santorum and Pawlenty were former Godfather's Pizza CEO Herman Cain, former New Mexico Gov. Gary Johnson and Rep. Ron Paul of Texas.

In the aftermath of the successful hunt for bin Laden, the candidates were asked if they supported enhanced interrogation techniques such as waterboarding. The audience at the Peace Center Hall applauded wildly when all the candidates except Mr. Paul and Mr. Johnson raised their hands.

The candidates showed disparities on foreign policy. Mr. Johnson, a libertarian, said the U.S. should pull out of Afghanistan "tomorrow." Mr. Cain, an Atlanta-based radio personality, said it remained unclear why the U.S. was still fighting in Iraq and Afghanistan.

But Mr. Pawlenty and Mr. Santorum both argued for a more muscular stance overseas, particularly toward Iran and Libya. 

The five also showed wide differences on social issues, with the two libertarians on the stage, Mr. Paul and Mr. Johnson, arguing that the government shouldn't interfere in personal decisions on drug use or gay marriage. Mr. Paul got laughs and applause when, speaking in one of the most conservative corners of the state, he defended the right to use heroin.

For a variety of reasons, many of the most recognized figures eyeing a 2012 run didn't show up in Greenville, including former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney, former House Speaker Newt Gingrich, and former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee. 

Of those who did take the stage, none has garnered more than 10% support in any recent poll. Those who joined the debate, co-sponsored by the state GOP and Fox News, stood to benefit most simply from being seen on national television. 

Mr. Paul, a frequent presidential candidate, is fairly well known within his party, but a recent Gallup poll found less than half of Republicans had heard of Messrs. Pawlenty and Santorum, and far fewer were familiar with Messrs. Cain or Johnson.

The candidates studiously avoided attacking one another. Asked to critique one of Mr. Romney's biggest political vulnerabilities—the health-care plan he signed while governor of Massachusetts—Mr. Pawlenty said it wasn't fair to attack someone who wasn't there to defend himself.

Asked if he objected to Mr. Gingrich's multiple marriages, Mr. Santorum instead jumped to the former congressman's defense, saying that he learned from his mistakes.

All the candidates were asked to tick off Mr. Obama's chief vulnerability. Nearly all cited the economy and gas prices. Nodding to the strike on bin Laden, Mr. Cain said, "One right decision does not a great president make."

 Write to  Neil King Jr. at neil.king@wsj.com 