PARIS -- It's getting harder to keep a secret in the world of fashion. 

Last night, for example, Lady Gaga tweeted, "I have a monster fashion announcement are your paws up? I am so excited I might give birth to a machine gun." 

This is no small thing. Lady Gaga has 8.5 million followers.

And for the record, Lady Gaga did in fact give birth to a machine gun, in the new video for her single "Born This Way," which was released on Monday—the same day that I met with  Nicola Formichetti, Gaga's stylist, friend and the creative director of the  Thierry Mugler fashion house.

As "Born This Way" played in the studio from an iPod and models such as  Jessica Stam walked back and forth in their tight-fitting Mugler ensembles on Monday, Mr. Formichetti spilled the beans: Yes, Lady Gaga would be walking the runway for his first women's show on Wednesday night. "Don't write it. Please," he said. Some things, he said, need to retain an element of surprise.

But Lady Gaga's excitement, what with the machine-gun birthing and all that entails, must have gotten to her. Just an hour after her first announcement, she tweeted "I'm making my debut as a runway model, walking in  MUGLER PARIS FASHION SHOW 3/2," and noted that her as-yet unheard song "Government Hooker" will be part of the music accompanying the show. Vigorous retweeting ensued.

Although the music hadn't yet been finalized as of Monday, "Hooker," as Mr. Formichetti calls the song, is expected to be mixed with the sound of Gaga's voice counting in German—"eins, zwei, Mugler!"—and finished with "Born This Way," a song about an individual who hails from a place called "GOAT," or "Government Owned Alien Territory." (Evidently there are Government Hookers on GOAT.) 

The show, which begins at 9:30 pm will be live-streamed via Facebook starting at 9:00 pm Paris time  

Also making an appearance will be  Rick Genest, an entirely tattooed man known as Rico or Zombie Boy to his Internet fans. Mr. Genest, who served as a muse to Mr. Formichetti for his first Mugler menswear collection unveiled in February, also shows up in Lady Gaga's "Born This Way" video. In it, he and Gaga dance--well, she dances, he kinda just stands there looking cool and aloof. They are wearing matching Mugler tuxedos, and her face is made up to resemble his. That is to say, they look like a pair of punk skeletons. 

"She is transformed into him," explained Mr. Formichetti. "It's amazing."

Mr. Genest, whose Twitter handle is @Ricothezombie, also divulged his involvement in the Mugler women's show via Twitter, writing on Sunday "Off to Paris tomorrow for the Mugler Women's Fashion Show! Sweet."

At the fittings on Monday, even though the models didn't yet know that they would be sharing a runway with the famous pop star, Gaga-ness was in the air. One Asian model named Ming, asked Mr. Formichetti, "When is Gaga coming to China?"

"It's complicated," he said, tapping a Marlboro Gold into a small glass. "But we're going to come to India!" 

The livestream of Mr. Formichetti's menswear show last month has been viewed more than 120 million times since then. Expect this show to generate even more excitement, both on and off the Internet. 

Now, we're off to the show. Eins, zwei, Mugler!

 Write to  Rachel Dodes at rachel.dodes@wsj.com 