Let's get it in writing:

I, Brett Lorenzo Favre, recently of Minneapolis and permanently of Hattiesburg, Miss., do hereby formally declare my official retirement from the National Football League. I understand what this means, and my fingers are not crossed behind my back.

This contract means I will not play football next year in the NFL. It means that in the spring, when the weather warms and minicamps begin, I will not torment the nation by unretiring or thinking about unretiring. I will not send a text message to an ESPN reporter that says, "FEELING BTTR THN EVR. THKING COMBACK." I will not slowly drive my truck past high-school-football practices or "accidentally" show up at the NFL combine and throw bullet passes to draft candidates. I will do my best to stay off Deadspin and TMZ.

If I throw passes "for fun," it honestly has to be "for fun." Or at least for a Wrangler commercial.

I hereby agree to not quietly reach out to the following: the Washington Redskins, the Oakland Raiders, the Tennessee Titans, the San Francisco 49ers, the Miami Dolphins, the Denver Broncos, the Carolina Panthers or that Russian guy who owns the New Jersey Nets.

I will officially get fat. I will have seconds and thirds and desserts. I will publicly vow to lose weight. I will go on a revolutionary diet. I will make an infomercial with Dick Butkus and/or Mike Golic. I will cha-cha on "Dancing With the Stars." People will tell me that I look more fit than I did 20 years ago.

But still, I will not come back to the NFL.

I will stay connected to the game. I will get a job on ESPN. It's the least they can do. I will sit behind a desk with other manly men and joke about Tom Brady's hair. I will laugh a lot, because that's what you do on those programs. I will show Dan Marino and Terry Bradshaw how it's done. I will call Boomer Esiason "Norman." I will call Cris Collinsworth "Chris."

I will also explain how to beat the Green Bay Packers. That will be my main expertise. I will tell anyone, anytime, how to beat the Green Bay Packers. I will do that for free.

One small caution: I will not wear a tie on TV. I will not shave, either. I prefer to wear a tattered cap and a hooded sweatshirt. I do not need laundry service.

I am permitted to explore football options outside of the NFL. I am allowed to flirt with the Canadian Football League. I can play Arena Football. I can coach. But I am not crazy enough to coach.

I may show up in strange places. I may do "30 Rock." I may buy a brownstone in Brooklyn. I may run the Doha Marathon. I may guest-edit Deadspin. I may sit in the front row at Diane von Furstenberg. I may leg wrestle with Vladimir Putin. I may appear on the red carpet at the Venice Film Festival alongside Isabelle Huppert and Jeff Goldblum. I may not explain why.

The only thing I can't do is play in the NFL again.

I will try to stay out of the headlines and reestablish my legacy as one of the greatest quarterbacks who ever lived. And when I go back to my house, I will not secretly call Mike Holmgren about a Cleveland Browns tryout.

Double pinky-swear. 

Signed,



————————

 Brett Favre

 January 2011

 Write to  Jason Gay at jason.gay@wsj.com 