From the aerial exploits of "Spider-Man" on Broadway to the massive, mobile sets of the Metropolitan Opera's recent "Das Rheingold," stage productions are growing ever more technologically complicated, and audiences have more and more to take in—stunts, projections, fantastical (sometimes unreliable) sets.

But at what point is it too much—not for the art form, but for the brain? When creators ramp up the spectacle, can human gray matter keep up?

That's a question for a neuroscientist, preferably one who's interested in performance, such as Rodolfo Llinas, a professor of neuroscience and chairman of the department of Physiology & Neuroscience at the NYU School of Medicine. Dr. Llinas—who, by the way, will discuss dreams and reality at the Rubin Museum of Art on March 30—was willing to explain a few things to Culture City about how the brain perceives performance.

My central question—how much can the brain process during a performance—arose after a recent visit to the Canadian Opera Company's production of "The Nightingale and Other Short Fables" at the Brooklyn Academy of Music. This short opera by Stravinksy was given a grand visual staging by director Robert Lepage (who helmed the aforementioned "Rheingold" and will use 3-D projections—glasses not necessary—for "Siegfried" next season at the Metropolitan Opera). The nightingale's story is told through elaborate puppets that are manipulated by opera singers, many of whom are positioned in a rectangular pool of water about four feet deep. Behind the moat is a 40-member chorus. Behind that, an 80-piece orchestra. Above it all: English surtitles.

Afterward, I felt I had seen a brilliant puppet show on a beautiful set—but I could barely recall the music (except for Olga Peretyatko in the title role). A friend who loved it questioned my disjointed view: If you love the way Stravinsky's music works with Balanchine's ballets, why can't you enjoy his music with puppets?

I contend that the real equation was puppets plus singers plus lake plus chorus plus orchestra plus titles. Stravinsky-Balanchine ballets are normally just music and movement.

When I proposed all this to Dr. Llinas, he invoked a classic research paper —"The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two: Some Limits on Our Capacity for Processing Information"—written in 1956 by cognitive psychologist George A. Miller. The central idea is that the brain can easily judge and retain seven elements, give or take two. Furthermore, we can recognize one, two or three objects without counting them. But the higher the number of objects—closer to seven (though other research suggests it may be less)—the harder you have to work. 

"You have only so many variables you can hold in your brain," Dr. Llinas said. If those variables are stage elements, one must be actively engaged with all of them to draw a rich experience from show. So dance might be easier to watch than a floating puppet opera. "If the music and dance are somehow synchronized and coherent, they become one entity. If the tempo of the music and speed of the dancing is not in register in any way, they don't become one entity. You are forced to either look at the guy jumping or listen to the music."

The choice of what element to focus on may be a matter of taste. "People come to opera from different angles—theater, music, visuals," said Alexander Neef, the Canadian Opera Company's general director. "The visual people will say, 'That's exactly what we want for opera.'"

But the trend toward maximum visuals has a counterbalance in minimalist productions. The set for Peter Brook's "A Magic Flute," coming to Lincoln Center Festival this summer, contains only bamboo poles. And recent productions of Shakespeare—such as the Public's recent "Timon of Athens," and Fiasco Theater's "Cymbeline"—have been visually spare.

Does it follow that less is more? In a way, yes, argues Dr. Llinas: "Say you go to see [Ionesco's] 'Rhinoceros' or [Beckett's] 'Waiting for Godot.' There is a minimalist dialog, a minimalist scenic event. You are forced to think and enter into some sort of prolonged imaging event inside your head, which requires a certain effort. Intellectuals love it because that's what they do."

This mental space is what differentiates the stage arts from, say, television. "With almost anything on television," Mr. Neef said, "there is just one way to understand it. It is not open to reflection. That is what we never do. We want to engage you in a dialog."

Joseph Melillo, BAM's executive producer, gave the example of watching an austere work by a stage artist such as Robert Wilson. "There has to be some quality on the stage that the minimalism supports, so you are getting something emotionally or psychologically within that visual environment," he said.

There is no right or wrong, but it will determine your experience in the theater. Maximum visuals engage you by providing draws for your attention; minimum visuals allow you to imagine more deeply. 

And where will you find the good Dr. Llinas? Though he saw "Das Rheingold," his taste is for Japanese Noh drama. "The issue is not the number of notes but the duration. The notes have these prolonged sounds," he said, mimicking one long, eerie note.

Great costumes, too.

 Write to  Pia Catton at Pia.Catton@wsj.com 