Many of the budget deficits that blindsided states—and sparked emergency tax increases and spending cuts—stem in part from the states' unduly rosy revenue forecasts, a new study said.

In a report Tuesday, economists at the Pew Center on the States and the Nelson A. Rockefeller Institute of Government conclude that states increasingly overestimate their tax revenue during tough economic times. The report's authors calculate that during the depth of the latest recession in 2009, income forecasts by all 50 states overshot reality by a total $49 billion.

"During downturns—when it matters more than ever for states to get it right—more states are not only getting it wrong, but making larger errors," the report said. The median state overestimated by 10.2% in 2009, with the least-accurate estimates in Arizona, New Hampshire, Oregon and North Carolina, all of which overshot by more than 25%, the study found. 

That is the opposite of what happens during periods of normal economic growth: In 16 of the 23 years tracked, the median revenue estimate was under by 1.5%, leading to a $10 billion surplus nationally, in 2009 dollars. Over the life of the 23-year study, the median error was 3.5%, or $25 billion in inflation-adjusted dollars. 

The inflated estimates during downturns lead states to constantly rebalance their budgets—by cutting services or raising taxes—as revenue comes in lower than planned. In New York, for instance, the state's budget-gap estimate for the fiscal year that ends this June started at $4.6 billion, but eventually doubled to $9 billion, which eventually resulted in cuts across the state government, including aid to local governments and schools. 

Low-ball estimates also can be a problem. Rather than saving the surpluses, lawmakers tend to cut taxes or spend the money on new programs, leading to bigger service cuts or tax increases when times eventually get tight. 

The off-the-mark forecasts are due in part to the increasing volatility of states' revenue. States are depending more on income taxes to fund their operations—with the exception of the seven states including Texas and Florida that don't have personal income taxes. Income-tax revenue can fluctuate widely because the wealthier taxpayers who make up a large share of the tax base have relatively large gains and drops in their taxable income. Meanwhile, sales-tax revenue hasn't kept pace with economic growth—and is less predictable—due in part to outdated tax codes. Those tax codes miss a large portion of economic activity because they were written for a time when manufacturing was a larger share of the economy, when goods were bought in stores and not online, and people spent just a sliver of their income in the service sector. 

 Write to  Conor Dougherty at conor.dougherty@wsj.com 