My husband and I have been married almost nine years. We have shared a joint banking account for two years. I hate it. Even though the concept of "his money" and "my money" dissipated into that of "our money" years ago, the actual joining of our accounts has left me feeling monitored.

Regular readers know by now that Joe is a financially responsible guy whose careful oversight of our home finances allows us to live a comfortable life. But because technology permits him to check in online to see the day-to-day movement in what is now our account, I feel a lack of privacy and autonomy.

Last week, when chatting on the phone at work with Joe, I mentioned that I had purchased online a $20 pair of pajamas for my niece.

"They were $29," he said.

"Excuse me?" I replied.

"They were $29," he said. "I just happened to be looking at our statement."

"You are driving me crazy," I said.

* * *

Like many situations that get on my nerves, this is one of my own creation. It started with The Drawer. When Joe and I started dating, he opened a drawer in my kitchen and found a crumpled wad of unopened bills. Some envelopes had wide red stripes across them and bore words like "FINAL NOTICE" and "COLLECTION AGENCY."

Joe shut the drawer quickly, as if preventing a serpent from ripping off his arm. He looked pale. He got sweaty.

"The thing about bills," I told him calmly, "is that when you don't pay them, they just send you another one."

The way I operated my finances was this: I paid my rent. I made regular (though not complete) payments on my credit card. Otherwise, when I was told a service was about to shut down, I'd pay the bill (plus the late fees and interest charges).

Joe could not abide by this. He is a person who is haunted by debt, someone who can't sleep if he thinks he has spent a dollar on credit that he couldn't spend in cash. He almost instantly set me up with an online checking account that would automatically pay my monthly bills -- and keep me from overdrawing my account.

When Joe and I began to contemplate spending our lives together, he expressed one reservation. "I'd like to marry you but I'm less enamored of your credit," he said. "We will never be able to buy a house or a car or anything."

So, at his insistence and with his help, I ordered a credit report and began writing letters to my debtors, asking for itemized explanations of what I owed.

Most of the bad marks on my report, it turned out, came from my interest and late fees. I paid them. The biggest bill (low thousands) turned out to be a scam -- a credit card set up by somebody using fraudulent information. I was on the road to clean credit. It was a lot of work. It's amazing what a gal will do for an engagement ring.

We got married. We had two kids. We were rather inextricably entangled. But I insisted on keeping our checking accounts separate. I wasn't trying to keep secrets, I just didn't want to explain my daily expenditures. He doesn't need to know how much my tank tops from the Gap cost. The financial mechanics of my hair color are none of his business.

As long as I paid the bills I was expected to pay personally, Joe had no issue with the separate accounts. That changed when I went on unpaid leave from work for a year to write a book. Without an income, my credit card started getting turned down. We received notices of late fees on my cellphone bills.

Finally, Joe said, "This is crazy. We've been married for years. Let's merge." I resisted. But when I began to have to ask my husband regularly to deposit cash in my account, I realized it was more intrusive to have to constantly ask him for money than to simply have a joint account. So I gave in.

* * *

I know my husband well enough to know that when he is looking at my charges online, it's not an issue of his trying to control me or pry into my daily incidental spending. He is budget-focused. He wants to understand the sometimes disorganized ways in which I spend money so that he can construct a budget that lets us afford what we really want to afford. Without his eye on the budget, we never could have bought our house last year.

I've been back on the newspaper payroll for a year and a half, but I've made no adjustments to our arrangement. Out of temporary poverty during my book leave, I turned over my entire financial autonomy to my husband. Out of laziness, I have let him continue to oversee my entire financial life. It's a surprising circumstance for a one-time collegiate women's studies devotee to be in. But life is funny.

As I write this, I am deciding to assume a small measure of responsibility. We'll continue to have a joint checking account. But I am going to tell Joe that I will take over my cellphone bill, and that I'd like a credit card that is mine to use and to pay in privacy. Those bills, which have been going to him, will now go only to me. So he'll see the total I'm paying, but he doesn't have to see every little thing I'm spending money on.

I'm not a kid anymore, nor am I the helpless damsel in distress I sometimes pretend to be, because money stresses me out and I know I have my husband's own financial neuroses to back me up.

I'm a mother of a daughter now. And I need to teach her that if she works hard and lives responsibly, she can buy whatever pajamas she likes.

I'll let you know how it goes.

—Katherine Rosman writes about pop culture and technology for The Wall Street Journal; she and her family live outside New York City. Email: checksandbalances@wsj.com. Twitter: @katierosman 