The shock of the new still gives François Morellet a kick. The 85-year-old contemporary French artist, whose geometrically abstract work has captivated audiences for over half a century, knows precisely the moment when he has created something worthwhile.

"I have some close friends who I like to show my latest work to," Mr. Morellet says jovially, his green eyes watering. "If all of a sudden they arrive and say 'Oh, le con [the jerk]! He's gone and done it,' it means it's worked. I've managed to shock them."

Despite having to walk with the aid of two canes, Mr. Morellet is a bundle of nervous energy as he scoots around the Centre Pompidou in central Paris pointing out the pieces of his latest exhibition, titled "Reinstallations," which runs until July 4.

The Pompidou exhibition is the first retrospective of Mr. Morellet's installations, which date back 48 years. Among the 26 pieces on display, two materials predominate: Mr. Morellet's beloved neon tubes and swathes of easily removable black scotch tape. 

The title of the exhibition comes from Mr. Morellet's desire to show that "the most specific quality of an installation is its ephemeral nature" and that first "it has to die before eventually being reborn, modified, of course, by the new space that it will occupy."

In his ninth decade, Mr. Morellet has begun to make a habit of recycling his work in interesting ways. At his "Blow Up" exhibition at the Musée d'Art Moderne in Paris four years ago, he revisited 11 all-over paintings from 1952 by blowing them up to four times their original size. The effect was both provocative and destabilizing—elements that often characterize the artist's work. Mr. Morellet's redesign of seven antique bay windows and oculi around the Lefuel staircase in the Museé du Louvre's Richelieu wing, in particular, made subtle use of his geometrical skills to create a destabilizing elegance. The windows, which were inaugurated amid much fanfare at the beginning of last year, took Mr. Morellet three years to complete, belying his reputation as an artist who is happy to dash something off in next to no time. 

Mr. Morellet became only the second living artist to have a work on permanent display in the Louvre. But one would never guess it from his modest appraisal. "What I like about these windows is that as a visitor you can very easily just not notice them," he says. 

This willing lack of ostentation is perhaps one reason why France has taken such a long time to embrace Mr. Morellet's work in the way other countries like Germany, Japan, the Netherlands and the U.S. have done.

"My work is always planned out in advance," says Mr. Morellet. "The material I use is as neutral as possible, including the paint I use, so that there is no trace of the paintbrush. It is an art form that has traditionally found little favor among collectors, among those people who want to have a relic of the artist with his fingerprints on it, or his blood, or his sperm."

But with time comes recognition, and last year, one of Mr. Morellet's distinctive repetitive hyphen paintings "2 Trames de Tirets 0° 90°" (1971) fetched a record €432,750 under the Sotheby's banner.

Mr. Morellet's relationship with his newfound fame is ambiguous. On the one hand, he's happy that his work has appreciated, but on the other, he's concerned that the growing number of exhibitions he is being asked to give are detracting from the time he has left to create new art. 

"What happens with my work after I'm gone? I really couldn't give a damn," he says. "If school children are ever made to learn my date of birth and the date of my death after I'm gone, that would be lamentable. Let others come forward and show what they can do."

As a founding member of Le Groupe de Recherche d'Art Visuel (GRAV), the group of six Kinetic artists active in Paris from 1960 to 1968 whose work was notably influenced by the Swiss concrete artist Max Bill, Mr. Morellet's dream was to abandon art with individual signatures and create collective works.

"We wanted to finish with museums, tableaux and traditional art forms," he says. "Several times we exhibited our works in the streets. We encouraged the participation of spectators. We were totally against the idea of the supreme artist who sells his work at an exorbitant price to very rich people."

Ultimately this dream foundered on what Mr. Morellet describes "as a very good conscience that was perhaps a little bit shallow," but he has never wavered in his desire "to joke and make things which are not very serious." He adds: "I am quite happy not to stray on the turf of artistic geniuses. I hope I don't become an influential artist." 

Mr. Morellet, who grew up in the western French town of Cholet, where he still lives, never went to art school and has always cultivated what he calls "contradictory tastes." He remembers going with his parents to the Eiffel Tower as a child and being far more interested by the colored pebbles beneath his feet than by the edifice itself.

"I am a frivolous old man who doesn't like things which are supposed to exist forever," he says, with a defiant giggle. "My greatest revelation was when I went to Granada in 1952 and discovered the centuries-old Moorish art. I spent hours poring over these massive mosaic columns designed with a mixture of positive and negative shapes in repetitive patterns. I couldn't have cared less about all the cathedrals."

Mr. Morellet believes that the meaning of any work of art should be provided by the spectator, not the artist. "If I was on a desert island, I'm sure I wouldn't bother [making art]," he says. "My theory is that I am merely there to prepare the terrain for the spectator's 'picnic.' When confronted by a work of art, it is up to the spectator to eat what he's brought along. Too bad if he's brought nothing with him."

 Write to  Tobias Grey at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 