MUMBAI --India's Glenmark Pharmaceuticals said it has agreed to license out development and commercialization rights of a biologic treatment it is developing to France's  Sanofi-Aventis S.A.

The drug, code-named GBR500, is aimed at treating Crohn's disease and other inflammatory conditions such as multiple sclerosis, the company said in a statement. 

The announcement sent Glenmark's shares to a one-month high as the agreement is expected to revive investor interest in the company's drug discovery and research program, which has been hit by the slow pace of fresh licensing deals and some contract terminations in the past few years. 

Glenmark is considered a front-runner among India's generic drug makers that are venturing into new drug development, mainly in partnerships with foreign companies, to help finance costly and lengthy research. For global majors, lower costs and the availability of skilled scientists, as well as the prospects of improving product pipelines, are the major attractions for partnering with Indian firms.

Glenmark said it will receive an upfront payment of $50 million and that the combined upfront and potential development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments could total $613 million. The Indian company also is eligible to receive royalties on sales of products commercialized under the license. 

Shares of the company initially vaulted 20% to 327.80 rupees --their highest price in a month. They were trading 13% higher at 310.50 rupees on the Bombay Stock Exchange at 0910 GMT, outperforming the 1.1% decline in the benchmark Sensex.

"It's the first novel biologic outlicensing deal coming from any Indian company," said Chief Executive Officer  Glenn Saldanha, adding "It helps us validate our capabilities in biologics in the monoclonal antibodies space."

Biological treatments--proteins manufactured in living cells rather than chemicals-based drugs--are complex and expensive to develop, but command high prices. Monoclonal antibodies are complex biosimilars to treat diseases such as cancer and multiple sclerosis.

Glenmark said it has completed dosing volunteers with the experimental drug in the U.S. as part of phase one, or initial-stage, human drug trials.

The drug has been "well tolerated with a good pharmacokinetic profile," it said in the statement. Plans are in place to initiate clinical proof of concept studies in Crohn's disease, the statement added. Crohn's disease is a form of inflammatory bowel disease that causes digestive and gastrointestinal problems. Sanofi has licensed the rights to all therapeutic indications.

Mr. Saldanha, who is also managing director, said 2017 is the earliest GBR500 is expected to be ready for commercial launch. 

As a result, most of the total $613 million payout from Sanofi is expected to come in by 2017, he added. The upfront payment of $50 million is expected to come in two to three months. Of this, $25 million will be paid upon closing of the transaction and the rest upon Sanofi's assessment of certain data to be provided by Glenmark.

The transaction is expected to close in the coming month, the company said.

Sanofi will have exclusive marketing rights for GBR500 in North America, Europe, Japan, Argentina, Chile and Uruguay. Sanofi and Glenmark will jointly market in Russia, Brazil, Australia and New Zealand, and Glenmark will retain exclusive marketing rights in India and other emerging market countries.

"The deal apparently looks beneficial. However, it's too early to predict the potential long-term benefit given the high probability of failure in drug development and research," said Surajit Pal, pharmaceutical analyst at Elara Capital. 

The company had seen some of its earlier drug licensing partnerships fizzle out, he added. 

Glenmark has faced several setbacks in the past few years with its drug development deals with Eli Lilly & Co., Merck KGaA and Forest Laboratories Inc. falling through, underlining the inherent risks involved in the drug discovery business. 

While the Eli Lilly and Forest Laboratories' deals had failed due to disappointing drug research data, the one with Merck didn't work out because of the German drug maker's decision to exit diabetes research. 

Glenmark succeeded in finding a partner in Sanofi for an under-development painkiller in May last year, after a gap of almost three years. 

Another analyst with a Mumbai-based brokerage said the development is positive as the licensing income that Glenmark might receive could be used to pare its debt. 

Mr. Saldanha told reporters Monday that the company will use the $50 million received upfront from Sanofi to repay part of its debt, which he said currently stands at about 19 billion rupees. 

He added that the company is in talks on licensing or other opportunities for its pipeline of under-development drugs. 

Glenmark has a total of eight molecules in various stages of clinical development, primarily focused in treating diseases such as asthma, smoker's cough, rheumatoid arthritis and neuropathic pain. 