While film stars promote their latest movies on sun-drenched private beach terraces, La Palme d'Or's two-star Michelin chef, Christian Sinicropi, has been busy in the kitchens of Hotel Martinez, concocting unlikely combinations of ingredients and visually stunning dishes, inspired by his favorite films. 

An avid kite surfer, devoted gardener and painter, Mr. Sinicropi sports a chartreuse-green chef's shirt, ("white is too stiff, too boring," he says) and has cooked for a fair share of cinema's biggest names, from Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie to Clint Eastwood and Gérard Depardieu. But what interests him the most is the emotional impact of a film, and how it tickles his culinary imagination. 

Each year, Mr. Sinicropi's jury dinner is a showstopper of wacky surprises. Last year, in honor of jury president Tim Burton, the jury members were served a panoply of remarkable "Alice in Wonderland" desserts, including a tiny chocolate Burton-look-alike man filled with feather-light mousse, and a delicate pink handbag in spun sugar, containing Alice's key. Mr. Sinicropi and his wife, Catherine, who is a potter, also design fanciful glazed ceramic plates at their atelier at home.

This year, Mr. Sinicropi contacted Warner Brothers to find out more about Robert de Niro's favorite food (fish, fried zucchini-flower fritters—a Provençal specialty—and, not surprisingly, pasta). The menu for Tuesday night's dinner included a wacky 3D "Taxi Driver" appetizer—"It's a New York caesar salad, but with peppers, sangria, foie gras and red and green basil"; a dazzling main course shaped by Martin Scorsese's "Casino"—"I shaped it like a kind of roulette wheel with zucchini flowers"; and for dessert, red berries and sorbet served on a green-lit ice cylinder. 

Mr. Sinicropi's cookbook, "Small Delights, Great Movies" (Ramsay Press), is a cinematic romp, with 60 recipes ranging from classic epics—"Star Wars" yields iced risotto with shrimp and melon on sword-like spears—to "Apocalypse Now," featuring squares of venison with caviar and red-cabbage purée with watercress and pumpkin, artfully arranged as a kind of maze. But the chef's all-time favorite invention is his "Forrest Gump." Served on a tiny ceramic street bench, it's a delicate array of poached codfish, a heart-shaped black truffle and a little Gump-like figure, sculpted from green cabbage and stuffed with smoked snails.

Born and raised in Cannes, Mr. Sinicropi says he loves the 15-day celebration but isn't daunted by the glittery show. When it comes down to it, his biggest thrill is vicarious. 

"I try to put myself in the place of the jury and imagine what they'll feel," he says. "Then, after the festival, the dishes goes straight to the Palme d'Or menu, so everyone can have a taste."