Taking care of an aging or ailing relative with health-care issues can be stressful and confusing, but a growing number of free or cheap smartphone apps aim to help caregivers keep track of medication dosages, nutritional requirements and other daily health-care needs. 

Baby boomers are the largest demographic taking care of elderly parents, and they're also big owners of smartphones, said  Gregg Malkary, managing director of Spyglass Consulting Group, which specializes in health care and information technology. 

More than 8,700 health-related applications are available across the three main platforms—Apple Inc.'s iPhone,  Google Inc.'s Android and  Research In Motion Ltd.'s BlackBerry—according to a September 2010 study by MobiHealthNews. The iPhone leads the pack in terms of quantity of health-related apps, with 7,136 in September, up 67% from February. 

One serious caveat: Don't assume a health app is safe. "Anyone can develop an app and it's not just based on U.S. standards or those of the FDA or any real governing regulatory body," said  Joseph Kim, a physician and founder of MedicalSmartphones.com and other websites. 

That said, there are some common-sense strategies to assess health apps, Dr. Kim said. Ask your doctor or health provider for advice, and read app reviews on the websites of reputable medical facilities, such as the Mayo Clinic, Harvard Medical School and Johns Hopkins School of Medicine. 

The following are four useful apps caregivers may want to consider, according to some health and technology experts.

 1. Tell My Geo (Android, $9.95 per month per phone)  

A personal-health-record app allows any health provider including emergency responders to access your medical history via your smartphone. Tell My Geo combines that function with a GPS locator that enables caregivers who also have the app loaded onto their smartphone to track a lost loved one. 

  Wayne Irving, chief executive of Iconosys Inc. and co-inventor of Tell My Geo, said he originally conceived the app for seniors exhibiting signs of early-stage Alzheimer's disease. But the app could help people with autism, mental illness or other ailments that can cause confusion, such as diabetics with low-blood-sugar levels, Mr. Irving said. Another safety feature allows a person to call a loved one by touching a photo icon, rather than remembering a name. 

 2. Personal Caregiver (iPhone, free)  

One of a growing subcategory of medical apps that track medications, Personal Caregiver has the added benefit of allowing you to schedule and track the medications of up to three people, including your own medications.

It also allows you to receive recall alerts from the Food and Drug Administration and more detailed medication information with a $9.99 premium edition. 

 3. Pain Care (iPhone/Android/soon available on BlackBerry, free)  

Pain Care, which won a Project HealthDesign award from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and the California HealthCare Foundation, translates the pain scale into an electronic journal where a patient can indicate pain levels by touching frowning or smiling faces, as well as location, duration, characteristics, mood and triggers. That data can then be shared instantly with a physician who can adjust medications and treatments accordingly. 

 4. iBiomed (iPhone/iPod Touch, free)  

Kwame and Florence Iwegbue, a South Carolina doctor and his wife, developed this app to help them juggle the huge quantity of information and tasks involved in caring for their own special-needs children with autism, seizure disorder, asthma and allergies. 

Features include a mobile treatment log book for prescriptions, supplements, therapies, diets, allergies and tests; a portable medical record; a searchable journal for such items as foods, side effects and reactions; treatment and prescription refill reminders; customizable graphs; and the ability to ask advice and share stories with other caregivers through an online forum. 