WASHINGTON -- India's economy is expected to continue expanding rapidly in coming years, but authorities should raise interest rates to curb inflation and push ahead with fiscal and financial reforms to maintain that growth, the International Monetary Fund said Wednesday.

"Sustaining rapid growth over the medium term will depend on sustaining reforms to facilitate infrastructure investment," the IMF said in a report on India's economy.

India's economic growth was among the strongest in the world last year, making it one of the driving forces of the global recovery.

The IMF forecasts that India's gross domestic product will grow 8.75% this financial year, which runs through March. Growth will taper off to about 8% the following year, the IMF said.

But India also is grappling with high inflation, surging inflows of foreign capital and high levels of government debt.

The IMF recommended that India accelerate its plans to end economic stimulus measures adopted during the global economic crisis.

"More substantial current spending adjustment, mainly by further cutting subsidies and improving the targeting of spending, would help achieve social goals along with medium-term fiscal consolidation," the IMF said.

That includes liberalization of diesel and fertilizer prices, the IMF added.

Earlier Wednesday, Oil Minister Murli Deora said the government is trying to prevent further increases in the price of diesel amid rising crude oil costs. Diesel is the main transportation fuel in India, and higher prices mean higher freight costs for essential commodities such as food.

The IMF recommended that India's central bank further increase interest rates to tackle inflation.

The Reserve Bank of India raised interest rates six times in 2010, and is widely expected to hike them again at its Jan. 25 policy meeting.

Real interest rates "are negative now. So rates should be moving to positive territory," Sanjaya Panth, IMF's senior resident representative to India, told reporters Thursday in New Delhi.

"We see room for further rate increases," but it's "something that has to be done gradually and that needs to be looked at continuously," Mr. Panth said.

The IMF expects headline inflation to be at 6.5% by end-March. That would be higher than the current policy interest rate, or repurchase rate, which stands at 6.25%.

The RBI's estimate is for 5.5% inflation at the end of March, with an upward risk to the forecast. The inflation rate was at 7.48% on-year in November, according to the most recent data.

Robert Prior-Wandesforde, head of India and South East Asia economics for Credit Suisse, said he endorsed the report's approach.

"A key issue is that real interest rates are negative," Prior-Wandesforde said. Monetary policy in India "is basically too loose for an economy that is growing above its sustainable rate."

Credit Suisse forecasts another 0.75 percentage point of rate increases in 2011.

The IMF also cautioned Indian authorities on the country's current account deficit, which is expected to reach 3.3% of GDP in 2010-11.

"As the deficit rises, so does the potential impact of a sudden stop or reversal of capital flows. Another risk is that the scale of the inflows could exceed India's capacity to absorb them," the IMF said.

But India doesn't need any new capital controls for now, Panth said. India currently caps the amount of money foreigners can invest in local debt markets.

"We don't think India's absorptive capacity has been reached or exceeded," he said.

India's first line of defense against an oversized deficit is a stronger currency, the IMF said. If the rupee became too strong, the international lender suggested India could intervene in the foreign exchange market or take regulatory measures.

"Over time, deepening the corporate bond market, increasing the supply of shares and further liberalizing foreign direct investment would increase the country's capacity to absorb capital from abroad," the IMF said.

The IMF also said India needs to pursue reforms to encourage private investment in infrastructure development, such as deepening the corporate bond market and lowering the cost of doing business in the country.

"There are several obstacles to achieving set targets. These include availability of financing, land acquisition, multiple clearances, capacity constraints, and governance issues along with various sector-specific concerns," the IMF said. 

—Rakesh Sharma contributed to the story

 Write to  Jeffrey Sparshott at jeffrey.sparshott@dowjones.com 