Bread has long been a political issue in France, most notably in 1789, when rioters incensed by rising prices stormed the Bastille. Today, the Préfecture of Paris still regulates when bakers may take their summer holiday, thus sparing citizens from trekking the streets for a fresh croissant in August. 

Earlier this month, in the annual contest for the best baguette in the capital, the City of Paris's jury chose bread from the ovens of Au Levain d'Antan at 6 rue des Abbesses, in Montmartre. 

Baker Pascal Barillon, who will now supply the presidential household for a year, said: "Each year, I try to make improvements to the baguette. This time, I tried to produce a creamy color and a very honeycombed structure inside, with a glossy appearance to the crust."

With such significance accorded this daily staple, it's surprising to discover that the world's leading expert on French bread—and the baguette in particular—is not a Frenchman, but an American, born into a Jewish family in Brooklyn.

Professor Steven L. Kaplan's publications on the subject have garnered him the chair of Goldwin Smith Professor of European History at Cornell University and the French government has appointed him a Chevalier de l'Ordre du Mérite and of l'Ordre des Arts et Lettres.

On a spring afternoon in Paris, Professor Kaplan steps into Dominique Saibron, a bustling bakery-bar-tearoom at 77 avenue du Général Leclerc by Alésia Metro station, wearing a Princeton baseball cap and carrying a black briefcase. From behind wire-framed glasses, the 68-year-old academic eyes the cornucopia of baguettes standing to attention. 

"When I'm in Paris, I try to do a dozen bakeries a week to see what's happening." He shakes his head sadly. "I've tasted some very bad breads this week. DOA."

DOA? "Dead on arrival. Bread is a living substance. You understand that when you plunge your hands into the dough batch."

When researching his guide to the best bakeries in Paris, "Cherchez le pain" (Plon, 2004), he visited 600 bakeries, and with his wife, Marie-Christine, spent five hours a day for six months munching and then spitting out samples (like in wine tasting). 

Now, he says, "Dominique Saibron is one of the best three or four bakeries in France, but there are so many different factors involved in baking bread. It's different each time."

Forty-nine years ago, Steven Kaplan visited Paris as a student and, upon biting into his first baguette in the Luxembourg Gardens, experienced a Proustian moment in reverse. Rather than being transported back in time, the "bewitching" taste of artisanal bread—compared to the industrial varieties he knew from the U.S.—inspired a vision of his academic future, he says.

As a historian, he realized that bread—a constant of everyday life for centuries—would prove a perfect focus for tracking social and political change.

Today, he says, "Bread is located at the crossroads of the material and the symbolic. Until recently, it was the ration of survival for 90% of the population, but it also represents the body of Christ and is the object of hundreds of proverbs.

"It's part of Communion in church, but also of more profane sharing; the breaking of bread," Professor Kaplan adds. "The words compagnon (companion) and copain (friend) are derived from someone with whom you break bread (pain). Bread constructs the social link."

His latest book, "La France et son pain: Histoire d'une passion" (Albin Michel, 2010), looks at the nation's relationship to bread, and his own. He also wrote the introduction to a new dictionary of bread, "Dictionnaire Universel du Pain" (Robert Laffont, 2010). This 1,217-page tome covers everything from bread making under the pharaohs in ancient Egypt to Charlie Chaplin making bread rolls dance across a dinner table in his 1925 film "The Gold Rush."

Early in his research, Professor Kaplan trained as a baker and spent three months working the 2 a.m. to 8 a.m. shift. "The first time they gave me the razor blade to make the incision on the crust, I was so nervous. I massacred 15 baguettes before I could do it properly."

He still carries a folding, picnic bread knife in his briefcase and when he dines at a restaurant, he takes the precaution of packing his own baguette. "If I consider that the bread isn't up to the standard of the rest of the meal, I gently inform the maître d'hôtel that the food is delicious and the wine's good, but that the bread is inadmissible and I bring out my bread.

"It's only by consumer militancy that you raise standards," he says. "On half a dozen occasions, I've had an email from the chef-patron saying that they are going to change the bread they serve."

Alight with enthusiasm, Professor Kaplan's conversation ranges from the ribald ditties sung by bakers kneading the dough in 18th-century France to recent moves for millers to supply flour in smaller and easier-to-lift sackfuls so as to encourage female recruits to the profession.

Availability and quality of bread is a recurring historical theme. Emperor Napoleon I, for instance, kept an eagle eye on wheat production and bread prices, and equipped his armies with mobile bakeries for foreign battle fields. As the first monarch post-Revolution, he knew the dangers of a policy on bread that was only half-baked.

When asked to sample one of Dominique Saibron's baguettes, Professor Kaplan turns somber. "I worry about tasting because I want it to be good and on many occasions, it's disappointing."

He picks up a baguette, scrutinizes it. "We want a bread with an architecture of elegance, a graceful line. The incisions here are quite nice, there's a nice coloring of flour and the pointed ends show that it was cast by hand." Turning it over, he taps it lightly. "From the pattern here, I can tell that it was baked on the stone floor of the oven."

He presses the bread between his hands and brings it to his ear. "When you squeeze the bread and listen, you can hear it sing."

Whipping out his knife, he slices the baguette vertically from top to bottom, opens it out and plunges his nose into its soft innards. "Corinthian raisin," he declares. "Black cherry, nuttiness, dried apricot." 

He plunges his nostrils deeper, "A little bit of verveine and a little bit of sweet potato. Wonderfully aromatic."

He notes the color with approval—creamy, rather than white—then pops a piece in his mouth. "The first contact is pleasant, not acidic, extremely beguiling." 

Despite his positive comments, his face remains grave. He munches thoughtfully. After a few moments, his face lightens. "This has a long, foodie taste in the mouth, a nice floral after-taste. A very nice gustatory experience, just as rich as the aromas."

Finally, he beams. "This is uncommonly excellent bread. Exalting!" With a floury farewell handshake, Professor Kaplan rushes off to an appointment, radiant that a favorite bakery met expectations. 