Stock options may be gaining popularity in India but it's unclear if shareholders understand the likely ramifications on a company's long-term health. 

Typically, stock options were used as a way to inculcate loyalty and retain employees by giving them a stake in the company. During the tech boom in the U.S. in the 1990s, when garage start-ups operating on a shoe-string budget were prevalent, stock options were the currency used to attract talent and pay employees, and unexpectedly it make millionaires of many geeks. 

Today, in the U.S., stock options form a significant component of CEO compensation and around nine million employees hold stock options. In India, while stock options have been largely restricted to software and financial services company, they are increasingly becoming popular in other industries as well. Companies such as ICICI Bank,  HDFC Bank, Infosys, Wipro, Larsen & Toubro,  ITC,
0372


-2.25
%




 Hindalco, Bharti Airtel have all used options as a wa of remunerating senior management.

While stock options may help in attracting and retaining employees in a more competitive labor market, its role as an incentive for better performance is debatable. Further, the connection between an individual's job performance and the company's share price is highly abstract, while a manager's bonus for meeting a specific sales or cost-cutting goal is a much more quantifiable measure. 

Research by Professor  Peter Cappelli and  Martin J. Conyon, a senior fellow at Wharton's Center for Human Resources, published in February this year, showed that employees do not view stock options per se as an incentive, and performance is affected only if the employee is actually able to realize profits by selling the stock.

Typically, professional CEOs and senior management teams that drive strategic decisions often get a large amount of options granted to them. Unlike shareholder owners who have a long-term stake that often transcends generations, professional managers are assumed to have a shorter perspective. Most professional executives have three- to five-year contracts, and there is a pressure to deliver results and move the stock price within this tenure.

As a result, executives are encouraged to focus on short-term performance often at the expense of long-term performance. Most if not all, strategic decisions are executed with an eye on the stock price. And, if these decisions work out, a CEO with sufficient stock options could make a lot of money. If the decisions backfire and the stock price collapses, the executive neither gains nor loses from the stock options but still gets his fixed compensation. This particular feature that allows CEOs to participate in upside gains without limit while providing a floor to avoid losses, encourages CEOs to play for bigger and riskier stakes.

Company chief executives, in an attempt to please the market, may be tempted to make costly acquisitions or chase market share at the cost of profitability. Conversely, they may abstain from taking hard decisions, which have significant, long-term benefits but are painful in the short-term to avoid being penalized by the market. The long-term health of the business thus may be ignored for shorter-term benefits.

  W. Gerard Sanders, professor of strategic management at the Jones Graduate School of Management at Rice University, Texas, and  Donald Hambrick, Smeal Chaired Professor of management at Smeal College of Business, Pennsylvania State University, examined the effects of stock options on executive risk-taking. Their report, which examined around 1,000 U.S. companies between 1993 and 2000, showed that stock options generate high risk taking among CEOs including making high levels of investment outlays and acquisitions Further, their analysis showed that CEOs with high level of stock options, delivered more big losses than big gains. They concluded that the heavy use of stock options yielded more unfavorable than favorable results.

In light of these negative factors, shareholders and companies would do well to pause and reconsider the ways that stock options are used and reassess the compensation structure, particularly of the CEO and senior management.