Even in a so-so quarter, Samsung Electronics is doing better than its rivals. 

The company's fourth-quarter earnings guidance fell short of expectations Friday. Its operating-profit estimate of about $2.7 billion for the fourth quarter is down a tad from a year earlier, making it the lowest quarter in 2010, due to weaker sales of flat-panel displays and dynamic-random-access memory chips. A final tally is due out later this month. 

But the South Korean leviathan—the No. 1 semiconductor, liquid-crystal display and television maker by revenue—still earned more in the fourth quarter than Sony expects to in the full fiscal year through March. 

Where it's drawing strength is in the increasing popularity of smartphones and tablet PCs, which will help offset other less profitable segments. Expanding at a faster pace than overall cellphone and PC sales, smartphones will account for nearly 27% of global-handset unit sales by the end of next year, from 18% in 2010, and tablets will jump to 19% from 4% during the same period, Nomura forecasts. 

Samsung tripled its market share in smartphones in the third quarter from a year earlier, according to IDC. More critically, it also shares a duopoly with  Toshiba
TOSYY


1.64
%




 in the market for NAND flash-memory chips that are critical to the functioning of smartphones and tablets. It's a highly profitable business line. Credit Suisse expects Samsung will generate an operating-profit margin of 38% on NAND chips in 2011. That's up from 30% last year, thanks to strong demand for smartphones and tablets, and a sharp contrast with much lower flat-panel margins. 

The squeeze on those panel margins could extend into the current year, with sales growth slowing sharply; Nomura forecasts global LCD TV demand to rise only 17% this year versus 28% in 2010 and 37% in 2009. 

But even if the news for Samsung isn't so bad—-the company's shares fell only 1% Friday—this outlook doesn't bode well for rivals that aren't so protected by NAND, tablet and smartphone businesses and have greater exposure to televisions, displays and DRAMs. 

Among these are  Sharp, LG Display and  Chimei Innolux
3481


0.36
%




 in panels, and chip makers  Elpida Memory and  Nanya Technology. So-so news from Samsung is worse news for this lot. 

 Write to  James Simms at james.simms@dowjones.com 