I didn't get on my first airplane until I was almost 20 years old. 

It was 1979 and I was managing a rapper from Harlem named Kurtis Blow. When our label, Mercury Records, found out that Kurtis's song "Christmas Rapping" was starting to get big in Holland, they decided to send us over to Amsterdam to help promote the record and further introduce the Dutch people to this new thing called "hip-hop."

Sitting in a coach seat as our KLM flight began its ascent, I can still remember how crazy it felt to watch New York slowly fade out of view. Besides visiting my father's people in Baltimore in few times, I'd barely ever been outside of the city. Now the world was opening up before me. I didn't know what to expect from our trip, but I liked the sense of stepping out into the unknown. 

I certainly didn't expect what was awaiting us when we landed— namely, a Dutch record executive who walked up to me, extended his hand and said, "Welcome to the Netherlands, Mr. Simmons." 

For a second, I wasn't sure who he was talking to. The only "Mr. Simmons" I knew was my father. I couldn't believe that someone in a foreign country would give a street kid like myself so much respect to call me "Mr." 

Those where the days when most Americans still dismissed rap as a street fad that would never last. Hearing a European executive call me "Mr. Simmons" gave me tremendous courage and confidence. It let me know that hip-hop did matter, and that no matter what the people back home might say, the culture possessed the ability to touch the entire world. To this day, I consider being called "Mr. Simmons" in that airport one of the most inspiring moments of my career.

The next words out of the executive's mouth were, "Is there anything you'd like to do once we get to Amsterdam?" "Yes," I replied without hesitation. "Get laid and get high." That, it turns out, was what he had been expecting. A weekend of great decadence was soon under way.

More than 30 years later, I'm still out on the road promoting things I'm passionate about—at the moment, my new book "Super Rich." But the way I travel has changed. Back when I first started managing rap acts, we rode buses and stayed at cheap hotels. Now I fly first class and stay at fancy hotels. When we have to make a tight run (like appearing at a rally with President Obama), my publicist, my marketing head, my executive assistant and I will jump on a Hawker, a small private jet. 

And because I've evolved, my requests run more along the lines of, "Where can I find a good yoga class and green juice?" than to the exploitative, harmful stuff I was distracted by as a young man.

In Los Angeles, I don't even need a hotel, since I have my own room at my buddy Brett Ratner's house. I know exactly what I want to do every time I'm in town: take a yoga class with my friend Steve Ross at Maha Yoga, grab a bite to eat at the Veggie Grill in Santa Monica and most importantly, go see a movie with my beautiful daughters, Ming Lee and Aoki. 

I've done talks and book signings in 20 cities over the past few months. It's humbling to hear first-hand how something you've written has touched people's lives in a meaningful, lasting way. 

The most inspiring event was one we had at the Seattle Public Library—simply for the overall sense of collective consciousness I felt in the crowd. In Seattle it seemed like everywhere I looked there was a vegan restaurant, animal shelter, yoga studio or some other space promoting a positive, stable relationship with the world. (I particularly enjoyed the hot Vinyasa class at Urban Yoga and the special vegan menu at the new Four Seasons.) The reading drew the most diverse crowd we'd had on the tour—yogis, hip-hop heads, single mothers with their kids, hustlers, Hare Krishnas, animal activists, little old Church Ladies—all united in the desire to share and spread a greater consciousness. 

And the funny thing is, the entire night, I don't think anyone called me "Mr. Simmons." 

—Mr. Simmons is the CEO and chairman of Rush Communications and author of "Super Rich" and "Do You!"