Mumbai--Canada's  Research In Motion Ltd said it is exploring investments in India, including setting up a manufacturing plant and logistics operations, as the BlackBerry smartphone maker considers expanding its operations in the world's fastest-growing telecom market. 

"India is an important and strategic market for RIM and its exciting and fast-growing mobile sector offers major potential for further expansion," the company said in a statement. 

Chief Information Officer Robin Bienfait will be in India to meet major BlackBerry customers as well as current and potential business partners, and will further explore RIM's investment possibilities, the company added. RIM, however, didn't provide any specific details. 

With more than 771 million mobile phone users at the end of January, India is the second-largest market for wireless services in the world and is a market that RIM can't ignore. 

India's smartphone market is expected to grow to about 40 million users by the end of 2015 from about 10 million now, according to a forecast by  Informa
IFJPY


0.17
%




 Telecoms & Media. 

"As part of RIM's strategy in India, RIM has been building its resources in order to support the growing opportunities," the company said. 

Its remarks come amid a standoff between RIM and the Indian government over the country's security needs. BlackBerry devices use advanced encryption, making them popular with corporate users. 

The Indian government, however, fears the highly encrypted messages and emails sent through BlackBerry smartphones make them convenient for terrorists to use undetected. It has asked RIM to grant access to the two services, which will let local security agencies monitor them. 

In January, RIM provided access to its messenger services, but maintains it can't provide a solution for corporate emails as there is no technology available that will allow monitoring of the service. 

The government has since said it is no longer discussing the matter with RIM and has turned to local telecom service providers for access to the email services, signalling a breakdown in talks between the two parties. 

RIM has said Indian government officials have assured the company it won't be "singled out" by local security agencies seeking access to corporate email services. 