LONDON—The Bank of England's preferred measure of broad money supply picked up in November although the pace of growth remained weak, underscoring the likelihood that the central bank will keep policy on hold for some time. 

Figures released by the BOE Tuesday showed that broad money supply, excluding those financial institutions whose activities distort underlying trends, rose 3.5% in November in three-month annualized terms. The pace was faster than the 2.7% monthly-rise in October. Compared to the year earlier, M4 grew 1.4%, slower than the 1.5% rise in October. 

The BOE has highlighted growth in broad money supply as a key indicator of the effectiveness of its £200 billion ($309.46 billion) quantitative easing policy of buying U.K. government bonds with freshly created central bank money. The latest figures remain significantly weaker than the 6% to 9% year-on-year rates of expansion that broad money supply tended to log before the financial crisis. 

Analysts said the figures reinforced the view that the U.K. economy is gradually healing, but that the central bank is likely to remain in wait-and-see mode until the recovery strengthens. 

"Although the pace [of money supply expansion] is probably just under half the pace we would hope to see in 'normal' conditions, we suspect the bank will take comfort from the fact that the growth rate is moving in the right direction—at least on the headline measure," said Alan Clarke, U.K. economist at BNP Paribas. 

In three-month annualized terms, M4 lending shrank 0.5%, slightly better than the 0.9% decline in October. M4 lending fell 0.8% annually in November, marking the weakest rate since records began in the fourth quarter of 1998

The BOE's quantitative easing policy was suspended in February, but the bank has left open the possibility of restarting it if conditions deteriorate. Monetary Policy Committee member  Adam Posen has voted for further stimulus at recent meetings, while  Andrew Sentance has called for modest policy tightening. 

Growth in household sector M4 lending was steady at 2.7% in November in three-month annualized terms, while M4 lending grew only 0.6%—its lowest rate since records began in 1963. Corporate sector M4 lending, meanwhile, contracted 1.2% in three-month annualized terms in November, much worse than the 5.8% increase in October. 

While most analysts see a rise in interest rates from the current 0.5% all-time low as the most likely next policy move, some still believe that the central bank will have to apply further stimulus to keep the recovery on track. 

"On the face of it, the continued weakness of broad money growth suggests that more [quantitative easing] might yet be needed later this year," said Vicky Redwood, senior U.K. economist at Capital Economics. 

M4 money supply comprises the money holdings of households, non-financial companies and financial companies that aren't banks or building societies, and is closely linked to trends in nominal spending in the medium term. 

Meanwhile, a YouGov poll published Tuesday showed U.K. public inflation expectations for the year ahead rose to a two-year high in the last month of 2010 as price growth remained at elevated levels.

The poll found that average annual inflation expectations were 3.5% in December, up from 3.3% in November and the fastest rate of growth since September 2008. 

The BOE pays most attention to measures of long-term inflation expectations, which tend to be less volatile. But five-to-10-year expectations also reached their highest rate since May 2008, increasing to 3.8% in December from 3.5% in November. 

Persistently strong price growth is a concern for central banks because it raises the risk that consumers will expect inflation to be high in future, encouraging them to push for pay rises. This raises costs for businesses, which in turn increase their prices, possibly leading to a self-perpetuating cycle. 

 Write to  Natasha Brereton at natasha.brereton@dowjones.com 