A state judge on Tuesday barred the New York State Independence Party from spending any money and raised questions about party leaders' integrity for allegedly failing to monitor $1.1 million that Mayor  Michael Bloomberg provided for a ballot-security operation.

In a related matter later Tuesday morning, another state judge sealed a courtroom as he conducted a hearing in connection with Manhattan prosecutors' request to find the political party in contempt of court for allegedly failing to cooperate with requests for information from a grand jury.

The dual hearings mark the latest development in Manhattan District Attorney  Cy Vance's case against  John Haggerty, a 42-year-old Queens political operative who was indicted last year on charges of stealing $1.1 million from Mr. Bloomberg.

Mr. Haggerty has pleaded not guilty. The Independence Party, the third-largest political party in the state, is a "noncriminal defendant" in the matter. The party's chairman,  Frank MacKay, has denied any wrongdoing.

According to the indictment, Mr. Bloomberg sent $1.2 million from his personal funds to the party in the days before the 2009 election. The party gave a significant portion of the money to Mr. Haggerty, who was supposed to spend it on a poll-watching and ballot-security operation. Instead, prosecutors allege, he spent the funds on a house.

The district attorney's office, which is seeking to recoup the mayor's money, sought to freeze the party's funds, a move that brought prosecutors and party lawyers to Supreme Court Judge  Martin Shulman's court Tuesday. "Something doesn't smell right here," said the judge as he questioned  William Wexler, the party's attorney, about why party leaders didn't do a better job policing the mayor's money.

He told Mr. Wexler he wanted to know why the party officials did not have a "clue where the $1.1 million went."

Mr. Wexler argued that Mr. Haggerty, a volunteer on Mr. Bloomberg's campaign, had a relationship with the mayor, and there was no reason to believe he wasn't using the money as intended. In an interview Tuesday, Mr. MacKay said there was no reason to be suspicious. But once questions were raised publicly about how Mr. Haggerty spent the money, the judge questioned whether the party exercised due diligence. Prosecutors have claimed the party participated with Mr. Haggerty in a coverup, an allegation the party denies.

"We won all our close races that day, including the mayor's race," Mr. MacKay said. "There was nothing to suspect that ballot security wasn't done at that time."

Mr. MacKay said he's looking forward to a full hearing before the judge. "If there's a victim in this very strange case, we're the victim," he said.

Last year, Mr. MacKay said he would return the money the prosecutors are seeking. The party attempted to return some money to the mayor, but the mayor, at the advice of prosecutors, asked that the money be returned to the district attorney.

The party has refused to return the money to prosecutors. Asked why the party was willing to give the money to the mayor and not prosecutors, Mr. Wexler quipped, "They like the mayor."

In court papers, the party argued that freezing funds could cause the party to collapse. On Tuesday, Mr. Wexler said, "They'll soldier on." The judge reserved the right to release some funds at a later date.

The party initially placed $250,000 in escrow. But $50,000 of that money was returned to the party before the judge froze the funds.

In the courtroom,  Daniel Alonso, chief assistant district attorney, said once Mr. Haggerty was indicted the "only responsible" course of action for the party was to return the money to the authorities.

When Judge Shulman asked about a potential plea deal with Mr. Haggerty,  Eric Seidel, the lead prosecutor on the case, said, "Anything's possible."

  Dennis Vacco, Mr. Haggerty's attorney, said, "There are no talks ongoing and we do not anticipate any negotiations about a plea. Maybe Eric is concerned about his case."

 Write to  Michael Howard Saul at michael.saul@wsj.com 