PHOENIX—Tucson shooting suspect Jared Loughner pleaded not guilty in federal court Monday to charges of attempted assassination and attempted murder of federal employees.

Mr. Loughner, 22 years old, didn't speak at the brief arraignment on charges tied to the Jan. 8 attack that killed six people and left 13 others wounded. The court entered a plea of not guilty on his behalf.

Among those injured in the shooting at a Safeway supermarket was Rep. Gabrielle Giffords, who authorities believe was the target of the attack. The six dead included federal Judge John Roll and Giffords aide Gabriel Zimmerman. 

The attempted-assassination count relates to Ms. Giffords and the attempted-murder charges are tied to members of her staff who were hurt.

More federal charges are likely to follow in an indictment that would supersede the current charges, prosecutors have said. New charges are likely to include murder of a federal official, which can carry the death penalty. Indictments involving potential death penalties require a more extensive review at the Justice Department. 

In court Monday, Judge Larry Alan Burns pressed prosecutors for a "ballpark" timeline of when a new indictment might be filed. Prosecutors said it could be 30 days or more and that they would try to file the new charges before the next court date, a status hearing set for March 9.

Mr. Loughner grinned as he was led into the courtroom in chains and an orange jumpsuit. He stared straight ahead through most of the proceeding. At one point, he looked up at a gallery of reporters standing above him and smiled. 

Mr. Loughner's attorney, Judy Clarke, pressed her hand to his back several times and the two exchanged whispered words a few times. Mr. Loughner's hair, which was shaved completely at the time of his arrest, has grown back into a short buzz cut. 

On Sunday night, federal prosecutors filed a motion to move future proceedings to Tucson, partly because so many of the witnesses in the case are based there. A four-hour round-trip drive would be a hardship for them, the motion said.

Ms. Clarke said that, for now, she didn't oppose the prosecution's motion to move the proceedings to Tucson. "I don't think we'll have any real opposition to that," Ms. Clarke told the judge. "But I'd like to figure out where Mr. Loughner would be housed."

Ms. Clarke could petition for a change of venue later. 

In Mr. Loughner's first court appearance on Jan. 10, Ms. Clarke said the case shouldn't be tried in Arizona. Judge Roll was a federal judge in the state. Shortly after his death, all Arizona judges recused themselves from the Loughner proceedings. 

We do think it's important to the victims" that Mr. Loughner be tried in Arizona, said Dennis Burke, U.S Attorney in the District of Arizona, in an interview Monday. "It's our position that the defendant can receive a fair trial" in Tucson

The case has been assigned to Judge Burns, of the U.S. District Court in San Diego, Calif. 

Legal observers have said that a potential line of defense for Mr. Loughner would be the argument that he was so mentally troubled at the time of the shootings that he couldn't be found guilty of a crime. In the months prior to the shootings, Mr. Loughner posted often bizarre messages on Internet chat sites and had outbursts in classes at a Tucson community college that led school authorities to bar him from school. However, legal observers say, an insanity defense can be very difficult to win in court. 

Judge Burns asked Ms. Clarke if she wanted to raise the issue of whether her client could assist her in his defense. "We are not raising this issue at this time," she said, but added "perhaps later."

Lead prosecutor Wallace Kleindienst told the judge his team gave Ms. Clarke 45 discs containing material from Mr. Loughner's computer, as well as 250 witness interviews. 

Mr. Loughner likely will face state criminal charges in connection with the shooting of victims who weren't federal employees.

—John R. Emshwiller contributed to this article.

 Write to  Tamara Audi at tammy.audi@wsj.com 