 The IMF is considering extending the repayment schedule for its loan program to Greece should Athens need more time.  

 China Investment's chairman, addressing uncertainty about the sovereign-wealth fund's future, said it is making progress toward getting fresh funds.  

 Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley are both launching yuan-denominated private-equity funds, the latest moves by foreign financial firms to expand in China.  

 U.S. financial regulators defended to senators their efforts to make far-reaching changes to rules governing banks and other financial firms, telling senators a repeal of the landmark regulatory revamp could lead to a repeat of the recent financial crisis.  

 Saab Automobile's future was in doubt again after a much-needed investment agreement with Chinese auto maker Hawtai Motor Group collapsed a week after it was announced.  

 Nissan swung to a profit in its fiscal fourth quarter as strong sales offset the yen's strength and production disruptions after the March 11 earthquake.  

 A Temasek-led consortium paid about $3.5 billion for the 70% stake that it bought this month in U.S. energy company Frac Tech.  

 Alibaba Group clarified its decision to transfer ownership of its online-payment unit to a company controlled by Jack Ma was in response to rules that could bar foreigners from owning controlling stakes in Chinese Internet-payment services.  

 Singapore's Temasek Holdings sold its entire 8% stake in Kaisa Group, in a divestment that will raise about $150 million. Kaisa shares tumbled.  

 South Korea regulators won't rule on Hana Financial's $4.36 billion bid for Lone Star Funds' 51% stake in Korea Exchange Bank next week, which could lead to the sale's collapse.  

 Silver futures slumped closer to $30 a troy ounce as traders, rattled by the previous session's commodity-sector plunge, sold holdings in favor of cash. Gold was flat.  

 U.S. stocks recovered from earlier losses to trade little changed. Asian markets were dragged down by the prior day's drop in energy and metals prices.  

 One of the reactors at Japan's Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant likely suffered a substantial meltdown of its core, and the vessels that contain the core were likely damaged, Tepco said in a sobering new assessment.  

 Syrian security forces conducted detentions across at least six cities of opposition activists as well as lawyers, doctors and other professionals. Residents reported continued gunfire in restive southern areas.  

 NATO forces bombed Gadhafi's compound in Tripoli, the morning after the Libyan leader resurfaced on state TV.  

Yemeni police killed two people and wounded at least 47, some by gunfire, while trying to disperse thousands of antigovernment protesters in two cities.

Cambodia sentenced to 19 years in prison a senior provincial official, the first person convicted under an anticorruption law.

A Thai court revoked bail for two leaders of the antigovernment Red Shirt protesters, a decision likely to inflame supporters ahead of divisive general elections in July.

Lorca, Spain, cleaned up after an earthquake killed eight people and injured dozens.

 Treating AIDS patients with antiretroviral drugs makes them strikingly less infectious, researchers said Thursday.  