Floodwaters in Brisbane peaked early Thursday, missing historic levels but still threatened thousands of homes in Australia's third-largest city, while the government's handling of the disaster came under greater scrutiny.

Foreign Minister Kevin Rudd said that Australia faced "a rocky period for some time ahead" as a result of the floods, which have left three-quarters of the state of Queensland a disaster zone. At least 20 people have died across the state since floods began last month. 





"2011 is going to be a year of reconstruction and recovery for Queensland," Mr. Rudd told Sky News.

Australia's Bureau of Meteorology said the flood gauge in Brisbane's city center was at 4.45 meters, or 14 feet, 7 inches, at 3:30 a.m. local time Thursday, below the peak of 5.45 meters seen in the city's 1974 floods. The state government said 20,000 houses had been hit by the floodwaters, well up on the 6,700 homes affected by the 1974 event.

In an evacuation center at Brisbane's Royal National Association, one of five refuge sites across the city, around 700 people were sleeping on air mattresses or huddled round a television screen relaying the news. Red Cross, military and other aid workers dealt with enquiries while local charities handed out breakfast. 

Mel Paterson, 35, a senior regional manager with Queensland's Red Cross said some of those who needed rescuing will return to severely damaged properties. "Houses have been inundated with the floods," Mr. Paterson said.

Releases from the Wivenhoe Dam upstream from the city were reduced quickly during Tuesday night, the Bureau of Meteorology said, while flood levels in the upstream city of Ipswich were falling strongly and would drop below major flood levels over the course of Thursday, giving hope that floodwaters will recede soon.

Brisbane Airport Corp. said the city's major terminal had survived the overnight high tide, and remained confident the airport would remain open although public transport to the site was limited.

Opposition lawmakers have so far shied from apportioning blame, but questions over the government's preparedness for the flooding—one of the worst environmental disasters to hit Australia—threaten to add political strain on Prime Minister Julia Gillard's minority Labor government, which depends on independent political support to maintain its grip on power. 

The flooding, and the potential political fallout, could be a defining moment for Ms. Gillard.

"How crises and disasters on the ground are managed is one thing but how the political fallout is managed is another," said Allan McConnell, an expert on crisis management at the University of Sydney. 

"There'll be fallout as to why didn't we see it coming, surely we should have better warning systems?" 

Ms. Gillard arrived late Tuesday in Brisbane, the waterlogged state capital, vowing to face the crisis "shoulder-to-shoulder" with local authorities. 

The prime minister pledged more military planes to move supplies around the devastated region and put 700 army personnel on standby. 

Meanwhile, Deputy Prime Minister Wayne Swan cut short a U.S. visit to join Ms. Gillard and other senior government officials. 

A representative for the prime minister said the scale of the disaster made it difficult to reach the worst-hit areas. 

Ms. Gillard courted controversy on Monday as the scale of the floods unfolded, attending a cricket match in Canberra between a hand-picked prime minister's team and the touring England squad. Monday saw flash floods hit an area known as the Great Dividing Range, sweeping through isolated towns in the resource-rich state's south, killing at least 10 people and leaving scores missing. 





Tony Abbott, leader of the main opposition Liberal-National coalition of center-right parties, has said now isn't the time to criticize. At the same time, he has pushed for more dams to be built, accusing policy makers of "dam phobia" over the past two decades. 

Mr. Abbott's coalition narrowly lost out after an August election failed to give a clear majority to either major political party. Ms. Gillard secured the support of several rural-based independent lawmakers in forming a minority government. That has forced the traditionally urban-based Labor Party to be more accountable to rural areas—a situation likely to take on even greater emphasis in the flooding aftermath and rebuilding efforts. 

The Australian dollar was trading at 99.63 U.S. cents early in the day, up from 98.70 cents at its open, staging its strongest recovery since the currency started a 3.5% fall at the start of the year. HiFX director Mike Hollows said the effect of the flooding, which some predict could shave 0.75% from Australia's growth, was now priced in.

"I think the sharp move higher is also due to a market that was just a little bit too short," he said. "With commodities pushing up as strongly as they are, eyes have been taken off the negative economic effects of the floods in Queensland."

Queensland is a key state for the commodity exports that have cushioned Australia from the worst effects of the global downturn, and the supply disruptions likely to result from the floods may lead to price rises that offset the impact of lost production.

Analysts Wednesday predicted the price of coking coal, Queensland's largest export, could near-double to US$400 a metric ton from US$225/ton as a result of cuts to production caused by the flooding. Australia supplies two-thirds of the sea-borne trade in the hard coking coal used in steel making.

Rabobank Australia also downgraded its production forecast for Australian cotton, sugar and sorghum crops in 2011, reducing export availability. It warned of further downside risk, citing the impact of the widespread flooding. Marketing concern Meat & Livestock Australia Ltd. said that the flooding had severely limited the supply of livestock at auctions Tuesday, but added that the impact on exports may be limited and that supplies elsewhere in the nation are solid.

Australia is the second biggest global beef exporter of beef after Brazil, and Queensland accounts for almost half of its shipments to external markets that include the U.S., Russia, Japan, South Korea and many other Asian nations. 

—Rebecca Howard in Wellington and Ray Brindal in Canberra contributed to this article. 

 Write to  David Fickling at david.fickling@dowjones.com, Enda Curran at enda.curran@dowjones.com and Rachel Pannett at rachel.pannett@dowjones.com 