The Monaco-based investor who challenged a plan to restart a derailed Manhattan condominium project told a bankruptcy court that he was prepared to file his own plan and bring in millions of needed investment in the project. 

  Cevdet Caner, the investor, said that his plan for the long-stalled One Madison Park high-rise tower could be filed within days if the Delaware bankruptcy court gave him control of the nearly complete 50-story glass tower overlooking Madison Square Park.

"We're very confident we can get this done in a very short period of time," Mr. Caner told Judge  Kevin Gross at a hearing in the U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Wilmington, Del. 

The development has been stalled in a foreclosure filing in New York state court and a bankruptcy filing in Delaware. Sales in the project stalled amid the downturn.

The cases have turned into a bitter struggle, with allegations of secret side deals, and forged signatures.

Last month, the lead developer in the tower,  Ira Shapiro, proposed a restructuring plan in which  Ian Bruce Eichner, the developer, would provide $40 million in investments toward completing the project.

But Mr. Caner, an investor in the project, stepped forward to claim in court papers he had obtained control of One Madison Park by obtaining the proxy of Mr. Shapiro's partner in the project,  Marc Jacobs.

Mr. Caner testified in the bankruptcy case Monday and Tuesday. Like Mr. Eichner, he has made—and lost—a fortune in real estate. 

The Kurdish-born Mr. Caner said his company survived the residential real-estate market crash, and he has invested in successful projects in Atlanta, Tokyo, Turkey and Austria.

According to his testimony, he became involved in One Madison in 2006, after being introduced to Messrs. Shapiro and Jacobs while on a trip to New York. 

On the witness stand, he said he had growing suspicions about One Madison, a project in which funds he advised—Green Bridge Capital and Special Situation—had invested some $24.6 million. 

He said he was unable to get documents from Mr. Shapiro, and in September 2009, he moved into Mr. Shapiro's management offices at Slazer Enterprises, intent on physically dogging the developer. 

"It was difficult to trace things at Slazer Enterprises. So I don't know where the money went," Mr. Caner said. 

  Bruce Grohsgal, an attorney for the Shapiro-led management companies, denied allegations of wrongdoing. 

"There's absolutely no foundation for such an outrageous accusation," Mr. Grohsgal, an attorney with Pachulski Stang Ziehl & Jones, said after one allegation of forgery during Monday's hearing. 

Mr. Caner misunderstood documents showing collateral pledges, which he took as evidence of multiple sales of single apartments, Mr. Grohsgal said. 

It will be up to the judge to decide whether to put Caner-linked investment funds in control of the One Madison development or leave it in the hands of Mr. Shapiro. 

 Write to  Peg Brickley at peg.brickley@dowjones.com 