A rebounding stock market helped buoy state pension plans' assets in 2010. But the plans still have a long way to go to bridge a funding gap caused in large part by losses suffered during the financial crisis, according to a report expected to be released Monday. 

Any upswing is good news for state pension plans, typically funded by contributions from public employers and workers and investment returns on assets held in the plans. 

State pension systems had an estimated funding ratio of 69% for fiscal year 2010, ending June 30, up from 65% for fiscal year 2009, according to Wilshire Associates, a Santa Monica, Calif.-based investment-consulting firm. But pension plans remain well below the 95% estimated average funding ratio for 2007. 

The ratio means that 126 state pension systems surveyed by Wilshire on average have 69% of the assets on hand compared to projections of what they will owe in pension payments to government workers over the long term. That figure is based on the market value of the assets. 

"The trajectory is up, albeit it's up off a pretty low base," says Steven Foresti, managing director at Wilshire and an author of the report. 

The so-called actuarial estimate, which most plans use and which spreads out investment gains and losses over longer periods, leads to a projection of 77% for 2010. That's down from 79% a year earlier and 87% in 2007.

For most of the pension plans, figures reflect funding through June. Since then, robust market returns have likely bolstered pension plans' assets, Mr. Foresti said.

Over the next decade, Wilshire projects public pension plans will have a median annual return on their assets of 6.5%. The pension plans included in the study have projected a median actuarial return of 8% over several decades, Wilshire says. 

Public pension plans' asset allocation has shifted over the past decade, according to Wilshire. 

In 2010, funds had 31.1% of their assets in U.S. stocks, down from 45% in 2000, while foreign equities have increased to 17.5% from 13% over the same time frame. Investments in so-called "alternative" assets classes, such as real estate, private equity, commodities and hedge funds have also increased. 

Public pension funds' health has received heightened attention in recent months amid increased stress on states' finances and questions by some over the size of retiree pensions. Representatives of government workers have said gaps are due at least in part to employers' failures to make required contributions.

The Wilshire report comes as other data also point to signs of improvement in state and local finances. 

State tax collections, for instance, increased 6.9% across 41 states that have reported their fourth-quarter revenue, the fastest rate in nearly five years, according to a February report by the Nelson A. Rockefeller Institute of Government at the State University of New York. 

Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke in a speech in New York last week said that if the economy continues to strengthen "states and localities may start to get a little breathing space," as tax collections rise with income and spending and the demand for support programs such as Medicaid, a federal-state partnership to provide health coverage for the poorest Americans, diminishes. But Mr. Bernanke and others also say that state and local governments face a tough slog ahead.