 With Spain's troubled savings banks struggling to attract badly needed private investment, the Bank of Spain is edging toward a variation on the "bad bank" model that aims to reassure investors while minimizing government risk. 

The model—in which individual lenders create a so-called bad bank that holds toxic assets and is supported by state funds—shows how Spain is ramping up efforts to attract private money as its seeks to plug a €14.1 billion ($20.24 billion) capital hole in the financial sector. 

The Bank of Spain previously backed the new "bad bank" structure in the case of just one savings bank, Banco Financiero y de Ahorros, which plans to list the healthier portion of its bank this summer.



 The Irish government announced a plan that seeks to create new jobs without deepening the country's debt crisis, mainly by providing incentives to boost private sector employment and retraining the unemployed.  



 Britain's coalition government, born a year ago, is entering stormy territory as its junior Liberal Democrats party tries to balance good relations with both the voting public and its partners in the Conservative Party. 

While the coalition is not in imminent danger, it faces more turbulence and scrutiny as the Lib Dems—on the heels of an election drubbing—try to play tougher with the Tories in areas like banking, constitutional reform and health care. 



 The former head of England's World Cup bid accused four members of world football's governing body of "improper and unethical" conduct in the bidding process to select the venues for the 2018 and 2022 FIFA World Cup tournaments, the latest fallout from the vote-rigging allegations that marred the selection process. 



 Germany's Free Democratic Party reshuffled its lineup of government ministers, the latest attempt by the junior coalition partner in Chancellor Angela Merkel's center-right coalition to reverse a precipitous decline in its approval ratings. 



Greece expects an audit of its budgets will show that a new financial-aid package of nearly €60 billion ($86 billion) will be required to cover its financial needs stretching into 2013, a senior Greek government official said.

The country staged a successful auction of €1.63 billion ($2.34 billion) in Treasury bills, partly dispelling worries over its ability to meet debt obligations amid market speculation that Greece will need to restructure its debt, a scenario European Central Bank officials denied.



 Turkey's privatization authority scrapped the state gas company's $1.2 billion privatization by industrialists Mehmet Kazanci and Mehmet Karamehmet, as they failed to pay for their 80% stake in the company on time. 

The decision puts in doubt their $5 billion purchase of Turkish power grids in another privatization the two men won last August, which could potentially open the field for other bidders.



Russia has reopened a criminal investigation into a prominent blogger and anticorruption activist, a likely sign of rising intrigue among Kremlin elites over presidential succession next year. 



Russia is unlikely to have another severe drought this year and current conditions point to a sizable harvest, traders and forecasters said. 



 Royal Dutch Shell's U.S. president said in an interview that a recent meeting with Environmental Protection Agency officials and energy aides to President Barack Obama left him more confident Shell would get all the permits it needs to start drilling in the Arctic seas off Alaska next year. 



 Several Senate Democrats proposed repealing about $2 billion in annual tax breaks for big oil companies as a debate over such incentives gained momentum amid rising gasoline prices and strong quarterly oil-giant profits. 



 U.S. import prices continued to rise at a strong pace in April, pushed higher by energy costs that have since come down over the past week amid sharp price swings.  



The trustee seeking to recover funds on behalf of victims of Ponzi scheme operator Bernard Madoff sued a commercial-banking unit of a Brazilian private bank, seeking nearly $112 million.



A federal trial judge in Maryland acquitted a former GlaxoSmithKline lawyer accused of lying during an investigation of Glaxo marketing practices, dealing a blow to the government's effort to target individuals in probes of the pharmaceutical industry.



 U.S. military officers in Afghanistan have drawn up preliminary proposals to withdraw as many as 5,000 troops from the country in July and as many as 5,000 more by the year's end, the first phase of a U.S. pullout promised by President Barack Obama, officials said. 



 China's trade surplus swelled dramatically in April, likely adding pressure on Beijing to allow a faster appreciation of the yuan just as U.S. and Chinese officials met for talks focused partly on issues of trade and currency. 

The country's trade surplus widened unexpectedly to $11.4 billion in April from a narrow $139 million in March as import growth slowed and exports powered ahead, data showed.



 Two of China's biggest banks have given some of their branches discretion to raise the minimum down payment and mortgage rates for first-time home buyers in areas where prices have surged, signaling growing concern among banks about real-estate bubbles. 



 The president of Tokyo Electric Power formally submitted a request for Japanese government aid, saying the embattled utility's financial problems could endanger its program to pay compensation to those affected by the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear-plant crisis.  

 An increase in taxes is necessary to fund Japan's reconstruction efforts after the March 11 earthquake, but the rise shouldn't be limited to the sales tax, the head of a government advisory panel said.  



In Afghanistan, hundreds of insurgents launched a large-scale attack against police in the remote mountainous eastern province of Nuristan, a part of the country that is largely under Taliban control, officials said. 

 Syria said it was continuing military operations in three areas across the country, as rights activists said those sieges and continued mass arrests threaten to cripple a seven-week uprising. 

The army and security forces on Monday arrested "dozens of wanted men and seized a quantity of weapons, ammunition, and explosives intended for an attack on members of the army and security forces," according to a statement carried by the state news agency.

European Union sanctions took effect against 13 Syrian officials who will be subject to a travel ban, asset freeze and arms embargo. 



The Palestinians issued their first bonds, a milestone in their effort to build the trappings of an independent state. The $70 million in five-year corporate bonds was issued by the biggest company in the Palestinian territories, the Palestinian Development and Investment Co., which has investments in real estate, energy, pharmaceuticals, electronics, communications and tourism.



An Egyptian court has convicted the country's former tourism minister, Zuheir Garana, of corruption and sentenced him to five years in prison. 

 Australia's government presented its annual budget, promising to deliver the quickest improvement in the country's finances on record, returning to surplus well ahead of its peers while also offering incentives to ease a labor shortage driven by a mining boom.  