General manger Erik Soler sat with manager Hans Backe last week while he came up with different viable lineups for a now-loaded Red Bulls roster. Mr. Backe came up with about 50. 

"Hans is doing his magical work now," Mr. Soler said. 

After the team spent last season grabbing superstars such as Thierry Henry and defender Rafael Marquez, the Red Bulls have what Mr. Backe calls a "decent balance." Now the second phase of the franchise's plan starts: developing a team around them. 

Preseason camp begins on Feb. 1, with the team headed to Mexico for 12 days and then Arizona. The goal? Team building, not star searching.

 Mr. Soler said this week on a conference call that he is not looking for a third "designated player," referring to the allotted slots that exist outside the salary cap and enable teams to grab stars such as Mr. Henry or David Beckham. Mr. Soler said the team has the financial means to grab another star, but it's not a need. 

"We have a good cover in every position now," Mr. Soler said. "We have enough defenders, enough midfielders and strikers to go into camp and play a lot of games and develop."

After the arrival of Mr. Henry last July, the Red Bulls might have been the MLS' best team. Even after a slow start, they were the top seed in the Eastern Conference, though they were eliminated in the first round of the playoffs by the San Jose Earthquakes. 

But with a full season under their belt, the front office is more optimistic. Mr. Henry has spent the offseason in London, where he's training with his former team, Premier League power Arsenal. 

"We spoke with Thierry about that. It's fantastic. He came into the league in the middle of the season. He wanted to be 100 percent prepared and fit [this year]," Mr. Soler said. 

A balance of big names and big futures will carry the Red Bulls this season. Their youth is headlined by Tim Ream, the 23-year-old defender who suited up for the U.S. national team during the offseason and has developed into a cornerstone for the Red Bulls, starting 30 games in his rookie season last year.

 Mr. Soler said that if he had openly predicted Mr. Ream's success as a rookie he would have "been put in a mental hospital."

There's also 18-year-old sensation Juan Agudelo, who in November became the youngest player to score a goal for the United States national team in a game against South Africa. 

Mr. Soler and Mr. Backe both stressed the team needs to buy one more defender before the roster is complete. Veteran defender Mike Petke retired and the team traded Jeremy Hall in November for a draft pick. Mr. Soler said additions at any other position won't be considered until he sees how the youth of the team develops. 

This week the team added more youth, selecting Penn State forward Corey Hertzog with the 13th overall selection in the MLS draft. Mr. Hertzog led the NCAA in goals (20) and points (46). 

He will start out playing forward on the right side, though how he fits in with a crowded offense that includes Mr. Henry and Mr. Agudelo remains to be seen. 

"All of my friends at home at home were like 'What if you go to New York and play with Thierry Henry?' and I said I wouldn't even know what to do. It's a dream to meet him, let alone play with him," Mr. Hertzog said.

Their most notable selection, however, was John Rooney, the brother of Manchester United superstar Wayne. Mr. Rooney, 20, has made 40 appearances with English team Macclesfield Town and has scored three goals. 

On the field, Mr. Backe said Mr. Rooney was one of the two or three best central-midfielders at the MLS' combine earlier this month. 

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 