NEW DELHI – India Tuesday reiterated that companies that offer encrypted communication services will have to allow monitoring of such services by security agencies if they want to operate in the country. 

"It's not a question of their giving access. Under law, they have to give access, everybody has to give access," federal Home Secretary  Gopal K. Pillai told reporters. "Whoever gives access will be allowed to operate. Whoever does not give access will not be allowed to operate." 

Mr. Pillai was responding to reporters' queries on whether BlackBerry smartphone maker  Research In Motion Ltd. and other companies that provide similar services had given access to monitor and intercept corporate emails. 

RIM has earlier said it won't be able to provide a facility to monitor corporate emails, though it did offer systems to intercept Internet browsing and messenger services used on its smart phones. 

India fears the highly encrypted messages and emails sent through RIM's BlackBerry smartphones make them convenient for terrorists to use undetected. It had asked RIM to grant access to its messenger services before Jan. 31. 

India had said recently it is holding talks with mobile-phone operators, and not RIM, to access BlackBerry corporate emails, indirectly putting pressure on the Canadian company. The government has referred to a clause in the telecom licensing agreement which specifies that government agencies can ask operators for access to monitor and intercept all communication services, and stop such services which can't be monitored. 

RIM said last week it has been assured that any policy that allows lawful access for encrypted enterprise or virtual private network telecommunications "will be applied equitably, broadly, and simultaneously to all such products and services that use encryption in India." 

In December, mobile handset maker  Nokia Corp.
NOK


-0.45
%




 said it had set up servers in India to let local security agencies monitor the Finnish company's email services. Last September, India said it would also seek access to  Google Inc.'s Gmail service and Luxembourg-based Skype's Internet phone service. 

Executives at both Google and Skype said late January that they haven't received any communication from Indian authorities on the matter. Executives at the two companies couldn't be immediately reached for comment Tuesday. 

 Write to  Prasanta Sahu at prasanta.sahu@dowjones.com and R. Jai Krishna at krishna.jai@dowjones.com 