HONG KONG—Bourse operator Hong Kong Exchanges & Clearing Ltd. said net profit rose 7% in 2010, boosted by an increase in average daily turnover value on the stock exchange and a record year for initial public offerings. 

The company also said it isn't in talks with other exchange operators, following a flurry of merger announcements around the world.

But it acknowledged it faces challenges in an "evolving exchange landscape" and that mergers among leading exchanges would intensify competition. 

Hong Kong's stock exchange, the most popular global venue for new share offerings during the past two years, has beaten rival exchanges in attracting issuers largely thanks to its ties with China. Companies raised US$57.74 billion through Hong Kong IPOs in 2010, according to data provider Dealogic. New York was a distant second with US$34.97 billion, while Shenzhen and Shanghai ranked third and fourth, respectively. 

HK Exchanges Chief Executive  Charles Li, speaking at a press conference Wednesday to discuss the results, predicted that Hong Kong's first yuan-denominated IPO will "definitely" happen this year. 

Mr. Li said that despite recent plans by some of the world's largest bourses to merge, "our strategy remains unchanged...Every time I go through all this I thought you already got what I'm trying to say...We're not in discussions with anybody." 

The exchange has repeatedly said it hasn't identified any significant alliance opportunities and that any tie-up would have to be consistent with its focus on markets in China. 

Mr. Li's comments come after  Deutsche Börse AG and  NYSE Euronext last month announced a merger that would create the world's largest financial exchange, shortly after the  London Stock Exchange Group and Toronto-based TMX Group set a merger of their own. In Asia, Singapore Exchange Ltd. announced in October a US$8.3 billion offer for all the shares of the operator of Australia's stock exchange,  ASX Ltd. All the deals require regulatory and shareholder approval.

HK Exchanges has been pushing hard to strengthen ties with China's markets. Last year, it said it would allow locally listed Chinese companies to prepare their financial statements using Chinese accounting standards, and mainland auditors to vet them. It also announced a plan to extend trading hours in Hong Kong to better align them with Chinese markets. 

HK Exchanges has said increasing the overlap with China is crucial because more than 70% of the trading volume on the local stock market is in China-related securities and the number of companies listed in both China and Hong Kong is likely to increase given the city's role as China's offshore yuan center. 

The exchange on Wednesday detailed its plan for a liquidity pool to help investors buy yuan-denominated shares in the secondary market with Hong Kong dollars if they have trouble getting sufficient amounts of yuan. 

Mr. Li said the pool, which HK Exchanges aims to launch in the second half of 2011, is a way of assuring investors there will be enough liquidity to support yuan-denominated investment products. 

"We can't afford to have renminbi products not succeed in Hong Kong," he added, using another name for the yuan. 

HK Exchanges said net profit for the 12 months ended Dec. 31 was HK$5.04 billion, up from HK$4.70 billion in 2009. The result was slightly below the average HK$5.09 billion forecast of 17 analysts in a Thomson Reuters poll. 

The company, which makes money from fees and tariffs related to securities, options and derivatives trading, as well as listing fees, investment income and clearing and settlement fees, said revenue rose 8% to HK$7.57 billion in 2010, from HK$7.04 billion a year earlier, as average daily turnover on the stock exchange rose 11% to HK$69.1 billion from HK$62.3 billion. 

HK Exchanges declared a final dividend of HK$2.31, up from HK$2.09 a year earlier. 

 Write to  Kate O'Keeffe at kathryn.okeeffe@dowjones.com 