Bedford-Stuyvesant has a new celebrity: Luke Matheny, the winner of the 2011 Academy Award for Best Live Action Short Film. 

Mr. Matheny, 35, created "God of Love"—an 18-minute comedy about a lounge-singing darts champion who falls for his drummer and prays for help—as his graduate thesis for New York University's Graduate Film Program, where he earned an MFA in May 2010. He wrote, directed and starred in the film, which was shot in 10 days in the city with a little help from friends and family: His mother, for one, drove up from Florida to serve the crew peanut-butter and jelly sandwiches and other snacks.

Mr. Matheny, a native of Delaware whose fluffy black hair and unaffected charm made his acceptance speech a highlight of Sunday night's Oscar ceremony, spoke with the Journal about his big win and how he makes his films. The last two days have been a dream, the filmmaker said, but they weren't exactly perfect.

 How was your post-Oscar night? 

I lost my keys to my friend's apartment. I had to stay in a cramped W Hotel room. Some of us were on the floor. Someone said, "I don't think 'The Kings Speech' team is doing this."

 So you woke up and went home? 

The car had been towed. I said to the guy at the lot, "Guess what happened last night?" And he said: "You won an Oscar!" I think on any other day of the year, the expense and frustration would have been upsetting. Somehow it didn't bother me today.

 Must have been a long night. 

We went to the Chateau Marmont and the Vanity Fair party. We tried to go to Madonna's party, but it was at capacity. But what was better was going to Mel's Drive-In with the random drunk people coming and in saying "Congratulations!" We were sitting there with the Oscar right on the table. 

 You started out as a journalist after going to Northwestern University's Medill School of Journalism. Any highlights? 

Headline writing was my forte. I kicked around at trade magazines—Electronic Media, which became TV Week—and websites.

 Why did you switch into film? 

I had always been a movie fan. If you name a year, I can tell you what movie won Best Picture. In Chicago, some friends and I decided to make a film. We went to Paris and shot a film called "A Place in France." It pointed out the need for formal instruction. I used that experience to try to get into a good film school.

 You play the main character in "God of Love." Is acting a path you want to follow? 

My student loans are such that I will not turn down any opportunities. I had a pretty specific comedic thing in mind, and sometimes it is easier to do it yourself.

 So many great directors started by making short films. What's next on the career path? 

What I would like to do next is direct and act in a feature that I wrote called "Ron Quixote." Maybe I can leverage the Oscar into a teaching position. [Mr. Matheny has taught writing and directing at the School of Cinema and Performing Arts in Brooklyn.]

 Are unrequited love and romantic delusions major themes for you?  

I have had no shortage of those feelings. I think everyone in the audience has had experiences like that, too. It's hard for people to talk about, but if you present it in a breezy way, it's easier.

 What are some films that influenced "God of Love," which you shot in black and white? 

We were trying to copy the 1960s jazz world. We looked at American films that had a jazz-world setting. Also "I Want to Live!" and "Paris Blues." My favorite movies are classic Hollywood studio pictures, by directors like Preston Sturges and Howard Hawks. Oh, I met Tom Hanks last night. I told him that I have a poster of "Joe Versus the Volcano" in my apartment.

 You memorably opened your acceptance speech by regretting that you hadn't gotten your haircut beforehand. When's the last time you did get one? 

I was at SuperCuts on Sixth Avenue and Waverly Place about two months ago. Maxine and Tonisha cut my hair. It was a big question if I should go last week. 

 Write to  Pia Catton at pia.catton@wsj.com 