HARTFORD—Democrat  Dan Malloy became Connecticut's 88th governor Wednesday, vowing at his inauguration to bring fiscal responsibility to a state he says is at "crossroads of crisis and opportunity."

The 55-year-old took the oath of office before hundreds inside the Hartford State Armory near the Capitol. Shortly after, he addressed the legislature at the Capitol.

The atmosphere surrounding Mr. Malloy's inauguration was festive, featuring an inaugural ball, afternoon parade, 19-gun salute and a helicopter flyover. But the governor—the state's first Democratic leader in two decades—sought to temper the partying with sobering rhetoric in his inauguration speech and his address to state legislators. 

He succeeds Republican  M. Jodi Rell, who served more than six years in the post but chose not to run for reelection.

"Today, we could use a few candles. Because as most people in Connecticut know, ours is not a pretty picture," he said.

Formerly the mayor of Stamford and once a New York City prosecutor, Mr. Malloy repeatedly spoke of the need for state government to clean up its fiscal mess, saying lawmakers had been guilty of "sugarcoating" the scope of Connecticut's problems.

He didn't lay put specific remedies or numbers in saying how he'd tackle the $3.5 billion budget gap, saying he'd wait until he unveils his budget plan next month to do so. The current shortfall is equivalent to nearly one-fifth of the state's spending.



During the campaign, Mr. Malloy refused to pledge that he wouldn't raise taxes—a decision that likely cost him votes in a historically close election with Republican  Tom Foley. 

Since then, he's suggested it will take a mix of tax hikes and service cuts to balance the budget, a point he seemed to reiterate Wednesday when he said it would take "shared sacrifice" to solve the issue.

In an interview after Mr. Malloy's address, Senate Republican Leader  John McKinney said he thought tax increases would be the wrong step. "Do I anticipate that the governor's plan will include increases? I do. Do I think that should be the starting point? I don't," he said, adding that reduced spending should be the first priority.

Still, he said the governor hit the right tone in his address and that he illustrated an understanding of how troubled the state was financially.

Mr. Malloy will have a Democrat-led legislature at his disposal. Already, some in the party have said they see Mr. Malloy's election as an opportunity to further their goals. 

Rep. Gary Holder-Winfield has said he plans to push a bill that would abolish the death penalty, for instance. He pushed the same bill in 2009, and it passed, but was vetoed by Ms. Rell. Mr. Malloy has indicated he would sign such a bill should it pass. 

Capital punishment is a red-hot issue in the state, as one man was given the death penalty last month for his role in a brutal home invasion and triple murder in Cheshire back in 2007. Another defendant in the case is expected to stand trial next month.

  Gary Rose, chairman of the government and politics department at Sacred Heart University, said the Democrats will have "an incredibly rich opportunity" to pass legislation with a Democratic governor.

"But there's a price that comes with leadership and it's called accountability," he said. "The label is strong now, and voters will now be able to directly attribute success or failure to that party."

 Write to  Chris Herring at chris.herring@wsj.com 