BANGALORE, India— Infosys Technologies Ltd.
INFY


1.44
%




 on Saturday named a banking veteran its chairman and one of its founders as the new chief executive as the Indian technology giant presented a much-anticipated management restructuring. 

  K.V. Kamath, the 63-year-old former top boss at India's largest private-sector lender,  ICICI Bank Ltd., will become the first nonfounder to head the Bangalore-based company's board. He will take over the nonexecutive chairman's post from Infosys co-founder  N.R. Narayana Murthy, who retires on Aug. 20.

  S.D. Shibulal, now chief operating officer, will succeed  S. Gopalakrishnan as CEO, Infosys said. Mr. Gopalakrishnan will become the executive co-chairman. The company hasn't named a new operating chief yet. 

Mr. Shibulal, 56, will be the fourth CEO of the company, which had 130,820 employees as of March 31. The appointments are effective Aug. 21. 

The management changes will bring to an end Mr. Murthy's active role at Infosys, the company he cofounded with Messrs. Gopalakrishnan and Shibulal in 1981 with $250. Mr. Murthy, the most-recognized face of Infosys, will be the chairman emeritus of the board, offering consultative support to both the board and executive management. 

Mr. Murthy held the posts of nonexecutive chairman and chief mentor since 2002. He is credited with building Infosys into India's second-largest software exporter and making the country the top destination for outsourcing work.

The company also said it plans to change its name to Infosys Ltd. as it looks to project itself as a business solutions provider, and not only a technology provider. 

The company has set up a nominations committee comprising independent members Messrs. Lehman and Kamath and  Deepak M. Satwalekar to ensure smooth succession planning at the technology major. Mr. Kamath later recused himself from the panel after his name was being considered for the chairman's position. 

Infosys's tradition of rotating the top job among the founders has drawn criticism from many in the industry in recent times, including the director-in-charge of human resources,  T.V. Mohandas Pai, who earlier this month announced his plan to step down from the company. 

  Jeffrey S. Lehman, chairman of the nominations committee, told reporters at a news conference that the committee was helping to frame a transition phase to "what will ultimately become an era that is entirely postfounders." 

The Mumbai- and Nasdaq-listed company faces tough competition in the technology outsourcing market. Infosys, known for setting conservative growth targets and consistently exceeding them, has been facing investor and analyst scrutiny after its financial performance in the past few quarters was shorn of its usual sheen. 

"The world of today is fraught with uncertainties—economic, regulatory and changing customer preferences," CEO-designate Mr. Shibulal said. He also unveiled a new strategy that will align the company's businesses based on industries, service lines and geographies as it seeks to strengthen its market position in outsourcing technologies services.

Mr. Kamath, former managing director and CEO of ICICI Bank, is currently an independent member of Infosys board. He is also the nonexecutive chairman of the bank. As chairman of Infosys, he will be responsible for all corporate governance matters at the company. 

The reorganization, long overdue according to analysts, is expected to set right the challenges faced by the company in building market share, in a marked shift of focus from the company's long-standing strategy of conserving profitability. 

Earlier this month, Infosys reported a disappointing net profit for the January-March period and forecast revenue for the current quarter below estimates. Its stock is down nearly 16% so far this year as it lags behind rivals like Tata Consultancy Services Ltd. and  Cognizant Technology Solutions Corp.
CTSH


0.76
%




, which are witnessing an improving business climate for the outsourcing industry. 

The reshuffle at Infosys follows management changes at the technology division of crosstown rival  Wipro Ltd., which, too, is experiencing weak growth as it failed to cash in on the recovery in outsourcing demand. 

The last major restructuring at Infosys was in 2007 when its cofounder and then chief executive Nandan Nilekani was replaced by Mr. Gopalakrishnan, who in turn left the operating chief's role to Mr. Shibulal. Mr. Nilekani assumed the role of vice chairman and later left the company to head an agency tasked by the Indian government with creating a national identification database for the country's 1.2 billion citizens. 

Infosys will also name three new members to the board at the company's annual general meeting on June 11. Two of the new members will replace the vacancies left by Mr. Pai and  K. Dinesh, one of the founders, who will retire on the same day.

—Rumman Ahmed contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Dhanya Ann Thoppil at dhanya.thoppil@dowjones.com and Gurdev Singh Virk at Gurdev.Singh@dowjones.com 