LONDON—The U.K. recorded its largest-ever goods trade deficit in November after a surge in oil imports overshadowed record exports, official data showed Wednesday. 

The goods trade deficit grew to £8.7 billion ($13.59 billion) from an increased estimate of an £8.6 billion deficit in October, the Office for National Statistics said. 

"November's U.K. trade figures are not as bad as the widening in the headline deficits suggests. However, it is clear that net trade is giving at best a limited boost to the wider economic recovery,"  Vicky Redwood, senior U.K. economist at Capital Economics, said in a note. 

Goods exports rose 4.1% from October to an all-time high of £23.6 billion in November, driven by sales of cars to European Union countries and Russia, the ONS said. But imports increased 3.4% to a record £32.4 billion, driven by purchases of oil and aircraft and aircraft parts from abroad. 

  Alan Clarke, an economist at BNP Paribas, said he still expects net trade to be one of the biggest contributors to growth this year, but it is unlikely to be a quick turnaround. 

"Going forward we expect exports to improve further, especially given signs of buoyancy in key trading partners such as Germany," he said in a note. "Meanwhile, the likely softening in domestic demand on the back of public-sector spending cutbacks and sluggish household consumption should reduce demand for imports." 

After dipping in October, oil imports jumped by more than £1 billion in November to their highest level since July 2008. That overshadowed a £342 million increase in oil exports from October and fueled an oil-trade deficit of £660 million following a rare surplus of £21 million in October. 

On the export side, exports of cars increased £353 million from October, but there were also higher foreign sales of chemicals and other semi-manufactured goods. 

Stripping out trade in oil and erratic goods, U.K. exports increased to £19.1 billion, the highest total since May 2006, the ONS said. 

"Despite a slight widening of the trade deficit, a recent wave of positive exporting data should offer some cheer to a government that has placed such a major focus on the success of U.K. exporters,"  Iain MacDonald, head of trade product at Barclays Corporate, said in a note. 

The goods trade deficit with non-EU countries shrank to £5 billion in November from a revised £5.1 billion in October. 

The deficit with China shrank to a seven-month low of £1.8 billion as exports grew and imports dipped. 

The U.K. and China sealed $4 billion worth of business deals in the energy and automotive sectors Monday during a visit to London by Chinese Vice Premier Li Keqiang. He said the two countries should expand bilateral trade and work to make it more balanced. 

The ONS said the trade deficit with EU countries widened to £3.7 billion from £3.5 billion in October. 

The U.K.'s total trade deficit widened to £4.1 billion in November from £4 billion the previous month even though the surplus in services trade was steady at £4.6 billion. 

 Write to  Nicholas Winning at nick.winning@dowjones.com 