I was stuck in "The Fridge." Somewhere 100 or so feet above the pine trees, I groped for a piece of climbing equipment that had dropped into a frigid nook filled with mountain water, halting my journey down one of South Africa's most spectacular "kloofs," high above the Western Cape city of Stellenbosch.

A kloof, in the South African language of Afrikaans, is a canyon. And kloofing is the sport of going up and down them, usually down. Attached to a rope and climbing harness, kloofers may walk backwards off a 150-foot cliff; straddle a rush of whitewater down a mossy embankment; or leap into chilly pools fed by waterfalls.

My guide into the world of kloofing was Teuns Kok, a 40-year-old professional transport planner. Mr. Kok specializes in making urban walkways safe and accessible for school children and the handicapped. The same principle applies when he goes kloofing in South Africa's rugged mountains.

In 2001, Mr. Kok and a few friends pioneered a route down Ostrich Kloof, outside the South African wine-making capital of Stellenbosch, where he lives. He has since guided select groups of friends and visitors down the kloof's hidden waterfalls and shady gullies—but they must be willing to entrust their lives to his ropes, makeshift anchor points and route planning.

In other countries, including the U.S., kloofing is known as "canyoneering." But South Africa's sandstone domes and verdant scrubland give the sport its own natural draws. It now has an avid following. 

Mr. Kok insisted the appeal isn't danger. "It's because of the enjoyment, the adventure, the beauty of what you see," he said. Danger is part of the package, though. So is primal fear. Kloofers must learn to lean back over an abyss so the legs and feet maintain balance on the descent. Hunch too far forward, the feet slip. Shins and knees are punished for the trepidation.

I had grown up hiking in the mountains of the Pacific Northwest, but considered myself a climbing neophyte. The night before our excursion, Mr. Kok gave me a refresher course near his home. He went over the route and some tips. Then he let me know he was breaking one of his cardinal rules in taking me up Ostrich Kloof: "We usually go with people we know."

There's a reason for that rule. Mr. Kok's frequent kloofing partner, Wayne Du Plooy—who owns an outdoor equipment store and also leads small group tours—recalled one trip they guided with "a couple of skinny college girls." The girls began to whimper while descending the first waterfall, said Mr. Du Plooy. As they were lowered down subsequently steeper rock faces, he said, the whimpers turned to wails. "You don't want to get there and the person says, 'No, I can't do this,' " he cautioned. "The only way out is down."

South Africans have been kloofing for more than a century, according to Dean van der Merwe, a spokesman for the Mountain Club of South Africa. European settlers often broke away from the wagon tracks to kloof, helping fill out blank swaths of 19th- and early 20th-century maps. 

Kloofing has since evolved into an extreme sport with a commercial niche. A handful of tour operators, several based in Cape Town, offer guides and lessons. One popular excursion is called Suicide Gorge for a series of hair-raising jumps and slides from rocks dozens of feet above the water. 

Mr. Kok has his own set of safety measures hard-wired into any Ostrich Kloof trip. He has fastened bolts into rock, or wrapped chains around reedy trees. The ropes are then threaded through a figure-eight device clamped into the harness, allowing kloofers to "abseil," or rappel, great distances at a controlled clip. So that kloofers don't bounce like yo-yos, he and Mr. Du Plooy lug hundreds of feet of "static" climbing rope that doesn't stretch as much as the "dynamic" variety.

Though a descent down Ostrich Kloof is normally a two-day trip, we decided to tackle it in one because of an ominous weather forecast. Backlit at dawn, the Groot Drakenstein Mountains resembled the jagged knuckles of a giant curled fist. As the sun rose, we climbed up through a steep gorge, wedged between massive rock faces. We traversed boulder fields, passed beside pristine pools and scampered up a vertical section of about 30 feet. The coup de grace was plopping onto our backsides and sliding down a grassy bank to our first abseil point.

We slipped harnesses around our waists and donned helmets. Mr. Du Plooy descended first with a phrase that he would repeat throughout the day: "See you at the bottom!" It was a reminder that I'd get there one way or another.

The next abseil started with a gentle grass slope but then it dropped onto a monstrous mossy maw. I peered over the edge to see a shallow rock pool more than 100 feet below. The "skinny college girl" in me began to whimper. By the end of abseil number two, my arms were tired, my clothes wet and my shins bleeding—only 13 more points to go. 

Several hours and nine abseils later, we arrived at the dreaded "Fridge," so nicknamed for what it does to one's body temperature. 

To get to it, one must abseil down through a plume of water, dropping into a dark hole. The hole was waist deep with water and bone-cold.

Beyond the lip of the pool was only air and sun-bleached rocks 120 feet below.

When our ropes were ready, my shivering hands fumbled the figure eight. It plunked into the water and disappeared. "Here," said Mr. Kok, quickly handing me his abseil device. "Take mine." I stepped onto the ledge and into the sunlight. As I abseiled down, I passed beside a shadowy cavern that few would ever get to see. The feet felt light. So did the heart. At the bottom, I thanked the transport planner who got us here.

 GETTING THERE The nearest airport to Stellenbosch is Cape Town International, approximately 45 minutes away. Flights from the United States are available on British Airways, South African, South African Express, Virgin Atlantic, United and American. Book December-February (South Africa's summer months). 

 KLOOF TOURS There are many operators based out of the Cape Town area, including Kamikaze Kanyon's Abseil Africa (abseilafrica.co.za) and Cape-Xtreme (cape-xtreme.com/adventure-tours/kloofing). The latter takes climbers to Suicide Gorge in the Hottentots Mountains, on an 8-to-10-hour day trip. Lunch and wet suits are provided on most excursions. 

 WHERE TO STAY There are dozens of luxury guest houses in Cape Town and its wine region. Knorhoek, 10 minutes from Stellenbosch, is a standout: a fifth-generation wine farm and seven-bedroom guest house with cafés and tastings (knorhoek.co.za). In Cape Town: Ezard House, a contemporary hotel perched on a seaside bluff (ezardhouse.com); Hemingway House, a four-room enclave surrounding a courtyard-pool (00-27-21-461-1857). Most inns can arrange transport to kloofing outfitters. 

 SIDE TRIPS The historic wine villages of Stellenbosch, Paarl and Franschhoek. Ask your concierge to recommend a tasting tour. 

 WHAT TO PACK Hiking shoes, shorts, sunscreen, a waterproof camera and bicycle gloves (to protect from rope burn). 

 DONE KLOOFING? Your guides will have a prearranged car waiting to pick you up at the bottom of the mountain.