 What it's like: Visiting Seville is not unlike being in a time machine. No sooner have you transited through one of Spain's most modern airports than you find yourself in a maze of tiny, city-center streets, little changed since medieval times. 

It is small wonder that Seville, the capital of the province of Andalucía and the fourth-largest city in Spain, has found favor with so many over the centuries. The Moors arrived in the eighth century and clearly liked what they found. It wasn't until 1248 that the city was taken from them by King Ferdinand III of Castile. 

After the discovery of the Americas in 1492, Seville also made an ideal base from which many expeditions to the New World set sail, down Spain's only major river, the Guadalquivir, to the open sea. 

You can see signs of this rich history everywhere you turn in this wonderful city. There's the outstanding cathedral and its bell tower, known locally as the Giralda, all that now remains of the original mosque that stood on this site. The upper levels of the tower are reached via a series of internal ramps constructed, it is said, so that the Arabs could ride their horses right to the top.



 Getting Around: Taxis are the best way to get around Seville until you get to know the city, with its many small streets and cobbled alleyways. Once you have your bearings, however, walking around the center is very rewarding.



 Best Hotels: There is no shortage of good business hotels in the center of Seville. One that stands out is the five-star Gran Meliá Colón close to the Plaza de Armas (www.melia-sevilla.com), where the Belle-Époque style of the building blends well with the newly refurbished rooms, complete with high-tech trimmings. A restaurant run by a Michelin-starred chef is a bonus.

For something really discreet, however, choose the tiny Hotel Casa Number 7 (www.casanumero7.com), a delightfully refurbished 19th century townhouse with only six guest rooms. It is owned by  Gonzalo del Rio, whose family also owns the Gonzalez Byass sherry company, based in nearby Jerez.



 Best bar for after-work drinks:You are spoiled for choice in Seville. A couple of bars worth a visit, however, are Bar Giralda at Mateus Gagos 1, one of the city's most famous bars, which started life as a Moorish bathhouse, and Bodega Santa Cruz, at Justino de Neve 2, an atmospheric bar where you'll find locals rubbing shoulders with visitors and where the waiters still chalk your bill on the bar, just as they have always done.



 Best restaurant for business entertaining:There is certainly no shortage of excellent restaurants suitable for business in Seville. Among the best is the Taberna del Alabardero (www.tabernadelalabardero.es), which specializes in traditional Spanish food but with a twist. There's a sunny terrace perfect for a prelunch drink, and apart from the main restaurant there are four private dining rooms. 



 Business etiquette: Business clothes are expected for meetings, though you can get away with no jacket in the height of summer. Longish business lunches are fairly common, as are after-work drinks and tapas. Dinner proper tends to be much later in the evening.



 Where do meetings take place?Meetings usually take place in offices or restaurants. Business hours are Monday to Friday from 9 a.m. to 6 p.m., though some companies still close for a couple of hours in the afternoon, a throwback to the old days of the siesta. Government offices and banks usually close at 2 p.m., though some also open on Saturday mornings. 



 How to get your laptop fixed:There are a number of computer repair companies in Seville. One that comes recommended is 123-Global Trading at Marques del Nervion 34, tel: (0)34 954 987 470 (www.123-informatica.com).



 What to do in your time off 

 In a whole afternoon: Head out of Seville to the delightful medieval hilltop town of Carmona, where you'll find an interesting mix of churches, private mansions and shady squares within the Moorish city walls. Go for an early-evening drink at one of the many small restaurants, such as that at the Alcazar de la Reina hotel, where you can spend a happy hour or two in an inner-courtyard filled with plants and ancient artifacts.

 In three hours: Visit the cultural theme park at Isla de la Cartuja, an area rich in museums and many other educational exhibits. 

 In one hour: It may sound touristy but it is worth taking a ride in a horse-drawn carriage around some of Seville's major attractions. You will find the carriages, known locally as coches, at the square by the Giralda.



  Best gift to take home:  Leather goods are some of the best buys, but let's not forget sherry, produced in nearby Jerez.