WASHINGTON—U.S. and coalition air attacks are now aiming to cut the supply lines for Libyan leader Col. Moammar Gadhafi's ground forces, in addition to destroying the country's air defenses.

In an interview that aired Sunday morning on CNN, Adm.  Mike Mullen, chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, said a no-fly zone was "effectively in place" over Libya after a series of coordinated strikes by allied ships and aircraft.

"Now we'll look to cut off his [Col. Gadhafi's] logistics lines," Adm. Mullen said. "He's got his forces pretty well stretched from Tripoli all the way out to Benghazi, and we will endeavor to sever his logistics support in the next day or so."

As part of the air operation Adm. Mullen said the U.S. and its allies were stationing combat aircraft over the embattled rebel stronghold of Benghazi. "We'll have them there on a 24/7 basis," he said.

Early Sunday morning, U.S. Marine Corps. AV-8B Harrier jump jets launched strikes against Col. Gadhafi's ground forces and air defenses, attacks that followed a salvo of more than 100 cruise missiles and strikes by French warplanes. A U.S. Marine Corps news release said the Harriers aimed to "halt an offensive against the Libyan populace."

Adm. Mullen said the Libyan air force has been effectively grounded, saying Col. Gadhafi "hasn't flown any aircraft for the last two days." Initial operations to destroy the regime's air defenses had been "very effective," hitting most of the Libyan military's air defense installations and airfields, he added.

Since the start of the military offensive against Libya, U.S. military officials have suggested that the U.S. would eventually move to more of a supporting role. Adm. Mullen said Gen. Carter Ham, the head of U.S. Africa Command and the senior U.S. commander supervising the operation, was in the process of sorting how the operation would be handed over to coalition control.

Appearing on the same program, Sen. John McCain (R., Ariz.) acknowledged that members of Congress might be nervous about a new U.S. military intervention but urged support for the mission. "I'm confident we can prevail, and I'm confident that if we hadn't have taken this action, that the consequences of failure would have reverberated for years," he said.

A second Republican, Sen. Lindsey Graham (R., S.C.), appearing on Fox News Sunday, said he is glad the U.S. intervening in Libya but is concerned the U.S. hasn't taken a more aggressive stance.

"I'm very worried that we're taking a back seat rather than a leadership role," Mr. Graham said. "We used to relish leading the free world, now it's like leading the free world is almost an inconvenience."

Sen. Jack Reed (D., R.I.), also speaking on Fox News, said the White House is right to coordinate U.S. action through international organizations.

Alan Zibel contributed to this report.