At the request of a national consumer group, a New York state ethics body is examining whether members of Gov.  Andrew Cuomo's Medicaid policy team ran afoul of conflicts-of-interest laws. 

The Center for Justice and Democracy on Tuesday submitted a formal ethics complaint to the Public Integrity Commission, which regulates ethics laws over New York state agency employees.

The Manhattan-based, nonprofit group, which often takes positions favorable to the plaintiffs' bar, asserted that members of the policy team are public employees and are covered by state laws restricting officials from mixing state duties with financial interests.

Mr. Cuomo's deputy secretary for health,  James Introne, dismissed the complaint as an "absurd stunt" carried out by a group "devoted to fighting against tort reform." A spokesman for the ethics commission said it was looking into the group's claims. 

The complaint focuses on four hospital-affiliated members of Mr. Cuomo's team, including the heads of state's two major hospital associations. It claims that those groups inappropriately benefited from the team's final recommendations to cap pain-and-suffering in malpractice awards at $250,000 and to create a medical indemnity fund to help hospitals pay for the costs of treating brain-damaged infants.

The measures, both backed by the hospital industry, could leave hospitals with more money than they stand to lose from proposed Medicaid cuts. 

"You've basically given the hospitals carte blanche to rewrite the judicial system," said  Joanne Doroshow, the executive director of the center and a former aide to  Ralph Nader. "There's something fundamentally undemocratic about that."

A key question is whether the ethics commission considers members of the Medicaid team to be state officers or employees as defined by state law.

That answer could hinge on whether the team appointed by Mr. Cuomo is viewed as the equivalent to an official state council or board—entities whose officers fall under the public officers law. 

On Jan. 5, Mr. Cuomo created a 27-member Medicaid team through an executive order. It required agencies to assist the team and to provide government space. It also set a deadline for a final report and required the team to submit quarterly update reports over the next year.

 Write to  Jacob Gershman at jacob.gershman@wsj.com 