PARIS—Christian Dior designer  John Galliano spent Monday afternoon at a Paris police station, confronting a couple who has accused him of making anti-Semitic slurs during a late-night argument in a bar last week.

The police visit by Mr. Galliano—who has been suspended from his post pending a police investigation into the incident—came hours after a video was circulated on the Internet showing the designer making a series of anti-Semitic remarks to people sitting at a table next to him in a restaurant.

The authenticity of the video, which was first posted on the website of British daily The Sun, couldn't be independently verified. It is unclear whether the video is from the evening that was the subject of Monday's police hearing or another moment.

Mr. Galliano's lawyer didn't respond to phone calls and several messages seeking comment Monday. Over the weekend, Mr. Galliano's lawyer said his client denied the accusations against him and planned to defend himself before police. The lawyer also said that Mr. Galliano had filed a defamation complaint against the couple in question. A spokeswoman for the Paris court didn't respond to phone calls for comment on the defamation complaint.

Dior declined to comment on the video. The company is trying to verify the video's authenticity, a person familiar with the matter said. If it is authenticated, the video leaves Dior "little option" but to dismiss the designer, this person said. 

The Paris fashion house, part of the luxury empire of LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton boss Bernard Arnault, suspended Mr. Galliano last week pending the results of the police investigation, citing its zero-tolerance policy against racism and anti-Semitism.

Dior will wait for the police investigation to conclude before it makes any definitive decision about Mr. Galliano's future, the person familiar with the matter added.

The Internet video, which was subsequently linked to various fashion websites, shows Mr. Galliano spouting various insults and declaring an admiration for Adolf Hitler. 

Making anti-Semitic remarks is illegal in France, and can bring up to six months in prison. The meeting at the police station on Monday was held in order to determine whether the state will press charges against Mr. Galliano. Police declined to say how long the investigation will last.

The Representative Council for Jewish Institutions in France said last week that it was "satisfied" with Dior's decision to act "without hesitation" in suspending Mr. Galliano.

Dior's high-profile Paris fashion show is scheduled for Friday. Last week, Mr. Galliano's lawyer said that his client would be at the event "as normal." 

Like many of his peers, Mr. Galliano is as famous for his outsized persona as he is for his fashions. His runway bows alone—during which he struts on the catwalk in outlandish outfits, such as astronaut or navy captain suits—are as anticipated as his extravagant ball gowns.

 Write to  Max Colchester at max.colchester@wsj.com and Christina Passariello at christina.passariello@wsj.com 