MANAMA, Bahrain—Saudi military forces in tanks and armored personnel carriers crossed the 16-mile causeway into the tiny island kingdom of Bahrain to defend the Sunni monarchy against a Shiite revolt, raising the specter of sectarian clashes and heightened conflict with Iran.

The deployment, against U.S. wishes, compounded Washington's struggle for sway in the Arab world on a day when Col. Moammar Gadhafi's military threatened to encircle rebel forces in eastern Libya, and the international community continued to debate taking military action to stop him.

Gulf Cooperation Council states, by contrast, moved quickly in response to a request from Bahrain's ruling al-Khalifa family to dispatch the first deployment of Arab troops across national borders since a revolt in Tunisia in December sparked unrest across the Arab world.

Saudi Arabia said 1,000 of its soldiers took part and the United Arab Emirates said 500 of its police officers had arrived at Bahrain's request.

A Saudi official said the soldiers were sent to protect Bahrain's oil and power facilities and other key installations. The ultimate size of the force, and where in Bahrain it will be deployed, hasn't been revealed.

The deployment followed a dramatic escalation in protests that broke out one month ago. On Sunday, police firing tear gas and rubber bullets effectively lost control of large areas of Manama's financial district. 

Protesters consolidated their control of the area Monday. Most of Manama's financial district was effectively closed because of the demonstrators' occupation and roadblocks. 

A highway running through the Bahraini capital's business hub remained closed and demonstrators extended their blockade by laying bricks, fallen lampposts and trash cans across the highway. There was no sign of any police presence in the area late Monday. 

The U.S. views stability in Bahrain, home base for the U.S. Navy's Fifth Fleet, as critical to checking Iran's influence in the Persian Gulf. 

But the U.S. fears that Saudi intervention will prompt Iran to step up its role in Bahrain by spurring the Shiite revolt through public statements and covert support, officials and diplomats said. 

Iran criticized the move Monday. "The peaceful demonstrations in Bahrain is an internal affair and trying to create fear and tension by using foreign army forces to crack down on these protests will only make things worse," a foreign ministry official said, Fars News Agency reported.

The U.S. tried, unsuccessfully, to persuade its Saudi allies to keep their forces out of the fray.

Tensions between President Barack Obama and the Saudi king flared in February over Mr. Obama's push for the immediate exit of President Hosni Mubarak in Egypt, rather than the graceful exit supported by the Saudis.

Officials and diplomats said the Saudis now appeared to be charting a largely independent course in response to unrest in Bahrain. 

Track events day by day.

See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

A look at the economic and political status of selected countries facing unrest in North Africa and the Middle East.



On Monday, Washington warned against taking any action to suppress the protesters. "We urge our GCC partners to show restraint and respect the rights of the people of Bahrain, and to act in a way that supports dialogue instead of undermining it," said White House National Security Council spokesman Tommy Vietor. 

The Gulf Cooperation Council comprises Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, the U.A.E., Qatar, Oman and Bahrain.

Mr. Vietor also put the onus on protesters to avoid provoking the military.

Bahrain's main opposition party, which has so far refused to enter into talks with the government, said prospects of dialogue were now dead. "Are you going to start dialogue with a gun to your head?" said Abdul Khalil, a senior member of the moderate al Wefaq party, which is calling for, among other things, a fully elected parliament. 

Bahrain's Shiite opposition has been split between moderates wanting constitutional changes and hard-liners dedicated to unseating the monarchy. The arrival of foreign forces gave these groups something they could agree on, with some calling it "a flagrant occupation of the country" that puts the country in "in grave danger of a war being launched by an outside armed military."

The deployment hardened the attitudes of protesters gathered at the Pearl roundabout in the Bahraini capital of Manama, where thousands have staged a weekslong sit-in. 

"People are preparing themselves and we are ready to fight back if any attacks come," said  Sayed Ahmed, a 24-year-old engineer who is part of a hard-line youth group. "We will fight to the last breath."

Mr. Ahmed said his group's primary objective was to maintain control of the roundabout and the financial center. 

U.S. officials said the foreign forces were keeping their distance from those areas in an effort to avoid confrontation.

With the growing unrest, the threat of sectarian violence has also been growing, with reports of clashes between Sunni and Shiite citizens. 

The deployment of Gulf troops could exacerbate sectarian tensions. "Although this has been defined as a joint GCC force, they will be seen on the ground as Saudi troops who are there to bolster the Sunni monarchy," said Gala Riani of IHS Global Insight Middle East, a political risk consultancy. 

The fears of sectarian violence are particularly acute for Saudi Arabia, where hundreds of protesters last week clashed with police in the Eastern Province, home to Saudi Arabia's Shiite minority.

"Saudi forces would be prepared to intervene if they judged that the al Khalifa's rule was at stake," said  Neil Partrick, a visiting fellow at the London School of Economics. 

"King Abdullah and the rest of the Saudi leadership probably judge there would be a greater risk to stability in Saudi Shia areas and of Iranian exploitation of it in the kingdom and elsewhere in the Gulf if they weren't prepared to make it very clear that they are prepared to act decisively," he said.

Saudi Arabia has long warned against what it sees as Iranian expansionism in the Mideast, while Tehran has hinted at territorial claims to Bahrain. 

Opposition groups in Bahrain deny any connection to Iran, and U.S. officials dismissed Bahraini allegations that Iran played a central role orchestrating the protests.

Since the 2003 invasion of Iraq, analysts have seen a growing confrontation between Saudi Arabia and majority-Shiite Iran, the Persian Gulf's two major powers, as the two aligned with opposing sides in conflicts in Lebanon, Iraq and the Palestinian territories.

—Summer Said  contributed to this article. 