As we hit Game 41, the midway point of this comeback season, the bad news is that the Knicks are on a three-game losing streak. The good news is that a three-game losing streak actually means something now.

Last season the Knicks lost three straight games nine times. Over the past few years, a Knicks' three-game losing streak was as much a New York institution as a Coney Island hot dog. Now it's panic-inducing.

That's progress. David Letterman, in an interview with Amar'e Stoudemire last week, lamented that he can no longer make fun of the Knicks. No one can. In fact, there are only two Eddy Curry jokes in this midseason report.

Let's look at how the Knicks made it to this point.

 TEAM MVP: What, besides Mr. Curry? OK, it's Mr. Stoudemire. He's second in the league in scoring. He scored at least 30 points in a franchise-record nine consecutive games and is most responsible for the franchise's turnaround.

He signed when no other free agent would, and now he's collecting the rewards. He's developed into the off-the-court celebrity the Knicks have lacked for years. He appeared on Letterman, he showed up on NBC's New Year's Eve countdown wearing sunglasses and a varsity jacket with his own name on it. According to Stats Inc., he is the first person to ever pull that off without looking like a doofus. He's a star.

 MVP NOT NAMED STOUDEMIRE: After the team's uncertain 3-8 start, point guard Raymond Felton has taken complete control of coach Mike D'Antoni's high-powered offense. He satisfies one of the offense's biggest requirements: He's a point guard who can score. He's one of only five players in the NBA to average as many as 17 points and eight assists this season.

 BIGGEST SURPRISE (tie): Admit it: Until recently, you thought that Landry Fields was either a bar in Brooklyn or someone who sued Mark Zuckerberg in "The Social Network." But as we all know now, he's the team's starting shooting guard who has surprised nearly everyone since being selected with the 39th pick in the draft.

He is workmanlike. He averages 10 points and seven rebounds, and Spike Lee is wearing his jersey. He played four years in college, so it can be argued his ceiling isn't nearly as high as other rookies. But for now, he may be the second-best rookie in the league.

Then there is Shawne Williams. He's leading the league in 3-point field goal percentage (55%) after being a long shot to make the team when training camp began.

 UNSUNG HERO: There are a lot reasons to overlook Wilson Chandler. He's quiet, was drafted by Isiah Thomas, and thus his success is a reminder of that dreadful era. But only 18 players in the NBA average as many as his 17 points and six rebounds a game. All of them are stars and only three—Kevin Durant, Kevin Love and Blake Griffin—are younger than Mr. Chandler.

 BIGGEST QUESTION MARK: Timofey Mozgov began this season as a starter, which you might have forgotten since his greatest contributions in the last few weeks have been limited to high-fives on the bench. Meanwhile, the mystery surrounding Anthony Randolph, the athletic if raw forward, seems at an end. His agent met with team president Donnie Walsh before a game at Madison Square Garden last week and he is likely to be traded soon.

 NEEDS IMPROVEMENT: The Knicks get outrebounded by 3.4 rebounds a game, which is worse than all but four teams in the league--all of whom have a losing record. There's an altogether lack of size and sometimes their frontcourt matchups, especially after foul trouble, turn into a comedy routine, with 6-foot-7 swingmen like Mr. Chandler and Mr. Williams guarding some of the game's best big men.

 BIGGEST HEADACHE: The Carmelo Anthony saga. Which has been the logical sequel to the LeBron James free agency saga last season.

Unlike Mr. James, there are actually a few reasons to doubt whether Mr. Anthony is even a fit. Consider this: The Knicks' offense, at this point, relies on what the coaching staff has determined to be the sport's best shots: the 3-pointer and the dunk.

 According to the website hoopdata, the Knicks are 27th out of 30 teams in shot attempts from 16 to 22 feet. Mr. Anthony takes the second-most of those shots in the NBA, with 6.7 per game. Putting him in this offense could be like casting Carrot Top in the Merchant of Venice. It's just going to confuse everyone.

He also takes 18.7 shots per game, sixth-most in the league and just behind Mr. Stoudemire, who shoots 19.2 shots per game. Should the Knicks turn Mr. Anthony down if he wants to sign? No, and they won't. But it's worth noting that it might not be the slam-dunk addition it seems.

 THE SECOND HALF: The Knicks are in sixth place in the Eastern Conference. They are probably locked in there: They probably won't pass Orlando or Atlanta, who are above them. If the season ended now, they would play the Chicago Bulls in the first round. They've defeated them twice.

The Knicks probably need another big man for the playoffs. Mr. Mozgov can't develop in time and Mr. Turiaf can't spell Mr. Stoudemire for enough quality minutes. Of course, there's always Eddy Curry.

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 