HONG KONG— Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS


0.32
%




's asset-management arm has agreed to buy India's Benchmark Asset Management Co., a big provider of exchange-traded funds.

The terms of the deal, expected to close this year subject to regulatory approvals, weren't known.

Benchmark Asset Management was founded in 2001 and had about $700 million in assets under management as of Dec. 31.

Goldman, which has had an asset-management license in India since 2008, said it planned to launch actively managed on-shore funds in the country. Its asset-management staff in India currently provide research for offshore funds that include Indian and other emerging-market stocks.

"Significant regulatory strides have been made in India to liberalize the market for asset managers and distributors over the past two years," said  Oliver Bolitho, head of Goldman Sachs Asset Management for Asia, in an interview.

Other foreign companies are entering India's asset-management business, hoping to capitalize on the country's rising wealth. Last March, Japan's Daiwa Securities Group Inc. agreed to buy a Mumbai asset-management company from Shinsei Bank.

The India deal comes as Goldman is making a push into asset management elsewhere in Asia.

On Tuesday, Goldman said it would set up a strategic asset-management partnership with Tong Yang Securities Inc. in South Korea. The agreement will allow the two firms to cooperate on providing asset-management services to Korean retail investors.

"Korea is one of the most important markets for us today," Mr. Bolitho said. "It has a very wealthy population and a strongly established capital market which is very deep and liquid."

He said the international focus of Korean investors, including the diversification of portfolios of large institutional investors, would make Goldman "increasingly relevant for their long-term needs."

Last month, Jun Kwang-woo, the chairman and chief executive of the National Pension Service, said he plans to invest $4 billion overseas in alternative assets, increasing the amount invested outside of Korea to about 20% by 2015 from 13% at the end of 2010.

As of the end of December, Goldman Sachs Asset Management had $840 billion in assets under management.

 Write to  Peter Stein at peter.stein@wsj.com 