TRIPOLI, Libya—Before U.S., U.K. and other allied forces attacked Libya's air defenses Saturday, the mood among top officials here in the capital was nothing short of surreal—a mix of denial, defiance and conciliation. 

In the morning, as Col. Moammar Gadhafi's forces pounded the rebel-controlled city of Benghazi in the east, an official read a letter from the Libyan leader to French President Nicolas Sarkozy, British Prime Minister David Cameron and United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon. 

In the letter, Col. Gadhafi called "invalid" a U.N. resolution passed last week authorizing the use of force against the regime in order to halt its slaughter of rebels and opposition figures. Col. Gadhafi warned that they would live to "regret" any military action against Libya.

Transcript of the letter from Col. Gadhafi to French President Nicolas Sarkozy and British Prime Minister David Cameron and U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki-moon:

Libya is not yours. Libya is for all Libyans

The resolutions of the Security Council are invalid because the Security Council is not authorized according to the U.N. Charter to intervene in internal affairs of any country.

This is injustice, it's a clear aggression and it is uncalculated risk for its consequences on the Mediterranean and Europe.

You have no right ever to intervene in our internal affairs.

Who gave you the right to intervene in our internal affairs?

You will regret it if you take the step toward intervening in our internal affairs, the affairs of our country.

It is indeed our country; it is not your country.

We could never and we would never fire one bullet against our people.

We are fighting al-Qaeda organization in what they call al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb.

Come and make sure for yourself that this […]

"This is injustice, it's a clear aggression and it is uncalculated risk for its consequences on the Mediterranean and Europe," read the official English text. "You will regret it, if you take the step toward intervening in our internal affairs." 

After the U.S. and the U.K. launched missile strikes, Col. Gadhafi went on the radio, vowing to turn the Mediterranean basin and North Africa into "a battle ground" and said he would arm all Libyan civilians to defend the country against foreign aggression.

Col. Gadhafi had been expected to address his supporters at his fortified compound in Bab Azizya in Tripoli. A podium was set up on the second floor balcony of the building, which had been hit by U.S. airstrikes in 1986. He has preserved the building with its damages intact and erected a monument in the building's courtyard of a fist crushing a U.S. fighter jet.

Dozens of men, women and children waved flags and posters of the Libyan leader, chanted slogans and swayed to patriotic songs blaring from giant speakers. "We will die with our leader and army," said Samira Abdullah, 38 years, who came with several members of her family from Tripoli's outskirts.

But Col. Gadhafi failed to show up, instead making a brief radio address. 

In an earlier letter to U.S. President Barack Obama, Col Gadhafi adopted a different tone than what he used with the French and British leaders, calling Mr. Obama "a son" that the Libyan leader would always "love."

Foreign Minister Moussa Koussa said Libya was abiding by the Security Council resolution passed on Thursday and that the cease-fire he announced on Friday was still in place. He invited the U.N. to send international observers to see this for themselves.

"This is proof that the Jamahiriya deals positively with the [U.N.] resolutions," said Mr. Koussa, referring to Libya by its official name. Mr. Koussa is a member of Col. Gadhafi's inner circle whose U.S. assets were frozen last week by the Treasury Department.

After reading from a short prepared statement, he walked out, ignoring a question that was shouted out by an Italian reporter. Another reporter later pressed Mr. Koussa in the hallway for an explanation of events in eastern Libya and the minister shot back, "Go to Benghazi!" Reporters in Tripoli are banned from venturing outside the city except for preorganized and staged government events. 

Libyan state-owned media broadcast unconfirmed reports saying that government forces had retaken most of Benghazi, prompting many of Col. Gadhafi's supporters to roam the streets of Tripoli and fire heavy celebratory fire in the air.

A television station showed what it said were armed Libyan civilians amassing at an airport in Sabha in southern Libya to act as human shields against any Western military strikes.

Meanwhile, Libyan Oil Minister Shukri Ghanem urged foreign oil companies to send back their workers and experts to Libya as soon as possible, saying that the situation in his country was returning to normal. He said his government intended to honor all its obligations toward foreign companies, including its $900 million contract with  BP PLC.

"Now we were able to restore most of the oil fields and they are ready to produce but we need our work force to come back," said Mr. Ghanem. He said the government was ready to bus or fly foreign workers to oil and gas installations around the country.

A day earlier Mr. Koussa said all civilian air traffic had been halted in Libya to comply with the no-fly zone mandated by the latest U.N. resolution. "It is not our intention to violate any of these agreements and we hope from their part that they will also honor this agreement…and send back their experts and people to work," Mr. Ghanem said.

He said he was in frequent contact with top executives from oil companies operating in Libya to assure them their contract with the country's national oil company would be upheld. 

"Our life—our blood, you can call it—is the oil," he said. "So we are not tampering with the oil."

Mr. Ghanem suggested, however, that if foreign oil companies didn't send back their staff, who were evacuated at the start of the crisis last month, then Libya would be compelled to offer new oil concessions to other companies from Brazil, China and India in order to restore production and exports to their previous levels. 

He said production has fallen "drastically," to less than 400,000 barrels a day from 1.7 million, while gas exports to Italy have completely halted. Exports were still taking place on a sporadic basis, he said, with two shipments of 700,000 barrels and another for one million loaded recently. He offered no details.

Separately the new justice minister in Tripoli who succeeded Mustafa Abdel-Jalil, the leader of the Benghazi-based temporary government known as the Interim Transitional National Council, also addressed reporters Saturday.

He said the regime had set up a special tribunal to try all those who were involved in the events that have swept Libya since that start of protests against the regime. He promised trials would be transparent and abide by international legal standards, while at the same time acknowledging that the regime has detained thousands over the past month. Hundreds of people have been rounded up in Tripoli alone for protesting against the regime or making contact with foreign media outlets, according to several residents.

In his letter to the U.N. secretary general and the British and French leaders, Col. Gadhafi urged them to send a fact-finding mission to Libya because his regime has committed no human-rights violations or atrocities against civilians.

"We could never, and we would never, fire one bullet against our people," he said.

 Write to  Sam Dagher at sam.dagher@wsj.com 