Facebook Inc. used controversial tactics to try to shift the online privacy spotlight away from itself—and onto rival  Google Inc.

The social-networking company secretly hired a public-relations firm to push stories critical of Google's privacy practices. But the strategy backfired when bloggers and journalists disclosed Facebook's behind-the-scenes role, forcing the company to explain its tactics. 

Facebook hired  WPP Group PLC's Burson-Marsteller to pitch journalists and security experts on stories that questioned Google's practice of collecting information from people's Facebook and other social-networking accounts. 

  Rosanna Fiske, the chief executive of the nonprofit Public Relations Society of America, said Burson-Marsteller's lack of disclosure is "deceptive" and violates her organization's ethical standards. 

"When you are following misleading practices, the message is tainted," she said. Consumers "wonder what else have they done that perhaps I shouldn't trust."

On Thursday, Facebook sought to play down the public-relations impact of its strategy. A Facebook spokesman said the company didn't authorize or intend to run a "smear" campaign but wanted to highlight that Facebook didn't approve of Google's data collection. 

"We engaged Burson-Marsteller to focus attention on this issue, using publicly available information that could be independently verified by any media organization or analyst," the spokesman said. "The issues are serious, and we should have presented them in a serious and transparent way."

A Google spokesman didn't respond to a request for comment.

A Burson-Marsteller spokesman said Facebook "requested that its name be withheld on the grounds that it was merely asking to bring publicly available information to light." 

But, he added, doing that was "not at all standard operating procedure and is against our policies, and the assignment on those terms should have been declined."

Facebook and Google are increasingly competing against each other for advertiser dollars and user loyalty. 

Privacy has become a major battleground in that fight as both companies face regulatory scrutiny and the threat of customer revolts over privacy practices.

According to the Ponemon Institute, a privacy-research firm, Google is so far winning the public perception race. A survey of Internet users it conducted in the U.S. in March, Google was No. 19 among the companies most trusted for privacy. Facebook didn't make the top 20, and Ponemon declined to say where the company ranked.

"Google continues to be viewed as an organization—even if it is a monster in terms of data collection—that is somehow meeting best privacy practices," said  Larry Ponemon, the founder of the Institute.

In this case, Facebook was trying to draw scrutiny to Google's practice of collecting information from some users' Facebook and other social-networking accounts in order to build out a list of each user's "social connections" on the Web. 

The list, which anyone with a registered Google account can view on Google's privacy dashboard, shows the user's "direct" and "secondary" connections—in other words, their online friends and those friends' contacts. The practice could help Google build a social-networking service of its own that would rival Facebook's.

The issue came to light after privacy-researcher  Chris Soghoian last week posted online his email exchange with Burson-Marsteller executive  John Mercurio. The exchange showed Mr. Mercurio encouraging Mr. Soghoian to write an op-ed on Google's data collection practice. 

Mr. Soghoian asked Mr. Mercurio to identify his client, but Mr. Mercurio declined to do so, saying the information he was sharing was publicly available.

"As a privacy advocate and critic of Google, I have a pretty good sense of what their problems are," Mr. Soghoian said in an interview. "This wasn't in my Top 10 of Google privacy problems."

Mr. Mercurio and  Jim Goldman, another Burson-Marsteller employee involved in the work, didn't respond to emails seeking comment.

USA Today reported on the role of Burson-Marsteller in an article Monday. The Daily Beast website identified Facebook as the firm's client in an article posted Wednesday.

Facebook and Google also traded public barbs last fall after Google sought access to Facebook users' friends lists as it looked toward building a social-networking service that could rival Facebook's, people familiar with the matter have said. 

Facebook rejected Google's pleas, leading Google to say it would no longer allow the social network to grab information about Google users' social and professional contacts in Gmail, Google's email service. 

In September,  Eric Schmidt, who was then Google chief executive, said his company would find ways to obtain Facebook users' friends lists if Facebook didn't give Google direct access.

 Write to  Geoffrey A. Fowler at geoffrey.fowler@wsj.com 