ISLAMABAD, Pakistan—A U.S. official who shot dead two armed men was remanded in police custody for six days, as Pakistani authorities said the American will face an investigation over allegations of murder under Pakistani laws. 

The official, identified by Pakistani officials as Raymond Davis, a security official at the U.S consulate in Lahore, appeared before a judge under heavy security on Friday.

Scores of armed police were deployed outside the court to prevent violent protests against the shootings, which aggravated anti-American sentiment. Journalists weren't allowed in the courtroom. 

Mr. Davis, who was driving his car after taking out some cash from an ATM in Lahore, shot and killed two armed men on a motorbike Thursday, after they allegedly tried to intercept his vehicle on a crowded street. 

He later told police that he fired in self-defense, police officials said. 

A pedestrian also was crushed to death by a U.S. consulate vehicle that came to rescue Mr. Davis, who was being chased by a crowd after the shooting.

Rana Sanaullah, the law minister of Punjab province of which Lahore is the capital, said police were investigating whether to charge Mr. Davis with murder and for possessing illegal weapons. 

Mr. Davis hasn't been formally charged and it remained unclear whether he was covered by diplomatic immunity from prosecution. 

"He will face trial under Pakistani laws," Mr. Sanaullah told a televised media conference.

Mr. Sanaullah said Mr. Davis was in the country on a short-stay visa and had made several trips to Pakistan in the past. 

Police also registered a murder case against an unidentified person driving the second consulate vehicle. Mr. Sanaullah said the U.S. consulate has agreed to surrender the person, who wasn't detained by police, by Friday evening.

Interior Minister Rehman Malik said Friday that diplomats weren't allowed to carry weapons in Pakistan.

A statement by the U.S. Embassy in Islamabad Friday confirmed a staff member of the U.S. Consulate in Lahore was involved in an incident that led to a loss of life, but it didn't name the official.

The statement said the U.S. Embassy was working with Pakistani authorities to determine the facts and work toward a resolution.

The incident triggered protests, with scores of people chanting anti-American slogans Thursday night and burning tires and blocking roads in Lahore, Pakistan's second-largest city after Karachi.

The protesters called for Mr. Davis to be tried for murder. A report published in English language newspaper Dawn, quoting an unnamed Pakistan senior police officer, said Mr. Davis had been detained by Pakistani security personnel in December 2009 for allegedly carrying weapons in a car in Lahore.

The report couldn't be verified independently.