After two years of cutting back on their overseas investments, businesses are starting to see the glass half full, and putting more capital into their foreign operations.

But there is one region in particular that is missing out: the euro zone. And that provides the clearest indication yet that the longer-term cost of the currency area's sovereign debt problems will exceed the sums involved in bailing out its weaker members.

If foreign investors continue to give the euro zone a body swerve, the result will be a weakened capital base, sluggish productivity growth, and a long-term reduction in its potential growth rate. 

The United Nations has been monitoring flows of foreign direct investment since the 1970s.  Those flows reached a peak in 2007, and fell sharply in 2008 and 2009 as businesses responded to the global financial crisis and the ensuing recession by buying  fewer foreign rivals, building fewer factories in new markets, and taking more of their profits home.

For much of the world, that stopped in 2010, and even reversed. The U.N.'s figures show foreign investment in Latin America rose by 21.1% from 2009, while foreign investment in Asia and Oceania rose by 10%.

One of the big gainers was the U.S., which attracted 43.3% more in foreign investment than it did in 2009. So the revival in investment flows wasn't restricted to fast-growing developing economies.

By contrast, foreign investment in the European Union fell by 19.9%, and most of that was down to the countries that use the euro. 

Foreign investment in Germany fell by 3.5%, while foreign investment in France dropped by 3.7%. The two nations that have been forced to seek external help to repay their debts saw some of the largest declines, with foreign investment in Ireland down 66.3% and foreign investment in Greece down 38.3%.

But others also suffered big declines. Foreign investment in Luxembourg was down 55.7%, in Italy it was down 35.5 %, and foreign investors actually withdrew $24.7 billion in capital from the Netherlands, making it the only country for which the  UN provides figures to suffer  that fate.

There were some bright spots, most notably Portugal, which attracted inflows with a value 17.8% higher than in 2009, while inflows to Spain rose by 4.8%.

But overall, foreign businesses appear to be staying clear of the euro zone, and not just those parts of it that are set to grow weakly in the years to come. 

It's hard to argue that the Greek market is particularly attractive when its economy has yet to emerge from recession and it faces years of growth-damping austerity. 

But Germany's economy grew strongly last year. Indeed, it hasn't expanded as rapidly since post-reunification records began in 1992.

So what is turning foreign businesses away from the euro zone? The obvious answer is the sovereign debt crisis that has gripped the currency area since late 2008. 

Most foreign direct investments are for the long term, unlike purchases of shares or bonds that can be reversed quickly, if at a loss. And if you are making an investment that plays out over at least a decade, it matters whether the currency your profits will be denominated in is still going to be around. Indeed, it matters if there will be currency risk around moving a product made in one part of what is now the euro zone to another part. 

So the most likely explanation for the euro zone's new status as the no-go area for foreign businesses is that there is so much uncertainty about its survival, they would prefer to wait and see rather than jump in.

"Europe is the weak spot," said  James Zhan, director of the investment and enterprise division at the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. "It's not recovering, and the big question is what will happen in the euro zone."

The worrying thing about the figures on foreign investment flows is that they suggest that the sovereign debt crisis will harm even those countries that aren't in the immediate line of fire from worried bond investors.

On the back of Germany's strong performance in 2010, it's tempting to think that the real economic damage will be confined to Greece and Ireland, and possibly Spain, Portugal, Belgium and Italy, or those nations that are forced to pursue austerity programs to quickly cut their debts.

To be sure, there is a measurable cost to Germany, France and other stronger parts of the currency area, and that is the amounts their taxpayers will have to cough up to bail out their less solvent brethren.

 Should the debt crisis rumble on, claiming new victims and underpinning doubts about the survival of the currency area itself, foreign investors are likely to continue to stay away. That will slow the accumulation of capital across the euro zone, unless domestic businesses pick up the slack, and there's little reason to think that will happen.

That in turn will limit needed productivity growth, and potential economic growth. 

The decline in foreign investment shows that the fates of the various euro-zone economies are closely interlinked, and in ways that may not have been anticipated. Indeed, there may be incalculable consequences for the long-term growth prospects of those countries that don't themselves have problems repaying their debts. 

There is therefore a pressing need for the euro zone to bring this crisis to a conclusion. The longer it goes on, the more widespread and durable the damage seems likely to be.

 Write to  Paul Hannon at paul.hannon@dowjones.com 