 Officials grappled with the new task of cooling overheating spent nuclear fuel at the Fukushima Daiichi power plant, the facility at the center of Japan's escalating nuclear crisis, as radiation contamination spread on the plant's grounds and seeped out in small amounts to nearby communities. 

While there was no report of radiation leakage at levels that would have short-term health effects on people, radiation levels in the plant have become elevated, prompting all workers to be evacuated at one point in the morning before being sent back to their posts.

The latest troubles came as Japan continued to suffer ripple effects from Friday's massive 9-magnitude earthquake and resulting tsunami. Continued aftershocks shook homes and offices. 

Authorities raised the official death toll to 4,277, though more than 8,000 people remain missing and parts of the country are still difficult to reach.

 Food and gas supplies are rapidly running out in parts of Japan, leaving people not only in the earthquake-stricken northeast but also in Tokyo scrambling to grab what's left on the emptying shelves at groceries and convenience stores. 

 Japan's rarely seen emperor urged the stricken country not to give up and said he was "deeply concerned" about the unfolding nuclear crisis in an unprecedented video address. 

Markets in the U.S. and Europe were affected in early trading after the European Union's energy chief declared the plant's site "effectively out of control." 

France called for a meeting of finance ministers of the Group of Seven leading nations to assess the consequences of the Japanese crisis on markets, as well as a meeting of energy and economy ministers of the Group of 20 industrial and developing nations, to foster international cooperation on energy. 

 The Japanese nuclear crisis has placed atomic energy back at the top of the political agenda throughout Europe, but European countries have split into two sides, with some countries urging immediate shutdowns and others remaining firmly committed to nuclear power.  

China halted approvals of new nuclear power plants pending changes to safety standards, signaling a shift toward caution from a country embarked at high speed on the world's biggest expansion program. The government also ordered integrity checks at existing plants. 

 The International Atomic Energy Agency's failure to quickly and accurately assess the potential danger posed by Japan's nuclear disaster is raising questions about the Vienna-based U.N. organization's ability to respond to such crises. 

The European Commission proposed a common system for calculating the tax base of businesses operating in the European Union, a plan that is opposed by Ireland and several other countries. 

 The European Commission spelled out some of its proposed privacy rights for citizens sharing personal data on the Internet, saying there should be a strict "right to be forgotten" that would allow users to tell websites to permanently delete data. 

 The European Central Bank's concerns about inflation haven't abated since its last meeting, but uncertainties including the unfolding crisis in Japan could affect interest-rate decisions in coming months, said Bank of Finland Governor Erkki Liikanen—who's also a a top ECB official—in an interview. 

 The euro zone's inflation rate rose to its highest level in 28 months in February, driven by higher costs for fuels for transport, heating oil, electricity, and gas.  

The number of people claiming unemployment benefits in the U.K. fell unexpectedly in February to its lowest level in two years. 

Portugal's future looked gloomier after its debt auction drew only moderate demand and high costs as the country faces a political crisis that could result in it requesting a bailout soon. 

 The Obama administration is ramping up its search for a new Federal Bureau of Investigation director, as Robert Mueller's term approaches its end in early September, with former Bush and Clinton administration officials and a federal judge among those being considered.  

U.S. wholesale prices surged last month on the back of higher energy and food prices, but underlying producer prices increased only moderately.

Separately, home construction in the U.S. took the steepest monthly plunge in almost 27 years in February and new building permits set a record low, an indication that the battered sector is a key source of weakness for the economy.

The greatest challenge facing Asian economies this year will be to tame building inflationary pressures, making further interest-rate rises likely, and raising the possibility of additional capital-control measures, Standard & Poor's said in its 2011 outlook report.

 A U.S. Central Intelligence Agency contractor who shot dead two armed men in January was freed by a Pakistani court after an agreement to pay monetary compensation to the men's families. 

Earlier Wednesday, the court formally charged Raymond Davis, a former Green Beret, with two counts of murder for shooting dead the two men in Lahore on Jan. 27 in disputed circumstances and with the illegal possession of firearms.

 Bahraini security forces carried out a violent crackdown against protesters to drive them from the center of the capital of Manama, and imposed a curfew across much of the city, as the island kingdom attempted to end weeks of demonstrations. 

Witnesses said at least two protesters were killed and dozens injured, and state television reported two policemen were "martyred" when they were hit by a vehicle after protesters were driven out of the square.

 The Palestinian president offered to visit the Hamas-ruled Gaza Strip for the first time in four years in a bid to help reunite the rival Palestinian governments. Hamas welcomed the offer. 

Mahmoud Abbas also declared he wouldn't run for re-election in voting called for later this year.

 U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton paid a surprise visit to Cairo's Tahrir Square, the epicenter and symbol of Egypt's revolution, while on her way to see Egypt's new prime minister and its powerful defense chief. 

 Col. Moammar Gadhafi's forces attacked the last rebel-held major city in western Libya and expanded territory near the eastern rebel capital of Benghazi, as the government gained momentum in its bid to reassert control. 

The United Nations Security Council met to debate a resolution that could authorize military action to stop Gadhafi, but it was unclear when negotiations would give way to a vote.

Following the seizure of Ajdabiya, on a strategic crossroads leading to Benghazi to the north and Tobruq in the east, Gadhafi's son Saif-el-Islam pledged to complete military operations against the rebels within 48 hours. 

French Foreign Minister Alain Juppé said several Arab countries are ready to take an active role in a military operation against Libya's strongman.

Officials arrested Congo's former rural development minister as part of a government campaign against corruption, an aide to the minister said. Philippe Undji and two aides were arrested after hours of interviews by court officials, said one of his aides. Undji was fired from his ministerial post on Friday.