DUBLIN—Ireland's government wants more time to fix its banking system, and the involvement of the European Financial Stability Fund in limiting the impact on its own finances. 

Early Monday, Irish Finance Minister Michael Noonan said he planned to speak with European Central Bank President  Jean-Claude Trichet about how Ireland can best achieve the deleveraging of its banking system. 

Speaking ahead of Monday's meeting of euro-zone finance ministers, Mr. Noonan said it was too soon to get into the specifics but that "agreement for a longer deleveraging period is what we're talking about." 

He said he was particularly concerned about the treatment of impaired assets. "If we can get an agreement on the deleveraging side, obviously then you don't have the same add-on from banking coming across to the sovereign side," he said.

One option, Mr. Noonan said, could be to use the current temporary or permanent euro-zone bailout facility to help Ireland handle the woes in its banking sector. 

"Neither the [European Financial Stability Facility] nor its replacement fund from 2013 have the kind of policy tools that ... we think would be helpful. I'll be raising some of the issues like that," he told reporters. 

Mr. Noonan also met with European Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs Olli Rehn Monday morning. 

A person familiar with the situation said one option would be for the EFSF to insure the Irish government against bailout costs that are higher than expected. But that is only one option, the source stressed. 

A spokesman for Mr. Rehn later said that Ireland's banks have already booked large losses and that the European Commission is "very satisfied" with the efforts Ireland has made thus far to restructure its banking sector. 

The Irish government has so far injected €46.3 billion into the banks, amounting to about 29% of Irish gross domestic product. The nation's lenders lost huge amounts as a result of reckless lending to property developers during the boom years. 

However, the Irish authorities have deferred injecting another €10 billion which the EU and International Monetary Fund said the banks required as part of the international bailout package Ireland received last November. 

Mr. Noonan told reporters Monday that the latest thinking of some central-bank officials is that the recapitalization needs may still exceed €10 billion. 

At elections last month, both parties in the new Irish coalition had campaigned on securing a better deal on the bailout loans and pledged to find ways for so-called burden-sharing of the huge banking losses. 

At a euro-zone leaders' summit on Friday, the new Irish Prime Minister Enda Kenny came under pressure to raise Ireland's comparatively low 12.5% corporate tax rate but refused to do so. The issue led to a heated debate between Mr. Kenny and some other European leaders. 

On his way into the meeting, Mr. Noonan said the corporate tax rate is "an ongoing issue." 

However, the Irish position seemed to win backing from others at the start of the meeting. 

Euro-zone chairman  Jean-Claude Juncker said further steps are needed to address the pricing of emergency loans given to Ireland. 

"I do think we have made a good decision as far as the pricing for Greece is concerned," Mr. Juncker said. "This still indicates that some steps have to be undertaken as far as the pricing for Ireland is concerned." 

Luxembourg's finance minister Luc Frieden said the euro-zone should "respect some national traditions." 

"I think there can be other options that should be explored. Taxation is not an aspect which is harmonized in Europe, so I think we have to respect some national traditions," Mr. Frieden said. 

—Matthew Dalton and Laurence Norman contributed to this article.