LONDON—European Union authorities intend to publish results of fresh stress on the balance sheets of the region's biggest banks and insurance companies in the middle of the year.

Tests conducted last year were criticized by some for being too weak. After almost all banks were told they had passed, Irish banks crumbled under mounting debts and some banks in other parts of the euro zone ran into difficulties.

While officials have said that more stress tests would be conducted, Thursday's announcements from the European Banking Authority and the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority, two newly created regulatory body, provided the first timetables.

The EBA said EU-wide tests would take place in the first half of the year, with the results to be published in the middle of the year. The tests will cover a "broadly similar" group to the 91 banks that were tested in mid-2010, and that the methodology and approach would build upon the measures used then, it added. 

It didn't say why it wanted to conduct a fresh round of tests. 

Domestic financial regulators, the European Systemic Risk Board, the European Central Bank and the European Commission, the EU's executive arm, will be involved in the process, it said. 

The EBA said it will separately initiate a review of liquidity funding risks across the EU banking sector. It said it will use the results to inform supervisory authorities about areas of vulnerability.

The second Europe-wide stress test for the insurance sector are expected to start at the beginning of the second quarter, EIPOA said. It said it wants to "identify and quantify the impact of the different stress scenarios on an insurer's financial position in an adverse and very severe economic environment." The test will cover at least half of insurance companies per country, measured according to gross premium income.

The Association of British Insurers said the banking and insurance industries face different issues.

"Stress tests in the banking system may well be appropriate, particularly in the light of the continuing financial problems faced by that sector," a spokesman said. "As regards insurance, it will be important to design any such tests in a way which recognizes the long-term nature of the businesses they run and the fact that they do not face the same short term liquidity or credit issues as banks. Insurance is different from banking and any stress tests must reflect this reality." 

 Write to  Margot Patrick at margot.patrick@dowjones.com 