MUMBAI—A special Ahmedabad court Tuesday handed down death sentences to 11 Muslims convicted of setting fire to a passenger train in the western Indian state of Gujarat nine years ago, triggering one of India's worst outbursts of communal violence. 

The court gave a lesser sentence of life imprisonment to the 20 others convicted of participating in the 2002 massacre, which left dead nearly 60 Hindus returning from a religious pilgrimage. The resulting violence killed more than 1,000 people—mostly Muslims.

The court last week had found 31 of 94 people accused in the case guilty of conspiracy and murder. The other 63 were acquitted in the trial that began in July 2009 in Ahmedabad's Sabarmati Central Jail.

J.M. Panchal, special public prosecutor, told reporters outside the court that even though all 31 were convicted of similar charges in connection with setting fire to the train carriage, the judge appears to have awarded differing sentences depending on the degree of involvement of those accused.

"The court must have felt that so far as the 11 persons handed death sentences are concerned, it is the rarest of the rare case," he said.

Another member of the prosecution team,  Rajendra Tewari, said the team had yet to see the approximately 900-page judgment, and so it was "difficult to say exactly what the full findings of the court are."

He said the life sentences handed to the 20 people would result in their spending about 14 years in jail and would be adjusted to accommodate the nine years virtually all of them had already been imprisoned.

Defense lawyer I.M. Munshi said the sentences were "very difficult to swallow," and he plans to appeal in the Gujarat High Court, said the Press Trust of India, India's largest news agency.

The riots in Godhra, a town 140 kilometers (about 90 miles)east of Ahmedabad, have continued to spark ferocious debate here over the years—mostly about whether the fire that killed the Hindu pilgrims was deliberately set.

Adding to the controversy was the alleged behavior of  Narendra Modi, the chief minister of the state, whom critics accused of failing to protect Muslims from Hindu mobs retaliating against the murder of the Hindu pilgrims. Mr. Modi has denied those accusations.

Two official inquiries reached contradictory conclusions. An inquiry ordered by the railway ministry ruled in 2006 that the fire was an accident. But a Gujarat state commission ruled in 2008 that the deaths on the train were the result of a premeditated conspiracy.

Last week's conviction and Tuesday's sentencing add weight to the claim of Mr. Modi's Gujarat government and the opposition Bharatiya Janata Party, of which he is a senior leader, that the Hindu pilgrims were deliberately killed.

Gujarat's government spokesman,  Jaynarayan Vyas, couldn't be reached for comment. Gujarat police said extra officers were deployed Tuesday, putting the state on maximum alert, and no unrest was reported.

Mr. Modi has maintained public silence about the Godhra incident, and a spokesman last week said that he preferred to respond with his actions, showing all he is doing for the people of his state.

 Write to  Arlene Chang at arlene.chang@wsj.com 