If you're feeling brave, how do you fancy investing in the Japanese stock market right now?

The Tokyo Stock Exchange plunged more than 10 percent overnight. It has now fallen by a fifth in the three trading days since the earthquake first hit. This is the scariest stock market on Earth. It's one of the fastest market collapses in history, comparable to 1929 and 1987.

But Japan is still the world's third biggest economy - and a much better one than many imagine. (More on that below). So is this the time for the brave to start buying?

Actually, yes, says Ed Merner, an American investment manager who's been working in Tokyo for forty years. As of today, the market has priced in the risk of a major nuclear meltdown and fallout, "as if Japan, or half of Japan, is going to disappear. Everything has been thrown away."

There are, of course, serious environmental and economic risks. (As we spoke, Merner's offices shook with another aftershock.) But the people of Tokyo seem to be taking things in stride. "So far, there's no panic," he says. "The people who are fleeing are the non-Japanese." The bullet trains south from Tokyo are leaving fairly empty, he says. "If you walk around here, everything is pretty normal." The biggest change so far in Tokyo is that people are going home early - partly because of the rolling power blackouts, which have affected the commuter rail.

If the country avoids much further catastrophe, he says, then stocks are at rock bottom. They are now "much, much" cheaper than they were in the crashes of 2002-03 and 2008-09, and at valuations last seen in the bear market of 1973-1974.

"We're going back to the early 1970s, and the first oil shock," says Merner, who runs Atlantis Investment Research, an investment boutique with $400 million under management.

For the brave, blue chip equities he likes here include  Toyota and  Honda,
HMC


0.87
%




 and two of the better banks,  Mitsubishi,
MTU


-0.69
%




 and  Sumitomo Mitsui. The latter has a dividend yield of 4.2 percent - almost unheard of in Japan. He's avoiding insurers and utilities.

Small-cap stocks are even cheaper - many are trading on half book value, or less. At times like this, that's often where you find the best bargains. Who is brave enough to buy small company stocks in this environment? As many are thinly traded anyway, they can see prices drop through the floor when some people rush to sell.

Yet timing and valuation are very different things. The market could be cheap and keep falling. 

In the short-term, the market is oversold. "If the news is neutral," Mr. Merner believes, "we'll see a bounce, we'll absolutely see a bounce."

Of course, the news may always get worse, which would at least postpone any rally.

As traders like to say, don't try to catch a falling knife. Anyone thinking of investing in Japanese equities would do well to take it in stages. The way to play a crash is always to buy little and often.

For a typical U.S. investor who wants to buy into Tokyo, the smart move may simply be to use a fund, particularly a low-cost index fund. Examples include the  iShares MSCI Japan Index ETF
EWJ


0.08
%




* and the  SPDR Russell/Nomura Small Cap Japan ETF.
JSC


1.13
%






(But watch the price you pay. The iShares Japan Fund didn't follow the Nikkei all the way down in early trade Tuesday. In an ominous sign for contrarians, bargain hunters were snapping it up, possibly prematurely. By lunchtime, it stood down just 2%.)

Japan wasn't expensive before the crisis. It has been the ugly duckling of international equity markets for years. After a bear market that seemed to last two decades, most investors overseas had long ago lost interest. Yet, ironically, a few were starting to take another look in the months before the earthquake. The most recent fund manager surveys had shown an uptick in sentiment, and the market had rallied since the fall. 

Many people still think Japan is broke and stagnant. The truth is different. While the Japanese government is heavily in debt, Japanese companies are, paradoxically, in much better shape. Most have spent the last twenty years repairing their balance sheets and building up cash. Exporters have been prospering from the boom in China. And Japanese families are sitting on a mountain of savings.

The stagnant reputation of the Japanese economy is also greatly exaggerated. Few people realize this, but over the past 20 years the Japanese economy has grown nearly as fast, per worker, as the U.S. economy. The differences have been slight. The economy's bigger problem has simply been that the population has been getting older, with more and more retirees.

In markets, fortune can favor the brave. But the odds are even better if you take it in small doses.

 *I own this fund in my portfolio. 

 Write to Brett Arends at brett.arends@wsj.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications  Ed Merner runs Atlantis Investment Research. A previous version of this column incorrectly said he runs Atlantic Investment Research. 