Asian stock markets posted solid gains Friday, cheering an overnight charge on Wall Street and on optimism over U.S. jobs data due later in the day, though concerns over high crude-oil prices remained.

South Korea's Kospi jumped 1.7% on the back of continued foreign buying, Japan's Nikkei Stock Average rose 1%, China's Shanghai Composite index gained 1.4%, Australia's S&P/ASX 200 added 1.2%, Hong Kong's Hang Seng index advanced 1.2% and Taiwan's Taiex edged 0.5% higher.

Dow Jones Industrial Average futures inched up three points in screen trade. The benchmark had climbed more than 191 points, or 1.6%, Thursday for its biggest one-day gain since Dec. 1, buoyed by solid jobless-claims data and a pullback in oil prices.

Nymex front-month crude-oil futures edged back above the $102 level, however, and were at $102.22 a barrel on Globex, up 34 cents from their closing level in New York.

Jim Ritterbusch, president of oil trading advisory firm Ritterbusch & Associates, said a run toward the $105-$107 per barrel area over the next few weeks was possible. 

"We still view the Libyan situation as far from being defined or resolved, and civil discontent in other Mideast and North Africa countries will remain deserving of a sizable security premium," he said.

U.S. data Thursday showed the number of workers filing new claims for unemployment benefits unexpectedly dropped last week to the lowest level since May 2008, contrary to expectations for an increase. The key U.S.-nonfarm-payrolls data, due to be released later in the global day, is expected to show that 218,000 jobs were added in February, compared with the 36,000 jobs added in January, according to a MarketWatch poll of economists. 

South Korean stocks added to Thursday's significant gains as foreign investors remained buyers, with gains led by construction shares that had posted heavy losses in the wake of the Libyan turmoil. Hyundai Engineering & Construction Co. rose 2.8%, while Samsung Engineering Co. esd up 5.3%.

Exporters with strong business exposure to Europe climbed after the euro jumped overnight on hopes the European Central Bank would raise interest rates soon. ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet had surprised markets by signaling the possibility of an increase at next month's meeting, and by warning that risks of inflation in the euro zone were to the upside.

Shares of Mazda Motor Corp. added 3.5% and Nikon Corp. gained 1.9%.

Chinese banks were mostly higher on expectations they will report strong full-year 2010 earnings. China Merchants Bank Co. rose 3% and Industrial & Commercial Bank of China added 1.7% in Hong Kong; in Shanghai, they gained 1.4% and 1.2%, respectively.

Some Chinese gold miners fell after gold prices retreated Thursday, with Shandong Gold-Mining losing 0.5% and Zijin Mining Group falling 0.2% in Shanghai.

In Hong Kong, the better-than-expected U.S.-jobless-claims data helped lift sourcing firm Li & Fung by 4.4%. The company is the biggest supplier to Wal-Mart Stores.

Hutchison Telecommunications Hong Kong Holdings gained 3.2%, though SmarTone Telecommunications Holdings fell 0.8% on profit-taking after the city's telecommunications regulator said Thursday the firms were the winning bidders in a Hong Kong auction of radio spectrum. SmarTone shares are still up more than 72% so far in 2011.

Elsewhere in the region, New Zealand's NZX 50 rose 0.6% and Philippine shares climbed 1.3%. In afternoon trading, India's Sensex rose 0.1%, Singapore's Straits Times index gained 1.3%, Thailand's SET index climbed 0.7% and Indonesian shares advanced 1.1%.

In foreign-exchange markets, the euro took a breather against the dollar after rising sharply Thursday. The single currency was buying $1.3955 from $1.3967 in late New York trade Thursday, and 115.03 yen from 115.07 yen. The dollar was at 82.42 yen, from 82.44 yen.

ANZ Bank Senior Dealer Alex Sinton said the euro/dollar pair may test 1.40, but is unlikely to move much higher in the short term. He said investors were likely to realize that while interest rates are going up, Europe still "has the debt issue and higher rates aren't going to help that, and I have to think they would be wary of trying to take it through the 1.40 area" without buying from European markets.

Spot gold was at $1,415.10 per troy ounce, down 20 cents from its New York close Thursday.

 Write to  Colin Ng at colin.ng@dowjones.com and V. Phani Kumar at phani.kumar@dowjones.com 