The streak is officially over at Manning & Napier Advisors Inc. After 11 consecutive years of beating the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index, the firm's  Manning & Napier Pro-Blend Maximum Term ended 2010 a percentage point behind the benchmark, returning 14.1% to the S&P's 15.1% (including dividends).

Read the complete  Quarterly Investing in Funds report .

Still intact, however, is the fund's reputation among analysts and investors for having outperformed the S&P 500 in a number of wildly diverse conditions. Indeed, while the fund didn't succeed in making money for investors in each of the 11 years preceding 2010, its declines were less than those of the S&P 500 in some of those years, and its gains greater in the others. During the dot-com rally of 1999, for example, the fund gained 33%, or 12 percentage points ahead of the S&P 500 index, according to data from Morningstar. 

And in 2008, a year of wrenching pain for most investors, it beat the benchmark by 1.6 points, falling 35.4% to the S&P's 37%.

"This run is even more impressive considering it encompasses a range of market types, including big speculative rallies, in 2003 and 2009, and two severe bear markets," Morningstar Inc. fund analyst Michael Breen wrote in a September report. Because of that consistent market-beating performance, the Manning & Napier fund ranks in the top 10% of Morningstar's large-blend category for the past three, five and 10 years. 

The fund is one of 27 run by the firm, which manages more than $30 billion in separate accounts, mutual funds and collective investment trust funds. Morningstar says the funds' returns rank, on average, in the top 14% of their categories for the past five years and 10 years. 

Manning & Napier Advisors avoids some of Wall Street's herd behavior partly by avoiding Wall Street itself. Now based in Fairport, N.Y., the firm was founded in 1970 in nearby Rochester, N.Y., by  Bill Manning, a former Merrill Lynch broker, and  Bill Napier, a bond investor.

There are no fund managers at the firm. An investment committee looks at the stock picks of in-house analysts and puts each recommendation through stringent valuation tests. The committee also can change investing styles for the company's funds depending on the market and economic outlook.

  Patrick Cunningham, who became chief executive of the employee-owned firm in June, was an engineer before he was hired by the founders in 1992. And the firm today still likes to hire from the corporate world rather than from Wall Street, because it likes to train its own analysts on its proprietary vision of growth, value and deep-value stocks.

Growth stocks must trade at a discount to their peers in addition to having strong earnings, Mr. Cunningham says. When appraising value investments, the firm often targets cyclical industries that are in a downturn. Analysts are looking for what Mr. Cunningham calls "the cement truck at the demolition derby"—the company that has been battered less than its peers and thus is in a position to ramp up its business when the sector bounces back.

Deep-value stocks are those that appear to be selling for 50 cents or 60 cents on the dollar, using old-fashioned valuation measures such as book value or cash flow.

Despite the streak, there's little sense of hubris at Manning & Napier. For instance, after the streak's 10th year, amid the dismal finish of 2008, "we didn't send congratulatory email to research [staff], even though we beat [the benchmark]," Mr. Cunningham says. "We lost money for our clients."

The Manning & Napier fund came roaring back in 2009, returning 36.1% for its investors—9.7 percentage points better than the S&P 500. 

But why did it fall behind the benchmark in the relatively sedate market of 2010? One theory: Many professionals say investing over the past 12 months was even more confounding than it was amid the historic volatility of 2008 and 2009.

Last year it was particularly difficult for stock pickers to beat the S&P 500 because the components of the index often moved in lock step, says  Lorenzo Di Mattia, who manages hedge fund Sibilla Global Fund. According to a study by Birinyi Associates Inc., a Westport, Conn., stock-market research firm, stocks in the broad Russell 3000 moved in unison more consistently in the first three quarters of 2010 than at any other time on record.

Says Mr. Cunningham: "People aren't distinguishing yet between great companies and mediocre ones. They're throwing everything out at the same time and buying everything at the same time."

It's unlikely the end of the streak will cause an exodus from the Manning & Napier fund, given its long-term performance Besides, even during the streak the fund never attracted a torrent of cash. Recent assets were $780 million. Bill Miller's Legg Mason Value Trust had roughly $21 billion in assets when it completed its 15-year winning streak over the S&P 500 at the end of 2006.

 Email Mr. Curran at rob.curran@dowjones.com. 