 U.S. economic growth slowed in the first quarter as higher prices, especially for food and engery, squeezed spending in other areas. New claims for unemployment benefits unexpectedly jumped last week, underscoring the weakness in the job market.  



 India shortlisted France's Dassault Aviation and Eurofighter for a contract to supply 126 fighter jets, one of India's biggest defense deals ever. 



 China doesn't depend much on its trade surplus for growth, the World Bank said, marking a sharp shift in the development model that helped to make China an economic powerhouse. 



 Japan's industrial production and consumer spending dropped at their sharpest rates on record in March, underscoring the impact of the recent earthquake and tsunami and the continuing nuclear-plant crisis on the nation's fragile economy. 

 Panasonic has slashed 17,600 jobs over the past year and plans to cut 17,000 more over the next two years, as the Japanese electronics giant streamlines operations. 



 Social-networking firm Renren lowered a key user number in its IPO prospectus, highlighting the murkiness of data in China's highflying Internet sector. 



 Huawei has filed lawsuits against ZTE, its biggest Chinese rival, alleging patent infringement. 



 China's largest banks posted stronger-than-expected first-quarter earnings, but the size of their buffer against a potential increase in bad loans was revised downward. 



 China's effort to promote wider use of its currency will be the wedge that opens the door to a bigger role for Citic Securities in foreign markets, a top executive at the brokerage said. 



 Higher oil prices drove a surge in first-quarter profit for Exxon Mobil and Royal Dutch Shell, reflecting a recovery in the broader energy sector. 

A U.S. storm system killed over 200 people, injured hundreds more, destroyed property and downed trees from Mississippi to North Carolina on Wednesday and Thursday. WSJ.com 



Japanese officials postponed a plan to ramp up efforts to cool nuclear fuel at the stricken nuclear complex amid concerns over leaks. Meanwhile,

 Buddhists commemorated the 49th day since the tsunami in a determined effort to forge ahead amid destruction. 



 Former U.S. President Jimmy Carter and a group he led left North Korea with messages from its authoritarian leaders, including an offer for a summit with the South. 



 A row over the role of Malaysia's state-controlled media shows how racial scare-mongering is an increasingly common political tool in a country that presents itself as a beacon for diversity. 



Turkey sent delegates to advise Syria on how to implement rapid reforms as the Assad regime's crackdown continued. 



Afghan investigators arrested the Kandahar prison's chief warden on suspicion of complicity with Monday's jailbreak of hundreds of Taliban militants.



Britain revoked a royal wedding invitation to the Syrian ambassador because of violent attacks on protesters by the government there.



Troops of Ivory Coast President Alassane Ouattara killed insurgent warlord Ibrahim Coulibaly, in a new round of violence that highlights the difficulty of reuniting the Western African nation edging back from civil war.