BRUSSELS—The European Union this week will propose new laws that aim to remove obstacles to professionals from one member state working elsewhere in the EU. 

The proposal seeks mutual recognition of certain diplomas and other professional qualifications across all 27 EU member states in a bid to make the region more competitive.

It will be among 12 priority proposals the European Commission plans to publish Wednesday in hopes of having them in place by the end of 2012 to deepen the region's internal market.

Its success is being seen as a key test of how committed EU member states are to the deeper economic integration that most signed up to as part of last month's "comprehensive" package of reforms. As in the past, the proposal must overcome powerful vested interests. 

Engineers, architects, accountants, doctors and lawyers are just some of the professions that still struggle to find their qualifications recognized in the EU beyond their home state. 

Different national requirements hinder work opportunities, while member states must choose from a limited pool of candidates and sometimes lack sufficient workers for certain fields.

Germany, for example, faces a shortage of skilled labor, especially in engineering, even as it is considered Europe's strongest economic engine. The Association of German Engineers said late last year that companies haven't been able to fill some 36,000 engineering jobs, while Germany's largest information-technology association, Bitkom, reported 43,000 posts remained open. 

"Professional services is the most protected service in the world...but a very powerful way to improve productivity and reduce costs," said Uri Dadush, director of the international economics program at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.

The EU has been negotiating for more than five years on how a larger set of educational and professional certifications could be recognized across all member states. Although a directive has been in place since 2005, loopholes have blocked many job seekers amid deeply held fears in member states over the loss of jobs to foreigners. There is also a concern about standards. 

"Is a dentist in Spain as qualified as in Germany?" Mr. Dadush said. 

While such questions haven't disappeared, there is a growing recognition that more flexible labor markets are key to European growth and could help reduce unemployment in the wake of the global financial crisis. Europe's aging population intensifies the pressure for reform. So does the leakage of skilled European workers to the U.S. 

The drive for change seemed to take fresh impetus after a German-led competitiveness pact for the euro area in February explicitly stated the need for mutual recognition. However, the pact was later watered down in the face of national opposition. Brussels officials are now pinning their hopes on the new proposal. 

Sheena McLoughlin of the European Policy Centre warned that while governments agree on the proposal in principle, "they are still extremely protective over their sovereign right to protect their border." 

For example, although Germany and Austria have held out until this year, countries must fully open their labor market on May 1 to citizens of the 2004 EU accession countries—Poland, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Slovakia, Slovenia and Hungary.

An example from the commission highlights the barriers set up in specific industries. A general-care nurse from Germany can relocate to France because training requirements for general-care nurses were harmonized under an EU directive. But a child-care nurse isn't recognized under the EU's automatic recognition rules. 

Louis Grech, a vice-chair of the European Parliament's internal market committee, which must approve the commission's proposal, said a "lack of trust" among member state governments must be overcome for the reform to be completed. 

In addition, in some countries, such as Austria, Belgium, Germany and the U.K., the division of powers between the central government and devolved regional authorities can further complicate the push to ensure qualifications are recognized across the EU. 

As many as 800 professions now are regulated in the 27 individual member states for reasons of quality, safety or security, according to a spokesman for the chair of the internal-market parliamentary committee, Malcolm Harbour. 

"This seems like an awful lot and provokes the question whether no other less burdensome means of regulation are possible to ensure the relevant public interests," said Mr. Harbour's spokesman, Tjalling de Vries.

 Write to  Riva Froymovich at riva.froymovich@dowjones.com 