NEW DELHI -- Coal India Ltd. said it plans to invest in building railway lines and wagons in the South Asian country as part of its efforts to ease bottlenecks in ensuring on-time supply of the fossil fuel to customers.

The state-run company expects to send a proposal in the next four to six months to India's railways ministry detailing its plans,  Nirmal Chandra Jha, Coal India's interim chairman, told Dow Jones Newswires recently by phone from Kolkata, where the company is headquartered.

An investment in railway infrastructure in India would be the first of its kind for the world's biggest coal producer by volume that is already building railway lines and roads at its two mines in Mozambique. Countries such as Mozambique and Indonesia prefer giving mining rights to companies that also develop related infrastructure.

Coal India is thinking of such a plan as inadequate railway infrastructure may force it to curb output. The company, which cut its output goal for the fiscal year through March to 440 million tons and about 447 million tons for the next year due to environmental issues, may further trim the target because of a shortage of railway wagons, former Chairman  Partha S. Bhattacharyya said Feb. 17.

"What will we do with the coal if it cannot be supplied to our customers," Mr. Jha said. "Along with environment issues holding us back, supplying to our customers has become a major challenge which needs to be addressed."

Mr. Jha, who is also the company's technical director, was given the additional charge of chairman on March 1.

"We have identified four-five sections [for building railway lines] which will help in easing transportation of coal from some of our coalfields," he said.

Mr. Jha said Coal India is keen to fund building of wagons by railways, "but certain policies prohibit such specific investments meant for captive use."

Coal India, which meets more than 80% domestic requirement of the dry fuel, has previously received complaints from its leading consumers such as power producer NTPC Ltd. and National Aluminium Co. for being unable to meet supply commitments. Coal is critical for India as about 70% of the country's power generation is based on it.

A shortage of railway lines and wagons is also forcing Coal India to store a large quantity of the fuel with itself. Coal India had stocks of 63 million in the last financial year ended March 31, 2010.

Mr. Jha said talks are on with the Indian Railways to arrange at least 10 additional wagons to clear the extra stocks.

"I am only comfortable with a stock of 15 days [about 6 million to 7 million tons]," Mr. Jha said. "I don't want to end the fiscal year with over 70 million tons in stocks."

Also, all the seven coal-producing units of Coal India stock the mineral at the pit-head, which increases environmental risks.

"The stock-pile is vulnerable to catching fire. There are other environmental hazards related to it," Mr. Jha said.

Earlier Tuesday, Coal Minister Sriprakash Jaiswal said coal companies are taking initiatives to invest in construction of railway lines that could be handed over to the railways for operation and maintenance.

"The new policy of railways allows coal companies to collect surcharge on their investments from the consumers. With this arrangement, the situation should improve significantly," Mr. Jaiswal said at an international coal conference.