WASHINGTON—President Barack Obama on Saturday said he is willing to make further spending cuts as his administration hashes out differences with Republicans to keep the government funded for the remainder of the year. 

Mr. Obama, in his weekly radio address to the nation, said Republicans and Democrats need to find a solution because the U.S. can't "do business two weeks at a time. It's not responsible, and it threatens the progress our economy has been making." 

The president this week signed into law a budget that will fund the government for the next two weeks. He ordered Vice President Joe Biden and other administration officials to broker a deal with Congressional leaders to fund the government through 2011. 

Republicans have proposed about $62 billion in current spending cuts, while the White House and Democrats have proposed about $50 billion in cuts. The majority of the cuts from Democrats, and the White House, are compared to Mr. Obama's fiscal 2011 budget request. Congress never passed that request. 

When it comes to current spending levels, the two sides are still far apart, as both sides are staunchly opposed to each other's spending plans. Mr. Obama reiterated that while he is willing to make cuts, areas such as education, innovation, and infrastructure are off limits. 

Rep. Diane Black, a Republican from Tennessee, said in the Republican radio address that Mr. Obama's budget proposals continue "out-of-control spending." 

"The policies of the past haven't worked, and despite some signs of life in our economy, the unemployment rate is still far above the levels that the president's advisers promised when the 'stimulus' spending bill was signed into law," she said. 

Both Mr. Obama and Ms. Black said they see positive signs in unemployment numbers released Friday. 

The Labor Department said nonfarm payrolls rose by 192,000 in February as the private-sector added 222,000 jobs. The unemployment rate, which is obtained from a separate household survey, fell to 8.9% last month, the first time it fell below 9% since April 2009 and a substantial decline from November's 9.8%. Still, there are about 13.67 million people who would like to work but can't get a job. 