U.S. auto sales rose 11% in December, capping a year that suggests the industry is on the verge of one of the most dramatic shifts in its history. 

For most of the past century, the U.S. car industry was dominated by  General Motors Co.
GM


0.28
%




,  Ford Motor Co.
F


1.16
%




 and Chrysler Group LLC. Now, as a result of both long-term trends and the upheaval of the last two years, the Big Three are about to be replaced by a Gang of Seven as the industry's driving force.

In 2010,  Hyundai Motor Co. saw its U.S. market share climb to just short of 5%. If the Korean auto maker crosses that threshold as expected this year, the U.S. market will have seven manufacturers—GM, Ford,  Toyota Motor Corp.,  Honda Motor Co.
HMC


1.10
%




, Chrysler,  Nissan Motor Co. and Hyundai—with market share of 5% or more. That's a dramatic shift from the days when the three Detroit companies dominated the market and dictated the industry's direction.

"I think it's fair to say we are entering a new era," said  Jim Press, a former Toyota and Chrysler executive now working as a consultant to several vehicle makers. "You have a completely different situation when you have six or seven companies that are all established, with a significant customer base. It's not like the old days when it was the Big Three and then all these little guys."

The emergence of seven major car makers means companies can no longer focus on besting a single rival, as they did years ago when GM was on top, or in recent years when Toyota set the bar for quality and reputation.

 "There's much less margin for error now," said  Michael J. Jackson, chief executive of  AutoNation Inc.,
AN


0.82
%




 a large chain of auto dealerships based in Fort Lauderdale, Fla. "If you don't give the customer exactly what he wants, he's got a wide range of other places to go."

See U.S. light-vehicle sales by month since 2005.

Underpinning the change in the competitive landscape are two extraordinary shifts in 2010: a stronger-than-expected resurgence by the three Detroit makers, and a reversal of fortune for Toyota, which just a year ago appeared ready to pass GM as the country's top-selling car maker.

In 2008 and 2009, the Detroit Three were beaten down by massive losses and, later, bankruptcy. But in 2010, Ford and Chrysler both gained market share. GM, while its share slipped less than a percentage point, is on its way to reporting billions of dollars in profit for 2010 as its sales rise.

At the same time, Toyota, which for nearly 30 years reported an almost unbroken string of U.S. market-share gains, suffered a significant setback, losing 1.8 points of share in 2010, to 15.2% from 17%, according to Autodata Corp. As a result, Toyota fell behind Ford in share for the first time since 2006.

Toyota has struggled to keep its sales rising since a recall and sudden-acceleration crisis engulfed the company a year ago. Toyota's sales fell 5.5% in December and were flat for the year, while almost every other major maker reported increases. 

GM's sales rose 8.5% in December and 7.2% for the full year. Ford's increased 6.8% in December and almost 20% for the full year. Chrysler saw increases of 16.4% last month and 16.5 for 2010. Chrylser sold 1.1 million vehicles last year, hitting the target set a year ago by Chief Executive Sergio Marchionne.

Meanwhile, Hyundai, which a decade ago was laughed off as a maker of cheap, small cars, said its December sales climbed 33% to 44,802. For the full year, its sales totaled 538,228, up 24%. It was the first year Hyundai's U.S. sales exceeded 500,000 vehicles.

 Write to  John Kell at john.kell@dowjones.com 