Japan's unfolding nuclear-power crisis took another grim turn Monday morning with a new explosion at the reactor facility in Fukushima, similar to one that hit a different part of the complex Saturday. Six people were injured and 500 were evacuated from the surrounding area. 

Televisions showed smoke billowing out of the No. 3 reactor at the Fukushima Daiichi plant shortly after 11 a.m local time. The government said there hasn't been a large increase in radiation following the explosion.

As in Saturday's explosion, the cause was a build-up of highly combustible hydrogen in the concrete building around the reactor, Japanese government spokesman Yukio Edano said. Based on pressure data, he added, it's unlikely the steel container surrounding the reactor was damaged. He said pressure in the reactor remains stable. Officials had warned a few hours earlier that an explosion could hit, and said the impact was limited. 

Officials are continuing to struggle to prevent meltdowns at both the No. 1 and No. 3 damaged reactors, saying their fuel rods may have been critically damaged by overheating. 

They stressed, however, that containment vessels housing the reactors remained intact and that there were no signs of the radiation leakage that would accompany a major meltdown. Early Monday, they reported that radiation had risen again near one of the reactors, but stressed that the level remained far below peaks seen over the weekend.

Officials were scrambling early Monday to contain numerous potential crises—from water and fuel shortages in hard-hit areas to emergency financial measures as markets reopened. Still, the problem with the country's nuclear plants stood out as perhaps the most worrisome development. 

Tokyo Electric Power Co.'s Fukushima Daiichi power plant in northern Japan was damaged in Friday's massive earthquake and tsunami. Authorities injected seawater into both to replace cooling water they had lost—a procedure that would render them unusable.

At a separate Fukushima TEPCO facility—the Daini plant about six miles away—three of its four reactors reported elevated temperatures, though the situation was less urgent as of late Sunday in Japan.

"We continue to face very worrisome situations at the Fukushima nuclear power plants," Prime Minister Naoto Kan said at a news conference Sunday evening. He didn't elaborate further. 

One person briefed on the situation said that critical issues remained at one facility, with troubling amounts of fuel exposed. 

Friday's 8.9 magnitude earthquake exceeded the level that Tokyo's plants are designed to withstand. Masataka Shimizu, chief executive of Tokyo Electric Power Co., which operates most of the affected nuclear reactors in Tohoku, said Sunday: "We could argue we were adequately prepared for tsunami within the size of our previous assumption. But the latest tsunami was of a level that far exceeded our assumption." 

For those near the troubled Fukushima complex, the government said Sunday that radiation tests had begun on everyone who was evacuated from the vicinity. 

Roughly 70,000 to 80,000 people living within in a radius of about 12 miles of the two plants have been asked to leave the area; the 500 or so who remained were evacuated following the latest explosion. The government said Saturday they were preparing to stockpile iodine used to treat radiation sickness, "just in case." 

Mr. Edano said nine people were affected by radiation released from the No. 1 reactor at the time of Saturday's explosion, and that there are no health concerns for now. 

Soon after the explosion, the radiation level outside the No. 1 reactor rose to 1,015 microsievert—the equivalent of being exposed to the maximum allowable level for a full year in a single day. The level has since fallen sharply.

Concerns have in the past day focused on Fukushima Daiichi's No. 3 reactor, the one that experienced Monday's explosion. The Fukushima Daiichi plant is located about 150 miles from Tokyo.

Despite the effort to inject seawater, the level of cooling water in the reactor remained low—for reasons that aren't clear—exposing fuel rods. 

The government Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency said late Sunday that roughly a half of the length of their more-than 12-foot-long fuel rods were outside of the cooling water—making the fuel vulnerable to serious damage. 

Officials started pouring seawater into the No. 3 reactor Sunday afternoon, following a similar step taken with the No. 1 reactor on Saturday, which appears to have stabilized the situation. But the same measures seemed to have had the same effect of causing an explosion in the facility without doing more damage to the core reactor. Officials said that, despite the explosion, there was no significant increase in measured radiation.

Nuclear experts are particularly worried about the No. 3 unit, supplied by Toshiba Corp., because it uses an unconventional fuel called MOX fuel, short for mixed oxide.

It is made by mixing low-enriched uranium with plutonium that has been recycled from a global stockpile of defunct nuclear weapons. This recycling is part of an international effort to decrease the number of nuclear weapons and move from "megatons to megawatts." 

MOX fuel has greater concentrations of "actinides," or radioactive elements and runs hotter than conventional fuel, so a shut down plant would have to deal with more "decay" or residual heat from fuel rods. 

There are at least two dozen MOX-burning nuclear plants globally. But some experts believe that an accident at a nuclear power plant utilizing MOX fuel could be more dangerous than one that uses conventional uranium-based fuel.

Japanese officials released no new information overnight about the Fukushima situation. But a foreign observer briefed on the situation early Monday said reactor No. 3 remained critical. 

"The fuel is getting hotter and hotter," this person said. 

The more of the fuel that is exposed, the hotter the fuel gets, converting even more of the coolant into steam, and worsening the situation, by exposing even more fuel to the melting and heating process, this person said. He described the crisis as proceeding like a freight train, that gathers momentum as the crisis continues. 

A similar crisis in reactor No. 1 at the same nuclear power station appeared to be slowing, he said, but it is unclear if the crisis in reactor one is completely past. That unit was supplied by General Electric Co. 

With the world's focus on the Fukushima complex, there were ominous reports Sunday and Monday about troubles spreading two other Japanese reactors—the Onagawa power plant in Sendai and Tokai No. 2 nuclear plant closer to Tokyo—but both later proved to be only temporary concerns.

The United Nations nuclear agency issued a statement Sunday saying a low-level emergency had been reported at Onagawa due to briefly elevated radiation levels detected outside the plant. But officials later concluded the radiation had nothing to do with any problems at the plant, and the emergency warning was rescinded.

In Tokai, the plant's operator said early Monday that a reactor-cooling pump was not working after being hit by the quake-driven tsunami. 

The Japan Atomic Power Co. said the reactor at the Tokai plant in Ibaraki Prefecture automatically shut down following Friday's earthquake. However, an additional water pump is working normally and "is safely cooling the reactor down," a company official said. 

—David Crawford in Berlin, Rebecca Smith in San Francisco, and Mari Iwata in Tokyo contributed to this article.

 Write to  Yuka Hayashi at yuka.hayashi@wsj.com 

