KAMPALA, Uganda—President Yoweri Museveni said Friday he was expanding his cabinet, and is expected to appoint opposition members to key posts, in a move to defuse unrest that threatens his 25-year rule.

As street protests have gathered steam over rising food prices and opposition to Mr. Museveni's government, the president has been quietly reaching out to select political rivals, according to people familiar with the situation. Over the past two weeks, he has placed personal calls to several opposition lawmakers, appealing to them to abandon street marches in return for cabinet positions, these people say.

The overtures show how the Ugandan leader, who was re-elected in February, is coming under strong political pressure, offering a test case of whether popular protests that toppled governments on the north of the continent will spread to other parts of Africa.

The president's main challenger in the most recent election, Kizza Besigye, has frequently pointed to protests in the Arab world to rally his own supporters. He accuses the ruling party of rigging votes in favor of Mr. Museveni. Rising food prices in Uganda have fueled the turmoil.

On Thursday, Mr. Besigye returned from a Kenyan hospital where he had been undergoing treatment following injuries sustained during a violent arrest last month. Crowds of supporters pulsed through the streets, resisting efforts of Ugandan security forces to disperse them. The march, which lasted about nine hours, ended up overshadowing the president's inauguration ceremony. About a dozen people have died in the last month of protests.

The debate in the Uganda 's parliament over an antigay bill has added to political tensions in the country. On Friday, Uganda 's parliament adjourned without acting on a bill that would mandate the death sentence in some cases, such as infecting an underage partner with HIV/AIDS.

Earlier in the week, Mr. Museveni told reporters at his ranch that he is open to working with some opposition members. But he ruled out sharing power with Mr. Besigye.

The cabinet aims to bring other powerful elements of the opposition into his camp. Mr. Museveni's office has said the president's cabinet will grow to 77 ministers from the current 71. The new ministries will include a ministry that focuses on oil and gas, another on constitutional affairs and one that is in charge of Kampala city, an opposition stronghold.

Among those the president has approached about cabinet appointments are former presidential candidates Norbert Mao and Abed Bwanika. Mr. Mao didn't respond to telephone calls. Mr. Bwanika declined to comment on any discussions with the president, but said that his People Progressive Party would embrace talks to reduce the unrest.

"The protests have already highlighted the problems, the next step should dialogue," he said.

Talks between government and the opposition were initially slated for May 3 but they stalled following the violent arrest of Mr. Besigye. The Ugandan government has banned live coverage of the protests, and the military has confiscated cameras and recorders of several reporters covering the return of the opposition leader from Kenya .

Even as protests continue, the government has tamped down talk of any broader power-sharing deal with protestors. Presidential spokesman Tamale Murundi said the ruling party doesn't need to form a coalition after a decisive victory in the February polls, so their numbers in the cabinet will be limited.

"We have only invited political parties for a dialogue on how to solve these problems but I don't think we need to appoint many of them," he said.