BEIJING—China reported a surprise trade deficit for February, its first in 11 months, as export growth slowed sharply and import growth remained strong in part because of rising prices for oil and other commodities.

China imported $7.3 billion more than it exported last month, the General Administration of Customs said early Thursday in Beijing. 

That compares with a trade surplus of $6.45 billion in January and a median forecast for a $3.9 billion surplus from economists in a Dow Jones Newswires survey. 

China last reported a monthly deficit in March 2010, when the figure was $7.2 billion.

Economists warned not to make too much of a single month's data, especially since China's economic statistics in the first two months of the year are generally distorted by the timing of China's Lunar New Year holiday, which fell in early February this year and later in the month last year. 

China's exports in February rose 2.4% from a year earlier, down from January's 37.7% rise and below the Dow Jones Newswires survey's forecast of a 25.9% expansion. 

Imports rose 19.4%, down from January's 51.0% increase and below the survey's forecast of a 32.8% rise.

China's net exports are generally weaker early in the year, as exporters stock up on raw materials and components for peak retail seasons later in the year.

"The big miss of export forecasts by consensus is more technical (related to the timing of Chinese New Year effect) instead of reflecting faster-than-expected deterioration in fundamentals," said Wang Qing, China economist for Morgan Stanley.

The data come after Chinese Commerce Minister Chen Deming said Monday the country's trade surplus will likely narrow for the full year, both in absolute terms and as a percentage of gross domestic product, because of faster growth in imports than in exports.

Economists said domestic companies rushed to ship their exports in January, ahead of the weeklong Lunar New Year holiday, which resulted in declines in exports and imports growth in February.

The data so far this year indicate relatively resilient demand for commodities despite surging prices. China is one of the world's biggest buyers of oil, iron ore, copper, and other inputs, which it needs to fuel the manufacturing and construction industries that in turn drive its fast-growing economy, the world's second largest. 

Mr. Wang noted that for the first two months of this year combined, exports grew 21% from the same period last year and imports grew 36%. "So the big picture is export growth remains very robust (in line with the data from other countries in the region) and the growth of imports (which is an indication of strength of domestic demand) is even stronger."

If the surplus does narrow over the course of this year, it could strengthen the hand of those within China who argue for only slow appreciation of China's currency. 



The U.S. and other governments have long criticized Beijing for keeping the yuan's value low against the dollar to help its exporters. 

The Chinese currency has gained only about 4% against the dollar since Beijing effectively de-pegged the yuan from the U.S. currency in June—far less than many U.S. officials and economists want. 

Analysts say continued deficits are unlikely, but that strength in imports could continue to pressure the surplus. "China's trade balance could be back into surplus again in coming months after the distortion" in January and February, Ting Lu, China economist at Bank of America-Merrill Lynch, wrote in a note Thursday. 

But "surging oil prices could add pressures." He estimates that every $1 increase in oil prices per barrel could cut China's annual trade surplus by $1.9 billion—but notes that the narrowing trade surplus could alleviate pressures on the yuan and also mitigate concerns about inflation.

The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index sold off on Thursday, partly on the unexpected deficit, ending down 1.5% at 2957.14, snapping a four-session rising streak. Offshore dollar-yuan nondeliverable forwards also reacted, pricing in less yuan appreciation. They now predict the yuan will rise just 2.1% against the dollar over the next year.

Bank of America-Merrill Lynch economist Lu Ting said the markets had likely overreacted, given the distortions from the Lunar New Year holiday. "Markets could overreact to the data but the overreaction will be short lived," he said in a note.

 Write to  Jason Dean at jason.dean@wsj.com 