Efforts to recall 14 Republican and Democratic senators in Wisconsin picked up momentum Tuesday while Gov. Scott Walker released emails suggesting the two sides discussed compromises in the three-week standoff over the governor's "budget-repair" bill.

A handful of emails between the governor's staff and top Democrats appear to show the governor softening his position on collective bargaining for public employee unions, which has been at the center of the stalemate. Fourteen Democratic senators left the state on Feb. 17 to prevent a vote on Mr. Walker's legislation.

The governor, who has previously said collective-bargaining rights should be restricted to wages, broadened his position to include mandatory overtime, performance bonuses and hazardous duty pay, the emails show. He also discussed scrapping a proposal to limit wage increases to the rate of inflation.

Cullen Werwie, a spokesman for the governor, said the emails "demonstrate that the lines of communications have been open and negotiations have been ongoing for more than a week. We have repeatedly tried to get Senate Democrats to come home and continued to provide reasonable offers for their consideration."

Democratic Sen. Bob Jauch, a recipient of several of the emails, said their release was a positive step that "enables people to see the kind of starting point you can get to achieve a compromise." 

"There was some real serious discussion about bringing collective bargaining back from the grave," he said. 

The talks, which began around Feb. 28 and continued at least through Sunday evening, appear to have faltered Monday when the two sides failed to agree on a face-to-face meeting. There are no indications that an agreement is imminent.

Late Tuesday afternoon Democrats in the state Senate and Assembly offered a joint proposal that would remove the collective-bargaining restrictions from the budget-repair bill but still require state employees to make the increased contributions to their pensions and health care that Mr. Walker wants. 

Their plan calls for Wisconsin to restructure its debt to free up $165 million in spending for the current fiscal year. It wasn't immediately clear whether that option is still available to the state.

Democrats also suggested stripping other portions of the budget-repair bill, including proposals to increase the governor's control over the state Medicaid program and to allow no-bid sales of state-owned power plants.

The standoff continued as Republican senators in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday introduced legislation that would give workers nationally the right to refrain from joining a labor union.

In Wisconsin, recall efforts are gaining steam with the help of groups from outside the state. Eight Republican and six Democratic senators have been targeted for recall. Nationwide liberal groups Progressive Change Campaign Committee, based in Washington, and Democracy for America, based in Vermont, have raised more than $500,000 online in the past week. 

The groups are using the money to pay for television ads targeting Republican senators Randy Hopper in Fond du Lac and Oshkosh, Dan Kapanke in La Crosse and Alberta Darling in Milwaukee. 

The senators appear to be vulnerable to recall because they won their districts by relatively narrow margins, and President Barack Obama carried all three districts, in two cases with 51% of the vote, the groups said.

Ms. Darling said she would support changes outlined in the governor's emails, but the recall campaign "is not intimidating me," she said. "From my perspective, I'm representing my district."

In Green Bay, David Vander Leest, a wind-farm developer organizing a recall effort against Democrat Dave Hansen, said a meeting last weekend drew 400 volunteers while 400 protesters lined up outside to demonstrate against the effort.

"It's become like a presidential election," Mr. Vander Leest said. "It's got everybody that much more heated up because it's touching people in the pocketbook."

Ken Goldstein, a professor of political science at the University of Wisconsin at Madison, said, "The state is phenomenally polarized. Democrats are lined up in lockstep against the governor, Republicans are lined up in lockstep behind him." 

Graeme Zielinski, a spokesman for the Wisconsin Democratic Party, said activists had 20% of the signatures needed in one district and 25% of those needed in another. Mr. Zielinski declined to identify the senators, saying "We'd like to keep them guessing."

Politicians who have been in office for at least one year can be recalled. Organizers say thousands of volunteers have collected tens of thousands of signatures on both sides.

The recall committees have 60 days to collect signatures in districts equal to 25% of the votes cast there in the last gubernatorial election. A recall election would then be held six weeks later between the senator and a candidate who gathered 400 signatures.

 Corrections & Amplifications 

Wisconsin state Sen. Randy Hopper represents the cities of Fond du Lac and Oshkosh. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said he represents Green Bay.

—Amy Merrick contributed to this article.

 Write to  Douglas Belkin at doug.belkin@wsj.com and Kris Maher at kris.maher@wsj.com 