  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS


0.09
%




's profit slide of 52% in the fourth quarter showed the securities giant's size and swagger aren't enough for it to escape the tightening squeeze of a regulatory overhaul and jittery clients and investors.

The New York company suffered its third quarterly profit decline in a row, hurt by lower revenue from its vaunted trading and investment-banking businesses. Fourth-quarter net income fell to $2.39 billion, or $3.79 a share, from $4.95 billion, or $8.20 a share, a year earlier. 

The lackluster performance ended one of the bumpiest years in the firm's 142-year-history with a thud that deepened questions about how Goldman,  Morgan Stanley
MS


0.19
%




 and other securities firms can expand without revving up some of the same risky practices that helped cause the financial crisis.

Like its rivals, Goldman is being hurt by the reluctance of many institutional investors, wealthy individuals, companies and other clients to take risks because they still are reeling from losses during the crisis. Hedge funds are weaning themselves from some of the leverage used to make big bets, and U.S. companies are holding more than $2 trillion in stagnant cash.

As a result, demand for the vast inventory of stocks, bonds and other investments that Goldman buys and sells on behalf of customers, generating commissions and other fees for the firm, fell in the latest quarter. Trading-related revenue shrank 31% to $3.64 billion from $5.25 billion in 2009's fourth quarter.

The deal pipeline also remains stubbornly sluggish, dragging down investment-banking revenue by 10% to $1.51 billion from the year-earlier $1.68 billion.

Goldman Chief Financial Officer  David Viniar said trading activity has been better in January, but he was tentative about the company's financial projections for 2011. In the fourth quarter, Goldman posted a return on equity of 13%, a far cry from the 20% or more that was routine before the financial crisis.

"The economy and activity levels are improving" said Nomura Securities analyst  Glenn Schorr. "But business is by no means booming."



Goldman faces a much longer-lasting threat from regulations spawned by last summer's Dodd-Frank law. While many of the new rules haven't been issued, Goldman already has pruned its proprietary-trading operations and other businesses likely to be reined in by regulators.

Mr. Viniar said Goldman needs to know what the rules are, especially for proprietary trading, derivatives and capital requirements, before it can decide where to commit its resources. "I think we are going to see how the world unfolds," he told an analyst who asked whether Goldman is about to increase its stock buybacks. When pressed about derivatives rules, he responded: "I think it is just too early for me to give you much." 

Mr. Viniar added that he hadn't yet studied a U.S. regulatory panel's recommendations Tuesday on how to implement the so-called Volcker rule, intended to restrict financial firms from trading with their own money. But rules on how Goldman manages the securities it holds on desks that facilitate trades for clients could hurt Goldman's bottom line, he cautioned.

"How that is defined is a really, really important thing," Mr. Viniar said in an interview with The Wall Street Journal, adding that the firm would have to charge clients more if Goldman is forced to hold securities in its inventory for shorter periods of time. "The fact we're there in the markets all the time allows us to do things for our clients at reasonable spreads." 

  Roger Freeman, an analyst at Barclays Capital, said the fourth-quarter results and Mr. Viniar's comments are signs the "regulatory process is long and drawn out and may remain an overhang on Goldman and its client trading activity."

Mr. Freeman said Goldman's conservative stance might have caused the firm to miss opportunities to invest its own capital or use more leverage to generate revenue as riskier financial markets come back to life. "Goldman hasn't been as prone to make direct investments from its balance sheet as they have in the past," the analyst said, which could hurt the firm "three or four years from now."

Goldman's average daily value at risk, or VAR, a measure of how much the company might lose in trading on any given day, was $120 million in the fourth quarter, down 45% from $218 million in the fourth quarter of 2009. 

Meanwhile, the firm's $170 billion in excess liquidity has been parked in ultrasafe, liquid assets like Treasury bonds. Such securities declined in December when investors moved money into riskier assets like stocks.

Net revenue shrank 10% to $8.64 billion from $9.62 billion. For the full year, Goldman's earnings declined to $8.35 billion from $13.39 billion in 2009. Compensation and benefits at the company, a bellwether for pay on Wall Street, fell 5% to $15.4 billion from $16.2 billion. On a per-employee basis, compensation fell by 14% to an average of $430,700 in 2010 from $498,246.

Goldman shares declined 4.7%, or $8.19, to $166.49 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading at 4 p.m.

Mr. Viniar didn't disclose any new details about Goldman's deal to help clients invest in Facebook Inc.

 Write to  Liz Rappaport at liz.rappaport@wsj.com 