FLORHAM PARK, N.J.—For one reason or another, Muhammad Wilkerson, the newest New York Jet, has always had to wait for the limelight. 

As a youngster, he was kept out of Pop Warner football when league managers decided he was too big to compete. 

Then, when he finally received some attention from major Division I programs, those same colleges began backing off when it became apparent that Wilkerson would have problems qualifying academically.

For those reasons—his relatively late start in the sport and his playing at Temple, which is far from renowned as far as college football goes—Wilkerson flew under the radar longer than he likely otherwise would have.

And now, even as he becomes the face of the Jets' draft class this year, he seems OK with that approach. Asked Friday how he would find his place on a team full of characters, Wilkerson said he'd let his play do the talking.

"I'm just a humble guy," said the 6-4, 305-pound defensive lineman from Linden, N.J. But on the field, he said, "I'm a totally different person; a physical guy who likes to dominate."

The Jets also used their second pick of the draft, in the late third round to further bolster their defensive line by taking Hampton nose tackle Kenrick Ellis. The 6-5, 345-pound Ellis will help serve as a replacement for Kris Jenkins at defensive tackle.

Shortly after he was selected, with the 30th overall pick, Wilkerson said he looked forward to helping the Jets be "more disruptive than they already are" on defense.

The 21-year-old pass rush specialist was a force in the Mid American Conference, playing a large part in boosting Temple's team defense from 81st nationally to 16th over a two-year span in yards allowed per game. He finished his three-year college career with 17.5 sacks and 26 tackles for loss.

He said the Jets' decision to take him with their first-round pick was far from a surprise, as he had good conversations with Coach Rex Ryan and the team's management.

Ryan sounded elated with the pick, just the second defensive player the Jets have chosen since he became coach in 2009.

 "He was excellent in college, but we think he's got more to give," Ryan said, adding that Wilkerson would likely play tackle or end. He compared Wilkerson to "a young Trevor Pryce," referring to the current Jets defensive end who's made four Pro Bowl appearances.

In an interview, Mark D'Onofrio, who recruited Wilkerson and was his defensive coordinator at Temple, said Wilkerson is a hard worker who often exceeds initial expectations. 

He figured the Jets were impressed that Wilkerson played the 3-4 defense in college, a background most prospects don't have. 

"He'll fit in great with their scheme, and I'm sure that's part of the reason why they took him.''

 Write to  Chris Herring at chris.herring@wsj.com 