Hats off to Kate Middleton. The new Duchess of Cambridge has sparked a trend in hat accessories called fascinators, say industry observers and entrepreneurs who specialize in the niche. 

Fascinators are decorative trappings made of fanciful materials such as feathers, flowers, lace or beads. They're typically attached to hats or worn in one's hair in lieu of a hat, along with formal attire. Some American hat retailers say the accouterments have been selling strong ever since photos of Ms. Middleton wearing them began to surface a few months ago. Customers are mostly brides and fans of the Kentucky Derby, the annual race that's populated by attendees donning frivolous, oversized hats.

Ms. Middleton's "affinity for the fascinator, or cocktail hat, has propelled the style to the fashion forefront," according to  Jill Hammer, spokeswoman for the Headwear Association, an industry trade group in Los Angeles. "Contemporary hat brands including San Diego Company, Betmar New York and Grace Hats have all seen recent increases in their cocktail hat business."

  Laura Lyons, owner of Serendipity Tiaras, an online retailer in Cedar Park, Texas, says she sold 106 fascinators in the first quarter, up from 22 during the same period a year ago. "I had to rush orders," she says. "I can only think it's because people are seeing Kate Middleton wearing them."

Serendipity Tiaras generates most of its traffic—31%—from organic  Google search results, followed by Google Adwords, which brings in about 18% of sales, says Ms. Lyons. 

A Google spokesman says searches for "fascinators" and "cocktail hats" are up 67% and 54%, respectively, from a year ago.

Meanwhile, a recent search for fascinators on Etsy.com, a crafts marketplace, generated more than 25,000 results.

The hairpieces are in high demand at Hats in the Belfry, an Annapolis, Md.-based retailer since 1978 with five locations and online store. During the first quarter, it sold 60 of the headpieces, up from 20 during the same period in 2010, says  James Sackor, general manager of e-commerce. The accessories range in price from $38 to $300. 

"It's because of her," says Mr. Sackor, crediting Ms. Middleton for the spike in sales. "Seeing her in that headwear just adds a new element to fashion that people maybe weren't sure about before. Now you can see it becoming more mainstream."

To be sure, Ms. Middleton has prompted consumers to spend money on a number of other items as well, from t-shirts and mugs to fruitcake, her choice of wedding cake. (Please see related article, "Fruitcakes Selling Like, Er, Hot Cakes.") Her wedding dress is also expected to inspire copycats.

 Write to  Sarah E. Needleman at sarah.needleman@wsj.com 