 European Union governments are considering proposals to significantly boost the bloc's €440 billion ($570 billion) bailout fund for indebted euro-zone countries, an acknowledgment the fund might prove too small if the region's debt crisis spreads to Spain. 

The European Union's weaker states comfortably sold planned amounts of Treasury bills, with Italy and Greece paying only marginally higher yields than previously, while Hungary's funding costs actually dipped. 

The smooth outcome of the T-bill tenders, or sales of short-term debt, is good news ahead of Portuguese, Spanish and Italian government bond sales in the next two days, but market participants remain cautious. 

Portugal's central bank forecast the country's economy will shrink in 2011, as the government's austerity measures take a toll on private consumption, but will return to growth in 2012, buoyed by strong exports. 

Prime Minister José Sócrates was upbeat about Portugal's prospects, noting that its economy grew in 2010 by nearly double the initial forecast and preliminary figures show that Portugal's budget deficit in 2010 is "clearly below" the targeted budget deficit of 7.3% of GDP.

 Spanish Prime Minister José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero pledged to accelerate the cleanup of the country's opaque network of savings banks known as cajas, a move that is part of Spain's attempt to convince the market it isn't in need of European aid. 

Japan threw its support behind Europe's bailout efforts, saying it will take a major stake in a bond offering for Ireland later this month by one of the special funds set up in the wake of the euro-zone sovereign debt crisis. 

The U.K. government is eyeing a package of measures to support certain industries, the prime minister's spokesman said, as the government continues efforts to switch the agenda away from its austerity plans. 

The nine members of the Bank of England's Monetary Policy Committee face possibly the most difficult combination of circumstances since the central bank gained independence in the setting of monetary policy over a decade ago. 

A serving British legislator has pleaded guilty to charges connected to the country's parliamentary expenses scandal, an admission which could trigger a by-election. 

The U.K.'s coalition government is predicted to lose its first major electoral test, the clearest sign yet that 2011 will be a tough year for Prime Minister David Cameron's eight-month-old administration. 

 Lawyers for WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange claim if he is extradited by the U.K. to Sweden to face a sexual assault investigation, there is a "real risk" the U.S. would seek to extradite him from Sweden, and detain him at Guantanamo Bay or subject him to the death penalty. 

Assange made a court appearance in London, at which a judge set a Feb. 7 date for his next hearing in the extradition matter.

A key operative of armed Basque separatist group ETA has been detained in southern France, Spanish police said, a day after the organization declared a ceasefire. 

Belgium's King Albert II asked mediator Johan Vande Lanotte to continue to seek a solution to the political impasse that has kept the country without a government for more than six months and increased concerns about its financial stability. 

 The White House will announce as soon as this month the formation of President Barack Obama's re-election campaign, with fund-raising likely to begin in March or early April, say officials involved in the planning. 

 U.S. Representative Gabrielle Giffords remains in critical condition in an Arizona hospital after brain surgery but doctors said she will survive her ordeal and her recovery is progressing. She has shown some slight movement on one side of her body, and there are signs she could open her eyes soon, a surgeon said. 

 A U.S. commission investigating the Deepwater Horizon oil spill said BP and its contractors committed "identifiable mistakes" and that systematic failures raise doubts about industry safety.  

A former technology analyst at Primary Global Research, an "expert network" firm ensnared in a major insider-trading investigation, admitted to setting up meetings with company insiders and passing along confidential information to clients, including hedge funds. 

 Images of a Chinese stealth fighter prototype in flight suggest that China has moved to the next stage of testing an aircraft that appears designed to rival the American F-22 and challenge U.S. air superiority in the Asia-Pacific region, aviation experts say. 

 China's first test flight of its stealth fighter overshadowed a mission to China by U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates to repair frayed military relations, and prompted concern about whether President Hu Jintao and the civilian leadership are fully in control of the increasingly powerful armed forces. 

U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates said North Korea must halt nuclear and missile tests before the U.S. will consider a return to international talks, saying North Korea will be able to strike the U.S. with a missile in five years.

 Japanese Defense Minister Toshimi Kitazawa ended a two-day visit to South Korea with a trip to the fortified inter-Korean border, following a promise to work more closely with Seoul that has been met with lukewarm response in South Korea. 

South Korean financial authorities announced new measures aimed at reducing excessive stock market volatility triggered by trading in stock derivatives, as they continue to take steps to protect the domestic financial system from rapid foreign capital flows. 

 In Hong Kong, American expatriate Nancy Kissel pleaded guilty to manslaughter and not guilty to the murder of her investment banker husband—a crime she was convicted of in 2005 in a verdict overturned by Hong Kong's highest court last year. 

 U.S. Vice President Joe Biden promised Afghan President Hamid Karzai that the U.S. won't abandon Afghanistan after the bulk of U.S. troops withdraw in 2014.  

 U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, making an unannounced visit to Yemen, pledged to broaden the U.S.'s relationship with the Arab state beyond the fight against al Qaeda. The aim, she said, is to forge a strategic partnership focused on economic and social development. 

 Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu pressed for tougher international sanctions against Iran's nuclear program, amid upbeat assessments by senior U.S. and Israeli officials about efforts to significantly slow Iran's bid to build a nuclear weapon.  

 Worries over flooding worsened as the death toll mounted and waters threatened the major city of Brisbane, while its currency fell over concerns about the rising costs to the economy. 

Residents in central Brisbane—a city home to about two million people—were warned by police to move to higher ground.