The yen stabilized Friday after a concerted push by the world's major central banks to counter the Japanese currency's recent spike, which saw it hit an all-time high in chaotic trading two days earlier.

The precise scope of the intervention isn't known, but traders estimated the yen selling was in the neighborhood of $20 billion. The selling was given added heft by the coordinated effort behind it. The Bank of Japan was joined by the European Central Bank, Federal Reserve and monetary authorities in Canada and the United Kingdom.

The rare concerted intervention sent the Japanese currency down more than 3% against the U.S. dollar. As the Bank of Japan first stepped in Friday, the yen quickly moved from around 79 yen to the dollar to nearly 82 yen before settling back around 81 yen. Late Friday, the dollar was trading at 80.76 yen.

Central bankers "have to be pretty happy with what they have seen," said  David Woo, currency strategist at Bank of America Merrill Lynch.

The export-led Japanese economy is seen as especially vulnerable to a rise in the yen following the disastrous earthquake and tsunami. The yen had moved higher in anticipation that many corporations and individuals would repatriate their money to Japan to help rebuild. As it moved up earlier this week, many investors who had been betting against the yen were forced to unwind their trades, adding further pressure.

Data from the Commodity Futures Trading Commission released on Friday showed that traders had $4.6 billion in net "long," or bullish, positions in the yen as of Tuesday, up 84% from a week earlier.

While central banks were clearly trying to nudge down the yen, many analysts said they also had a broader aim: restoring calm to the markets.

Trading in the currency had grown disorderly in recent days, with an overwhelming number of traders trying to buy yen from too few sellers. That was especially true during the sharp move Wednesday evening in New York when the yen rocketed to a new all-time high of 76.32 against the U.S. dollar—a move of 4.6% within minutes.

"I don't think they're going to try and hold any one level, but rather to try and keep dollar-yen in the 80-yen area," said Alan Ruskin, a currency strategist at  Deutsche Bank AG. Should the yen head strongly back toward its new record high, the Bank of Japan could get more aggressive again, Mr. Ruskin added.

Historically central bank intervention has often proved futile. But analysts were less skeptical of the current effort. One reason is that the yen selling was coordinated by central banks around the world. Meanwhile, the Bank of Japan has been flooding the Japanese financial markets with excess money to help keep its economy stable in the wake of the disaster. By essentially printing more money, the Bank of Japan is to some degree diluting the value of existing yen.

In addition, Mr. Ruskin says, the primary source of yen demand in recent days has been Japanese investors and corporations beginning to repatriate money from abroad. The end of March is also the fiscal year end in Japan, and companies often bring money home at this time of year. 

"I'm not a great fan of intervention ... but this is a shorter term story," Mr. Ruskin said.

The joint effort was the first since 2000, when central banks teamed up to buttress the euro. That effort totaled about $6 billion and resulted in helping the euro temporarily, though the currency fell again a few months later.

Some argue that the Bank of Japan is likely to allow some more breathing room on the yen because, even though it hit a post-World War II high this week on a nominal basis, by some other measures the yen isn't overvalued. 

According to the Bank of Japan's own measure of the yen's inflation and trade-weighted value at the end of February, it was less than 1% above its long-term average of the last 38 years. At the end of last month, the yen was changing hands near 82 yen to the U.S. dollar.

"While its value may look stretched, the real, effective exchange rate is actually in the middle of its range," said  David Mann, currency strategist at Standard Chartered PLC. From that standpoint, its levels "are no big deal," he added.

Still, Japan's economy has been ravaged by the earthquake, and a rising yen would only add to the nation's troubles by reducing the competitiveness of its major exporters as they try to rebuild. 

Goldman Sachs Group Inc. on Friday estimated economic damage to Japan's buildings and production facilities would tally $193 billion, some 3.3% of the country's gross domestic product. Typically economic growth rebounds after an earthquake or similar disaster, because of the extra spending on rebuilding. But power shortages could dampen that effect, Goldman said in a research note.

On Friday, more companies announced problems getting parts and supplies, underscoring how far the ripples from Japan's disaster are spreading across global manufacturing and how uncertain the timing of any recovery could be.

  Honda Motor Co.
HMC


0.81
%




 said it will suspend automobile and motorcycle assembly operations through Wednesday, as some of its suppliers need more time to restore their damaged production facilities. About 30% of suppliers for its four- and two-wheeled vehicles in the quake-hit area won't resume operations anytime soon, a Honda spokesman said.

French car maker Renault SA said it is trimming back production of high-end sedans at a plant at Busan, South Korea, operated by its Renault Samsung Motors subsidiary due a shortage of parts, including engines and gearboxes, caused by Japan's earthquake last week. 

—Yoshio Takahashi  and David Pearson  contributed to this article.