MELBOURNE, Australia—Nine years after Leander Paes and Mahesh Bhupathi went their separate ways, the Australian Open remains that one elusive Grand Slam title for the recently reunited doubles pair.

This was the first Grand Slam tournament the two Indian players had played together since the 2002 Australian Open, and it became apparent early on that their complicity on the court had been restored to its former self.

But when it comes to on-court chemistry, no one matches Bob and Mike Bryan, and after just over an hour the American twins had won their fifth title here in six years, 6-3, 6-4.

Reaching the final remains a remarkable achievement for the 37-year-old Mr. Paes and the 36-year-old Mr. Bhupathi, but one that is unlikely to satisfy the celebrated pair.

The two—either together or with other partners—have won every Grand Slam tournament except for this one. And, after deciding to team up again at the end of last year, they made clear that their main goal in doing so was to win an event they last played as a team in 2002.

"We had a great couple of weeks," said Mr. Paes in a postmatch press conference. "We had a tough draw, pretty much played all the best teams in the world getting to the final, and today we lost to the best team on the planet."

That the Bryan brothers are tough to beat at the Australian Open is a big understatement. The team ranked No. 1 in the world entered Saturday's final with just one loss here since 2006. Last year, they won all 11 finals they contested.

But Messrs. Paes and Bhupathi had some reason to be confident too. They had won their first event of the year in Chennai and overcame a string of difficult opponents to reach the final. They did so thanks to Mr. Bhupathi's powerful returns and Mr. Paes' deft hands at the net.

A little trickery also helped. After a second-round defeat, Spaniard Feliciano Lopez—apparently irked by the Indian pair's repeated use of a Spanish word for encouragement—refused to shake hands with Mr. Paes.

Adversity only seemed to boost the team known as the "Indian Express," but the Bryan brothers offered too much of it to their opponents in Saturday's final.

Their serves were faster and more consistent. Their volleys were a little cleaner. They broke Mr. Paes' serve in the match's sixth game and held serve to win the first set comfortably, 6-3. The second set followed a similar pattern, and after breaking Mr. Bhupathi's serve at 4-4 on a ball that clipped the net the twins went on to seal their victory on Bob Bryan's serve, celebrating with their customary chest bump.

Scheduled after the women's final, the match didn't start until 10:30 p.m. in a half-full Rod Laver Arena. By the time trophies were handed only a fraction of the spectators remained.

Messrs. Paes and Bhupathi have committed only to a few tournaments in the spring. When asked whether they will be back in 2012 to try again to finally capture the Australian Open, Mr. Paes said that "one year is a long time." 

They both have off-court activities. Mr. Bhupathi, who is getting married to actress Lara Dutta later this year, manages a talent agency. Mr. Paes has started acting in Bollywood films.

But their performance here these past two weeks leaves little doubt that they remain a perfect match on the doubles tour.

"We played them a lot individually, but they're obviously better together," said Bob Bryan before Saturday's match.

Just after receiving the runner-up trophy, Mr. Bhupathi praised his doubles partner, who remained in the background, and made clear they have regained their place near the top of the doubles game.

"It took the best team in the world to stop this train," he said.

 Write to  Nicolas Brulliard at nicolas.brulliard@dowjones.com 