Meteorologists continued Sunday surveying areas hard-hit by last week's tornadoes across the South, trying to fully catalog the strength of the historic storms. 

The National Weather Service estimated there were 266 tornadoes in the 24-hour period from Wednesday to Thursday. If the final number isn't scaled back significantly, it would top the previous record of 148 tornadoes set April 3-4, 1974.

More than 340 people were killed from tornadoes and storms that swept across seven states on Wednesday and Thursday – the highest U.S. death toll from tornadoes since April 5-6, 1936, when 454 people were killed, mostly in Mississippi and Georgia. The death toll in Alabama, the hardest-hit state, now stands at 250, with 2,219 people injured or hospitalized, state officials said early Sunday. The number still missing is unknown, they said. 

Authorities said a tornado in northwestern Alabama reached EF-5—the highest rating for tornado damage—as peak winds topped 200 miles an hour. The 0.75-mile-wide tornado killed 25 people and brought widespread destruction along a 25.2-mile-long path in Marion County before crossing into the Tennessee Valley.

The Alabama town of Hackleburg appeared to have been hardest hit in that part of the state, with several subdivisions and the local high school destroyed. Thousands of trees were downed, at least 100 structures were leveled and vehicles were tossed more than 150 yards along the tornado's path, the National Weather Service in Birmingham, Ala., said Sunday. Authorities estimated there were more than 600 tornadoes across the U.S. last month, toppling the previous monthly record of 542 tornadoes set in May 2003. The previous April record was 267 tornadoes, set in 1974.

Authorities are still sifting through the destruction from an 80-mile-long, 1.5-mile-tornado that tore through Tuscaloosa and Birmingham in central Alabama, killing at least 65 people and injuring more than 1,000. The weather service has categorized that tornado as "at least'' an EF-4, with winds of at least 165 miles an hour in Pleasant Growth on the outskirts of Birmingham.

"We haven't seen the entire track on the ground,'' said Jim Stefkovich, a meteorologist with the National Weather Service in Birmingham. "It's slow going.''

The tornado was generated by a "supercell'' thunderstorm that lasted more than seven hours Wednesday and traveled from Mississippi to North Carolina. At least 10 EF-4 tornadoes—which pack winds of 166 to 200 miles an hour—touched down in various states last week, according to the National Weather Service.

Parts of the South, including Texas, were under tornado watches again Sunday, but "we're not going to see anything near the magnitude of what we saw last week,'' said Jared Guyer, a weather forecaster at the federal Storm Prediction Center in Norman, Oklahoma.

Mr. Guyer said there was a "slight risk'' for more tornadoes Sunday in parts of northeastern Texas, southern Arkansas, northern Louisiana and western Tennessee. There also was a "slight risk'' of more tornadoes developing in already battered Mississippi and Alabama by Monday, although thunderstorms and hail were more likely.

"In relative terms, it's not near the magnitude of the very active weather we had last week,'' Mr. Guyer added.

Major thunderstorms and tornadoes are produced by a volatile mix of three ingredients—wind shear, instability and lift—and commonly occur in the spring as warm and cold air fronts clash. May typically is the busiest month.

Meteorologists said Alabama just appeared to have been less lucky than neighboring states last week. "There's no real reason. You could have had similar conditions to the west or somewhere else. It's all about the ingredients,'' said Greg Carbin, another meteorologist at the Storm Prediction Center.

It is difficult to predict whether there will be a continued spike in tornadoes this year. A spate of tornadoes in one month historically hasn't resulted in more tornadoes the following month, according to Mr. Carbin.

 Write to  Mike Esterl at mike.esterl@wsj.com 