The European Union's energy chief warned Wednesday that the events at Japan's nuclear plant could be "catastrophic" in comments that rattled markets and were later played down by the European Commission. 

In introductory remarks to the European Parliament's environment committee, Guenther Oettinger, commissioner for energy, said the situation at Japan's Fukushima Daiichi plant is "effectively out of control. In the coming hours there could be further catastrophic events which could pose a threat to the lives of people on the island." 

At the time, Mr. Oettinger didn't specify where his information was coming from. 

However, a spokeswoman for Mr. Oettinger later said the commissioner didn't have any privileged information and that his remarks were aimed at describing how he personally sees the situation in the country. 

"It was his fear not only as a politician, but as a person," Marlene Holzner said. 

That was reinforced by a spokeswoman for EU Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso. She said the EU's executive arm was focused on helping Japan deal with the situation not on trying to qualify a fast-evolving situation on the ground. 

"Our focus is now not on qualifying, as an institution, what the situation is," Pia Ahrenkilde Hansen said. She added that the situation was clearly "serious." 

Mr. Oettinger's remarks drew a sharp market reaction. 

The Euro Stoxx 50 closed down 2.3% at 2721.24, falling for the third consecutive day, with the market sliding after Oettinger's remarks. 

The Dow Jones Industrial Average tumbled late morning New York time after Mr. Oettinger spoke. The DJIA remained lower on Japan fears later in the session. 

In his remarks, Oettinger also raised concerns about what he said were "growing differences in the statements issued" by the Japanese government and the utility company operating the distressed plant. 

Mr. Oettinger's comments drew criticism from other senior officials on Wednesday. 

The head of the International Atomic Energy Agency said he wouldn't agree with the European Energy Commissioner's assertion that the situation at the Fukushima plant is "out of control." 

"It's not the time to say the situation is out of control...evidently, the situation has developed in the last 24 hours and is now very serious," IAEA Director General Yukiya Amano said. 

Mr. Oettinger's comments Wednesday were not the first time he has used emotive language to describe the situation in Japan. 

On Tuesday, he also warned the situation in Japan could fall out of control and described the impact of the earthquake and tsunami there as an "apocalypse." 

The Fukushima plant has been hit by several explosions at some of its six reactors after the tsunami in Japan damaged its cooling systems. Nuclear radiation has been released directly into the atmosphere. 

The IAEA's Amano said Wednesday the latest radiation readings on site show only a "limited release" of radiation. 

European Commission officials acknowledge they have only limited direct information of the situation at the plant and depend in large part on Japanese government information and press reports. 

However, a Commission spokeswoman said the EU has been receiving information from other sources in recent days, including the International Atomic Energy Agency and the EU's ECURIE automatic information exchange. 

Separately, the EU called a meeting of energy ministers Monday to discuss Japan's nuclear crisis and its consequences for the region. On Tuesday, Oettinger announced EU member states had agreed to carry out stress tests at the region's 143 nuclear plants. 

 Write to  Alessandro Torello at alessandro.torello@dowjones.com 