The tempting story line about Sunday's conference championship game between the Chicago Bears and Green Bay Packers is how different the participating cities are.

Chicago is home to nearly three million people. Green Bay, the NFL's smallest city, has a population closer to 100,000. Chicago might have more skyscrapers than Green Bay has elevators. And while the Second City overflows with magnificent museums, five-star restaurants and renowned universities, in Green Bay, life centers around much simpler pleasures like Friday night fish fries and 25-cent rides at the Bay Beach Amusement Park.

Many Chicagoans would tell you that the differences basically boil down to urbane vs. hick. John Kass of the Chicago Tribune wrote this week that the last thing he wanted to do was make fun of Green Bay's idea of fine dining—and then proceeded to do just that. "Besides, what's wrong with Applebee's, anyway?" he asked.

Of course, that snooty attitude grates on Chicago's neighbors to the north. They have a name for the intruders from Illinois who flock across the state line to enjoy Wisconsin's lakes and outdoor activities: FIBs. The "I" stands for Illinois, and the "F" and "B" stand for words not fit for a family newspaper.

But poke a little deeper into the history, and there are plenty of similarities to be found between Chicago and Green Bay. Green Bay's shoulders might not be as broad as Chicago's, but both are Midwestern cities built long ago on paper making and meat packing by a wide range of European immigrants. They sprouted, albeit on different scales, as heavily Catholic, blue-collar and bibulous strongholds.

Then there's the other kinship they share: football. Green Bay and Chicago are home to the two most storied franchises in the NFL. Their roots are embedded in the league's hardscrabble, leather-helmet days. The Bears, who began as the Decatur Staleys, were charter members when what became the NFL was born in 1920. The Packers joined the league the following year.

The Packers have won the most league championships, 12. The Bears have won nine, the second most. The Bears have 26 players in the Hall of Fame, more than any other team. The Packers rank second with 21.

Even more appealing is the symbolism the franchises bring to the game. Two of its Founding Fathers: George "Papa Bear" Halas and Curly Lambeau. The legendary players, so many of them with names that rattle with consonants: Bronko Nagurski, Clarke Hinkle, Ray Nitschke, Dick Butkus, Mike Ditka. The dynasties: The Monsters of the Midway of the 1930s and '40s, and Vince Lombardi's Packers. The sacred stadiums: Lambeau Field and Soldier Field.

The Packers and Bears clashed for the first time in 1921, and they have played at least twice a year since 1925 (except for the strike-shortened 1982 season). But only once before have they met in the playoffs—in 1941, one week after the bombing of Pearl Harbor.

The game, played at Wrigley Field, drew a sellout crowd of 43,425. The Bears won and played host to the New York Giants in the NFL championship the next week. That game drew 13,341 fans. 

The Packers-Bears rivalry—or Bears-Packers, if you're from Chicago—was bigger in the eyes of fans than the NFL title game. Bragging rights mattered more than a trophy. 

For the rivalry's first game in 1921, some 300 fans left Green Bay on a midnight train to cheer on their Packers. They were accompanied by the team's Lumberjack Band—its members dressed in hunting caps, Mackinaw coats and corduroy pants. And when they arrived in Chicago early on Sunday morning, they proceeded to parade through the city's streets.

In the 1920s, railroads began running special trains between the two cities on game day. They'd fill them with thousands of fans and throw a party on wheels, converting baggage cars into bar cars. Those excursions weren't for the faint of heart, and neither were the games. By 1928, whenever the Packers played in Chicago, St. Mary's of The Angels Parish in Green Bay scheduled a special Mass at 5:15 a.m. so parishioners could get to the local station in time to catch a train to Chicago for the game.

In 1945, the Bears' Lee Artoe nailed the Packers' Larry Craig with a sucker-punch when the teams first played in Green Bay. When they met again in Chicago, Ken Keuper of the Packers retaliated, using his elbow as a jackhammer against Artoe's face, breaking his nose and jaw, and knocking out 11 teeth. "He went down like a cow in the stockyards getting hit with a mallet," Keuper said years later, with fiendish delight.

The late Ed McCaskey, "Papa Bear" Halas's son-in-law and a former chairman of the Bears, swore that when the team visited Green Bay and stayed in the old Northland Hotel, Packer fans would prevent the players from sleeping by parading through the halls blasting musical instruments at all hours of the night. 

Apocryphal or not, such was the nature of the rivalry in the 1940s. It was vicious also in the 1980s, as when the Packers' Charles Martin, a hot-headed defensive lineman, body-slammed Bears quarterback Jim McMahon to the hard turf at Soldier Field in 1986. Mr. McMahon injured his throwing shoulder and was never the same, which, many Bears have said, prevented the team from defending its 1985 Super Bowl victory.

Of late the rivalry has been more civil. Part of the reason is that when the Bears have been good, the Packers have generally been bad, and vice versa. Until this year, that had been the case since the mid-1960s.

Sunday's game will be the 182nd meeting between the two teams, and perhaps the biggest ever. Ticket prices on the secondary market have exceeded $1,000, and football purists everywhere are feeling more than a little nostalgic. 

Coaches and players on both sides have been respectful thus far, but they have made it clear that they expect emotions to run high. "It's going to be a physical game," promised Bears Head Coach Lovie Smith. "We don't like each other."

 Mr. Christl has been a sports writer for papers in Milwaukee and Green Bay for more than 35 years. He is the co-author of "Mudbaths & Bloodbaths: The Inside Story of the Bears-Packers Rivalry" (Prairie Oak Press, 1997). 