Companies start reporting final 2010 earnings in earnest this week, but the gains should peak this quarter then level off as high unemployment and new headwinds restrain further business profit gains. 

Pressures from rising costs and tougher comparisons are draining the momentum from corporate profits. While some businesses should see a modest boost this year from new tax-law depreciation changes, big profit gains are largely behind many industries. 

This week,  Alcoa Inc.
AA


-0.46
%




 and  Intel Corp.
INTC


-0.27
%




 are expected to report markedly higher profits for the final quarter of 2010. Overall, fourth-quarter profits are projected to jump 9.8% from a year ago, continuing the streak of rising earnings that helped send the Dow Jones Industrial Average this month to levels not seen since May 2008.

But barring an unexpected acceleration in the economy, industries such as airlines, food, construction and telecommunications that have lagged the recovery, could remain under pressure. The airline industry, for instance, just posted its first full year of profit in four years, but now faces sharply higher costs for jet fuel and labor pressures. 

The end of the sharp profit recovery has implications for businesses and investors. Standard & Poor's now expects reported profits for S&P 500-Index members will hit a three-year peak this quarter, and move slightly lower for the next five quarters. Earnings for the S&P 500 companies are expected to hit $22.62 a share, up 29% from a year ago and off a deep loss in late 2008.

The reasons profits may plateau lies with the state of the U.S. work force. Unemployment remains high and wage growth sluggish; both will keep a lid on domestic demand.

 Track the performances of 150 companies as they report and compare their results with analyst estimates. Sort by reporting date and industry.

The economy added only 103,000 jobs in December, and 1.1 million for the year, the Labor Department reported Friday. While the consensus is that hiring in 2011 will improve over 2010's rate, many still expect the unemployment rate will remain stuck at about 9% through year end, extending what is already a record, 20-month-long streak above that level.

"The big decline in the jobless rate to 9.4% from 9.8% was due to a third consecutive decrease in the labor force, again not a sign that people are seeing their job prospects increase," said  Steven Ricchiuto, chief economist at Mizuho Securities.

At the current rate of hiring, warned Federal Reserve Bank Chairman Ben Bernanke on Friday, "we're not going to see sustained declines in the unemployment rate."

Sales of some big-ticket goods could see a modest boost from a new, 100% tax write-off for capital expenditures in effect for the next two years. The hope is the tax break, which took effect Jan. 1, will spur business investment and lead to more hiring. 

"It clearly will promote capital spending in 2011," said  Novellus Systems Inc.
NVLS


1.16
%




 Chief Executive  Richard Hill. He expects the deduction will accelerate the purchase of new business PCs, indirectly benefiting the sale of its chip-making equipment. "PCs will remain very strong [in 2011]," he said. 

  FedEx Corp.
FDX


0.16
%




 said it may increase the number of cargo jets it buys over the next 18 months as a result of the change. The tax bill's accelerated depreciation "will have a favorable impact on cash flow," said spokesman Jess Bunn. 

However, other say the impact will be modest. "This is not going to be a tremendous boon in terms of economic boost," said  Andy Hammons, a principal in the federal income tax practice at tax services firm Ryan LLC. "It's going to be an advantage for companies already planning to spend in 2011."

The tax write-off should help corporate revenue continue to chug higher even if profits plateau. S&P 500 revenues excluding financial and utility companies, are projected to rise 6.9% for the quarter ended Dec. 31. That modest sales boost could help offset any ding from higher materials costs. 

The Fed's second round of monetary easing, scheduled to run through June, also should help support the stock market at its current levels. The wealth effect, increased consumer spending spurred on by higher stock market and other asset prices, has bolstered retailers, hotels and leisure goods companies. 

In a generally improved but hardly robust holiday season, luxury-goods peddlers continued their strong comeback.  Saks Inc. posted an 11.8% gain in December at stores open at least a year, well above the 3.9% gain that analysts had expected.  Nordstrom Inc.
JWN


-0.03
%




 reported an 8.4% increase, ahead of a 3.4% forecast.

Sectors that produced hot gains in 2010 such as financial, energy and materials sectors should cool off this year, while last year's relative underperformers such as consumer staples and health-care are forecast to lead in 2011, according to earnings forecasts compiled by  Douglas Cliggott, U.S. equity strategist at Credit Suisse Group.

 Mr. Cliggott thinks businesses dependent on consumers' discretionary spending outlays will feel the pinch of higher household savings rates. And he expects consumer-savings rates to edge higher, which means "spending on durable goods is likely to slow in the next six months." 

While an imminent drop in profit margins isn't assured, Citigroup's  Tobias Levkovichwrote in a note last week, the risk exists for 2011. He expects, though, that earnings growth and stock buybacks will support corporate earnings overall.

—Bob Sechler, Bob Tita and Shara Tibken contributed to this article.

 Write to  Paul Vigna at paul.vigna@dowjones.com and John Shipman at john.shipman@dowjones.com 