  Robert Alexander wants to give young men and women in Ghana the opportunity to study and play sports. 

Recently, Mr. Alexander contributed $25,000 to Right to Dream, a 12-year-old organization with a residential middle school in the eastern region of Ghana that uses sports, specifically soccer, as a way to build leaders and encourage study. The organization sends its best students to the U.S. for further studies.

Mr. Alexander, 56 years old, is a New York Tri-State Region chairman of CB Richard Ellis Group Inc. He resides in Garden City, N.Y.

He initially became involved with the organization when a Right to Dream scholar attended the Hotchkiss School in Lakeville, Conn., where Mr. Alexander's son was also a student. 

Before his current gift, Mr. Alexander contributed toward the costs of food and lodging for Right to Dream students at Hotchkiss.

Some of the 80 young men that have been enrolled in the program have received a scholarship to attend boarding school and then college in the U.S. There are currently 16 boys studying at a prep school or college, attending Fordham, Marquette and Bucknell, among other universities. 

One young man, Michael Tetteh, now plays professional soccer with the Seattle Sounders.

Talent for soccer is a cornerstone of the program, but all of the young men that come to the U.S. are also academically gifted as well as natural and eager leaders off the field. "As a whole, they are extremely hardworking, polite and they are wide open to ideas," says Mr. Alexander.

Scholars are shepherded to schools and on to college by John Powers, also a chairman at CB Richard Ellis, and his daughter Kerry Powers. Messrs. Powers and Alexander have been colleagues for more than 20 years. 

"It's been extremely exciting to participate in this program," says Mr. Alexander. "The organization creates leaders—folks that can go back and make real contributions."

Now that the boys' program is in place, there is a new effort to expand Right to Dream to include a girls' academy. Mr. Alexander's recent gift is seed money for that effort. 

"Right now, there seems to be no institution or program that combines academics and athletics for women, at all. It doesn't exist and we're starting from scratch," says Mr. Alexander. The hope is to have 20 candidates for the school by the beginning of the next academic year. 

"Obviously it's a difficult environment for any of the young folks to move ahead and in particular for women," says Mr. Alexander.