PHOENIX—Federal officials said Tuesday they busted a network of gun buyers and smugglers planning to ship 700 guns to Mexican drug cartels embroiled in deadly turf wars. 

Law-enforcement officials arrested 17 people named in a 53-count indictment unsealed Tuesday. Police were still searching for three other people named in the indictment.

"The drug cartels go shopping for their war weapons in Arizona," said Dennis Burke, U.S. attorney for the District of Arizona. "One of Arizona's top exports is weapons for drug cartels."

The arrests come on the heels of Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's visit Monday to Mexico City for talks with Mexican President Felipe Calderón that addressed the battle against drug violence in Mexico.

The war among drug cartels fighting to control territory and supply routes has fueled violence in Mexico that has killed more than 34,000 people in the country since 2006. 

Of the 73,000 illegal firearms seized in Mexico since December 2006, officials estimate that 90% originated in the U.S.

Officials in Arizona, Texas and California have targeted gun-smuggling rings in the past four years by going after "straw purchasers," who buy guns legally in the U.S., then hand them over to an intermediary who transports the weapons across the border to Mexican drug cartels.

That process is meant in part to shield the true buyer of the weapons from law enforcement. The straw purchasers are sometimes single mothers and unemployed Americans offered a few hundred dollars to buy a weapon and hand it over, federal authorities said.

"This is a huge problem in our state," said Mr. Burke.

Authorities in Phoenix have busted gun-smuggling rings in the past—most notably last year when they seized 1,300 weapons from Arizona and New Mexico they believed were bound for Mexico. 

Tuesday's bust was a more complex case designed to snag both straw purchasers and organizers of the scheme, law-enforcement officials said. And it represents the state's most significant case against gun smuggling so far, Mr. Burke said.

The arrests represent "a complete dismantling, from top to bottom, of a Phoenix-based organization that we believe supplies guns to drug cartels in Mexico," said Bill Newell, special agent in charge of the Phoenix division of the Bureau of Alcohol Tobacco Firearms and Explosives.

Law-enforcement officials say the gun supply to Mexico is difficult to track in part because there are no federal limits on the number of long guns, or rifles, that an individual can legally buy. In addition, licensed gun dealers aren't required to alert federal authorities of multiple rifle purchases as they are with handguns.

More than 500 weapons were seized by authorities, both in the U.S. and Mexico. It's unclear what, if any, impact this will have on the flow of guns over the border. Mr. Newell acknowledged that Tuesday's bust could be just a drop in the bucket, but added, "We have to keep trying."

Among the alleged straw purchases detailed in the indictment: One man allegedly bought two AK-47 rifles from a Glendale, Ariz., gun dealer on Nov. 3. A week later, he allegedly purchased 10 AK-47s from the same dealer. Two days later, he allegedly bought five more of the same weapon; a month later he allegedly purchased 20 more.

 Write to  Tamara Audi at tammy.audi@wsj.com 