CAMBRIDGE, Mass.—New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie said he's considered toning down the rhetoric that shot him into political stardom over the past year.

He just doesn't think it would work yet.

"I haven't seen any signs yet from the other side that conciliation would be met with compromise," he said Friday at the Harvard Graduate School of Education during a question-and-answer session after a speech. 

"I am prepared to ratchet down the rhetoric if I could get any indication that there's any interest in changing the failed system," he said.

The question came at the very end of a nearly two-hour event, part of a lecture series that has featured some of the biggest names in educational policy circles, from national teachers union leader Randi Weingarten to former Washington, D.C., schools chief Michelle Rhee.

Mr. Christie's speech, a patchwork of those he frequently makes, ended with a call for students to disrupt the status quo.

One graduate student, Jenny Hanson, 29 years old, politely asked whether he believed his famed bold words and embrace of the fight has prevented him from achieving his goals. Mr. Christie—who seems at his most comfortable in front of a microphone—lowered his tone and paused for a few seconds.

"Your question's a really, really good one, and it's one that I've struggled with a lot more than people would suspect," he said. "I have to first awaken the public to the fact that the house is on fire."

Afterward, Ms. Hanson said she agreed with Mr. Christie's policies but thought his tone was wrong. "He's probably going to make more enemies than real change," she said.

During his first year in office, Mr. Christie became a hero to Republicans across the country for his frank talk. He said teachers were using students as "drug mules" in the run-up to school-budget referendums, urging people to vote against school budgets in districts where teachers refused to take pay freezes.

On Friday, Mr. Christie took pains to set up a contrast between teachers and their union.

Far from advocating for an elimination of teacher tenure, he said it was an important protection that should be earned.

"When the union says I want to eliminate tenure, that's not true," he said. "I don't want teachers to be afraid of political firings, retaliatory firings, inappropriate firings."

The union could be forgiven for confusing his message. In his State of the State in January, he said: "The time to eliminate teacher tenure is now."

The New Jersey Education Association suggested changing tenure by putting arbitrators in charge to speed up the process, but Mr. Christie has brushed that off. He wants teachers to have to earn tenure by keeping three years of good ratings, losing it with one year of a very poor rating or two years of poor ratings. Teachers would be evaluated with in-class observation and student test scores.