NEW YORK—A report indicating Greece was considering bailing out of the euro zone pushed the euro to its second day of sharp declines.

The euro tumbled on an article by the German magazine der Spiegel that Greece was considering leaving the 17-nation currency bloc—and denials by German and Greek officials didn't stem the decline.

"It's definitely scared the market," said  John McCarthy, managing director of foreign exchange at ING Capital Markets in New York. Mr. McCarthy noted that the euro "couldn't rally at all" even before the Spiegel report. It was stalled as other risk-related currencies posted gains following a stronger-than-forecast monthly U.S. employment report.

The euro lost more than 1% versus the dollar Friday, capping a dizzying two-day spiral that saw it fall from above $1.49 Thursday—its highest level since December 2009—to below $1.44. 

The common currency first fell sharply when European Central Bank President  Jean-Claude Trichet Thursday failed to use the word's "strong vigilance" in referring to inflation, which was widely interpreted to signal no interest-rate increase in June. The euro tumbled further later in the day, caught up in a major selloff of risk-related assets. 

Late Friday, the euro was at $1.4353 from $1.4526 late Thursday. The dollar was at ¥80.57 from ¥80.13, while the euro was at ¥115.64 from ¥116.39. The euro hit its lowest level against the yen since March 29.

The U.K. pound bought $1.6398 from $1.6376. The dollar was at 0.8770 Swiss franc from 0.8709 franc.

The ICE Dollar Index, which measures the dollar's performance against a basket of currencies, was at 74.91 from 74.194.

Greece has recently been discussing the possibility of renegotiating the terms of the bailout it received in 2010 from the European Union and International Monetary Fund. Some analysts said the report that Greece may exit the currency group is nothing more than a tactic to renegotiate the terms of its bailout.

Even if it is simply a negotiating ploy, talk of Greece giving up the euro raises sovereign-debt problems that could weigh on the common currency in the near term—re-igniting fears that had dissipated in recent weeks as the euro has surged.

"The potential disastrous result that would occur from such a pullout is the gun to the head of the EU/IMF to soften and extend the terms," of Greece's current financial assistance, said  Andy Busch, global foreign exchange strategist at BMO Capital Markets in Chicago. "For the markets, there is no choice but to sell the euro currency, the European financial stocks and European debt to cover the potential massive losses that would occur." 

The sharpness of the euro's fall could be explained by how heavily the market had bet the euro would continue its rise. The Commodity Futures Trading Commission on Friday released data indicating a 48% jump in long positions on the common currency, or wagers that the euro would increase in value. The data were compiled as of Tuesday, days before the euro's downturn. The currency's decline may have been accelerated by investors unwinding those bets.

The dollar started New York trading Friday mostly lower, particularly against riskier commodity currencies after the strong monthly U.S. jobs report relieved some worries that global economic growth might be slowing.

—Andrew J. Johnson contributed to this article. 