Among the many fabled ocean liners that graced the North Atlantic in the 20th century, the S.S. France stands out. It was famous for its streamlined beauty, graceful lines and sturdy construction. And it was one of the last vessels built specifically for carrying passengers back and forth between Europe and New York rather than for mere cruising. The ship, which began service in 1962, entered a period of hiatus in the mid-1970s and then sprang to life anew under different ownership, no longer French but Scandinavian, rechristened the SS Norway, a cruise ship at last. The change in status reflected the sad fact that the competitiveness of passenger ships was nearly fatally affected by the OPEC cartel and the epochal rise in oil prices in 1973-74. Back then, only the subsidized Queen Elizabeth 2 survived extinction.

By John Maxtone-Graham  Norton, 224 pages, $75 

The SS Norway was certainly a creditable addition to the world's fleet of cruise ships, but it was definitely as the SS France that this ship reigned as the queen of luxury oceanliners, a worthy successor to the its legendary predecessors, the Ile de France and the Normandie.

What a superbly Gallic tradition! Among the many grand vessels that crossed the North Atlantic in the heyday of 20th-century luxury travel, the French ships occupied a special place. Beautiful to look at from the outside, they possessed interiors notable for their stunning decor and exquisite attention to detail, with splendid public rooms and cabins that offered the last word in comfort. And then there was that ineffable "l'atmosphere transat," a term derived from the name of the ships' owner, the Compagnie Générale Transatlantique. Across the English Channel and across the Atlantic the name was reduced simply to "The French Line." 

There was a lot to the atmosphere, not least the pungent dark tobacco in Gauloises and Gitanes cigarettes, the smell of which lingered everywhere in those prelapsarian days. An air of elegance pervaded every nook and cranny of the ship, with its chic appointments and unique touches. Chief among these was "La Grande Descente," the distinctive stairway that led down into the first-class dining saloon. The stairway was angled so that each of the elegantly clad passengers—black tie for men and evening dresses for ladies—had their moment as the cynosure of the room. And that was before anyone sat down to enjoy the superb food.

I remember all this from personal experience when, barely out of my teens and encased in my newly purchased tuxedo, I drank in that incomparable "atmosphere transat." I recall, for instance, that the first-class dinner menu on the SS France included, on its back page, a French poem, different each day. One evening's literary selection was from Baudelaire. Another evening, the famous 16th-century poem by Joachim du Bellay that begins, appropriately: "Heureux qui comme Ulysse a fait un beau voyage." ("Happy is he who, like Ulysses, has made a beautiful voyage.")

If my single experience is indelibly stamped on my memory after more than 40 years, John Maxtone- Graham, the author of "France/Norway"—a lavishly illustrated tribute to the great ship—has a great deal more to draw on. He made countless trips on the SS France and, later, the SS Norway, including the France's last westbound trans-Atlantic passenger crossing in 1974. He brings to the subject a vast knowledge of oceanliners in general and of the ship's particular qualities. The result is an enormously detailed, authoritative description of everything from the SS France's construction to its successive outfittings, alongside sea-faring triumphs and travails. In short, everything one could want to know about a legendary vessel.

Mr. Maxtone-Graham's searching mind and evocative memory does not limit itself to the watery world. He waxes eloquent about Southampton's long-since-demolished Ocean Terminal, "a steel and glass art deco masterpiece," with its characteristically British "refreshment counter for a first (or final) pint of warm beer or restorative cup of tea. . . . Boat trains from [London's] Waterloo Station snaked through the docks to the terminal's inboard platforms, permitting passengers to ascend via escalator into successive levels of convenient splendor that put New York's dreary pier sheds to shame." Indeed, he credits the terminal with luring the SS France to dock alongside Southampton's quay rather than anchoring off the Isle of Wight and ferrying passengers by tender, as the Ile de France and Normandie had done to avoid the port's notoriously tricky navigational features.

But Mr. Maxtone-Graham's greatest attention is naturally devoted to the ship itself. He claims that its bright and airy first-class smoking room was "a joyous Innisfree" and "unquestionably" the ship's "most appealing space." He explains that, by the mid-1960s, "transatlantic smoking rooms had metamorphosed from turn-of-the- century, men-only sancta for smoking, drinking, gambling and occasional vulgarity into larger, less smoky and prettier public rooms admitting their wives. Make no mistake, these were substantial, well-thought-out facilities that bore little resemblance to the token, vestigial cigar lairs for the incurables aboard today's cruise ships." His partiality to the smoking room leads him to be rather unfair to the liner's other large gathering space, the Grand Salon, illustrated disadvantageously in the book with shots that do not convey either its elegance or its comfort.

He is quite right to celebrate the smoking room as a "bright, double-height venue" with "superior sea views" where one might find "the vessel's most amusing passengers gathered for cocktails, games, tea, conversation." Personally, I preferred the charms of the Grand Salon. There were plenty of amusing and interesting characters to be found there. I remember an emir from the Persian Gulf, with his robes and entourage; an eminent master from one of Yale's colleges; and a New York trial judge who talked about how many drug cases were then coming before him. (This was the 1960s, after all.) The room's blend of the imposing and the cozy made it the perfect setting for cocktails as well as afternoon tea. Its deep chairs and sofas offered little islands of intimacy in a sea of grandeur.

Other verdicts from Mr. Maxtone-Graham are spot-on. He celebrates the quietly elegant writing and card rooms, the surprisingly grand library rotunda and the truly spectacular Salle de Spectacle, a two-level auditorium that showed a new French and a new Hollywood movie every day, often "pre- release." (Incidentally, the first-class passengers sat in the balcony.) He lavishes a great deal of attention—again, rightly—on the comfortable cabins and their well-appointed bathrooms, which featured an ice-water spigot. He stops to note the absence of the old-fashioned sea-water faucets for the bathtubs, once considered a spa-like feature of trans-Atlantic travel. The bathtubs, it was true, could now be "filled in a trice because of torrents delivered through a heroic spout," in contrast to the painfully slow faucets of early liners. But "saltwater faucets had vanished; the French Line no longer offered that traditional ancient saline option."

I confess to having regretted the loss of the "ancient saline option," having fond memories of it from a previous crossing on the Queen Mary. There was something so exotic about the hot salt baths, notwithstanding their stickiness and the difficulties of getting soap to lather. Perhaps it was the uniqueness of the shipboard experience, or the powerful smell of heated seawater, or the fact that all the seawater's minerals kept the water hotter than hot for a long time. In any case, something was lost when that pleasure was gone, even if the compact bathrooms on the SS France, with their heated towel racks and gushing freshwater, had their own charms.

But for many passengers, the pièce de résistance onboard the SS France was its superlative cuisine. Hailed by none other than Craig Claiborne as "the finest French restaurant in the world," the first-class dining room—or, to give its correct title, the Salle à Manger Chambord—more than lived up to the glories of the classic Loire chateau that supplied its name. As Mr. Maxtone- Graham notes, the decision not to offer an à la carte alternative to the dining room's fixed menu—as many Atlantic liners had done since the early 20th century—was itself a statement about the splendors of Chambord's offerings: Why should anyone pay extra to order à la carte when Chambord offered a virtual four-star experience?

"Any passenger requesting a specialité was, if humanly possible, accommodated," Mr. Maxtone-Graham writes. "No request was too special." Quoting Ian Fleming's maxim that "scrambled eggs will never let you down," Mr. Maxtone-Graham admits that his special request, often repeated onboard the SS France, was for scrambled eggs prepared tableside with plenty of Normandy butter and cream, surrounded "with a singular garnish: four spoonfuls of icy Beluga caviar, set like compass points in four directions." Looking back, he says: "Ian Fleming was right: scrambled eggs, especially those scrambled eggs, never let me down."

As for me, prompted by a tip in Claiborne's article about how to maximize the dining room's caviar experience, I began each dinner with a large baked Idaho potato, garnished with a generous dollop of butter and sour cream and filled with an enormous portion of the finest beluga caviar— before going on to sample other delights, all washed down with copious amounts of complimentary wine. Even at the time, the price of the passage (about $500) seemed an incredible bargain for such luxury, which if available at all in today's very different shipboard world would cost a small fortune, even adjusted for inflation.

—Mr. Rubin is a writer in Pasadena, Calif.