SINGAPORE –Vietnam has rejected Indian corn due to quality-related issues several times in past three months, trading executives said Wednesday, with the most recent occurrence involving at least 34 containers being rejected at Hai Phong port a few days ago. 

Corn trade between the two countries has been reduced to a trickle compared with earlier shipments of up to 250,000 tons a month, when India was a major supplier of the grain to Vietnam. 

The recent logjam over quality has forced importers to make costlier purchases from South America, pushing up domestic Vietnamese prices and hitting trade margins. 

"Fresh purchases of Indian corn by Vietnamese buyers have almost stopped, and only a small volume from earlier contracts is being shipped from India," said an executive with a global commodity trading company. 

Another trader said Vietnamese authorities have complained about a pest, tragoderma granarium, found in some cargoes of Indian corn and soymeal. 

Indian exporters confirmed the fresh rejection, but said it is impossible for pests to survive at the current level of pesticide application. 

"We increased the methyl bromide fumigation dosage significantly above international norms, as suggested by Vietnam," one of the Indian exporters said. 

Since early December, more than 150,000 tons of Indian corn and soymeal has been either rejected outright or accepted only after re-fumigation, traders said. 

Both corn importers and exporters are wary of future rejections and looking at other origins and destinations, with Vietnamese buyers seeking corn from Argentina and Thailand. 

India exports corn fumigated with aluminium phosphine, considered milder than methyl bromide, across Asia; no other Asian countries have complained of pests. 

"Until recently, rejected cargoes were re-fumigated at Vietnamese ports at the seller's expense, but the authorities have now decided to stop giving permission to do so," said an executive familiar with the developments. 

With Vietnamese authorities insisting on outright rejection and fresh shipments, traders said they have already incurred large demurrage costs and plan to sell the cargoes to Indonesia as the corn is still in good condition and complies with international norms. 

Indonesian buyers imported more than 200,000 tons of Indian corn last month and have so far arranged for 300,000 tons to be shipped in March and April. 

Offers are currently being made around $325-$330 a ton, cost and freight, for shipment of corn from India to Indonesia in bulk, while earlier trades were done between $290 and $310/ton, C&F. 

Vietnamese authorities couldn't be immediately reached for comment. According to official documents reviewed by Dow Jones Newswires, corn and soymeal imported from India are on a list specifying any shipments are to be subjected to detailed pest risk analysis and a phytosanitary import permits. 

 Write to  Sameer Mohindru at sameer.mohindru@dowjones.com 