BEIJING—China's central bank governor emphasized the importance of interest rates in fighting inflation, fueling expectations for further tightening after the government said that consumer prices continued to rise at a rapid pace last month.

People's Bank of China Governor Zhou Xiaochuan also played down the role of the Chinese currency's exchange rate in curbing rising prices, saying at a news conference Friday that the government's anti-inflation efforts "don't particularly emphasize the exchange-rate tool." His comments echo other recent remarks from Chinese officials that appear aimed in part at parrying U.S. calls for Beijing to tame prices by letting the yuan strengthen more quickly.

China's National Bureau of Statistics said Friday that the consumer-price index in the world's second-largest economy rose 4.9% in February from February 2010. Last month's rise was in line with the 4.9% rise in January, and was just slightly higher than economists' expectations. The bureau said investment and factory output also rose at a rapid clip.

Despite a series of rate increases and other tightening measures in recent months, inflation has continued to run at its highest levels in about two years, feeding concern about the government's ability to tackle what officials have called their main economic priority this year.

China's February economic data are distorted by the timing of its Lunar New Year holiday, which fell earlier in the month this year than in 2010. The holiday, China's biggest of the year, alters spending patterns, especially for food, limiting the ability of economists to extrapolate longer-term trends.

Still, analysts said the February numbers suggested that the government has yet to get prices under control. The CPI reading "reflects that inflationary pressure is still acute in China. This probably has surprised the decision makers in Beijing," Credit Suisse economists  Dong Tao and  Christiaan Tuntono wrote in a note. They said the data set the stage for another rate increase some time after the close of the National People's Congress, which ends Monday.

Mr. Zhou buttressed expectations for further action in his comments to reporters on the sidelines of the annual session of China's legislature, the National People's Congress.

"Following our economy's successful recovery from the global economic crisis, inflation has also risen," Mr. Zhou said. "In this situation, interest-rate policy is definitely an important tool that needs to be used." He acknowledged that rate increases may lead to a surge in capital inflows—something Beijing wants to avoid—but said China can use its capital controls to cope with the issue.

Inflation is dogging many of the world's emerging economies, in part because they have drawn large inflows of capital from the developed world, where interest rates remain low. But economists say much of the blame for China's inflation woes comes from an explosion of credit as China's state-run banks heeded a government call to juice up the economy amid the global recession.

Inflation has historically been a trigger of public unrest in China—albeit at rates much higher than the current pace. Premier Wen Jiabao, in his speech Saturday to start the National People's Congress, said the government would "make it our top priority in macroeconomic control to keep overall price levels stable." He said the government hopes to cap CPI growth for the full year around 4%.

But the government needs to balance the inflation fight against fears that tightening too much could strangle economic growth in China, which has driven global growth in recent years. So far, the government has raised interest rates three times since October and steadily ratcheted up the share of deposits banks must hold in reserve, rather than lend. But benchmark lending rates are still only slightly above the rate of inflation, and the benchmark one-year deposit rate—at 3%—is well below it.

Mr. Zhou said on Friday that the central bank aims to keep bank deposit rates above the level of inflation in the medium-to-long term, but that real deposit rates may be negative at times in the short term.

U.S. officials and economists have argued that China, for its own sake, should allow the yuan to rise more quickly to curtail price rises—a more valuable yuan would lower costs of imported goods in the local currency. But Chinese officials fear that accelerating the yuan's appreciation could hurt the country's exporters. The government has let the yuan rise less than 4% since unshackling it from the dollar in June.

Friday's data suggested more inflation is in the pipeline. China's producer price index rose 7.2% from a year earlier, up from January's 6.6% rise and higher than expectations for a 7% rise.

Value-added industrial output in the first two months of the year rose 14.1%, accelerating from December's 13.5% increase. Steel production in particular surged, with daily average production of crude steel in February rising to a record of 1.94 million tons.

 Write to  Jason Dean at jason.dean@wsj.com 