 Lawyers for one of three senior managers fired by Renault filed a complaint for slanderous accusation, challenging the French auto maker to substantiate its accusation that he sold corporate secrets. One of the lawyers for Michel Balthazard, a leader in the company's electric vehicle program, said the suit did not target Renault, but was against an anonymous person in order to know "who has made slanderous accusations to Renault concerning our client." 

Chrysler Group and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency said they are working together to commercialize an unusual type of hybrid vehicle technology aimed at reducing fuel consumption. The system recovers energy as a vehicle brakes and uses the resulting hydraulic pressure to help power the vehicle.

 AMR's fourth-quarter loss narrowed as the parent of American Airlines saw revenue improve amid a stronger business travel market and improved fare trends. The third-largest U.S. airline by traffic reported a loss of $97 million, compared with a prior-year loss of $344 million. 

EasyJet's bosses waived their rights to bonuses for 2010 after the budget airline suffered from a series of disruptions and a slew of negative publicity last year. 

Japan Airlines' chairman said the company may not be able to meet its goal of raising 50 billion yen ($605 million) in capital from the private sector by the end of March, highlighting JAL's difficulties in returning to full financial health a year after it filed for bankruptcy protection. 

IndiGo, India's largest budget carrier by market share, said it will start flights to overseas destinations in August. The airline has received approval from India's civil aviation ministry to operate flights from several cities in India to Singapore, Bangkok, Dubai and Muscat.

 Wells Fargo's fourth-quarter earnings rose 21% to $3.41 billion as the fourth-largest U.S. bank by assets posted stronger-than-expected revenue amid the release of $850 million from reserves due to improved portfolio performance. 

Citigroup's chief executive officer, Vikram Pandit, plans to name John Havens as president and chief operating officer as part of a structural overhaul meant to address the bank's efforts to expand.

James Forese, a 25-year veteran of the Salomon Brothers securities business which became part of Citi in 1998, will gain greater authority over the institutional business in a promotion from his current role as co-head of global markets. 

U.S. Bancorp's fourth-quarter earnings rose 62% to $974 million as credit quality continued to improve for the fifth-largest U.S. commercial bank by assets.

State Street's fourth-quarter profit plunged 84% to $81 million on charges, but adjusted results topped analysts' expectations. 

Spanish savings bank CatalunyaCaixa sold a 1.6% stake in oil company Repsol YPF for about €448.2 million ($599.9 million). Broker UBS said in a filing with regulators that it placed close to 20 million Repsol shares at €22.56 apiece with qualified investors through an accelerated book-building. 

Chevron said it hopes to advance the start of a $3.1 billion natural-gas project in the Gulf of Thailand to this year from 2012, in the latest step by the major U.S. energy producer to cash in on booming Asian demand for cleaner-burning fuels. 

 Swiss watchmakers are planning to raise prices to defend margins coming under attack from the strength of the Swiss franc, with the first price rises likely to come in April. 

Swatch Group reported a double-digit rise in sales for 2010 and said that, after a strong start in January, it was confident for 2011. Swatch said gross sales rose 18.8% to 6.44 billion Swiss francs ($6.7 billion) from the year-earlier period. 

Hedge-fund assets grew at a record rate in the fourth quarter, Hedge Fund Research Inc. said, as strong investment performance and new investor capital pushed industry assets to $1.917 trillion, just shy of their mid-2008 peak. 

Base salaries for senior positions in the City of London rose sharply at the end of last year, according to research, amid the intense public and political pressure over the way financial firms compensate their staff. December's peak average salary for senior staff was the highest since City of London recruitment firm Morgan McKinley began recording the data in January 2008.

 Goldman Sachs' fourth-quarter profit tumbled 52% to $2.39 billion as revenue fell more than analysts expected, dropping 10% to $8.64 billion. 

Goldman's annual compensation per employee fell 13.6% in 2010 from a year before as the firm set aside 5% less for payouts for a higher headcount. 

American Express said it will cut about 550 jobs as it consolidates some facilities as the card company projected fourth-quarter earnings that slightly missed Wall Street estimates. 

Japan's SBI Holdings hopes to raise between US$300 million and US$500 million from offering shares of its financial unit in both Hong Kong and Japan, said people familiar with the matter, the first time a Japanese company offered shares in the Chinese territory. 

The European Commission halted trading in its carbon market, its chief weapon against climate change, after allegations that permits worth €6.7 million ($9 million) had been stolen. The commission said the suspension of most transactions would last until at least Jan. 26 and only the allocation and surrender of carbon allowances would be allowed.

 Singapore Exchange set an Aug. 15 date for the start of what it said will be the world's fastest trading platform, a $195 million project called SGX Reach that could help push Asia into adopting the fast electronic-trading platforms that have already swept through the U.S. and Europe. 

Pearson, the publisher of the Financial Times newspaper and Penguin books, raised its profit forecast for 2010 by 6%, citing strong sales in its education and publishing operations. Pearson previously raised its profit forecast in October.

Jeremy Hunt, the U.K. culture secretary, launched a thorough review of media regulations and laid out plans for a new communications act to regulate the fast-changing media industry. 

He also announced plans for a new television station dedicated to local news content. 

Chinese statistics showed a 9.3% slide in the country's rare-earth metal exports last year to 39,813 metric tons, but also showed overseas sales were a third higher than stipulated in the government's quota allocation. 

 Swiss drug giant Roche Holding said its promising new skin-cancer drug helps patients with advanced forms of the disease live longer and without their illness worsening, according to late-stage trial data.  

 EBay reported a drop in profit and 5% rise in revenue amid a surge in PayPal payments business and smaller improvements in its core marketplace business. For the last three months of 2010, eBay reported income of $559 million, down from $1.36 billion for the same period the previous year.  

 Nokia, the struggling Finnish mobile phone giant, has abruptly canceled the U.S. launch of the X7 touchscreen smartphone that was slated to launch exclusively this year with AT&T, people familiar with the situation said. 

 ASML Holding ushered in the European technology earnings season with record results and said it plans to double its dividend and launch a share buyback. The world's largest maker of lithography systems that map out electronic circuits on silicon wafers said net profit for the quarter ended Dec. 31 rose sharply to €406.8 million ($544.5 million) from €50.5 million a year earlier. 

 Chinese Internet giant Alibaba Group said it will invest as much as $4.6 billion to build a network of warehouses across China to improve logistics for its customers.  

 VimpelCom's major shareholder Alfa Group attempted to calm tensions that recently flared as rival shareholder Telenor accused its partners of deception and tricks in a merger with the telecom assets of Egyptian billionaire Naguib Sawiris. 

In an interview, Chief Executive Alexei Reznikovich of Alfa's Altimo telecom holding company declined to make any concessions to Telenor, and hinted that Sawiris may gain board seats, strengthening the Egyptian's position in the company at the expense of the others on the board. 

SK Telecom submitted a bid for Indonesian conglomerate Lippo Group's cable television and Internet company First Media, people familiar with the situation said, in a deal that could see the South Korean telecom carrier expand in high-growth emerging markets as growth slows at home. 

Softbank, the exclusive supplier of the iPhone in Japan, is selling more than $660 million in bonds to institutional investors in another sign that lower-rated companies are returning to the corporate-bond market. 