 Related Stories: 



 Two years after retiring as a PETCO executive, Stephen Gartner sat on the stoop of his new home in Tennessee, bored with the prospect of yet another round of golf. He decided he needed a second career -- and a haircut. Surely a trim was the easier proposition, but where? Gartner hadn't seen a Great Clips outlet – his salon of choice during his corporate days in Chicago – within a hundred miles of their new home. He had never considered running a franchise before, let alone a hair salon, but felt he had stumbled onto something and decided to look into it. What he found was a second life as a franchisee.

From hair salons to real estate firms, fast food chains and interior decorators, franchisors are reporting a surge in the percentage of older owners in recent years – at Great Clips alone, the number of owners over 50 increased by more than 15% last year. Today's 50-plus Americans are wealthier, healthier and more active than ever before, experts say. They also have better credit and are more qualified to run a business. 



 Name: Stephen Gartner  Age: 60 

 Old job: VP of Logistics, PETCO Animal Supplies (San Diego)  Locations: 1,050  Employees: 22,000 

 New job: Co-owner, Great Clips (Johnson City and Kingsport, Tennessee)  Locations: 2  Employees: 14 

There are a number of reasons to choose any particular franchise, including the opportunity to turn a lifelong interest like wine into a Vino 100 operation, for example. Not the case with Gartner, who looked first at the bottom line. "This was a business with record quarter-after-quarter growth, even during a recession," Gartner says about Great Clips, a Minneapolis-based chain with over 2,400 outlets across the U.S. and Canada. Despite the recession, the company recorded more than a dozen consecutive quarters of customer growth, prompting Franchise Times magazine to rank it among the nation's top 100 business franchises. 

Each salon costs between $100,000 and $200,000 to launch, depending on location, including everything from franchise fees, real estate and marketing costs to bulk shipments of shampoo and conditioner. As such, Great Clips requires potential franchisees to have at least $50,000 in liquid funds available and a personal net worth of $300,000 or more, says Rob Goggins, vice president of franchise development at Great Clips. 

Of course, franchises are not risk-free. While they have a better success rate than startups, up to 20% if franchises struggle to stay afloat, according to SCORE, a national small-business coaching network. That risk is even greater for older franchisees, says SCORE district director William Morland: "If you buy a franchise at age 25 and it doesn't work, you can go get a job and save up some more money to try again. The reality is another job, or the time to save more money, is probably not available to an older person," Morland says. 

On top of a hefty investment in a location, owners usually pay an upfront fee as high as 25% to the franchisor. They're also charged ongoing royalties, typically from 5% to 9% of sales. Even if business is slow, the franchisor's corporate playbook sets the rules for branding and product lines, leaving new owners little room to maneuver. And for all their business-in-a-box appeal, franchises, like all businesses, require a big time commitment: 14-hour days are common, experts say. 

Gartner was used to long hours. Decades of overseeing distribution, warehousing and global supply chains for large corporations gave Gartner the analytical skills to tackle the finances, operations and real estate side of the business. "The salon business is very cash-oriented. You don't have a lot of receivables, so it's not that tough to manage," he says. 

In 2009, Gartner opened a $500,000 line of credit with a local bank – far more than they needed he says, but providing a nice cash cushion. In March, the couple paid $145,000 to launch their first salon, in the Shoppers at West Market mall in Johnson City, plus a one-time franchise location fee of $20,000. Because Great Clips was unknown in the area, they spent most of the upfront investment on advertising and marketing. "We came into a market that was unfamiliar with the brand. We had to get it out there," he says.

Meanwhile, managing a team of hairdressers and stylists turned out to be not so different from dealing with forklift operators, truck drivers and other warehouse personnel: "One is lifting boxes and the other's doing hair. But my job is all about how to motivate people to work well on an hourly basis, and that's very similar," he says. 

A second salon followed in October 2010, and Gartner says he's currently working on opening a third. "We're really in the process of growing now," he says. "We're having fun. I can tell you our dinner conversations are very different than what they used to be." 

Gartner is also happier on the golf course these days – when he has time to play.

 Be open to opportunities. Gartner never would have predicted a career in logistics would have made him a good fit for Great Clips. But with a little bit of research, he realized the two weren't so different. "Make sure what you're looking at is right for you and you know what you're getting into," he says. Gartner researched the hair products and services industry with the same eye to detail he used in monitoring the comings and goings of millions of pet food and accessories packages at PETCO. 

 Understand your capital. There's a big difference between working within the budget of a large corporate subdivision and making sure you have cash to make payroll. "You want to be sure you have enough to break-even first and then to finance your projected growth," says Bill Morland, a SCORE district director based in Orange County, Calif. Morland says the most important document for any new business is a cash flow statement, which should be checked weekly. "You can be making a profit, but if you're not managing your cash you can 'succeed' yourself out of business," he says. 

 You don't have to start from scratch. Buying a franchise gave Gartner a head start, with an already-developed concept and brand. Great Clips also offers several days of online and face-to-face training in salon management training, says Goggins. That said, bringing a franchise into a new market is more like launching a startup, he adds. "The advantage is you've got the pick of the market in terms of real estate and an untapped base, but you're also working from the ground up." 

 "Take Two" is an ongoing series of profiles of first-time business owners over 50 by Angus Loten, a small business reporter for the Wall Street Journal. Email him at angus.loten@wsj.com. 



