WASHINGTON—U.S. intelligence analysts, poring over computer files and documents seized from Osama bin Laden's Pakistani hideout, have started piecing together al Qaeda's terror playbook, including new details about how the network sought to exploit security loopholes to sneak militants into the U.S. and Western countries. 

The information reviewed so far is also providing leads on al Qaeda leaders and their connections across different parts of the group's network, officials said.

While President Obama has decided not to release photographs of Osama bin Laden taken after the al Qaeda leader was shot to death Sunday by U.S. forces, other photos taken at the compound have been released by Reuters. 



While many of the plans have been predicted by U.S. intelligence analysts, the information coming from bin Laden's hideout is rare validation that provides national-security officials with specific terror schemes to assess and counter.

Seized documents show al Qaeda was looking at using international driving permits, which can be obtain with relative ease, to help sleeper cells obtain other forms of government-issued identification that would make it easier for them to travel, according to officials familiar with the matter.

The militant group also showed enthusiasm for carrying out attacks on dates of symbolic significance, prompting U.S. officials to worry in particular about July 4 and Sept. 11. The discovery reverses U.S. officials' previous belief that al Qaeda wasn't fixated on anniversaries and would rather strike when it made tactical sense to do so.

Photos from around the world.

"There is, strategically, a recognition that carrying something out on a specific date would be something that they would do," said a U.S. counterterrorism official.

Members of the special-operations forces who conducted the strike met President Barack Obama and Vice President Joe Biden on Friday at Fort Campbell, Ky. Some briefed the president on the operation and later, Messrs. Obama and Biden met with the operation's full force and awarded the units a Presidential Unit Citation, the highest such honor that can be given to such groups. 

"Our strategy is working and there is no greater evidence of that than justice finally being delivered to Osama bin Laden," Mr. Obama said in an address to 2,000 uniformed members of the 10st Airborne Division, some of whom had been in the U.S. fewer than 24 hours following their third or fourth tours in Afghanistan.

An initial review of the trove seized from the Abbottabad, Pakistan, compound when bin Laden was killed by Navy SEALs this week suggests he was more active in day-to-day plotting than previously thought, officials said.

Materials taken from the hideout have been moved to a secure facility at Central Intelligence Agency headquarters in Langley, Va., just outside Washington. The process of reviewing all of the materials could take a month or longer because some documents are encrypted and written materials have to be translated from Arabic into English, officials said.

The around-the-clock mining operation involves dozens of specialists drawn from across the U.S. national-security agencies. In addition to the CIA, the team is drawn from the National Security Agency, the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Department of Homeland Security and others.

Since bin Laden's death, counterterrorism officials monitoring jihadi websites and Internet chat rooms have seen a surge in threats leveled against the West. After the bin Laden mission, chat rooms initially went silent before the recent spike. 

A U.S. counterterrorism official cautioned against reading too much into chat-room bluster, however, on the assumption that actual planning for revenge attacks wouldn't take place in such public forums.

As the CIA task force combs through the recovered material, the agency's top priority is hunting for hints of specific plots.

The next priority is to amass information that shows how different players in the al Qaeda network and its affiliates are connected, U.S. officials said. Of particular interest is any information that would connect bin Laden directly to affiliates such as al Qaeda's Yemeni branch, al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, or militant groups in Africa such as Somalia-based al Shabaab.

The prevailing belief is that bin Laden had been delegating a considerable amount of operational responsibility to affiliates who could more easily travel undetected.

—Carol E. Lee in Fort Campbell, Ky., contributed to this article.

 Write to  Adam Entous at adam.entous@wsj.com and Siobhan Gorman at siobhan.gorman@wsj.com 