Part of my job as a teacher of creative writing is to curate a reading series for our students and the interested public. We often get great writers to come share their work and to talk about anything from the sources of their inspiration to the books on their bedside tables. 

During the question-and-answer period, however, the discussion almost always turns to process: Our audience wants to know every detail of how an author actually sits down to write a book. In writing fiction, there is the mystical element that none of us ever quite understands—how we turn language and ideas into stories and then, hopefully, into art.

And so, to gird themselves against the anxiety of this fraught endeavor, writers often come up with their own personal rules of process. Think of it as a means of self-discipline, with a dollop of magical thinking and even obsessive-compulsive disorder thrown in to keep the spirit afloat. 

Highlights of our author series include a session with the novelist Jennifer Egan, who told us that she writes by hand on yellow pads without rereading a word until she finishes a complete draft of a book. She rereads these pages only when she comes back to type them into the computer, editing as she goes (and always finding some of the writing indecipherable). 

Why do it this way? Because she's afraid of looking back and finding how bad the pages are; she writes until she is so far in that she can't get out. And then she goes back and revises endlessly. 

The formidable Cynthia Ozick doesn't even consider a second draft. As she told us, referring to herself in the second person: "You must never go back and change anything." Even if she had a new idea along the way, she said, she didn't allow herself to rework a book's structure. 

I work on a computer, and I start every day rereading and revising, from the opening line, which in the first stabs of a first draft, often feels like weed-whacking. When I get to about 70 pages, this becomes impractical, so I start five pages in and continue to inch my way forward. 

You might think this makes for strong beginnings and weaker endings. The weaker-endings part is sometimes true, alas, but I've never written a book where I didn't ultimately have to lop off or thin out the first 60 to 100 pages, no matter how hard I tried to cut to the chase.

It seems that this slow revving up is how I get to know my characters, and often what I have ended up writing is a lot of superfluous back-story that informs their personalities and choices but never makes it to the printed page. 

Starting from page one is an idea I stole from the novelist Elizabeth Dewberry. When she told me that beginning from the beginning was how she commenced every day, I thought I'd give it a try. That was two decades ago.

Since then, many things have changed about the way I write. I used to write at night (now I sleep), spend all day writing (now I'm lucky to get a few solid hours in the morning), and smoke (no more). But I still move glacially forward every day that I sit down at my computer, rethinking and refining each paragraph, line, and word as I go along.

—Ms. Schulman teaches creative writing at the New School in New York City. Her fifth novel, "This Beautiful Life," will be published in August.