GLEN BURNIE, Md.—When Chesapeake Bay Candle decided to build a U.S. factory, founders  Mei Xu and  David Wang thought it would take nine months and cost $2.5 million.

But $3.5 million and 13 months later, the couple is still waiting for their final occupancy permit. A temporary sign is draped across the front of the beige concrete structure, a former liquor warehouse on the outskirts of Baltimore.

"I think our government needs to ask itself, 'Are we really ready for business to come back from Asia?'," says Ms. Xu, a Chinese immigrant who with her husband founded Pacific Trade International, the Rockville, Md.-based company behind the Chesapeake Bay brand, in 1994. "I'm not sure it is."

Chesapeake Bay Candle, known for scented and textured candles that sell for $9.99 at Kohl's and Target, has set up three factories in Asia over the past 16 years. But when it came to building a plant in the U.S. to expand its customer base and better serve existing clients, the founders were unprepared for the regulatory hurdles.

The new facility was supposed to be up and running last fall, but now isn't expected to open until the end of June. Expensive upgrades required to meet local building codes have dented margins and forced the company to rejigger its supply chain to backup deliveries with products from Asia.

Chesapeake Bay Candle's move to expand via U.S.-manufactured goods comes as the cost advantages of producing in Asia are narrowing. Over the past year, wages in China and Vietnam have gone up as much as 40%, the company says. Freight costs have increased between 5% and 6%.

Despite its All-American name, Chesapeake Bay Candle's products to date have always been produced in Asia, first in China and then in Vietnam after a successful move by the U.S. candle industry to raise tariffs on Chinese-made candles.

But as sales grew, to $84 million in 2010 from $65 million in 2005, the company decided to expand production to a new U.S. plant that will employ 100 people. The new factory will allow the company to sell to smaller chains that focus on U.S.-made products and also to fulfill orders from bigger chains, which have increasingly been operating with leaner inventories.

"To do well in this market, you need to be able to produce and ship the next day," says Ms. Xu. "That means making it here."

Candles are one industry in which U.S. producers dominate their home market. The National Candle Association estimates the U.S. market is about $2 billion, with imports accounting for 20% or less of that. Imports have been low since 2004, when "the anti-dumping duties came into play," said the association's president,  Frederic Contino. That's when duties for Chinese-made candles entering the U.S. more than doubled to the current 108.3%.

To continue to supply the U.S. market, the company decided to open the first of two factories in Vietnam. The existing Chinese factory still supplies China and other non-U.S. markets.

In its efforts to build a plant in the U.S., Chesapeake Bay faced challenges from the start. The factory's original design called for storing large quantities of the many fragrance oils needed to make scented candles. But after submitting plans to county officials, the founders learned that storing the oil would require building a containment room with special doors and walls and an emergency drainage system.

Chief Operating Officer  Dale Williams says that the containment room alone was going to cost $250,000, 10 times what he expected the entire storage facility to cost. The company opted instead to cut the amount of oils it will store, even though that could make it more difficult to meet orders in the future.

The company admits it made mistakes, too. Ms. Xu thought that a building formerly used as a liquor warehouse would need few changes to meet current fire codes. In fact, the company had to put in new sprinkler and air-handling systems, as well as handicap-accessible bathrooms and a new roof. In total, Chesapeake Bay now estimates 30% of the project's $3.5 million price tag is related to various aspects of "code compliance."

Some of the added costs are the result of delays. Company officials declined to comment on the cost of rent, but said that comparable buildings go for $35,000 to $50,000 per month.

Ms. Xu blames the system of overlapping rules for the expensive delays, not county officials. "There's no malfeasance," she says, adding that she thinks there ought to be a "concierge service" for small businesses seeking to move jobs to the U.S.

A spokeswoman for Anne Arundel County's department of inspections and permits says the county responded quickly to applications for permits from Chesapeake Bay, but that it took the company six weeks to respond to the county's initial objections to the plant's design. The company says it needed time to make revisions.

The final hurdle is the occupancy permit, which Ms. Xu says she hopes to get later this month. That will allow her to start hiring hourly workers and bring in new customers who need to inspect supplier facilities. The long-awaited grand opening is expected to take place on June 28.

 Write to  Timothy Aeppel at timothy.aeppel@wsj.com 