INDIANAPOLIS—Before the 2009 NFL season began, the Buffalo Bills cut Dominic Rhodes. He hadn't even played in a regular-season game for them yet. In fact, he had never been cut from a football team before, and he reacted to it by plopping down on the couch of his home in Dallas and, for months, doing absolutely nothing.

From that comfy spot, he watched as another of his former teams—the Indianapolis Colts, the organization with whom he had spent his best and most gratifying seasons—reached the Super Bowl last year. "That took me to a whole another place," he said. "I decided in my heart and my head it was time for me to get up and take care of business."

He was standing in front of his locker at the Colts' practice facility here as he spoke—back at the place where he was most comfortable, back to a stage of his career when he could contribute to an NFL team again. With their running game virtually non-existent and their offense more reliant on quarterback Peyton Manning's right arm than it ever had been, the Colts plucked Mr. Rhodes out of pro football purgatory on Dec. 7, signing him away from the Florida Tuskers of the United Football League.

His presence and respectable production—along with the return of tailback Joseph Addai, who missed eight games with a nerve injury in his left shoulder—give the Colts' offense a dimension against the Jets in Saturday's AFC wild-card game that it hasn't previously displayed. The Colts ranked 29th among the NFL's 32 teams in rushing yardage; as a byproduct of that ineffectiveness, Mr. Manning threw 679 passes, the most in any of his 13 seasons in the league. But Mr. Rhodes, who turns 32 later this month, accumulated 172 yards on 37 carries over Indianapolis' final three regular-season games, all Colts victories, and he looks like the same player he had been during his six earlier seasons with the team, Mr. Manning said.

"Everybody keeps talking about a great job bringing Dom back," Mr. Manning said, "and I can't quite figure out why he left."

Mr. Rhodes already had been something of an NFL Horatio Alger story. Having never played Division I college football—he transferred from Tyler Junior College in Tyler, Texas, to Midwestern State, a Division II school in Wichita Falls—he joined the Colts as an undrafted free agent in 2001. He rushed for 1,104 yards in his rookie season, and on Feb. 4, 2007, in the Colts' 29-17 victory over the Chicago Bears in Super Bowl XLI, he made a strong case as the game's most valuable player, rushing for 113 yards and a one-yard touchdown that gave the Colts the lead for good. If nothing else, he would forever be a folk hero here.

A free agent the following offseason, he agreed a two-year contract with the Raiders, but Oakland drafted tailback Darren McFadden and waived Mr. Rhodes after just one year. He returned to the Colts for the 2008 season, then signed a free-agent deal with the Bills. Neither Oakland nor Buffalo has reached the playoffs since 2002, so there's no small irony in Mr. Rhodes' flourishing here and not with those lesser teams.

"The mentalities of the players are a lot different," Mr. Rhodes said. "They don't know how to win. This team, we know how to win. People take it a lot different. They study different. They make plays different. Balls don't fall on the ground as much. Bad things don't happen as much.…Guys strive to be great. Guys strive to be the best. Guys practice to be the best. And in those places, that doesn't happen all the time."

Last January, after Mr. Rhodes realized he didn't want to stop playing football, he contacted Rod Jones, an NFL defensive back for 11 years who now works as a personal trainer in the Dallas area, to begin a program to get himself back into playing shape. Mr. Jones trains several NFL players, including Arizona cornerback Michael Adams and Baltimore offensive lineman Chad Slaughter, and perhaps the most interesting aspect of his background is that he played college football in the mid-1980s at Southern Methodist University.

He had been investigated as part of the infamous booster scandal that led the NCAA to suspend the school's football program in 1987. (He said no SMU booster or alumnus ever offered him money because he wasn't one of "those top, top blue chips.") He does draw on his college experience as a teaching and motivational tool in working with athletes these days, but he doesn't use it as a cautionary tale.

Rather, he said in a phone interview, he points out the unintended benefit of SMU's dirty recruiting practices: A player had to push himself to stand out among so many talented players, especially the ones who had been bought and paid for. During practices, for instance, 300-pound defensive lineman Jerry Ball, who spent 13 years in the NFL, would line up across from a wide receiver and say, I'm about to jam him one-on-one. I'm a cornerback in a lineman's body.

"When you stepped on the field, there was a certain expectancy," Mr. Jones said. "If you get up there with this high-recruit status and you look soft, you'd really get ridiculed. You'd get teased. They expected some top-notch things. You had to perform because everybody back there would knock your head off."

When he finally met Mr. Rhodes in person for the first time, Mr. Jones was surprised that Mr. Rhodes was only 5-foot-9 and 200 pounds. From watching Mr. Rhodes play on TV, "I thought he was about 230 pounds," Mr. Jones said. "He played like a big guy." As part of the training program, Mr. Jones took Mr. Rhodes to Atwell Middle School in Dallas, where he had Mr. Rhodes drag sleds across the school's playing fields and run what Mr. Jones calls "the green mile"—a 240-yard hill with a steep incline. "It was grueling, man," Mr. Rhodes said, but it also renewed his enthusiasm to play professionally, even in the six-team UFL, which debuted in the fall of 2009.

In his eight games with the Tuskers, Mr. Rhodes—one of nine former UFL players on active rosters of NFL playoff teams—set a league record by rushing for 547 yards. He led the league in rushing touchdowns, total touchdowns and all-purpose yards, and when the Colts contacted him about returning, "I was on the first thing smoking the next morning" to fly to Indianapolis. The primary difference between the UFL and the NFL, he said, is not the quality or speed of play but the attention paid to the games and players. In the UFL, only one or two reporters work a locker room each day.

"In the NFL," he said as a dozen or so media members gathered around him, "all of you are here."

 Write to  Mike Sielski at mike.sielski@wsj.com 