Long before Argentine soccer wizard Lionel Messi could skim the earth in a blur of ball and deadly dancing feet, Shakespearean England had to get it all rolling.

"Teams of hundreds of men in Great Britain would square off in an anything-goes fiesta of clawing, kicking, pushing, and elbowing," writes Josh Chetwynd in his little gem of a book on the history of the balls of sports and games. "Typically, the objective was to get a ball—using hands, feet, or any body part—from the middle of town to a spot either at the top of the village or at the bottom."

Eager to civilize their pastime, organizers crafted balls with care. In two towns, they were made out of silver and bore inscriptions such as "Fair play is good play." On one Scottish island, they were stuffed with cork dust so that they would float if a team hit its goal, the harbor.

Mr. Chetwynd is a former reporter and semi-pro baseball player. (Full disclosure: We have exchanged friendly emails about each other's work, but have never met.) His American, gee-whiz newspaper prose, delivered in 60 short chapters, each on a ball and its game, is perfect for this kind of simple, enthusiastic history.

This book is about many different spheres, but, bounced together, they tell a story of the invention of modern organized sports, which came of age in the 19th century, when the Industrial Revolution blessed the West with leisure time and money. In an astonishing 75 years of creativity, before World War I shattered our appreciation of play, we invented the modern forms of rugby, tennis, ping pong, football, soccer, baseball and basketball. For those of us who love sports, that era must rival the Renaissance for genius.

And, amazingly, as Mr. Chetwynd illustrates, in a lot of cases, people simply made these wonderful games up. Take basketball, which was designed in 1891 by a Canadian physical education professor called James Naismith. Baskets were just the beginning; it was the ball that would truly define the game. He wanted it to be "handled with the hands and not hidden." He started with a soccer ball and then made it bigger.

This early roundball "tended to get lumpy or deaden from the impact," Mr. Chetwynd writes. "The hardest thing was to keep the ball round," remarked John Wooden, who later became a college coaching legend, in 1918. "We usually had to tie a rubber band about it to hold its shape." Thankfully, by the early 1940s the molded leather basketball had been invented.

 By Josh Chetwynd  Perigee, 240 pages, $13.95 

Modern mass production was similarly essential to the development of ping pong, which British army officers stumbled into around 1880, when they decided to play lawn tennis indoors. They made balls out of the rounded end of wine and champagne corks. Cigar box lids were used as a paddles and books as a net. Sports manufacturers in the U.K. and the U.S. sensed an opportunity, and they came up with equipment they could mass-produce. The development of a ball made out of celluloid was a breakthrough, and led to the onomatopoeic baptism of the game. 

In his chapter on cricket, Mr. Chetwynd addresses what is, for Americans, one of that sport's most mystifying elements: You rarely replace the ball. In international "test" cricket, the same ball must be bowled a minimum of 480 times. That's the equivalent, Mr. Chetwynd points out, of using the same baseball for two straight games. 

What gives? The rationale in the beginning was cost. Balls were expensive because they were time-consuming to produce. It can still take as many as 75 days to fashion a top-flight cricket ball out of cork-rubber composite and wool string that must be hand-pressed together in five layers. 

However, one ball per game quickly became an integral part of the sport's strategy. Teams pick "fast bowlers" at the beginning of matches when the ball is bouncy and alive, and "spin bowlers" toward the end, to take advantage of deformations to deceive the batter with whirling, tricky bounces.

There is room for the trivial among all this trivia. The hand-held office stress ball, for example, was devised in 1988 by an inventor called Alex Carswell. (When Lehman Brothers went belly-up, it had 2,055 stress balls listed among its assets.) The beach ball was invented in 1922 by a rubber company looking to diversify production. And how about this nugget: In 2009, a kid knocked a beach ball onto an English soccer game, deflecting the ball into Liverpool's goal and giving underdog Sunderland a 1-0 victory. That ball is now the property of the U.K.'s National Football Museum.

One constant in these 60 chapters is that the stories aren't really about balls, but about the people who invented these games and started playing them regularly. Contrary to what American romantics, this writer included, like to imply, baseball didn't really originate in Eden. 

For example: Softball, baseball's bigger-balled sister, came about on a day when Yale and Harvard alums, horsing around in Chicago in 1887, started throwing a boxing glove at each other. A newspaper reporter named George Hancock suggested they play some baseball with it. And then he started organizing games.

It's all a healthy reminder that if our games are to survive in a world with much simulation, online and elsewhere, we need to play them ourselves, and to teach them to our young. And why not make up some new ones?

 Mr. Miller, a Brussels-based correspondent for the Wall Street Journal, has played, coached and written about baseball, and sometimes other sports, for 25 years. 