A group of U.S. lawmakers wants the Securities and Exchange Commission to push companies to disclose when they have fallen victim to cyberattacks.

Three weeks after Sony Corp. was forced to shut down its PlayStation network by hackers who stole users' information, the group, which includes Senate Commerce Committee Chairman  Jay Rockefeller of West Virginia, on Wednesday sent a letter to the SEC asking it to issue guidance stating that companies must report when they have suffered a major network attack and disclose details on intellectual property or trade secrets that hackers may have stolen. 

The SEC guidance should also clarify that existing corporate-risk disclosure requirements compel companies to disclose if they are vulnerable to cyberattacks, the five lawmakers, all Senate Democrats, said. 

"In light of the growing threat and the national security and economic ramifications of successful attacks against American businesses, it is essential that corporate leaders know their responsibility for managing and disclosing information security risk," the lawmakers wrote to SEC Chairman  Mary Schapiro. 

An SEC spokesman declined to comment in advance of the agency's response to lawmakers.

Mr. Rockefeller's chief goal, aides said, is to create more transparency in a murky area of corporate disclosure. 

A Commerce Committee review of recent SEC disclosures found companies that did report their information-security-risk exposure were inconsistent in the level of detail they provided, the lawmakers said. None provided information on steps that were being taken by the corporation to close potential security gaps, they added. 

A 2009 study by insurance underwriter  Hiscox Inc.
HSX


1.30
%




 found that 38% of Fortune 500 companies made a "significant oversight" when they failed to mention risk of data-security breaches in their public filings. 

Specifically, the lawmakers want to ensure that firms disclose when they have suffered a "material network breach," which would be a cyberattack or data theft that would affect the average investor's decision to purchase or sell a stock.

The lawmakers want the SEC, by issuing guidance, to make it more clear when attacks or data breaches rise to the material level and become subject to disclosure, rather than the current approach of relying on a company's interpretation of when an incident is material.

When  Google Inc. announced last year that it and at least 20 other companies had been targeted by cyberattacks that originated in China, lawmakers and security specialists had hoped the decision to go public with the incident would encourage other affected companies to do so, too. But only a few other firms came forward.

  Intel Corp.
INTC


0.17
%




 provided an exception to the reluctance to report cyberattacks in February when the company disclosed in an SEC filing that it had been targeted by a "sophisticated" cyberattack in the previous month.

The other four lawmakers who signed the letter are Sen. Robert Menendez of New Jersey, Sen. Sheldon Whitehouse of Rhode Island, Sen. Mark Warner of Virginia and Sen. Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut.