Texas Gov. Rick Perry boasted during his re-election campaign last fall about his state's fiscal health. Now it looks as though Texas will be getting a taste of the budget woes facing other states.

Texas is heading into its next two-year budget cycle, which begins Sept. 1, with about $5 billion less in tax revenue than the state had in 2009, State Comptroller Susan Combs forecast on Monday. Meanwhile, the state's population has surged, as has demand for programs for the poor and unemployed.

Forecasts differ about the size of the likely budget gap because of different estimates for Medicaid expenses, with liberal policy analysts estimating the deficit at almost $27 billion and conservatives saying it will be somewhere between $12 billion and $16 billion. 

A tax increase could help generate revenue, but leaders of the Republican-controlled legislature have sworn to cut spending instead.

Texas officials, led by Mr. Perry, in recent years have pointed to the state's relatively strong economic and fiscal health, which they attributed to low-tax, low-regulation policies. 

The energy-rich state has also benefited from high crude-oil prices, especially as the national recession began in 2008.

But while Texas is doing better than many of its peers, the state "has not been immune to the economic forces wreaking havoc" across the U.S., said Ms. Combs, a Republican. 

The state's unemployment rate, which was 8.2% in November, has remained far lower than the national average, now at 9.4%. But consumers have cut back on their spending, which in turn has reduced sales-tax collections.

Mr. Perry, who must approve any budget fix fashioned by the legislature, said in a statement, "I am confident we will meet our state's needs within this revenue estimate by prioritizing spending without raising taxes."

The state will have $72.2 billion to spend from its own taxes, the comptroller said, and will get slightly more than $100 billion from Washington, but the federal dollars must be spent on specific programs. 

Scott McCown, director of the left-leaning Center for Public Policy Priorities, estimated the deficit at $26.8 billion, or about 25% of what the state would need to contribute to maintain current services. 

But Talmadge Heflin, director of fiscal policy at the right-leaning Texas Public Policy Foundation, said that "claims that Texas is $27 billion in the red are flat-out false."

In November, Republicans gained a supermajority in the Texas House, and GOP leaders have said they won't raise taxes. State leaders have already cut more than $1.2 billion from the current year's spending, and have ordered agencies to find 10% cuts for the next fiscal year.

Texas will probably end the current fiscal year with more than $8 billion in a rainy-day fund, according to the comptroller's office. But some political observers said the legislature is unlikely to tap those funds to cover the current budget shortfall.

"Quite a few Republicans are going to say, 'That's not an emergency,' " said Daron Shaw, a professor of government at the University of Texas at Austin. "An emergency is hurricanes, tornados, 'wrath of God' stuff."

 Write to  Leslie Eaton at leslie.eaton@wsj.com 