Professional lacrosse may have taken one step closer Tuesday to becoming a bona fide spectator sport in medium-sized towns across the northeast. 

Or maybe not—it's a little too early to tell. 

In a slightly disjointed press conference at The Ainsworth, a trendy sports bar in Chelsea, a group of sports officials and professional lacrosse players announced the formation of an organization called the North American Lacrosse League. 

The organization's backers said the league would be comprised of at least six teams of about 17 players each and planned to start playing games in January.

Phil Evans, the league's inaugural commissioner, who is the former president of the NBA Development League, called it "a big day for lacrosse generally and a big day for professional lacrosse in particular." 

Oddly, many of the details of the league, such as where the teams would be located and who has purchased franchises, were not divulged. Evans said those details would be released sometime in June. 

There was no mention of a team in New York City. 

What he would say is that the league will be headquartered in Somerville, N.J., and that it is now selling expansion teams for $250,000 a pop. Evans also suggested the league would focus on putting teams in smaller cities that don't already have professional lacrosse teams.

The upstart league doesn't seem to be trying to overtake the sport's two existing leagues. Major League Lacrosse, which features six professional teams and is played outdoors starting in May, has been hosting games since 2001. The new league will share calendar space with the National Lacrosse League, which has 10 teams and the stronger attendance of the two (its championship game this weekend will be televised on Versus on Sunday at 2 p.m.) 

George Daniel, commissioner of the National Lacrosse League, said he welcomed the new league but doesn't see it as a competitor. He said he believes the league will launch in smaller markets and pay players less. He said he thought this league could eventually become a sort of feeder system for his teams.

Evans stressed that his organization isn't competing with anyone. He said it was largely an effort to make lacrosse more popular with kids. The NLL, he says, has done a "phenomenal job" over the past 25 years of promoting the game. "But the reality is they're only in seven markets in the United States. Their rosters aren't comprised of many American players."

Evans noted that only about 19% of that league's players are Americans. "For us, that's where we see the opportunity."

There's no question the sport is popular on the recreational level. According to a Sporting Goods Manufacturers Association report, it's one of the nation's fastest-growing sports. 

The broader question, of course, is whether lacrosse is the sort of thing scads of people will pay to watch in medium-sized northeastern cities in the dead of winter. 

 Write to  Chris Herring at chris.herring@wsj.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications:  Commissioner Phil Evans of the newly formed North American Lacrosse League didn't say where that league will place its teams. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said there would be teams in Albany and Wilkes-Barre, Pa.