Carnegie Mellon University's Tepper School of Business has tapped an insider, Robert Dammon, as its ninth dean, the school announced Tuesday morning. 

Mr. Dammon currently Tepper's associate dean for education, has been at the school since 1984. 

The relatively small school is known for its quantitative focus, with many of its graduates winding up in technical positions in finance, consulting and operations. 

Mr. Dammon's appointment won't dramatically shift the school away from its technical leanings, says hedge fund founder  David Tepper, who donated a $55 million "naming-gift" to the school in 2004. (Formerly, it was the Graduate School of Industrial Administration.) 

Mr. Dammon, who starts his post May 1, was chosen by the president and provost of the university after a committee chose a handful of finalists. 

Mr. Dammon, 54, spoke with The Wall Street Journal about boosting the school's rankings, developing a new curriculum and tapping alumni to boost the school's endowment. 

Edited excerpts follow:

 WSJ: How did your name get thrown into the ring for the position?

 Mr. Dammon: Being associate dean, I came up as a natural internal candidate. At the beginning, I wasn't really sure I wanted to do the job. I know how much work it is. You're expected to provide leadership and direction, and you have to communicate effectively internally and externally with various constituents: There are faculty who are focused on research and teaching, alumni who want you to improve the school's reputation and rankings, there are students who are putting pressure on you to change the curriculum. On top of that, there's fundraising and dealing with the rest of the university campus. I already don't get much sleep.

 WSJ: Currently, you teach [a corporate restructuring class] in addition to your administrative duties. Will you continue to teach as dean?

 Mr. Dammon: Initially I thought I would not continue to teach. But now I want to stay in the classroom for at least the first year. It's an important way to stay connected to the students. I have a fairly good reputation as a teacher, but the next group of students who come in won't know me at all if I simply sit in my office and don't connect. We have fewer than 10,000 alumni, but I've taught 20 to 25% of them.

 WSJ: How much of your job will be interacting with alumni?

 Mr. Dammon: One of the first things I want to do is reconnect with alumni. I think it will help a great deal that many of them know me as a former teacher. I'll be traveling to a lot of alumni events on the West Coast and in New York and abroad, but I'll also set up individual appointments with our more senior alumni.

 WSJ: Many new deans have ushered in new curriculums during their first few years. Are you analyzing the curriculum?

 Mr. Dammon: We're about a year into our curriculum review. The committee began by assessing the curriculum content and comparing it to what other schools are doing. Then we had focus groups with alumni, faculty and recruiters. Since then, we've redesigned our orientation, which we now call "pre-term." It's much more meaty and valuable, and it gives students a better perspective on what to expect from the program. Now, the committee is working on the two-year program, and the plan is to finish that up by early summer.

 WSJ: The school is known for its quantitative focus. Will the new curriculum reposition the school to be better known in other fields, such as general management or marketing?

 Mr. Dammon: No, those aren't our strengths. We really want to be known for our rigorous academic approach, as well as our focus on analytical decision making. The school's intellectual property is our most valuable asset, and we are part of a university that has prestigious programs in computer engineering and the fine arts, which is unique. I want to look for opportunities to develop new degree programs that can't be duplicated by other institutions.

 WSJ: David Tepper, the namesake of the business school and a major donor, says he's looking for you to raise the profile of the business school. Do you have a strategy?

 Mr. Dammon: We've produced nine Nobel Prize winners in the business school, but we don't talk about it much to the external marketplace, and I am going to change that. If we are going to be recognized for the quality of the program, we need to make sure the outside world knows about us. And if we want to move up in the rankings, that's also a necessity. I want to be as visible as I possibly can.

 WSJ: Who do you think is the school's biggest competitor?

 Mr. Dammon: The ones that come closest are probably University of Chicago and MIT. They take the same approach. We also get a lot of cross-applications with the University of Michigan, but since our programs are so different, that may be a regional thing.

 WSJ: Across the board, endowments and donations have taken a dip during the recession. Do you have a plan for tackling student contributions?

 Mr. Dammon: For a business school, we have one of the smallest endowments. [As of the last fiscal year, which ended June 30, 2010, the university endowment was $815.1 million.] The same is true for the university. The percentage of our budget that is financed by endowment is somewhere in the neighborhood of 8 to 10%, whereas at other leading schools that may be 20 or 25%. I will be trying every avenue possible, contacting foundations and corporations and friends of the school. Meeting alumni will be key. I need to excite them about giving back, as well as convince them of the value of what we're doing – which I don't think will be a hard sell, by the way.

 Write to  Diana Middleton at diana.middleton@wsj.com 