GLENDALE, Ariz.—There will come a day when the South doesn't own college football. We're just not sure when.

Auburn's thrilling 22-19 victory over Oregon in the national-championship game Monday night—the Tigers' first national title since 1957—extended a regional reign unlike any in the sport's modern history. For the fifth straight season, the national champion comes from the Southeastern Conference. This time, the SEC managed to slow the sport's most feared offense.

But it isn't only that. Once again, another college-football season has centered on a collection of football-crazed campuses in the Southeast.

The pay-for-play controversy surrounding Auburn quarterback Cam Newton was the story of the year, and it continues to hang over the sport. Although the NCAA gave Mr. Newton the green light to play last month, college football was riven by criticism over that ruling since the NCAA found that Mr. Newton's father Cecil attempted to sell his son's services during his college recruitment.

The possibility remains that Auburn may eventually suffer retroactive penalties that tarnish this championship. Mr. Newton's father reportedly was not in attendance for the game, after his son said in the run-up to the game that he would be.

The South continues to be the home of the game's biggest stars and its top teams. Mr. Newton was the Heisman Trophy winner this season. The Heisman winner last season was another Southern player, Alabama running back Mark Ingram. The most-anticipated regular-season game in 2010? Auburn-Alabama. Last season? The Alabama-Florida SEC title game.

There is one other undefeated team: 13-0 Texas Christian, which once again means there's a dollop of controversy. But no reasonable person could look at TCU's schedule and Auburn's and conclude the Horned Frogs are worthier of being No. 1.

Heading into Monday night's showdown, though, it looked like the end of the South's football hegemony might finally be at hand.

Auburn was up against the highest-scoring team in college football, the newest member of the sport's elite. The combination of coach Chip Kelly's warp-speed offense and Nike cofounder Phil Knight's spare-no-expense support of his alma mater has turned Oregon—a historical have-not—into a juggernaut.

Full analysis of the five Bowl Championship Series games, including insights from the Journal's Darren Everson and key stats to watch.

Plus, the SEC hadn't been particularly impressive this bowl season. In the four previous years that the SEC won the national title, its also-rans compiled a dominant 21-11 record in their bowl games—proving the conference's superiority. This season: 4-5.

Meanwhile, the most impressive team of the postseason before Monday night was Stanford of the Pac-10. The Cardinal buried Virginia Tech, the Atlantic Coast Conference champion, 40-12 in the Orange Bowl. Oregon routed Stanford by 21 on Oct. 2. The public appeared to be catching onto all of this: Initially, Auburn was a three-point favorite in Las Vegas, but by the time that game day arrived, the spread dropped to a single point—a significant shift for such an important game.

The game was played at the University of Phoenix Stadium, deep in Pac-10 country—yet Auburn had two-thirds of the crowd, a demonstration of the South's unmatched fan zeal. Players repeatedly slipped on the grass turf, dulling two of the nation's most prolific offenses.

It was clear from the start that this game wouldn't live up to shootout hype. The first quarter was scoreless. The two quarterbacks spent much of it trying to top each other's mental mistakes.

The first time Oregon had the ball, the Ducks' Darron Thomas made a bad pitch on a running play, leading to a punt. Auburn punted the ball back after Mr. Newton fumbled while getting sacked. On Oregon's second possession, Mr. Thomas threw high on a 3rd-and-8 and was intercepted. Then Mr. Newton reciprocated by zinging the ball into double coverage and watching Oregon star Cliff Harris intercept.

But Oregon and Auburn had the No. 1 and No. 4 scoring offenses, respectively, in college football this season—and neither had a stellar defense. It figured that they'd settle down eventually.

The Ducks struggled to consistently move the ball, though, much as they did in the Rose Bowl last season against Ohio State. Oregon averaged an obscene 305 yards rushing this season; Monday night the Ducks didn't crack 100. It was evident in that Rose Bowl and Monday night that the Oregon offense—which has overmatched lesser competition—is still at a talent deficit against the country's best competition.

Auburn also got some breaks. The Tigers' first touchdown, a 35-yard pass over the middle by Mr. Newton, came immediately after the officials erroneously deprived Oregon of an interception. Late in the second quarter, Auburn failed on a 4th and goal from the Oregon 1 when Eric Smith dropped a low pass from Mr. Newton in the end zone. But that wound up working to Auburn's benefit: The Tigers got a safety, then scored a touchdown on the ensuing possession, giving them a 16-11 halftime lead.

The biggest break of all came after Oregon tied the game late in the fourth quarter. Auburn—which had just surrendered the lead because of a fumble by Mr. Newton—retook the lead after a bizarre long run by running back Michael Dyer. Mr. Dyer appeared to be down after a short gain—every player stopped and stood around, including Mr. Dyer himself—but he wasn't, and the officials never blew the whistle. Mr. Dyer wound up running for 37 yards to the Oregon 23, and the Tigers won the game on kicker Wes Byrum's 19-year field goal.

For Auburn, a proud football school that nonetheless exists in Alabama's shadow, this is an unprecedented moment. Since the Tigers shared their one previous title with Ohio State, this is the only time Auburn has stood alone atop the sport. Pending potential retroactive penalties, of course.

 Write to  Darren Everson at darren.everson@wsj.com 