The precious-metals selloff accelerated on Thursday amid worries the rally of the past few years may be petering out and concerns that China will slam the brakes on its economy.

Heartening numbers on the U.S. economy on Thursday also tarnished demand for gold as a safe haven investment. On Thursday, gold for January delivery fell 1.7% to $1,346.50 per troy ounce, the lowest level in more than two months. Gold is down 5% for the year. Silver, whose swings are often more exaggerated than gold, dropped 4.6% and is down 11% this year.

Until recently, gold and its precious-metal brethren have been the main beneficiaries of economic uncertainty and low interest rates that central banks have maintained to stimulate growth. Gold found demand from investors of all beliefs—those fearing an economic Armageddon and those worrying the economy will recover too quickly, spurring inflation. 

But investors are now looking to China, where prices are rising rapidly, sparking worries that the government may raise interest rates sharply to stifle demand. As well, the prospect of the Federal Reserve pulling back from its stimulus policies this year and withdrawing liquidity from the financial system, is reducing demand for gold, and dimming inflation fears. 

And gold's strength—it rose 30% in 2010 alone—has caused some fund managers to become skeptical of its ability to rise much further.

Dennis Gartman, a hedge-fund manager and author of the Gartman Letter, has sold two-thirds of his gold holdings over the past few weeks. On Thursday, he said he sold because of "the fact that it wasn't making new highs and that the market was a little too crowded."

"Everywhere you went, everyone you knew was aggressive long," he added. "That's a bad sign, because that means everybody has already bought."

Since Dec. 31, investors have redeemed 29.3 metric tons of gold from SPDR Gold Shares, the world's largest gold-backed, exchange-traded fund, reflecting the shift in sentiment. 

The futures market also is flashing warning signs. Bullish bets by financial investors in New York's Comex market are down 32% since early October, according to  Tom Pawlicki, an analyst at MF Global, in a research note.

In the options pit, meanwhile, put options—bets that prices will fall—are more expensive than call options, bets that prices will rise, another sign of investors turning nervous about a near-term price correction.

Investor interest could be further limited. On Thursday,  CME Group,
CME


0.24
%




 which operates exchanges, raised margin requirements on gold, silver and some other commodities, making it more expensive to trade them.

What isn't clear is whether the recent decline signals that an end to gold's decade-long rally is in sight, or whether it is merely a pause that will soon be followed by another price rise. Gold has had numerous short-term drops in recent years, but has risen each of the past 10 years, including a 29.8% gain last year.

However, the sentiment has moved recently, as the U.S. and Europe both surprised markets with better-than-expected economic data.

The mood swing culminated Thursday as the U.S. reported a sharp drop in new jobless claims for last week, and China said its economic expansion accelerated in the fourth quarter despite efforts to slow growth.

Though many remain skeptical that the U.S. economy will be strong enough to warrant an increase in interest rates, the market is increasingly betting that the U.S. Federal Reserve will stop pumping new stimulus into the economy, a policy that fueled interest in gold as a hedge against currency devaluation.

Meanwhile, growing inflationary pressure in China has fueled concerns about further government moves to combat rising prices. On Thursday, China said its December consumer price index rose 4.6% from a year ago, above Beijing's official target, though slightly below November's figure. Strong economic growth has given the government more leeway to raise banks' capital requirements or hike interest rates, which will further drain liquidity from the market and hurt zero-yield investments such as gold.

Worries that China may stamp on the brakes hurt commodities of all stripes on Thursday. Oil and copper both dropped 2.2%. Gold can be a leading indicator for the rest of the commodities market, and its declines have outpaced those other commodities this year.

Reduced concern about the economy "have lessened the safe-haven demand for gold, which is often viewed as a form of insurance policy," said  Anne-Laure Tremblay, a precious-metal analyst with BNP Paribas. 

Some investors who have pulled back nonetheless retain significant gold investments. In November,  Charles Morris, who runs HSBC's $2.5 billion Absolute Return Fund, told investors he had halved the fund's bullion stake to 6%. He said in a note to investors that the move reflected "the fact that we remain bullish over the long term." 

But he also noted that gold has risen in tandem with other risky assets, and so "the diversification benefits have become less obvious."

Investors who were along for the ride now may be more willing to invest in stocks, which have also been rising, which may further tarnish gold's luster. 

"While we think this is unlikely to be a definitive turning point, we do think that gold will underperform in the commodities space," analysts at Macquarie wrote in a recent research note.

Still, "the smoke signals are pretty ominous" for investors with overweight positions in gold, said  Jon Nadler, an analyst at Kitco Metals Inc., a bullion dealer. "It's not the end of the world, but it certainly presents some rhetorical question marks to those who said it can only go up."

 Write to  Carolyn Cui at carolyn.cui@wsj.com and Liam Pleven at liam.pleven@wsj.com 