  Wal-Mart
WMT


-0.71
%




 has long wanted in to New York City, and this time it's serious. For the Arkansas retailer, which already has 4,300 US stores, New York is a bit like the moon: forbidding and devoid of Nascar fans, but the final frontier for expansion. In recent months, it's been scoping potential sites and hiring pollsters to gauge New York support. It even launched a new website, WalmartNYC.com.

Everyone has an opinion about whether New York needs Wal-Mart, and your stance typically depends on whether you can afford to value intangibles such as aesthetics and community over low prices. I'm fortunate enough to fall into that camp. But as the debate rages on, I've had to admit: I don't know what I'm talking about, because I've never shopped at Wal-Mart. And I'm not alone. While the company says NYC residents spent $165 million last year at suburban Wal-Marts ringing the city, plenty of us have yet to set foot in the store. Solution: After a 30-minute bus ride from the Port Authority, it's just a half-mile walk to Store #3795 in North Bergen.

To encounter Wal-Mart for the first time is to experience a sort of horizontal vertigo. At 217,000 square feet (that's five acres), it takes 10 minutes to walk the building's perimeter. It's so big, you can't see to the other side, thanks to the curvature of the earth. The shopping carts are the size of Jacuzzis, and the aisles are wider than your living room. 

Store #3795 stocks 120,000 different products—including merchandise you never dreamed existed. The  Disney
DIS


0.30
%




 Princess fishing pole. Magazines devoted to radio-control helicopters. Milk-replacement formula for kittens. If you've ever wondered, "Where do people buy this stuff?" (car seat covers featuring serpents wrestling tigers; men's boxers that say "Wanna Smurf around?"), the answer, it turns out, is Wal-Mart. 

But Wal-Marts are also like inside-out strip malls, with lots of services. After you buy your lawnmower and a sack of potatoes, you can eat lunch, get your taxes done, cash a check, buy a cell-phone plan or get your eyes examined. My first order of business: a haircut. Many Wal-Marts include a SmartStyle salon, where you can get a Wal-do for $15.50. 

I've got a real Samson complex—I worry the hairdresser will go all Delilah on me and cut too much off. But my stylist, who was dressed in a gold-lettered "Viva La Juicy" sweatshirt, followed my instructions to the letter. And while she wasn't much for small talk, she did an amazing job singing loud Latin ballads, and finished with a blowout that left me looking like a character out of "Friends" circa 2004. 

In my four hours wandering the aisles like a zombie, that was about all the human interaction I enjoyed. I didn't even encounter one of those canonical Wal-Mart greeters. There was a boxer-faced, blue-vested man hanging out by the entrance, but he was too busy staring off into the bakery section to say hello. Feeling snubbed, I left the store and entered again. No dice. 

What I did encounter was the promised low prices. Shirts sell for seven bucks (sleeves included), bath towels cost $2.77. When you live in a city where you can't find even a used bicycle for less than $200, it's shocking to see a men's "Roadmaster" mountain bike selling for $75 (online reviews range from "it works" to "I broke my arm"). 

Whether you'll want to buy anything is another question. Take the clothing department. Wal-Mart says it aims to provide basics at low prices. But there's a definite aesthetic, which I think of as "crazed Ohio insurance claims adjustor." The emphasis is on bright colors and flashy detail. There are some interesting legacy brands (Jordache!) for the irony-obsessed, as well as store brands, like Faded Glory, for ladies and gentlemen who wish to dress like Bruce Springsteen.

I bought a $20 Norma Kamali jersey wrap dress in an animal print I've dubbed "albino ocelot." It's more tasteful than it sounds, and it got a few compliments at the office. But here's the thing: If you tell someone you got your outfit at Target, you get congratulated for your fashion savvy; if you tell someone it's from Wal-Mart, it's like announcing you bought it from Satan. 

Wal-Mart says it can offer us decent, low-cost eats, and it might have something there. Packaged foods at the store's huge supermarket cost roughly a third less than I'd pay at the local Met Foodmarket, and meat prices are frankly unsettling—turkeys the size of a German shepherd sell for 92 cents a pound. That night, I made myself a big Wal-dinner. The French bread was leaden and the ice cream ($2.59 for a big tub) flavorless. If you love the taste and texture of imitation crab, you'll love Wal-Mart's $5-a-pound salmon. But in terms of nutrients per dollar, it was a deal.

The real problem with Wal-Mart? It makes life too easy. In one afternoon, I got a week's worth of shopping and errands done under one roof, spending a total of $67. I live in New York so I can suffer interesting inconveniences that no other town can offer. If we're going to get a Wal-Mart, we might as well give up and call ourselves New San Jose. Now if only there was a free shuttle to North Bergen from Brooklyn….

—Ms. Kadet, who writes the "Tough Customer" column for SmartMoney magazine, can be reached at anne.kadet@dowjones.com