Big retail chains keep trying to sell or rent music and movies online as sales of CDs and DVDs decline, but these ventures have done little to dent the market share of industry leaders  Netflix Inc., Apple Inc. and  Amazon.com Inc.

What 'Despicable Me' costs to rent or buy at the Web services of three chains and iTunes

Alphaline (Sears)

CinemaNow (Best Buy)

Vudu (Wal-Mart)

iTunes (Apple)

  Sears Holdings Corp. became the latest traditional retailer to get into streaming and downloads on Dec. 28, when it launched movie service Alphaline Entertainment. That followed  Best Buy Co.'s launch last year of rental and purchase site CinemaNow and  Wal-Mart Stores Inc.'s acquisition of streaming service Vudu last February for roughly $100 million.

The retailers say the ventures not only help them gain a foothold in the fast-growing digital entertainment business, but also give them an edge in selling Internet-connected televisions and movie players in their stores.

Many of the TVs that Best Buy sells now come with CinemaNow software, while many of Wal-Mart's are loaded with Vudu. The retailers also use free or discounted digital entertainment to lure customers to their websites, much as they have long done by selling certain movie and music discs at a loss to attract shoppers to their stores.

"As customers elect to get their entertainment in different forms, we feel it is important to provide them with the full array of options," said  Karen Austin, Sears Holdings' president of consumer electronics. 

Like Best Buy, Sears uses an online platform from  Sonic Solutions of Novato, Calif., as the backbone of its movie service that it offers in its Sears and Kmart stores. "It's an opportunity to grab a bigger piece of a growing market," Ms. Austin said.

Yet like the music download services that Wal-Mart and other store chains have run for years, the movie services have attracted only minimal interest from mainstream consumers despite often aggressive pricing, industry analysts say. That contrasts with the rapid growth of  Netflix, which said Thursday it added 3.1 million subscribers over the holiday period as it reported a 52% jump in profit.

Figures on online movie market share are sketchy, but analysts say store chains command a paltry sliver—a far cry from retailers' once-dominant position in selling DVDs. That's similar to the retailers' success in selling music online. 

Market researcher NPD Group Inc. estimates Apple's iTunes has 66% of the digital music download market, followed by 13% for Amazon's site. The only store-chain site in the top five is Best Buy's Napster, with a 1% share. NPD discloses only the top-five providers, which don't include Wal-Mart. The chain was the nation's largest seller of music of all kinds last decade.

NPD's music estimates don't include streaming services that allow customers to access a virtual jukebox of songs while they are online. This is a large part of the business at Napster, which Best Buy purchased in 2008 for $121 million.

But analysts estimate that Best Buy is an also-ran against streaming sites such as Rhapsody International Inc.'s service, despite charging just $5 a month for access to 11 million songs.

"I'm not sure why, because it is not a bad service, but Napster has failed to capture mind share," said  Stephen Mader of retail consultancy Kantar Retail. "Retailers are playing in this space because it is fairly inexpensive for them, but they are strictly niche players in their current form."

None of the retailers disclose revenue or profitability of their Web-based services.

  Chris Homeister, Best Buy's senior vice president of home entertainment, said the company is positioned to reap benefits from a fledgling industry standard called Ultraviolet under development by electronics makers and movie studios. It will allow buyers of a movie disc to access digital copies of the film on phones, laptops and other devices.

  Edward Lichty, Vudu's general manager, said Wal-Mart recognizes it is "starting from a different place than Netflix and iTunes," but plans to make its presence felt with low-priced offers. 

Wal-Mart has included $10 Vudu credits with its TVs and Blu-ray DVD players, allowing customers to sample the service free. It also has tried to help consumers ease into online entertainment by selling movie discs such as "Toy Story 3" that come bundled with codes that allow customers to access digital copies of the same movie online.

"Not only do we believe that segue is possible, but some of the things we have done serve as proof," Mr. Lichty said. "Wal-Mart bought Vudu to make an impact."

Vudu is converting consumers such as football sports agent Mook Williams, who prefers renting individual movies, priced as low as 99 cents, to paying higher monthly fees to access an unlimited supply of films via Netflix. But Mr. Williams, who was unaware the service is owned by Wal-Mart, said it was unlikely to draw him into shopping at the retailer. 

 Write to  Miguel Bustillo at miguel.bustillo@wsj.com 