The Securities and Exchange Commission is investigating whether banks and private-equity firms violated bribery laws in their dealings with sovereign-wealth funds, according to people familiar with the matter.

The SEC has sent letters of inquiry to banks such as  Citigroup Inc.
C


0.67
%




 as well as private-equity firms including  Blackstone Group
BX


0.39
%




 LP, the people said. The letters are said to have been sent to as many as 10 firms in the past week, one person said. 

Though the letters didn't contain specific allegations of bribery, they requested that firms retain documents and asked about the firms' dealings with sovereign-wealth funds, the people said. One person familiar with a firm that received a letter said it was brief, indicating the investigation is at the early stages.

Sovereign-wealth funds, which are investment funds owned and generally operated by overseas governments, have invested in both private-equity managers and the biggest Wall Street firms over the past several years. In some cases, the sovereign funds have helped the firms stave off collapse. 

Sovereign wealth funds also invest in funds managed by private-equity firms. 

The wave of investments by sovereign-wealth funds in U.S. financial companies over the past several years included stakes in Citigroup, Merrill Lynch & Co. before its acquisition by Bank of America Corp., and Morgan Stanley. For example, China Investment Corp., which manages more than $300 billion, invested in both Morgan Stanley and Blackstone. 

The letters appear to be tied to a broad Foreign Corrupt Practices Act investigation of the banking industry, said attorneys who are familiar with past FCPA investigations of other industries. Foreign employees who work on sovereign-wealth funds would be considered government officials and covered by the FCPA, legal experts said. 

The focus of the inquiry couldn't immediately be determined, but FCPA inquiries involve bribes paid to foreign-government officials or employees of state-owned companies to gain a business advantage. The FCPA pertains to cash as well as non-monetary gifts such as entertainment and trips. 

The SEC declined to comment. A spokeswoman for the Department of Justice, which also enforces the FCPA, declined to comment on whether it was involved in the inquiry.

U.S. government officials have used the FCPA to penetrate entire industries, such as a probe into drug makers that may be paying overseas bribes to boost sales. 

A probe into the oil industry netted millions of dollars in fines. In November,  Royal Dutch Shell PLC and six other companies agreed to pay a combined $236 million to settle allegations that they or their contractors bribed foreign officials to smooth the way for importing equipment and materials into several countries. 

Shell, which admitted it approved or condoned bribes and improperly recorded them as a business expense, agreed to settle criminal and civil allegations and at the time said it cooperated with the probe and disciplined or fired staff tied to the charges.

"Those financial institutions that have in place effective FCPA compliance programs presumably are already addressing their FCPA risks," said  Simeon Kriesberg, a lawyer who works on FCPA issues in the Washington, D.C., office of Mayer Brown. "Those that do not have compliance programs in place may get a rude awakening."

—Jean Eaglesham contributed to this article.