An epidemic of deadly tornadoes this week likely has been spawned by the rare collision of hot, humid air from the Gulf of Mexico with frigid Arctic winds pushed down across five Southern states by global climate patterns, weather experts said.

These forces have helped produce about 800 twisters so far this month, four times the average for April, meteorologists said. The National Weather Service reported 165 tornadoes on Wednesday alone. The last comparable spate of destructive storms occurred in April 1974, when 148 twisters touched down in 13 states over 16 hours.

“Hopefully, this is not a preview of coming events for May and June, which historically are the most active tornado months,” said climatologist William Patzert at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 

Some meteorologists cautioned that they couldn’t pinpoint the exact cause of so many powerful storms because the vast continental interplay of wind, temperature, humidity and barometric pressure is too intricate.

“It’s as complicated as a living thing, even though it is only water vapor and air,” said severe-storm expert Hugh Willoughby at Florida International University’s hurricane center in Miami. “I don’t see anything that really leaps out to say this is different from all other springs.”

Several other research meteorologists, however, said spring storm systems had been strengthened and pinned in place for longer than usual this year by shifts in climate patterns over the Arctic and the Pacific oceans, far from Wednesday’s destruction.

The rise and fall of atmospheric pressure over the Arctic—a long-term climate pattern called the Arctic Oscillation—and the lingering effects of a cooling La Niña current in the Pacific Ocean can alter the path of prevailing winds across North America by altering the balance of energy in the atmosphere. That combination may have propelled repeated outbreaks of severe storms over the Southern states.

“The pattern seems to persist for the next week,” said research meteorologist Thomas Schmidlin at Kent State University in Ohio. 

Powering the storms is heat and moisture from the Gulf of Mexico, where sea-surface temperatures recently have been running about two degrees Fahrenheit above average. Researchers, however, discounted any link to long-term global climate change.

Records show that there are twice as many tornadoes in the U.S. annually as 50 years ago, but the historical records of tornadoes are incomplete and measures of tornado intensity have been revamped recently, making year-to-year comparisons difficult. Storm watchers today also are more vigilant and more likely to report smaller tornadoes.

“We don’t really have any expectations of how tornadoes will change, if at all, as the planet warms,” said Harold Brooks at the National Severe Storms Laboratory in Norman, Okla. “Some factors will become more favorable for tornado formation and others less favorable.”

 Write to  Robert Lee Hotz at sciencejournal@wsj.com 