Research In Motion, the Canadian company that makes the BlackBerry smartphone, found itself in a number of high-profile spats with Asian governments in the past year. Security authorities in India demanded access to BlackBerry users' data last summer to aid in its fight against militant groups. Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates have halted BlackBerry service altogether, citing similar security concerns. But RIM has no stranger or more persistent foe than Indonesian Communications Minister Tifatul Sembiring.

Last August, Mr. Sembiring issued a directive threatening to revoke RIM's operating license in Indonesia if it did not block users' access to pornography. Mr. Sembiring has made policing online speech his top concern as communications chief, and his methods are equally controversial. He has proposed barring any website that has a "negative impact" on Indonesian society, and last year he attempted without success to blanket-block all naughty Web content during Ramadan.

With RIM his approach has been similarly bull-headed. When talks with the company foundered at the end of last year, he issued an ultimatum: Be porn-free in Indonesia by Jan. 21 or face a nationwide ban. To rally support for his cause, the irate minister began delivering anti-RIM broadsides from his Twitter account. "If RIM does not comply with the laws of Indonesia, then enough is enough!" one message reads.

When his threats didn't light the fire he hoped for, Mr. Sembiring tried another tack, accusing RIM last week of not paying taxes and contributing nothing to the Indonesian economy. The company is "taking too much money from Indonesians without even paying any taxes here," he fumed on Twitter. What he failed to mention was that RIM pays no taxes to Jakarta because it owes no taxes to Jakarta. The company is not involved in the retail sale of its products in Indonesia, so it is the local service providers who must pay sales taxes and customs fees.

RIM handled the kerfuffle with poise. On Monday, company representatives met with communications ministry officials in Jakarta. By this Friday, they agreed, Indonesia's BlackBerry devices will be porn-free. The move represents the first time RIM has placed filters on BlackBerry content anywhere in the world. 

While RIM's commitment to observing local laws is admirable, the law in this case deserves greater scrutiny. Mr. Sembiring claims legal authority for his various crusades from sweeping antipornography legislation passed in 2008, a law that has become a powerful tool for advancing Islamic values in a religiously diverse but secular, majority Muslim state.

Most recently, the law appeared to take precedence over Indonesia's press protections in the trial of Erwin Arnada, the former publisher of Playboy's Indonesian edition. Since the magazine does not publish nude pictures and its content is similar to that of other local magazines, its real offense seems to be the use of the Playboy name. Mr. Arnada was sentenced last October to two years in prison. 

Although the quarrel with RIM has now been settled amicably, it represents a worrying trend. Mr. Sembiring is chairman of the Islamist Prosperous Justice Party, or PKS, which punches above its weight because moderate Muslims are reluctant to tackle it head-on. The silence from President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono's office in this dispute was striking. In a nation whose constitution guarantees a secular democracy, legal safeguards exist to stop moral power-plays like Mr. Sembiring's, but somebody has to be courageous enough to invoke them.