WASHINGTON—Federal safety regulators signaled Thursday they weren't convinced the San Bruno, Calif., pipeline explosion that killed eight people last September was a freak accident, as three days of hearings on the blast concluded.

At the hearing of the National Transportation Safety Board, a representative of a trade group that represents gas utilities described the San Bruno accident, which also destroyed 38 homes, as an unusual event due to a defective pipe—and not indicative of wider problems.

"I'm not seeing it as an issue," said Christina Sames, vice president of engineering and operations for the American Gas Association. "I'm seeing it as an anomaly."

But an NTSB investigator challenged that view. Bob Trainor, chief of the NTSB's pipeline safety unit, said the San Bruno accident and a propane pipeline explosion in November 2007 both involved welding defects in lengths of pipe that failed along long seams. The 2007 accident in Carmichael, Miss., killed two people, destroyed four homes and torched 71 acres of land.

"I question whether these two accidents should be considered anomalies," Mr. Trainor said.

A member of Congress who represents the San Bruno area and who attended the hearings also disputed the "anomaly" description. "Is it an anomaly every time a plane crashes?" asked Rep. Jackie Speier, a Democrat.

Thursday concluded the first set of NTSB hearings in more than a decade on pipeline safety, and board members posed many questions that went well beyond the specifics of the San Bruno blast. The board will now complete its investigation, and it is expected to produce recommendations on what should be done to improve pipeline safety across the U.S.

Experts told the panel that robotic tools, equipped with cameras and sensors, could have detected manufacturing defects in the San Bruno pipeline. The tools are known as PIGs, short for pipeline inspection gauges, and work on the inside of modern pipelines.

But the operator of the San Bruno pipeline, San Francisco-based  PG&E Corp.
PCG


0.39
%




, couldn't use such robots because the 1956 pipeline couldn't accommodate them. 

Experts testified that this is the case for more than 60% of major pipelines. 

Furthermore, they said there are 187,837 miles of pre-1970 pipelines in the U.S., meaning they were installed before the adoption of national pipeline- safety standards.

After the hearing, Deborah Hersman, the chairwoman of the safety board, noted that the industry has wrestled with the same problems, such as pre-1970 pipelines, for more than a decade. "There aren't new problems," she said. "What we need is new solutions."

Ms. Herman, who has been with the NTSB since 2004, formerly was a senior legislative aide to West Virginia Sen. Bob Wise, for whom she worked to garner passage of the 2002 Pipeline Safety Improvement Act. 

 Write to  Rebecca Smith at rebecca.smith@wsj.com 