WELLINGTON—New Zealand may sell as much as US$6 billion worth of its holdings in state-owned energy companies and the nation's flagship airline as well as cut spending in a bid to bring its budget back to surplus a year ahead of schedule.

The surprise announcement cheered credit ratings agencies that have threatened to downgrade the country. 

Prime Minister John Key, who has been struggling to stem the red ink in the government's finances and jumpstart a long-sluggish economy, said Wednesday the government is studying the possibility of selling stakes of up to 49% in energy companies Mighty River Power Ltd., Meridian Energy Ltd. and Genesis Energy, as well as coal producer Solid Energy New Zealand Ltd. It has also sought advice on the merits of reducing its holding in Air New Zealand Ltd. from 76%, while still maintaining a majority stake in the national carrier, he said. 

Together, the partial privatizations of those state-owned assets, which are together worth some 16.6 billion New Zealand dollars (US$12.75 billion), could net up NZ$7.8 billion, a large windfall for a government currently projecting a deficit in its operating balance, excluding gains and losses, of NZ$11.1 billion in the fiscal year to June 30. 

Mr. Key didn't specify a date for a decision but indicated the government wouldn't move ahead with any asset sales in its first term, which is due to end this year or early next year. The timing of the next election hasn't yet been set.

"Our final policy will be decided prior to this year's election, and we will seek a mandate from the electorate before proceeding with any change," he said in a speech in Auckland. 

The government's already burgeoning budget deficit has swelled this year due to costs related to a large earthquake in September and weaker-than-expected tax revenues, due to the tepid economic recovery. 

Against that backdrop, government efforts have been focused on reining in spending and on rebalancing the economy toward savings, productive investment and exports. 

The partial privatization of state assets "makes sound economic sense," ANZ Head of Market Economics and Strategy  Khoon Goh said, noting that the idea is not only to free up capital but also to introduce more strict market discipline. "If successful, it could actually result in the assets being more valuable on a dollar basis even though the government's stake is reduced." 

Mr. Key said the budget for the fiscal year starting July 1 would reduce the new spending allowance to NZ$800 million to NZ$900 million from the current NZ$1.1 billion. 

"With a tighter budget this year, and assuming revenue stays on track, the budget will return to a meaningful surplus in 2014-15—a year earlier than forecast," he said. 

In December, the government said it would restore its budget to surplus in the fiscal year ending June 2016. Mr. Key underscored the government's aim is to reduce its reliance on overseas lenders "who can at any time decide we are just too much of a risk." 

While running a budget deficit was the right thing to do during the recession, "as the economy recovers, borrowing NZ$300 million a week is unaffordable and is holding the economy back," he said. 

Standard & Poor's Ratings Services sovereign analyst  Kyran Curry said the tentative plans Mr. Key outlined were a step in the right direction. 

"The things that the government is looking at doing to strengthen New Zealand's credit quality are all very important steps toward stabilizing the outlook and in the much longer run to raise the ratings even," Mr. Curry said in an interview. 

It's necessary to see the benefits coming through before S&P's evaluates any change to the rating, he added.

S&P in November shifted its outlook on New Zealand's foreign-currency credit rating to negative from stable, warning of a possible downgrade to its long-term rating of AA+ due to the country's widening external imbalances. 

Fitch Ratings sovereign analyst Andrew Colquhoun said the steps Mr. Key flagged could improve the sustainability of the government's finances. But high household borrowing remains a big concern for the ratings agency and a downgrade is still possible unless there is clear evidence of rebalancing of the economy, he said. 

 Write to  Rebecca Howard at rebecca.howard@dowjones.com 