DUBLIN—The Irish government announced a plan Tuesday that seeks to create new jobs without deepening the country's debt crisis, mainly by providing incentives to boost private-sector employment and retraining the unemployed. 

Hundreds of thousands of Irish people have already lost their jobs in the aftermath of the country's property and banking crashes and others may soon be out of work, victims of Ireland's debt crisis and government budget cuts. Many people have left the country in despair of finding work at home. 

Prime Minister Enda Kenny, who leads the coalition that took power in March, has said creating jobs is his priority. The government's plan calls for tax cuts for employers and programs to retrain the unemployed. But tight budget constraints mean the plan can't add to debt and the government said it would finance it from a new levy on pension funds. 

Ireland sought financial help from the European Union and the International Monetary Fund in November after markets became spooked at the costs of rescuing Ireland's private banks and refused to lend the government and the lenders more money. Reflecting the huge banking recapitalization costs, the country's budget deficit soared to 32.4% of gross domestic product last year. 

Tuesday's jobs package featured the announcement of 20,900 retraining programs, including aid for sectors such as construction that have been worst hit during the last three years of recession. Other measures are designed to boost labor-intensive sectors such as tourism, some service businesses and road-building by reducing taxes and refocusing capital spending on maintaining local highways. 

But the new government stressed it won't budge on its competitive corporation-tax regime despite calls from some large EU countries for Ireland to increase the 12.5% rate in return for a cut in the interest rate it pays for its bailout loans. 

The new coalition, led by Mr. Kenny's right-of-center Fine Gael party, includes the left-leaning Labour Party. Both parties agreed in a joint program for government to follow the EU-IMF austerity targets that aim to reduce Ireland's budget deficit to below 3% of its gross domestic product by the end of 2015. 

The Irish jobless rate has soared to 14.6%, from about 4% in 2007. Many people employed in sectors such as construction and retail, which grew during the final years of the country's boom, have lost their jobs and face long-term unemployment. The scar of emigration that last marked the country up to the late 1980s has now returned. 

"The problem is that the fiscal constraints on the government mean that what it can do on job creation and economic stimulus is limited," said  Alan McQuaid, chief economist at Bloxham Stockbrokers. "It may be more about lifting the morale of depressed consumers," he added. 

The domestic economy has been hit by government spending cuts and tax increases that have led to households spending less and saving more. Under the EU-IMF bailout deal, the government itself has to cut many thousands of jobs. About 16,400 government posts have gone since 2008 and the government must reduce its payroll numbers to 302,000 by the end of this year. 