I despair for the future of the physical book, but apparently not as much as  Veronika Teuber. The German-born artist spends her days on the Lower East Side preserving her library in beeswax.

"I was at a lecture in early '97," she said. "They were talking about publishing books in the past, present and how it will be in the future. It will be a very sad day for me if books are not published any more. The electronic format isn't interesting to me. The electronic book is always the same."

At the risk of sounding past tense, I'd have to agree. Physical books have personality, presence. Some even have their own peculiar scent, like people. I recently picked up the two-volume "The Annotated  Sherlock Holmes" at a used-book sale. When I brought it home and opened it, the fragrance of the previous owner's pipe rose from its pages. How many eBooks offer that? 

The attraction of the book starts with the weight of the object in 

your hands. The book can be beautiful in its own right—regardless of whether the writing lives up to the cover and the quality of the printing. But the most important sensation I get is of control. Your computer or Kindle or iPad can run out of juice from one moment to the next. Chinese hackers with nothing better to do could probably delete your entire electronic library with a single keystroke. Or you could drop it in the tub.

The latter could happen with a book, too. But the price of replacing a paperback isn't as onerous as that of buying a new Nook. In any case, my relationship with a book is more intimate than with an electronic device. It's a friend rather than a temperamental acquaintance, something that doesn't need coddling. (I'm not suggesting that Kindles et al. are entirely without merit. With a few clicks, my brother, a classics scholar, can download books that have been out of print for centuries from university libraries around the world. And they're convenient on subways, as long as nobody wants to take it from you.) 

Ms. Teuber, 67 years old, isn't as flaky as she may initially sound. The modest East Third Street apartment she shares with her husband,  Anthony Biancucci, a graphic designer, is filled with favorite books she has no intention of waxing—Lawrence Durrell's "Alexandria Quartet," for example; and Proust. 

She's also the first to appreciate the inherent irony of her enterprise. "I can't really read them anymore," she said of her library in aspic. Indeed, she admits that the mummification process gives her pause. "I feel very bad during the first liquid beeswax phase," she said. 

She melts the wax in a double boiler, then uses a paintbrush to coat the cover, binding, pages. "The moment I do it I know I can't open the book anymore, and it is painful."

In Ms. Teuber's defense, she's adding more to the process than she's subtracting. The results often are beautiful. She selects books that instinctively attract her—be it because of their shape, color, size, content or simply due to intuition. "It's like when I do a portrait," said the artist, who divides her time between Manhattan and a studio near Limoges in France. "The face has to have an attraction to me. The same with a book."

She said she visits French flea markets in search of 19th-century volumes. One of her best finds came when she moved into her own home, a former chapel, and discovered 66 well-worn prayer books, turning them into a single sculptural piece. 

The effect of the work seems a combination of a book's inherent individuality and the manner in which the artist chooses to embellish it. For some reason, I never thought to ask Ms. Teuber whether she had children. These books feel like the children of a loving mother, who sets limits but doesn't suffocate them. They're taken as they come; each one's personality allowed to flourish.

With some volumes she embosses the beeswax. She paints designs on others, a few with hidden messages in florescent paint that glow in the dark. She even drilled a hole through one that she felt was insufficiently transformed by the sealing process. Ms. Teuber estimates she's preserved more than 600 books—half of them here, half at her home in France, and about 30 with her dealer in Germany. She said she's sold 80 volumes at prices ranging from $600 to $800. 

"On the one hand, technology is fantastic," she observed. "On the other hand, if you have an apartment and the book shelves are empty and there's one Kindle standing there, that's depressing."

She has no plans to stop beeswaxing, in the same way that most people with more conventional libraries think of them as organic, works in progress. "As long as I'll be alive," she vowed, "I'll do the waxed books." 

— ralph.gardner@wsj.com 