The Midas touch of  Feng Xiaogang is reaching all the way to North America.

The Chinese director's latest movie, "If You Are the One 2," opened in eight cities in North America on Dec. 24, two days after it was released in China—a rare distinction. Chinese films often take weeks or months to reach even a handful of U.S. cinemas.

A sequel to Mr. Feng's offbeat romantic comedy of 2008, "If You Are the One," the film stars  Ge You and  Shu Qi, reprising their roles in the original. It's a big hit at home, its box-office take in China already far surpassing the roughly 350 million yuan (US$53 million) that the original took in, and it got off to a robust start in North America, pulling in US$7,475 per screen in the U.S. and US$12,160 in Canada on its opening weekend. Currently showing on about 20 North American screens—in New York, Los Angeles, San Francisco, Toronto, Vancouver and other cities with large Chinese populations—"If You Are the One 2" has so far earned about $350,000 there.

The decision to open in the U.S. and Canada simultaneously with China reflects a decision by the film's North American distributor to tap into overseas Chinese audiences, who are eager to catch the latest films as soon as they are released. China Lion Film Distribution is borrowing a page from the playbook of the big Hollywood studios, which have taken to releasing movies in major global markets at the same time. Chief Executive  Milt Barlow says having Chinese movies open at the same time in North America and other countries outside of Asia should help combat rampant piracy—eventually.

"The [overseas Chinese] audience is so conditioned to seeing these pictures on the Internet or on pirated DVDs," he says. "It will take a while to break the habit that has been around a long time. Nothing beats seeing these pictures on a big screen."

"If You Are the One 2" continues a streak of commercial successes for Mr. Feng. His previous film, last year's "Aftershock," pulled in about $100 million at the box office in China, a record for a mainland movie.

 Write to  Dean Napolitano at dean.napolitano@wsj.com 