 IFC Center  323 Sixth Ave., (212) 924-7771  Friday-May 13

War is hell. In "Caterpillar," that hell isn't only the atrocity of the opening frames, set during the second Sino-Japanese War of 1940. It's what happens when village son Kyuzo (Shima Ohnishi) returns home from combat missing both arms and legs, his face horribly burned, with scarce capacity for speech or hearing. The helpless "war god" becomes the burden of the horrified Shigeko (the sublime Shinobu Terajima), his wife, whose complex arc of emotions betrays a certain pleasure in the reversal of marital dynamics. 

The film is a brutal indictment of Japanese militarism by 1960s rebel auteur Kōji Wakamatsu, who returned to filmmaking in 2004 after a 25-year break. It's also a study of how everyday Japanese life, far from the battlefield, became defined by that wartime spirit. Mr. Wakamatsu, notorious for his radically politicized use of the Japanese pinku eiga—the erotic "pink film" genre that flourished in the 1960s—works in more stately fashion here. He is now 75, and has the confident, measured hand of an old master. But his scenes can be as thoroughly shocking as ever—and perversely amusing even in such a dark scenario. 

Shigeko's first instinct, as she shares a quiet moment with her deformed husband, is to strangle him to death. Kyuzo resists, wordlessly mouthing something urgent. He needs to relieve himself, and that basic biological necessity spares his life, as Shigeko begins to laugh at the absurdity. Fulfilling the fallen hero's needs, especially his incessant sexual demands, becomes his wife's sole purpose, much to her frustration. "Eat, sleep. Eat, sleep. That's all you do!" she screams at him. Eventually, she begins punching him, reciprocating the treatment she's received at his hands, as Kyuzo suffers flashbacks to the crimes he committed in the emperor's name.

"Caterpillar" is adapted from a 1930s short story by Japanese mystery writer Edogawa Rampo (the pen name is a transliteration of "Edgar Allan Poe"), which was censored by the Japanese government during the war. Mr. Wakamatsu, whose 2008 docudrama "United Red Army" turns a critical eye to left-wing extremism of the '60s and '70s, asserts that no war is just. Violence deforms hearts and minds as surely as physical bodies, and war merely institutionalizes it. "Caterpillar," with its bravura performances and unflinching depictions of human indignities, graces and cruelties, brings a quietly devastating argument to the most intimate setting. 

 reRun Gastropub Theater  147 Front St., Brooklyn, (718) 797-2322  Thursday

"It's better to be a live dog than a dead lion," a character named Motel Philosopher (Jim Roche) counsels mild-mannered Charles Driggs (Jeff Daniels) as the latter hangs tough through a tilt-a-whirl romance with the movie's titular wild thing, Lulu (Melanie Griffith). The improvised line (actually, it comes from Ecclesiastes) is one of the many shoot-from-the-hip inspirations that make this one of the coolest American films of the last 30 years. Jonathan Demme's twisty 1986 screwball-meets-noir is a celebration of multi-cultural Americana, clever cameos (like John Waters as a gas-station attendant), and mix-tape grooviness. It also marked Ray Liotta's debut as Ray Sinclair, a badfella whose sinister charisma steers a reckless roadtrip into thrillerville. The film gets a free preview screening before next week's release of the Criterion Collection DVD.

 Film Society of Lincoln Center  165 65th St., (212) 875-5601  Friday-May 19

Taiwan has produced some major voices in world cinema, including such revered directors as Edward Yang and Hou Hsiao-hsien, as well as iconoclastic visionaries like Tsai Ming-liang. This 20-film series surveys some of the pivotal moments in the nation's cinema. The programs span a half-century, from Le Xing's 1963 "Our Neighbors" (aka "Head of Street, End of Lane"), a sympathetic, neorealist view of life on the lower rungs, to "Cape No. 7," Wei Tei-Sheng's 2008 unabashed, crowd-pleasing romantic musical. Notable titles include Mr. Hou's "A Time to Live and a Time to Die," Mr. Tsai's 1992 debut, "Rebels of the Neon God," Fred Tan's "Rouge of the North" and the new film "Juliets," an omnibus in which three different directors reimagine Shakespeare.

 Tribeca Cinemas  54 Varick St., (212) 941-2001  Through Sunday

Now in its 11th year, this festival features a range of recent films from and about India. That includes documentaries such as "Bhopali," Max Carlson's harrowing look at the lingering effects of the catastrophic 1984 Union Carbide gas leak in that Bhopal. But it also means the campy Bollywood homage "Geeta in Paradise" and the star-crossed period romance "Noukadubi," the closing-night gala. Of particular interest to New York audiences is "Karma to Nirvana," part two of the ongoing documentary series "Holy Kitchens," produced by celebrity chef Vikas Khanna. The films explore the role played by Eastern religious traditions in food, in this case the influence of Hindu principles, evoking Gandhi's declaration that "God comes to the hungry in the form of food."

 Museum of the Moving Image  3601 35th Ave., Queens, (718) 777-6888  Friday-Sunday

Audiences can dial M for "Mildred Pierce" Sunday as the Museum of the Moving Image celebrates Mother's Day with a 5-1/2 hour theatrical screening of Todd Haynes's recent HBO miniseries, an adaptation of James M. Cain's 1941 novel, also the source for the 1945 Michael Curtiz film noir starring Joan Crawford, the ultimate "Mommy Dearest." Kate Winslet updates the role in the acclaimed, all-star production, which will be shown with an intermission. Preceding the main event on Friday and Saturday is Chantal Akerman's minimalist classic, "Jeanne Dielman: 23, Quai du Commerce, 1080 Bruxelles." Few actresses can really be called immortal, but Delphine Seyrig qualifies, and her performance here seals the deal, as a woman whose obsessive domestic routine can't scrub away a mental breakdown.