 New York 

Enough about "Spider-Man" already—Tom Stoppard is back on Broadway! Only time will tell whether "Arcadia" is Mr. Stoppard's masterpiece, but it isn't premature to call it one of the key English-language plays of the postwar era, and even in a staging that is less than satisfactory, it makes a rich and affecting impression. Now for the bad news: David Leveaux's revival of "Arcadia," which was originally mounted in London two years ago with a different cast, isn't much better than adequate. When you're talking about a high-profile revival of a great play, good enough won't cut it.

More about that shortly, but first a few heartfelt words about "Arcadia" itself. Last seen on Broadway in 1995, it is an entrancingly clever whodunit for eggheads whose underlying purpose is to dramatize the central problem of modernity: How are we to live our lives if it turns out that they have no ultimate meaning? The play, which is set in an English country house, moves back and forth in time between 1809 and today, and the two main modern-day characters, Hannah (Lia Williams) and Bernard (Billy Crudup), are scholars who are trying to figure out what was going on in the house two centuries earlier. The answer is both astonishing and improbable: Thomasina (Bel Powley), a 13-year-old child prodigy, has figured out the Second Law of Thermodynamics all by herself, much to the bewilderment of Septimus (Tom Riley), her rakish tutor, to whom she is no less precociously attracted.

Ethel Barrymore Theatre,  243 W. 47th St., New York

($71.50-$121.50), 212-239-6200/800-432-7250, closes June 19

The reason why this matters is twofold. Not only does it mean that the universe is slowly and inexorably running down, but it casts a dark shadow of doubt on the optimistic certitude with which Septimus and his contemporaries (not to mention most of us today) lead their well- ordered lives. Hence the haunting exchange between the troubled teacher and his brilliant pupil that is the play's climax. "When we have found all the mysteries and lost all the meaning, we will be alone, on an empty shore," Septimus says, to which Thomasina, a preternaturally wise child who knows by instinct that love is the meaning of life, offers the only possible reply: "Then we will dance."

Those who saw Mr. Stoppard's "The Coast of Utopia" will find themselves on familiar ground in "Arcadia," which grapples with a similar set of concerns, albeit transplanted into a different context. Alexander Herzen's climactic speech in "The Coast of Utopia" would not sound out of place in "Arcadia": "History knocks at a thousand gates at every moment, and the gatekeeper is chance. It takes wit and courage to make our way while our way is making us, with no consolation to count on but art and the summer lightning of personal happiness." Such is the credo of Mr. Stoppard, a thoughtful, troubled agnostic who fears both the destructive moral consequences of radical relativism and the corrosive effects of imperfectly understood scientific discoveries on man's hopeful yet fragile soul.

"Arcadia," like "The Coast of Utopia," is—or should be—far easier to experience than it is to explain. Mr. Stoppard has embedded his philosophical interests in an ingeniously structured double-decker plot that is studded with glints of wicked wit ("Nobody would kill a man and then pan his book. I mean, not in that order"). You don't have to be a physicist, much less a philosopher, to see what Mr. Stoppard is up to, so long as "Arcadia" is staged and the lines spoken with complete clarity and correct emphasis.

This, alas, is where Mr. Leveaux and his cast go wrong. Time and again Mr. Stoppard's punch lines go astray or get thrown away, and the trouble starts as soon as the curtain goes up: Ms. Powley speaks her lines in a thickly mannered accent that might work for an English audience but serves on Broadway as a high bar to immediate comprehension. Other members of the cast are wrestling with related problems. Raúl Esparza, cast as a fey mathematician who tries to explain chaos theory to Hannah, makes the mistake of reducing his big speech to unintelligible gabble, while Mr. Crudup is too genial to be convincing as a waspishly malicious academic. Ms. Williams, who plays Hannah as a quizzical, disappointed tomboy, is both good and appealing, but hers is the only major role in "Arcadia" that is being performed with total believability.

In recent seasons I've seen two excellent regional mountings of "Arcadia," the first directed by Charles Newell for Chicago's Court Theatre in 2007 and the second directed by Aaron Posner for Washington's Folger Theatre in 2009. Both were finely cast (Holly Twyford was especially memorable as Hannah in Washington) and stylishly staged, and both had the crisp sparkle that is missing from Mr. Leveaux's production. If you've never seen "Arcadia," its absence may not be immediately apparent, but those who know the play well will likely find this earnest revival to be unpleasingly flat.

—Mr. Teachout, the Journal's drama critic, blogs about theater and the other arts at www.terryteachout.com. Write to him at tteachout@wsj.com.