The F-15E Strike Eagle fighter was flying just before midnight Tuesday at 22,000 feet over northeastern Libya when its engines pitched out.

In the frantic seconds that followed, the plane's pilot and weapon systems officer decided they had no choice but to eject.

As the two crew members parachuted to the ground, another U.S. Air Force fighter jet remained overhead, and a rapid military-rescue response sprung into action from the Mediterranean Sea. 

Shortly after midnight, a pair of AV-8B Harrier jump-jets launched from the USS Kearsarge and rendezvoused over the crash site with a circling fighter jet, who by then had made contact with one of the F-15 crew members—the pilot—on the ground.

In parallel, two MV-22 Ospreys—specialized aircraft that can take off and land vertically like a helicopter but can fly as fast as a fixed-wing aircraft—prepared to launch from the Kearsarge. 

And a force of more than three dozen Marines boarded two CH-53E helicopters to provide security for the rescue mission, known in military parlance as a "tactical recovery of aircraft and personnel."

With the Ospreys and helicopters en route, the Harriers dropped two 500-pound laser-guided bombs near the crash site in what a senior Marine officer described as a "precautionary" measure to warn off people who might have been approaching the aviator on the ground.

"My understanding is [the pilot] asked for ordnance to be delivered in between where he was located and where he saw people coming toward him," said a senior Marine officer, citing preliminary reports.

The Ospreys reached the pilot's location by 2:19 a.m. local time. While the helicopters hovered overhead, one of the Ospreys landed to recover the him. The Ospreys returned to the Kearsarge with the F-15 pilot aboard by 3 a.m. local time.

Military officials said the second crew member, the weapon systems officer, had been initially recovered by "opposition forces." 

Adm. Samuel Locklear, the commander of the U.S. task force in the Mediterranean, told reporters Tuesday the second crew member "was treated with dignity and respect," and was "now in the care of the United States." Further details weren't immediately available.

Initial indications point to a malfunction aboard the F-15 as the cause of the aircraft's crash. A senior military official said there was "no indication of hostile action but we'll do a thorough investigation as to cause."

While events unfolded in Libya, President Barack Obama was in his hotel suite at the Sheraton San Cristóbal hotel in a neighborhood of Santiago, Chile, getting ready for dinner when, at 7:45 p.m. local time, his national security adviser, Tom Donilon, informed him that the U.S. plane was down in Libya, marking the first U.S. loss in the Libyan campaign so far.

As the presidential motorcade drove Mr. Obama and the first lady to the La Moneda Palace for a lavish dinner hosted by Chilean President Pinera, Mr. Donilon briefed the president on preliminary recovery efforts and was told that the U.S. military was in touch with the pilots on the ground in northeast Libya.

Mr. Donilon skipped the palace dinner to monitor developments from the Sheraton, and twice gave updates to Chief of Staff William Daley, who was with the president at dinner, using a secure phone line. Mr. Daley, in turn, relayed what he learned to Mr. Obama.

Weeks earlier, in testimony before Congress, Defense Secretary Robert Gates had voiced caution about the real-life complexities and dangers of launching a military campaign against Col. Moammar Gadhafi in Libya. Among the administration's national-security apparatus, the Pentagon had been among the most reticent about launching military action.

Mr. Gates found out about the crash shortly after midnight in his suite at the Astoria hotel in St. Petersburg, Russia. Aides said his first thoughts were about the safety of the missing crew members. 

At midnight Santiago time, when the president was back at the Sheraton, he had a secure call with Adm. Michael Mullen, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, in which Adm. Mullen relayed to him DOD's assessment that both of the crewmen were safe.