TUNIS—The speaker of Tunisia's parliament was named interim president and talks started on the formation of a caretaker government Saturday, a day after the first successful mass uprising against an Arab leader in years forced former President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali to flee the country.

Mr. Ben Ali left Friday for Saudi Arabia amid swelling protests against his 23-year autocratic rule. In a statement read on national television Saturday, the head of Tunisia's constitutional council declared the post of the president vacant and called for elections within 60 days. a requirement under the constitution. Citing the constitution, the statement said parliament speaker Foued Mebazaa would act as the North African country's head of state until that time.

Mr. Mebazaa immediately met with opposition figures as well as some former ruling party leaders to discuss a caretaker government ahead of the elections. In a televised address, he said that the temporary government would be an inclusive one. 

"All Tunisians, without exception and exclusion, must be associated in the political process," Mr. Mebazza said after taking the oath of office. 

Saturday's developments offer some clarity about the political situation in the wake of Mr. Ben Ali's sudden departure from office. It also marks the second switch of power in 24 hours. On Friday, Prime Minister Mohammed Ghannouchi said he had temporarily assumed power, after Mr. Ben Ali had attempted to dissolve Mr. Ghannouchi's government.

But uncertainty lingered in Tunis. Although Mr. Ben Ali was out of office, the security structure that had become a hallmark of his tenure showed no signs of weakening. Martial law was in effect around the country. Multiple security police units patrolled central Tunis, and the army was deployed around the city. Authorities kept the public from congregating. 

Tanks blocked the boulevard where the Interior Ministry is located. Balaclava-wearing snipers had taken position on the ministry roof. Plainclothes security police armed with wooden batons barked at pedestrians not to stop, allowing only residents of the street to enter the area that a day earlier was the site of the largest public demonstration in the country in recent memory.

Across the country Saturday there were reports of looting and deadly fires as well as food shortages in certain cities, apparently due to the fact that delivery men didn't show up to work and grocery stores didn't open amid fears of unrest. 

Local radio stations reported that inmates at three prisons attempted to break out of their facilities during the day. In one prison, in the resort town of Monistir, a fire in the facility killed at least 42 people, according to the Associated Press. The news agency also reported a mass breakout in another prison. The detainees were a mixture of political prisoners and criminals, according to local human rights officials.

Still, the mood among many citizens appeared joyful. Many were relieved at the announcement that passed power into the speaker of parliament's hands according to the constitution. "Today is the first day I am proud to be Tunisian," said lawyer Noureddinne Jerbi. "Ben Ali is gone, his family are gone and the rule of law is being respected," he said.

The Tunisian Central Bank issued a statement Saturday saying that banks would be operating normal business operations and performing all financial transactions when the work week starts again. The statement said that the country has enough foreign-currency reserves to cover its obligations.

Air France-KLM announced it would resume flights to Tunisia on Sunday, after it and Deutsche Lufthansa AG cancelled flights to the country on Saturday. Thomas Cook AG, the German arm of the U.K.'s Thomas Cook Group PLC organized four flights on Friday to take about 230 tourists to Germany, while an additional 2,000 will leave Tunisia in the coming days.

Many people in the wider Middle East shared a sense of celebration about the political changes in Tunisia, reveling over the historic moment Friday in which a popular uprising forced a sitting Arab president out of office.

In contrast, Arab governments offered mostly tepid reactions to the popular overthrow of Mr. Ben Ali. The Egyptian Foreign Ministry said in a statement that it "respects the choices made by the Tunisian people," but added that it "trusts they are wise enough to…avoid plunging Tunisia into chaos."

There was little still official response throughout the Middle East about the changing political developments in Tunisia. The Saudi government said that Mr. Ben Ali and his family were welcome to stay in the Gulf nation, but officials said that they would be prevented from transferring their personal wealth with them.

Allegations of corruption that have plagued Mr. Ben Ali's tenure were one of the major rallying points for the month-long demonstrations against his rule. Some Tunisian opposition leaders in exile made calls to have the former president returned to the country to stand trial. It was unclear whether the new caretaker government would take any steps to make that happen.

The political changes unfolding in Tunisia mark a new chapter in the U.S.'s relations with the nation, which received modest amounts of U.S. aid and vexed U.S. officials. In a confidential 2009 U.S. cable leaked recently by WikiLeaks, an official wrote that Mr. Ben Ali's rule had degenerated into a "sclerotic" regime. "By many measures, Tunisia should be a close U.S. ally. But it is not," the cable said.

In a statement Friday, President Barack Obama applauded "the courage and dignity" of Tunisians and called for the government to respect human rights and hold elections soon. His statement came a day after Secretary of State Hillary Clinton blasted governments across the Muslim world for stagnant political orders, saying unaddressed corruption or repression could set the stage for more violence.

Unlike Algeria, Egypt, Libya and others in North Africa, Tunisia has little in the way of homegrown Islamist activity. Diplomats in Tunis say the popular uprising here was fueled by an educated young population and a dissatisfied middle class. Protests have crossed class divides, with trade unions, well-known artists and social organizations participating.

Still, many U.S. and European officials remain wary about what could replace the government in Tunisia, as well as in other Arab capitals, if the democratic tide intensifies. One troubling example is militant group Hezbollah's use of the political system in Lebanon to increase its power.

"We have no idea what comes next," said a senior European official. While he said Islamist parties don't appear to have a major role in the country, he added: "We don't know what's hiding in the shadows."

Mr. Ben Ali, 74 years old, came to power in a bloodless coup in 1987 and was only the second president in the country since Tunisia gained independence from France in 1956. He and his family held close control over politics and major swaths of the economy, diplomats here say. 

Known as a strong-man president, he consistently won elections that were often criticized over their fairness. Most opposition parties were banned under his rule. In 2009, he was re-elected for a fifth five-year term with 89% of the vote. 

When he came to power, he was generally popular. Throughout the 1990s, Tunisians witnessed healthy economic growth and the country was the envy of many natural resource-poor countries in the region. The country's Mediterranean beaches became popular with European tourists, and Tunisia counts itself as a leader in the Arab world for promoting women's rights and education. 

But by the mid-2000s, dissatisfaction had grown. The government did a poor job adapting to the global financial crisis, which hit its tourism- and manufacturing-dominated economy hard, diplomats say. This failure, these people say, exacerbated the economic imbalances between the capital and the less-developed areas inside the country and the lack of jobs for skilled, university graduates. 

Protests over unemployment and police crackdowns erupted in mid-December in the western Sidi Bouzid region and spread quickly across the country. 

U.S. diplomatic cables released by WikiLeaks at around the same time underscored existing perceptions of government corruption, some protesters say. In one, an embassy official called the country a "police state" and described multiple allegations of corruption by the president's family members. 

Many Tunisians are frustrated by the lack of political freedom and angered by First Family corruption, high unemployment and regional inequities," one diplomat wrote. "In the end, serious change here will have to await Ben Ali's departure."

The events that immediately preceded the president's exit, including whether he left of his own volition, remained unclear. On Thursday, Messrs. Ben Ali and Ghannouchi held a private meeting with a small group of opposition leaders who discussed a new governing arrangement, according to a person who was briefed on the meeting. 

Tunisians from all walks of life crowded Friday morning onto a central tree-lined boulevard in Tunis shouting for the president to stand down. Common chants included "Get Out, Ben Ali!" and "Ben Ali: Thanks, but Enough Is Enough!" 

The crowd broke out singing the national anthem in regular intervals and directed cat-calls to undercover security agents who scrambled across rooftops to record the faces of those who had gathered in the streets. For hours, antiriot police stood on the sidelines but didn't interfere with the protest.

By mid-afternoon, however, clashes began and police fired tear gas into the crowd and beat demonstrators after a group of people tried to climb the security gate in front of the ministry building. The streets cleared quickly, with parents sweeping up their children and young people melting back down side streets. 

Mr. Ben Ali declared a state of emergency and a nationwide curfew. He dissolved the government and promised new legislative elections within six months. 

But Mr. Ben Ali also spent part of the day Friday on the phone with some Arab leaders seeking safe places for a temporary exile, according to one person familiar with the situation.

Within an hour of his emergency declaration, military vehicles took up position at the airport and the presidential airplane departed, according to two officials. State television reported that Mr. Ben Ali was heading for Malta. According to Al Jazeera network, the plane continued to France. A French official said, however, that Paris didn't get a request and doesn't wish to host Mr. Ben Ali. He landed eventually in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, according to a person familiar with the situation.

—Keith Johnson, Summer Said, Jay Solomon and David Gauthier-Villars contributed to this article.

 Write to  Margaret Coker at margaret.coker@wsj.com 