Since the dawn of time—or at least amplification—parents have been telling their kids: "Turn it down!" These days, the fact that you can probably sing along with the song being played by the typical earbud-user sitting across from you makes you wonder about the future of hearing.

For the concerned parent, buying kids a pair of noise-attenuating earphones—which can encourage listening at lower volumes by blocking ambient noise—is a sensible preventative measure, like providing a helmet along with the bike. When worn properly, these earphones also deliver much stronger bass response, which is crucial for pop music.

The problem with nonsealing earbuds is that they are often used to drown out the din of modern life. Headphone listeners tend to set their music volume 13 decibels louder than their surrounding noise level. In a subway car, where levels average 89 decibels, according to data compiled by 3M's Occupational Health & Environmental Safety Division, this would expose the listener to the equivalent of a bulldozer at close range.

The other culprit encouraging high-volume listening may be the audio quality of the headphones themselves. Especially when used outdoors, nonsealing earbuds can sound tinny and flat.

To get solid bass response without blasting out your ears, it's crucial that an in-ear earphone provide a good seal, according to Ken Bass, owner of 32 Ohm Audio, a Portland, Ore., hi-fi store that specializes in headphones. "When the speaker is that small, as it is in an earbud, you need to confine the space with a seal," explained Mr. Bass. "If you don't, you don't get any low end."

In fact, the same pair of earphones can sound drastically different depending on which earpiece you use and how deeply it's seated—a poor seal can make a $400 pair sound on par with a $10 pair.

We limited our search to earphones with solid build quality and a street price of $100 or less. We looked for those that have good bass response (keeping pop-music fans in mind) as well as strong clarity (who wants muffled movie dialogue?).

To dispel some misconceptions: In-ear devices are no more dangerous than the headband variety, according to Elliott Berger, an expert in hearing conservation at 3M's E-A-RCAL Acoustical Laboratory. And active-noise reduction headphones (like the Bose series) generally work for low-frequency sounds, "not the noise in the most dangerous frequency range," Mr. Berger said. As a result, they're more for comfort than protection. 

One caveat about noise-isolating headphones: Wearing them makes it hard to hear quiet threats in the environment (bikers, Priuses). The Sennheiser and Ultimate Ears shown here feature a single-flange silicone tip that provides the least amount of noise attenuation but are appropriate for situations where you want to be able to hear your surroundings.

The foam sleeves on the Shure and Etymotic earphones take more work to insert (you need to roll them down and give them a few seconds to expand in your ear canal) but are the most effective at blocking sound and will deliver the best bass. It can take a few days to get used to the foam sleeves, but they grow on you, especially once you hear the improvement in sound. Here are our favorites of the headphones we tested.

 1. Howard Leight Sync 

Howard Leight isn't a hi-fi company—it specializes in industrial and consumer-grade hearing protection—so not surprisingly the Sync is essentially an earmuff crossed with a pair of headphones. While other safety-oriented companies make similar products, the Sync has a chamber inside the ear cup to enhance bass. The Sync's headband may be tighter than your average headphone's, but the noise isolation is astounding. $30, howardleight.com/ear-muffs/sync  

 2. Sennheiser CX 680 

Although the CX 680 has the active user in mind (its silicone fins are designed to hold the headphones in place while you exercise), its sound is superlative, delivering satisfying bass and detailed highs with an open, airy quality that rivals earbuds twice its price. $70, sennheiser.com  

 3. Shure SE215 

What sets the Shures apart is its foam—a proprietary blend that is surprisingly comfortable and, thankfully, washable. Because of the way the drivers press against the ear, inserting the foam tips is much easier. Once you get the hang of it, the result is dramatically better bass. The SE215's cables—the most vulnerable part of the product—are detachable and replaceable. $100, shure.com  

 4. Etymotic MC5 

For maximum noise attenuation, the mc5 is a great starter headphone because it comes with a range of earpieces: two sizes of triple-flange silicone tips; a cylindrical foam tip; and a "glider" foam tip (our favorite because it's easy to insert, relatively comfortable and provides excellent noise attenuation). The mc5 doesn't offer the deepest sounding bass, but its clarity is superb. $80, etymotic.com  

 5. Ultimate Ears 100 

This $20 entry-level offering from Ultimate Ears is the perfect choice for kids—or adults—who routinely lose or trash their headphones. Despite its price, the Ultimate Ears 100 sound more balanced and tighter than standard-issue nonsealing earbuds. In a refreshing change from basic white, it comes in 10 eye-popping, colors. $20, ultimateears.com  

Good news for lovers of loud music: It's okay to turn up the volume a bit for short periods of time, as long as you watch your overall sound-level intake. It's kind of like indulging in chocolate cake: fine in moderation.

According to Brian Fligor, director of diagnostic audiology at Children's Hospital Boston, most people can listen to their portable MP3 players using the headphones that came with the device at 80% of the maximum volume for 90 minutes per day without increasing risk for noise-induced hearing loss. (Surprisingly, all popular MP3 players output the same levels, he found.)

But you have to be aware of all the sound in your life, explained Andrew Vermiglio, an audiologist with the House Research Institute, a nonprofit organization that studies and promotes hearing safety. "It's not just MP3 players. Sitting on a lawn mower or a noisy train. Going to a concert. All of these things can add up."

Because it can be hard to judge how loud your listening level is, Dr. Fligor suggests setting your player to a comfortable listening level at home and not raising it to overcome background noise once you get outside. 

 --Michael Hsu 