Going to Africa was not a dream of mine. I couldn't imagine myself squealing at animals in the wild, even baby ones. I was skeptical of any new enterprise that required immunization. And I never, never, never wanted to set foot on the kind of small plane used to fly to remote game preserves.

So I was genuinely surprised that I ended up adoring Africa when I visited there in 2007. Especially surprising was the fact that I enjoyed traveling through Africa with my husband's ex-wife. 

Sure, Kayle and I had long been friendly—chatting at school programs, conferring on our two households' complicated calendars—but travel can fray the nerves of the closest companions. And that's not taking into account the uncommon arrangement. Africans we met professed to find nothing unusual about a man traveling with two wives. But Westerners tended to be a little more...awed. And curious. 

Our trip began pragmatically: My husband, David Simon, was in South Africa for three months, shooting "Generation Kill," the miniseries he co-created. His son, Ethan, and I both needed to visit, but Ethan's school allowed him no more than two weeks away and I wanted to stay at least three weeks. We could not imagine sending 13-year-old Ethan, savvy traveler though he was, home alone on an 18-hour flight. What to do? We asked his mother, Kayle, if she wanted to go on a safari. 

We are lucky to be what people call a blended family. David and Kayle may be divorced, but they raised their son together. They collaborated seamlessly on all aspects of Ethan's bar mitzvah. We saw each other at holiday dinners and exchanged gifts. I even thanked Kayle in the acknowledgments to one of my novels, noting that her flexibility about my household's ever-changing schedule made her the true Mrs. Incredible. But we had never traveled as a unit before.

Happily, we discovered that four is better than three on a vacation. With four, no one becomes the odd man out. If only two people wanted to go on a night safari, there was no guilt about leaving someone alone at the lodge. At dinner, Kayle and I split bottles of South African Sauvignon Blanc, while David and Ethan decided it was their duty to sample every version of Malva pudding, a rich South African dessert made with apricot jam and brandy. As Nora Ephron once wrote of two couples: "Two of us liked dark meat and two of us liked light meat and together we made a chicken." We made a chicken.

Did the trip change our family dynamic? The proof is in the (Malva) pudding. We've continued to travel together even when logistics are not an issue. To New Orleans for Jazz Fest. And, in the summer of 2008, to Hawaii for a vacation as long as the African one. 



Just as four is better than three, sometimes three parents are better than two. Kayle is the organized one who reads guidebooks in advance; thanks to her long-range planning, we ate exquisite meals at the best restaurants in Oahu, Maui and the Big Island. David is the spontaneous, didactic one who immerses himself in the local culture and history. I'm the one who craves physical activity—swimming, snorkeling, hiking. A teenage boy may be driven insane in our company, but he will never lack for good food, entertainment or exercise. 

However, I'm not physically daring. The volcano on the Big Island was active during our trip and everyone else in our quartet was eager to take a helicopter trip over the scorched landscape. Even more scared of helicopters than I am of small planes, I urged them to go without me. Ethan said politely he'd rather skip the trip if we couldn't go as a family.

I got on the damn helicopter.

—Ms. Lippman has written 15 novels. Her latest book, "The Girl in the Green Raincoat," is out this month. 