HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam—Building a nation is a tricky business, what with legal systems to choose, policies to polish and founding heroes to enshrine.

Then, as Vietnam is finding out, there's the book of national achievements to compile.

Up-and-coming nations have long published books along the lines of the "Guinness Book of World Records," chronicling the feats of their fearless citizens to help provide that sense of national purpose politicians love. India and Malaysia were among the first, shrugging off the yoke of colonialism to bake giant pizzas or weave enormous carpets. Former Soviet satellites including Poland and Ukraine followed, publishing their own national record books. Even the tiny Mediterranean island Malta, population 411,390, published a slender volume, the "Malta Book of Records and Facts."

Now Vietnam is stepping up to bat with the "Vietnam Book of Records," published by Viet Books Co., an outfit better known for publishing drab government directories. The new tome is quickly filling up. There's the village with the most portraits of revolutionary hero Ho Chi Minh; the largest model turtle made of dried squid; and, not least, Tran Minh Thiem, a 75-year-old pensioner credited with spinning around more times than any other Vietnamese without falling down.

Few record-holders embody the spirit of perseverance that marks Vietnam as the wiry Mr. Thiem does. While Americans attempt to set records for all sorts of things, from wearing the most number of T-shirts at one time to assembling the largest collection of toy dragons, Mr. Thiem is touring Ho Chi Minh City's old people's clubs, spinning up to 7,000 times in an afternoon and showing other elderly Vietnamese how to roll back the years.

Donning a flowing red shirt, white pants and a gleaming pair of Puma sneakers here at his grocery store in a dusty alley, Mr. Thiem gradually wound himself up for an afternoon performance recently. Moving his feet in precise 90-degree movements, he removed his hearing aid and extended his arms.

For an additional flourish, he held a pair of red, folding fans in his hands. "That's to keep the audience from getting bored," he says, and just as well: Mr. Thiem actually turns slowly, and it can take him three or four hours to complete a performance.

"After spinning, I can eat more and sleep better, too, but it's not easy for other people to do it without getting sick," he says. At the pensioners' clubs, other people manage only a few dozen turns, he says.

Mr. Thiem first caught the spinning bug when a circus visited his hometown near Ho Chi Minh City, the former Saigon, when he was 26. He says he was inspired by the troupe's Cossack dancers and began mimicking their twirling moves. The first day he managed 200 rotations before getting a headache, but then he managed to work up to 500 and then 700 turns.

Now, his record is 12,000 turns, "and nobody's going to beat it," Mr. Thiem predicts.

Other Vietnamese are also succumbing to record fever, and it's proving a welcome distraction from Vietnam's worsening economic problems, which in recent months have seen a decade-long boom turn into spiraling inflation and a quickly depreciating currency. Le Tran Truong An, publisher of the Vietnam Book of Records, last year appointed an editorial board of 38 people to filter through the growing mountain of applications. It's a lot of work, he says, but "it's much more fun" than what the company usually does.

"This is an attempt to recognize the achievements of our people," says Mr. An, an animated fellow perched among the piles of files mounting up in his second-floor office overlooking a crowded Ho Chi Minh City side-street. "Hopefully it will help introduce Vietnam to the rest of the world." It has already introduced Vietnam to the world of records. The 1,000th anniversary of the founding of capital city Hanoi in October led to a deluge of new candidates, including the 1,000 players who participated in the country's largest-ever soccer match. There was also the country's largest ever parade, which included 31,000 people, including 1,000 representatives from Vietnam's officially designated list of 49,630 national heroes.

Then there are the somewhat more free-spirited record holders. One man holds the record for cultivating Vietnam's largest miniature bonsai tree. (It looks suspiciously like a regular tree.) Meanwhile, 61-year-old Luu Van Du rocks out on his electric guitar by picking the strings with his teeth. Many of the current record holders gathered at an annual ceremony at Ho Chi Minh City's Rex Hotel on Dec. 18.

Candidates featured in Viet Books' new monthly "Record" magazine include a man who says he can float longer than anybody else in Vietnam and the rather alarming Bui brothers, who rub chopped chili peppers into their eyes. They also can eat a kilo of chilies in 10 minutes. "Chilies are just like any other fruit," one of the brothers, Bui Ngoc Vinh, told the magazine, claiming that he and his brother are now immune to the pain.

Few record holders have faced as many obstacles as Vietnam's red-shirted spinning man, Mr. Thiem. Running his grocery store and a small real-estate business diverted him from his spinning. Also his wife, Nguyen Cao Thi, doesn't like his spinning and made her feelings clear on the subject when she married Mr. Thiem in 1975, at the end of the Vietnam War.

"If he's spinning he's not focusing on his family, which is what we needed to do at that time," says Mrs. Thi, who helps run the family business in the outskirts of Ho Chi Minh City, now a teeming metropolis of skyscrapers that is home to more than seven million people.

She eventually relented in 1999 after Mr. Thiem convinced her of what he says are the health benefits of spinning round and round for hours and hours. He says he hasn't been ill in more than 30 years, but, then, he also doesn't smoke or drink and is a vegetarian. Says the 71-year-old Mrs. Thi: "I still worry that people will think I'm married to a crazy person." 

—Nguyen Anh Thu contributed to this article.

 Write to  James Hookway at james.hookway@wsj.com 