LONDON—Strong industrial-production growth in Germany and Italy was partly offset in February by sharp falls in output in Ireland and Greece, official data showed Wednesday. 

Growth in industrial output was also hit by a decline in energy production for the second consecutive month, the figures, released by the European Union's Eurostat agency, showed. Euro-zone industrial output in February rose 0.4% from January and was 7.3% stronger than in February last year. January's data estimate was also lowered to show a monthly increase of 0.2% and annual growth of 6.3%. 

"The industrial sector is still bound to make a clear positive contribution to GDP [gross domestic product] growth in the first quarter," said  Martin van Vliet, an economist at ING. "If production were to hold steady in March, which seems to be quite a conservative assumption, it would rise by around 1% quarter-on-quarter in the first quarter, consistent with a 0.2 point [GDP] growth contribution."

However, growth in the European industrial sector faces headwinds in the form of higher oil prices, the stronger euro, austerity measures in several countries and the possibility of higher European Central Bank interest rates later this year. 

A recent survey by the European Commission suggests confidence in the sector in March remained at its highest level since before the global economic crisis in June 2007, but a survey of manufacturers by Markit indicated the pace of growth in the sector has slowed slightly. 

"Note though that quarterly construction and service-sector growth are likely to have accelerated sharply in the first quarter after the fourth quarter's weather-related slowdown. Accordingly, there remains a strong chance that GDP growth accelerated in the first quarter," said  Ben May, an economist at Capital Economics. 

Euro-zone quarterly economic growth slowed to 0.3% in the final three months of last year from 0.4% in the third quarter as several countries were hit by severe winter weather. 

Eurostat industrial output data suggest there remains a sharp divergence in economic performance between Germany and the smaller member states at the heart of the region's debt crisis such as Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Spain. 

On a monthly basis, industrial output jumped 1.4% in both Germany and Italy, the euro zone's biggest and third-largest economies respectively, and rose 0.4% in France. 

But in Ireland and Greece, two countries that have needed financial support from the European Union and International Monetary Fund to deal with their debt problems, industrial output fell 2.5% and 1% respectively in February. 

The data showed that energy was the only industrial sector to register a drop in production during March in the euro zone. Energy production fell 0.6% on the month and 3.3% on an annual basis, the sharpest year-to-year decline since November 2009. 

Elsewhere, on an annual basis, increases in production of intermediate and capital goods continued to outpace output of durable and nondurable consumer goods. 

 Write to  Nicholas Winning at nick.winning@dowjones.com 