MANNHEIM, Germany—Euro-zone governments could boost the effective lending capacity of the region's financial rescue fund to €440 billion ($599.06 billion), but not beyond, a key economic advisor to Germany's center-right government said Monday. 

  Wolfgang Franz, who chairs the Germany's council of independent economic experts, also said that this is not the time to revamp the European Financial Stability Facility to allow the EFSF to be used to buy back bonds issued by troubled member states. 

Speaking in an interview, Mr. Franz also endorsed Bundesbank President  Axel Weber as the next European Central Bank president when the job becomes available this autumn. 

"I don't think it would be a massive problem to increase the EFSF's effective lending capacity to €440 billion, as originally planned," Mr. Franz said. "But that should be the limit for the foreseeable future." 

The remarks come as German government officials fear that the cost of adding to the volume of the fund would disproportionately fall on euro-zone countries in better fiscal health. 

Although it is currently a €440 billion fund, the EFSF can lend out only about €250 billion, according to some estimates. One reason is that the guarantees provided by euro-zone members states are extra-large, so that the EFSF gets a top triple-A credit rating. Also, the facility's lending capacity shrinks when one guarantor drops out to receive aid, as Ireland did last year. 

Mr. Franz, who is also president of Germany's well-respected ZEW think tank, said "this is not the time to publicly speculate about Greek bond buy-backs." 

"Markets must give Greece the time to implement its tough consolidation plan and await its results," he said, adding that "the EU rescue mechanism seems to work reasonably well in its current form." 

In a thinly-veiled criticism of the government's communication strategy during the crisis, Mr. Franz said "the German government would be well advised to discuss its position (on the rescue fund) behind closed doors, and in small circles and speak publicly with one voice." Otherwise, it risks upsetting fragile financial markets, he said. 

There does not appear to be a consensus within the center-right government on whether the lending capacity of the euro zone's bailout fund should be increased. 

Asked whether Mr. Weber should take the ECB's helm when  Jean-Claude Trichet's eight-year term expires in October, Mr. Franz said: "Axel Weber is not only an excellent economist, especially in the field of monetary economics, but, importantly, he sticks to his guns. He has staunchly defended euro-zone stability, even during the most difficult times. That's what the euro zone and the European Central Bank needs right now. I couldn't think of a better future ECB president than Axel Weber." 

The Bundesbank chief is seen as one of two leading contenders for the ECB's presidency, along with fellow ECB board member  Mario Draghi. Both men, although well respected in global financial circles, have remained quiet about their intentions. 

Turning to Germany's economic growth prospects, Mr. Franz said that economists "shouldn't get carried away" following very strong economic activity in 2010. "The underlying growth dynamics in 2011 should be weaker than the headline number suggests," Mr. Franz said. "We peg the statistical overhang at roughly 1.5%," which means that there is a massive advance contribution of 2010 GDP to economic growth this year, Mr. Franz said. The German Council of Economic Experts predicts that Germany's economy will grow by 2.2% in 2011. 

Germany's economy in 2010 grew at its strongest rate since the country's reunification, propelled by buoyant exports and rising investment, according to preliminary estimates from the Federal Statistics Office. German gross domestic product increased 3.6% last year in price-adjusted terms, after slumping 4.7% in 2009. 

 Write to  Nina Koeppen at nina.koeppen@dowjones.com 