Aer Lingus Group said it swung to a pretax profit in 2010 of €30.4 million ($41.8 million) from a loss of €154.8 million a year ago, but warned that if fuel prices stay high, its operating profit will be significantly lower this year. 

The Irish airline also said it posted a fourth-quarter pretax loss €32 million, after a loss of €134.8 million a year earlier, driven lower by charges relating to its redundancy scheme. 

Air India's chief operating officer Gustav Baldauf resigned, a company spokesman said. Baldauf joined the state-run carrier in April as its first COO, but had reportedly criticized the government recently about interference in the airline's operations. 

 HSBC, Europe's largest bank by market value, said full-year net profit jumped to $13.2 billion, compared with $5.83 billion in 2009, due to a fall in bad loans, but cut a key earnings measure to reflect rising capital charges. 

The bank also awarded new Chief Executive Stuart Gulliver £5.2 million ($8.4 million) in deferred shares for his 2010 performance, less than the £9 million all-share bonus he received for his work in 2009. 

 UBS named the former financial head of the Gates Foundation, Alexander Friedman, as chief investment officer of its flagship private bank, one of several prominent hires at the unit. UBS also hired former White House deputy chief of staff Mona Sutphen and Mark Haefele, an alternative asset manager.  

National Bank of Greece's Chief Executive Officer Apostolos Tamvakakis said its offer for rival Alpha Bank is a friendly approach and rejected the idea of making a hostile bid, saying that such a move wouldn't be productive. 

Bayer, the German chemical and pharmaceutical company, issued a cautious forecast for 2011 after swinging to a surprise net loss in the fourth quarter of €145 million ($199.4 million), down from €153 million net profit a year earlier, as high charges hit results.

Luxottica Group said its net profit rose 88% to €55.6 million ($76.5 million) in the fourth quarter and expects another strong year in 2011 as consumers flock back to high-end brands while the its Sunglass Hut chain continues to grow. The world's largest eyewear maker said it made a full-year net profit of €403 million. 

Lloyd's of London, the U.K.'s 322-year-old insurance and reinsurance market, will be prepared for Europe's proposed new Solvency II capital rules for insurance companies when they are introduced in January 2013, Chairman Lord Peter Levene said in an interview. 

 Ventas, which operates senior housing communities, skilled-nursing facilities and hospitals, plans to acquire Nationwide Health Properties in an all-stock deal valued at $5.8 billion, creating a large health-care real-estate-investment trust. 

Axa Private Equity said it agreed to pay €360 million ($495.1 million) for 10% of Spanish energy transport company Compania Logistica de Hidrocarburos, the fifth largest service-station operator in Spain. 

A Louisiana pension fund that has pushed for a higher sale price in other mergers has sued to block NYSE Euronext's acquisition by Deutsche Börse. The Louisiana Municipal Police Employees' Retirement System alleges the transaction doesn't deliver a "fair price."

The Korea Exchange is considering an initial public offering to make it easier to participate in the ongoing consolidation of global stock exchanges, said Kim Bong-soo, chairman of South Korea's main bourse operator. He didn't give a timeframe for a potential listing.

 Publisher Pearson said full-year net profit more than tripled to £1.3 billion ($2.1 billion) from £425 million in 2009, due to strong performances at its education and publishing operations as well as the sale proceeds of Interactive Data Corp.  

 Copper miner Equinox Minerals will offer 4.8 billion Canadian dollars ($4.91 billion) in cash and shares to take over Lundin Mining in a hostile bid that could derail Lundin's planned C$9 billion merger with Inmet Mining. 

Merck & Co. said ongoing reviews by antitrust regulators will delay the formation of a new animal-health joint venture with Sanofi-Aventis until the third quarter. 

 Debt-laden Centro Properties Group agreed to sell its 588 U.S. shopping centers to private-equity giant Blackstone Group for $9.4 billion in a deal that will allow Centro's Australian operations to continue as a stand-alone company, according to people familiar with the matter.  

 A fund run by J.P. Morgan Chase is in talks with Twitter to take a minority stake in the rapidly growing microblogging company, people familiar with the matter said. The investment, which is expected to value Twitter at more than $4 billion, will be made from the bank's new $1.2 billion digital growth fund, these people said.  

 U.S. deals website Groupon said it is teaming up with Chinese internet giant Tencent Holdings to launch a group-buying services website in China, placing it ahead of other major U.S. social internet companies in building a China presence.  

Google's move last week to lower the search rankings of websites that the company said offer little useful information appears to be having a dramatic impact, according to firms that study search-engine data. The internet giant estimated that the new algorithms would affect about 12% of U.S.-based search queries and would expand to non-U.S. queries in the near future.

 Mobile giant Vodafone said some of its U.K. customers might have experienced temporary loss of voice, text message and Internet services due to some equipment damage following a break-in at one of its technical facilities near London on Sunday night.  

The parent company of China Unicom will offer a new mobile phone brand that will use the company's own operating system, placing it in competition with Apple's iPhone and devices using Google's Android operating system. 

Hutchison Port Holdings Trust said it plans to raise as much as US$6.4 billion in an initial public offering in Singapore, which, if successful, would be the largest IPO in the city-state's history. 

QR National, Australia's largest coal hauler, said it swung to a net profit of 278 million Australian dollars (US$282.9 million) in the first half, compared with a A$132 million loss a year earlier in its first results since a A$4.6 billion privatization by the Queensland state government in November.