  (See Corrections & Amplifications item below.)  

 Detroit  

Does America need a party wagon with clamshell doors or a sports car with a power-boosting flywheel contraption in place of the passenger seat?

That car makers are wooing consumers with show cars that pose such fanciful notions is one more indicator that the auto industry's depression is starting to lift. The show cars will be on display when the North American International Auto Show opens in Detroit Saturday.

Car makers plan on displaying small show cars and wagons with curves, creases, ornamental flourishes and unconventional proportions to dispel the stereotype that compact vehicles must be drab. The Mini Paceman concept, for example, is a two-door micro-car accented with brushed copper where chrome might normally be used. Boxy sport utility vehicles are morphing into more aerodynamic shapes. There are electric cars and hybrids—but in more than one case electrification is used as a way to achieve extreme speed. 

Auto makers spend millions of dollars on the design and engineering of their concept cars, and pay close attention to how consumers and the media react. While many concept cars remain show pieces, car makers have responded to enthusiasm for show cars by putting more realistic versions into production.

 Tesla Under Pressure 

 Ford Takes a Chance on C-Max 

 Mercedes Upgrades Popular C-Class 

 Porsche Returns to Detroit With 918 Spyder Hybrid 

 The Detroit Auto Show's Best Luxury Cars 



The avid reception for a VW Beetle concept at the Detroit auto show in 1994 propelled the German auto maker to build the reincarnation of its iconic model. Car makers also road-test features in concept models that make it to production. The idea of using voice commands to operate a phone on the road emerged in show cars a decade ago. Now such technology is a reality.

Other concept cars that have made it to real production lines are the Chevy Volt hybrid, the Dodge Challenger muscle car, and the Pontiac Solstice roadster. One famous example of a vehicle that bombed: the Pontiac Aztek crossover.



Of the concept cars at the Detroit show this week, here are a few that reflect industry trends that will shape what consumers see in showrooms soon—or just flout convention in novel ways.

The Vertrek concept is Ford's proposal for a vehicle to replace the boxy Escape compact crossover. The Escape embodied Detroit's old view of crossovers: They should look like gas-thirsty sport utility vehicles so customers don't feel wimpy driving what's really a bulked up compact car. The Vertrek represents the new view: Aerodynamic styling sends a message that the vehicle is fuel efficient and hip. The concept offers "stop-start" technology that shuts down the engine at stoplights to save gas.

 What Works: The Vertrek's sleeker lines don't compromise interior space. 

 Monkey Wrench: The Vertrek looks good—like a gaggle of similar compact crossovers already on the market.

 • Hyundai Curb  

Korean auto maker Hyundai Motor Co. is keeping competitors up at night with its string of expressive new models. Drawing on design talent from studios in California, Europe and Korea, Hyundai has transformed its midsize Sonata sedan from a knock-off of the Toyota Camry into an eye-catching styling leader in the segment. The Hyundai Curb concept, a product of the company's California design shop, reflects Hyundai's desire to grab a piece of the urban club-wagon market pioneered by a  Toyota Motor Corp. car, the Scion xB. The Curb concept is compact, but uses clamshell doors to create the feeling of a spacious playroom on wheels.

  What Works: Hyundai's drive to use styling flair to set itself apart from the established Japanese brands is a welcome kick in the industry's pants.

 Monkey Wrench: It isn't clear the U.S. market is dying for more variations on the blocky urban micro-wagon theme. Scion xB sales fell 20% last year.

 • GM Sierra All Terrain HD 

  General Motors Co.
GM


0.28
%




 killed the Hummer H2 maxi-sport utility vehicle when a deal to sell the brand to a Chinese heavy-equipment company blew up. The hulking Sierra All Terrain HD is the show truck for all those people who miss the Hummer's Terminator macho feel. The Sierra All Terrain has a 6.6-liter diesel engine and a six-speed Allison heavy truck transmission, 35-inch tires, and a suspension built for forging far beyond the limits of pavement. 

  What Works: The Chevy Volt plug-in hybrid may be the North American Car of the Year for 2011, but GM's most loyal customers love great, big trucks. 

 Monkey Wrench: GM has an unnerving penchant for dreaming up super-size trucks just ahead of big spikes in oil prices. 

 • Porsche 918 RSR  

Of all the concept cars on display in Detroit, the Porsche 918 RSR is one of the truest to the old idea of the concept car.

This racing car derived from Porsche's previously shown 918 Spyder concept has an unusual energy-storing flywheel where the passenger usually sits. The system, seen on Porsche's 911 GTR 3 race car, stores energy, and then feeds it back on demand to power electric motors that drive the front wheels. The result: a boost that gives the car the equivalent of 767 horsepower, Porsche says.

Porsche is likely to offer some form of the 918 as a production car. Would it sell a version of the 918 RSR concept? It seems far-fetched.

Still, Mercedes-Benz this week was emboldened to display a lemon-lime sorbet colored, gull-wing door super car called the SLS AMG E-Cell. The car's electric powertrain delivers more than 500 horsepower, says  Daimler AG
DDAIY


-0.34
%




 Chief Executive Dieter Zetsche. 

Build it or Bag it? Mr. Zetsche's made the call. Mercedes will build it, to order, starting in 2013.

 Write to  Joseph B. White at joseph.white@wsj.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications:  An earlier version of this article was incorrectly accompanied by a photograph the Porsche 918 Spyder instead of the Porsche 918 RSR described in the article.