WASHINGTON—President Barack Obama made a big push for clean energy Tuesday, saying the nation should develop 80% of its electricity from clean sources by 2035 and pursue a raft of research and development projects to be financed by killing $4 billion in annual tax subsidies for oil, gas and other fossil-fuel producers. 

Mr. Obama's emphasis on renewable-energy investment marks a shift away from efforts to develop a comprehensive global-warming policy with Congress, reflecting political reality and Republican opposition to the greenhouse-gas regulations. 

The prime-time focus on clean energy underscores the White House's belief that domestic production of wind, solar and other types of clean energy—as well as innovative technologies that make them cheaper and more reliable—could provide jobs in a weak economy and reduce the country's dependence on fossil fuels. 

The president will say his 2012 budget would increase clean-energy technology funding by one-third when compared with the prior year, or to about $8 billion. 

"Instead of subsidizing yesterday's energy, let's invest in tomorrow's," Mr. Obama will say, according to a copy of his prepared remarks. He will add, "Now, clean-energy breakthroughs will only translate into clean-energy jobs if businesses know there will be a market for what they're selling." 

The president will say his budget would include consumer rebates and other incentives for electric vehicles, aimed at putting one million advanced technology vehicles on the road by 2015. 

Mr. Obama's plan also calls for a sizable increase in government-funded research and development, focused in part on getting the cost of solar energy down to $1 a watt. The president will call for more "Energy Innovation Hubs," launched by the U.S. Energy Department, which foster the development of new technology until it's ready for the private sector. 

Debate over the future of clean energy often focuses on the government's use of both carrots and sticks to encourage a shift from fossil fuels to alternative energy sources. The president's speech is decidedly focused on the carrots. 

The administration has already won praise from the environmental community for doling out billions of dollars of loan guarantees and tax incentives to promote solar, wind, biofuels and clean coal projects, among others. 

Luma Resources, a solar-roofing company whose founders were guests of First Lady Michelle Obama at the address, received $500,000 under the 2009 stimulus program. Last month, the Energy Department provided a $1.45 billion loan guarantee to one of the world's largest solar generation plants, Abengoa Solar Inc.'s Solana project in Arizona. 

Going forward, wind and solar companies would also like to see a long-term extension of a popular grant program, called 1603 grants, which allows them obtain grants instead of investment tax credits. 

Clean-energy advocates also support the creation of a national renewable electricity standard, which would force power companies to generate a certain percentage of their electricity from renewable sources. Democratic lawmakers have proposed a 15% standard. 

The Obama administration faces a tougher challenge, however, when it comes to developing and enforcing new standards for fossil fuels, which can be cheaper and easier to use than alternative energy sources. 

In what has become an oft-quoted mantra, business leaders accuse the administration of passing regulations that kill jobs in a tough economy. Coal companies have been particularly critical of the administration's greenhouse gas rules, which seek to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping gases, and oil companies have criticized the pace at which the administration issues offshore drilling permits. 

There have been recent signs that Mr. Obama is willing to take a closer look at the impact of federal rules—and particularly, the impact of environmental rules—on the job market. 

Earlier this month, the president signed an executive order that requires federal agencies to review outdated rules that hurt job creation. Last night, on the eve of the president's address, Carol Browner stepped down as the White House's climate and energy czar. Ms. Browner was known for her work on a climate bill and her departure was seen as sign the president could soften his approach to environmental rules.

 Write to  Tennille Tracy at tennille.tracy@dowjones.com 