MUMBAI—India's central bank raised its lending rate by half a percentage point Tuesday and announced a new monetary policy framework, escalating its fight against inflation even as it lowered its forecast for this year's economic growth.

The surprise half-percentage-point rise to 7.25%—more than the Reserve Bank of India's usual quarter-percentage-point increases—highlights the urgency of taming price pressures that threaten the economy's rapid growth. 

  IRT: RBI Policy Brings Banks More Pain 

  Heard: RBI Moves Strongly, but Is It Too Little, Too Late?  

"Reining in inflation should … take precedence, even if there are some short-term costs by way of lower growth," RBI Governor Duvvuri Subbarao said in an address to bankers in which he unveiled the monetary policy review for the fiscal year that began April 1. 

The central bank said it will change its monetary policy structure to use the repurchase rate, or lending rate, as its main policy lever, seeking to influence the overnight call rate. 

The revision followed an RBI working group report that sought to refine its liquidity-management framework in line with international best practices. The repo rate was chosen as the operative rate as the central bank aims to keep liquidity tight. 

The reverse repurchase rate, or borrowing rate, also was raised by half a percentage point, to 6.25%. The new policy framework envisages a one-percentage-point corridor between the two rates. 

The sharp rise in the key rates has New Delhi's approval, which generally has been more pro-growth. 

Finance Minister Pranab Mukherjee said the move was needed as "inflationary pressures in the economy are still very high." 

The RBI set its inflation target for March 2012, the end of the current fiscal year, at 6%, as rising crude-oil prices fan price pressures. 

The RBI's attempts to tamp down inflation have been unsuccessful so far. Originally driven by food prices, inflation in recent months has moved into manufactured goods as well, raising the specter of a wage-price spiral. 

Headline inflation came in at 8.98% in March, nearly a full percentage point higher than the RBI's estimate of 8%, which it had revised upward three times. 

The RBI expects the economy to expand around 8% in the current fiscal year, lower than the 8.6% the economy is estimated to have grown last fiscal year. The government expects the economy to grow as much as 9.25% this fiscal year. 

The central bank's lower estimate reflects the slowing momentum in the world's second-fastest-growing major economy. The series of rate rises has raised borrowing costs just as rising global commodity prices have pinched investment. 

Only five of 15 economists polled by Dow Jones Newswires had predicted the 0.5 percentage point increase. The rest had expected a 0.25 percentage-point rise. 

Bonds slipped and stocks fell on the move, with the benchmark Sensex closing down 2.4% at a near six-week low of 18,534.69.

The rupee initially rose, but gave up gains tracking a sharp fall in stocks. The dollar was at 44.51 rupees in late trade versus 44.34 rupees late Monday. 

"If you define baby step as 25 basis points, then 50 basis points is a large step. It's no longer a baby step," RBI Governor Subbarao said in a news conference later. 

"There is a need to slow down growth sufficiently below potential to ease the demand-led price pressures," HSBC said in a note. 

Rate changes since 2004 in dozens of countries.

The RBI is likely to continue monetary tightening. Eight out of 10 economists polled by Dow Jones Newswires expect another quarter-perecentage-point rise at the next meeting on June 16, with one expecting a half-percentage-point increase. They expect further increases of 0.5 percentage point to 0.75 percentage point by end-March 2012. 

With Tuesday's increases, the RBI has raised the repo rate by 2.5 percentage points and the reverse repo rate by three percentage points in a little over a year. 

The RBI held banks' cash reserve ratio at 6%, and left the level of deposits banks must set aside in government bonds at 24%. 

It also said it was setting up a "marginal standing facility" as an additional liquidity facility, against which banks can borrow an amount up to 1% of their deposits. The rate for the marginal standing facility will be one percentage point above the repo rate, and two percentage points above the reverse repo rate. 

The bank saving deposit rate was raised by half a percentage point to 4%, the first increase since March 1, 2003. 

Bankers said the rise in the policy rates will lead to higher lending rates. IDBI Bank Ltd. was first off the block, raising its lending and deposit rates shortly after the central bank's decision. 

The state-run lender increased interest rates on some deposits by 0.25 percentage point to 0.5 percentage point, it said in a statement. The bank also raised its base rate and prime lending rate by 0.50 percentage point each to 10% and 14.5%, respectively, effective Thursday. The base rate is the rate below which banks can't price any loans. 

ICICI Bank Chief Executive  Chanda Kochhar said she expects lending rates to rise between 0.5 percentage point to one percentage point across the sector. 

"Lending rate transmission has to happen, maybe with a bit of a lag," said Pratip Chaudhuri, chairman of State Bank of India. He expects the rates he offers to his borrowers to rise by 0.25 percentage point to 0.5 percentage point. 

Companies, which have been suffering from high input costs, will be hurt more by the rate increases. 

"The continued monetary tightening without any movement on structural reforms to address supply-side bottlenecks will have an added impact on capacity creation and expansion,"  Chandrajit Banerjee, director general at the Confederation of Indian Industry, an industry lobby group, said in a statement. 

"Going forward, high oil and other commodity prices and the impact of the anti-inflationary monetary stance will weigh on growth," the RBI said. 

The Indian government may cut its economic growth forecast for this fiscal year because of global uncertainties and rising commodity prices, said Montek Singh Ahluwalia, deputy chairman of the Planning Commission, the top government think tank. 

Industrial production data, a monthly index of economic activity, also have been flagging. Output during April 2010-February 2011 was up 7.8% year-to-year, compared to 10% in the previous year. 

Last week, the Asian Development Bank said that if fuel and food prices continue to rise at their current pace, inflation could shave 0.4-1.5 percentage points off gross domestic product in each of Asia's largest developing economies this year and next, including in China and India.

—Prasanta Sahu and Mukesh Jagota in New Delhi and Raghavendra Upadhyaya in Mumbai contributed to this article.

 Write to  Subhadip Sircar at subhadip.sircar@dowjones.com and Nupur Acharya at nupur.acharya@dowjones.com 