NEW DELHI—It was a tough crowd, but  Vikram Pandit, chief executive of  Citigroup Inc.,
C


0.92
%




 managed to win over the room full of finance majors gathered to meet him in an Obama-esque town hall gathering in the first-floor ballroom of the Indian capital city's regal Imperial Hotel.

President Obama had it easier, though. There was no dancing or hip-shaking here. This crowd meant business. It was all Street talk and all earnest.

So Mr. Pandit, despite trying not to, was forced to be the professional banker that he is, and offer up statements similar to what he might exchange with his peers on Wall Street.

Since taking over as chief executive in December 2007, Mr. Pandit is on his first official visit to his country of birth. His first stop was in Mumbai, where Citigroup hosted a cocktail reception in the glittering ballroom of the Taj Mahal Palace so he could meet some of his largest revenue generators, the firm's clients. He has been in Delhi for two days attending the spring meeting of the International Institute of Finance.

Now that Citigroup is no longer on the verge of collapse, or owned by the U.S. government, or still running huge losses—last year it netted globally $10.6 billion on revenues of $86.6 billion—the man at the helm finally has time to breathe, and to check in on business in other parts of world to gauge the growth opportunities.

Mr. Pandit addressed the town-hall-style meeting in Delhi, aglitter under three enormous chandeliers. Under their bright white light in the rectangular room, 150 men and women from business schools and graduate schools across the city listened, with another 260 beaming in via a videoconference feed. And then started the volley of hard questions: During the financial crisis, the U.S. government infused dollars in the system but that money ended up as credit loans in India and other countries. How did this help the U.S. financial system?

Mr. Pandit responded that a whole series of tools was used, and the government was spending money in a Keynesian way.

Another: How do you expect to compete with the private sector banks and other foreign banks in India?

As a global bank—with offices in Africa and Latin America—Citi can be a ready banking partner for Indian companies wherever they want to do business, he replied.

And then: How do you hope to increase credit to the small and medium companies across India and increase their access to financial products?

Citi is working with India's central bank to see how the bank can increase its footprint, Mr. Pandit said.

And finally: Where does Citi see itself better positioned-in India or China with their respective governance and economic structures? Mr. Pandit sidestepped this question, saying, "There is a lot of convergence in the world," and adding that executives "have to be realistic that we can get to the same point from different routes."

Mr. Pandit finally said: "Are there only finance majors in this room? Anyone from marketing? We need to talk about the brand pretty soon!"

In India today, Citigroup has 42 branches, 7,500 employees and services 45,000 companies. The bank doesn't break out its revenues by country and will only say that it has been consistently profitable in India. Last year, the Asia-Pacific region provided 43% of net profits.

Mr. Pandit said he wants to serve more midsize companies and is working with the Central Bank of India on regulation to see how Citi can increase the number of bank branch offices. Reserve Bank of India rules restrict the number of branches that foreign banks can open in India each year.

Students in the audience were thrilled to be interacting with Mr. Pandit but some wished he were more candid.

Nishita Gupta, who is doing a master's degree in mathematics at Delhi University's St. Stephen's College and the purveyor of the India-China question, said, "I was expecting him to be more open."

But Lokesh Bahety, an MBA student in Delhi who has an internship lined up at Citi, applauded the wide variety of questions Mr. Pandit addressed.

"The questions were from all verticals, and Sir took a lot of time to answer them," he said after the event.

Mr. Pandit won over the students with his final sales pitch: Whether for international experience or training and development of a suite of fancy financial products, whatever is your financial major's hearts' desire, "being at Citi reminds me of being in a candy store. We have everything, so whatever you want, we can offer it to you."