"When Rose woke up that morning, she felt royal." Thus begins "The Queen of France" (Candlewick, 32 pages, $16.99), an endearingly droll picture book for children ages 4 to 7 by Tim Wadham. In it, a little girl transforms herself by means of jewelry and a fluffy pink skirt into a regal figure who sweeps around the household making lordly enquiries. "Why are you planting those bumpy sticks?" the queen asks Rose's mother, who smiles up from her work in the garden. "This is a rosebush, your majesty," Rose's mother replies. When the queen pricks her finger on a thorn, she goes off in search of the Royal Physician but finds only Rose's father mowing the lawn. So she removes her imperial raiment, turns back into Rose, bandages her finger and, in short order, resumes her stately attire. Coming upon Rose's mother, now in the kitchen, the queen remarks: "I am shocked to see that you do your own cooking." Rose's mother looks amused. "Well," she says, "here in the village, we have to do our own cooking." There's a nostalgic echo of Maurice Sendak in Kady MacDonald Denton's pencil-and-watercolor illustrations here, particularly in the way she has drawn Rose's quirky face and queenly posture. As with all childhood dress-ups, the fun is not just in pretending to be someone else but in returning to the warm embrace of the familiar. Eventually Rose tells her parents: "I would rather be your daughter than the queen of France." Ah, but for how long? After dinner, Rose no longer feels "royal" but instead feels "scary." And on the final pages we see her holding up a reptile costume. "Perfect," she says.

Aldous Huxley was a tremendously prolific writer, but he produced only one story for young readers. In 1944, the author of "Brave New World" wrote a mordant little tale called "The Crows of Pearblossom" as a gift to his niece. It was published in 1967, four years after Huxley's death, and went out of print. Now it's back in a vivid picture-book edition (Abrams, 40 pages, $16.95) with robust and suitably disquieting illustrations by Sophie Blackall. As you might imagine, Huxley spins no saccharine tale of bunnies frisking in the sunshine. The story begins with the discovery by poor Mrs. Crow that a rattlesnake is to blame for the daily disappearance of her "darling little" eggs. When she pours out her grief and rage upon her husband, who is just back from his job as assistant manager in a local drugstore, Mr. Crow shakes his head: "This is serious," he says. "This is the sort of thing that somebody will have to do something about." He has no intention of confronting the monster in its lair and killing it, as Mrs. Crow demands, but neither can he endure her insinuation that he is afraid to do so. To relieve his feelings, he insults his wife and flies off to confer with Old Man Owl. Owl's clever idea is to devise two indigestible eggs of hardened clay, which the menfolk slip into the nest and leave as bait for the serpent. Hungry Mr. Snake is not long in arriving. "Two eggs today!" he says, smacking his lips; "nyum-nyum." Soon the snake is writhing in intestinal distress, lashing furiously until he is "coiled and corkscrewed into such complicated convulsions" that he forms a bowline knot on one end and a clove hitch on the other. He's stuck, hitched to the tree right above the nest in what turns out to be a useful position. For Mrs. Crow goes on to hatch 17 children, and, Mr. Huxley concludes, "she uses the snake as a clothesline on which to hang the little crows' diapers."

Children have a chance to acquaint themselves with another artistic giant of the 20th century with "The Boy Who Bit Picasso" (Abrams, 48 pages, 16.95), a sparkling illustrated memoir of Antony Penrose's childhood encounters with the great painter and sculptor. In these pages, the son of the photographer Lee Miller and the artist Sir Arthur Penrose (both of them Surrealists) recounts his memories of an occasion when Pablo Picasso came to stay on the family's farm in the English countryside and, later, when Mr. Penrose and his parents traveled to France to return the visit. It is a wonderfully engaging glimpse of the creative life, as viewed from child-height. The book is full of black-and-white photos taken by the author's mother, along with drawings and pieces from Picasso's oeuvre. One snapshot shows the boy introducing the beret-wearing Picasso to his family's Ayrshire bull, William. "That evening Picasso sat by the fire and drew William and two of his friends dressed up as flying grasshoppers!" the author remembers, above an image of the painting "Grasshopper Bulls, 1950." Later we see the boy wearing a hat, glasses and false nose in Picasso's studio, near Cannes: "We all had to choose a disguise and wear it for most of the day." Through his reminiscences, Mr. Penrose conveys a surprising amount of information about Picasso, his approach to art—and his temper. The title comes from an incident that Mr. Penrose's mother remembered and told him about. One day, he writes, "I got overexcited and naughtily bit Picasso. Picasso turned around and bit me right back—hard!" According to the family story, just as the boy cried out, Picasso was heard to exclaim: "Gosh, that's the first Englishman I've ever bitten!"