MANAMA, Bahrain—Bahrain arrested several opposition leaders and activists in dawn raids Thursday, showing that the government aimed to widen its attempts at stifling the island's uprising. 

The crackdown on the mostly Shiite opposition also points to a sharp turn in a political standoff within Bahrain's ruling family where hard-liners have appeared to gain the upper hand.

At the center of the dispute, analysts say, is Prime Minister Sheik Khalifa bin Salman Al Khalifa, 75 years old, who one of the country's most powerful and wealthy figures and the uncle of Bahrain's King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa. The unelected prime minister and a tight circle of conservative figures control Bahraini security forces and are believed to argue strongly against compromise and for the island's status quo. 

On the other side stands the king's son, Crown Prince Salman bin Hamad Al Khalifa, a younger man who has positioned himself as a voice of moderate reform. Until this week's crackdown, the crown prince had pushed for a dialog with the Shiite opposition, an approach that pitted himself against conservative Sunnis in his own family. 

Track events day by day.

Thursday's events showed the extent of the ascendancy of the hard-line faction. Among those arrested were two leaders of the opposition Haq movement, including top leader Hassan Mushaima, a prominent Shiite activist; and Ebrahim Sharif, the leader of a moderate Sunni group called the National Democratic Party. A spokesman for Bahrain's government declined to comment on the arrests. 

It capped a major about-face for the government, which for weeks had allowed peaceful protests, some drawing more than 100,000 people onto the tiny kingdom's streets calling for democracy. 

Earlier this week 1,000 soldiers from Saudi Arabia and 500 police from the United Arab Emirates entered Bahrain across its causeway to the peninsula. The next day, Sunni soldiers clashed with Shiites on outside the capital; on Wednesday, security forces used tear gas on protesters in the center of Manama in an effort to crush the pro-democracy movement altogether. The king declared a three-month state of emergency and curfew. 

The hardening of the king's stance follows maneuvering in the Bahraini court, where the crown prince has lost influence to his great-uncle the prime minister. "The crown prince and his efforts at moderation have been sidelined," said Jean-Francois Seznec, a professor who studies Bahrain at Georgetown University. "The prime minister wanted to make a big point that he was in control."

Bahrain is an island where a Shiite majority has long had limited access to jobs and wealth. Analysts say hard-liners among elite Sunnis see much to lose if democratic reforms take place that sideline their minority rule. The prime minister is one of the country's wealthiest men and draws much of his family power from patronage he doles between its members.

Still, the crown prince attempted to parry that influence even before the protests began. He made efforts to open Bahrain's economy through the Economic Development Board, which he controls, and clashed with his grand-uncle over issues like more liberal foreign worker policies.

After security forces killed unarmed protesters in Manama during the first days of the unrest in late-February, drawing international criticism, the crown prince stepped forward as a potential peacemaker and power broker between the two sides. "Momentum was with the crown prince," said Shadi Hamid, a Doha-based analyst with the Brookings Institution. But Mr. Hamid says Prince Salman was not willing to concede enough to the protesters, stalling hope for a compromise.

One stumbling block was that protesters were making a demand that too many ruling Sunnis could not accept: The ouster of the prime minister, whose rule has extended almost four decades. Some were demanding to end the monarchy altogether and create a republic. "This turned it into a matter of survival for the Al Khalifa family," says Mr. Hamid. 

Frustrated by the lack of apparent progress in the dialog, protesters at Pearl Roundabout last weekend organized marches on the financial center and on the neighborhood where the royal family resides where they clashed with pro-government supporter wielding swords and bats. 

The possibility of damaging the Bahrain economy and a direct march towards the royal homes may have spooked the ruling clan. 

The crackdown by Bahrain put a spotlight on what appeared to be the U.S.'s increasingly limited influence over the kingdom, which is home to the Navy's Fifth Fleet. The White House's response on Thursday was particularly harsh, calling the use of violence against protestors "abhorrent" and their grievances "legitimate."

Whether moderates on either the Sunni or Shiite will be able to regain control of the political debate remains to be seen. 

The king's decision to invite the Sunni Saudi army to spearhead the crackdown – what Shiites have called characterized as a brutal foreign invasion – is likely to inspire ire between the two religious groups as allegations of killings at the hands of Saudis continue. And the arrest of Mr. Sharif, the Sunni moderate politician, eliminates another voice which bridged the two communities, likely to drive moderates to harden their positions.

Mr. Seznec noted that just as the crown prince had rallied the island's Sunni moderates in insisting a solution could be found without a government crackdown, the moderate political party Al Wefaq had convinced many Shiites that change could come through non-violent protests. The sudden bloody crackdown has diminished the group's credibility with Shiites and may drive them towards hardline leaders. 

Ziad Majed, a Middle East expert at the American University in Paris said a period of sectarian violence could now be in the cards for Bahrain. "This in turn will lead to the radicalization of opposition positions, and we are now in a front of open conflict."

—Adam Entous contributed to this article.