MUMBAI –Indian banks will have to raise more deposits and restrain lending as a mismatch between the two was a factor responsible for a cash deficit in the system, the central bank governor said Tuesday. 

Banks' credit rose as much as 24.4% year-on-year in December, outpacing their deposit growth of 16.5% during the period, and the central bank's indicative projection of a 20% rise for the fiscal year through March. This has led the ratio of incremental non-food credit to deposit peak at 110.5% in mid-December. 

"We will monitor this [credit-deposit ratio] very closely and use our supervisory responsibilities to ensure that those banks which are far out of line are brought in line," Duvvuri Subbarao told reporters after announcing the central bank's monetary policy review for the October-December quarter. 

The Reserve Bank of India raised its key lending and borrowing rate by 25 basis points each in the policy, its seventh hike since March 2010 to tame stubbornly high inflation. 

Sluggish deposit growth and slow spending by the government in Asia's third-largest economy led to a cash shortage in the system. Banks borrowed an average 1 trillion rupees ($20 billion) from the central bank daily during October-December. 

The RBI had to take a series of measures, including a cut in the compulsory bond-holding ratio by banks and several bond buybacks, to boost liquidity. It also held liquidity injection facilities twice daily for banks to meet their cash shortfall. 

"The anxiety of the RBI is that are you using the daily borrowing [from the central bank] to fund your credit growth which can create a systemic problem for tomorrow," K.R. Kamath, chairman of Punjab National Bank told reporters at post-policy bankers' conference. "If you can't find the resources, probably the credit growth will come down," he said. 

The RBI too said while it will ensure liquidity for productive sectors, it was important that credit growth moderates to "conform broadly to the indicative projections." It also said "rapid credit growth without a commensurate increase in deposits wasn't sustainable." 

In fact, banks started the fiscal year with a cash surplus as slow loan growth led to a build-up of over 1 trillion rupees of excess liquidity in the system. 

Banks, as a result, shed their high cost deposits and avoided raising deposit rates to reduce the cost of holding capital. 

However, the excess liquidity was soon mopped up in the April-June period, as telecommunications companies withdrew more than 1 trillion rupees to pay for mobile telephony and wireless Internet licenses. 

The July-December period too saw a spike in demand for loans from companies as the Indian economy took a fast route to recovery out of the global credit crisis. Loans to infrastructure, metals products and engineering companies were two-thirds of the annual incremental loan disbursal as of Dec. 17. 

Adding to this was the growing middle-class aspirations to own a house as the economy returned to its fast pace of growth, and banks lured borrowers through low interest rate mortgage loans. All this while the deposit growth lagged behind and a series of rate hikes by the RBI pushed the system into a deficit mode. 

"Banks need to focus on the underlying structural cause of liquidity tightness arising out of the gap between the credit and deposit growth rates," the RBI said. 

 Write to  Nupur Acharya at nupur.acharya@dowjones.com 