U.S. economic output finally regained the level reached before the recession, as growth sped up on stronger consumer spending and exports.

Gross domestic product—a broad measure of all goods and services produced—grew at a 3.2% annual rate in the fourth quarter, the government said Friday. That's up from the 2.6% pace notched the quarter before and confirms the view held by many economists and stock-market investors that the economy is gaining enough momentum to start bringing down unemployment in the months ahead.

The expansion in large part was fueled by a jump in consumer spending—a crucial change from earlier in the recovery, when growth relied heavily on businesses investing and building up inventories. 

Final sales—a measure that gives a feeling for underlying demand in the economy by subtracting the change in business inventories from GDP—notched its biggest increase since 1984, growing 7.1% in the fourth quarter.

This reviving demand bodes well for 2011, because businesses could take it as a signal to stock their shelves and hire workers.

To be sure, the economic outlook still has clouds. Some economists worry that the year-end spending splurge by consumers could ebb. Another serious challenge is unemployment, which stands at 9.4%. 

Investors didn't react much to the GDP report, which had largely been priced into the market. The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose slightly, passing the 12000 level, but then tumbled as television images of rioting in Egypt rattled investors. 

"The mix of growth is much more indicative of a sustainable expansion," Zach Pandl, a Nomura Securities International Inc. analyst, said of the GDP report. "We've recovered our losses, but we haven't made any gains yet."

In the fourth quarter, economic output reached a $13.38 trillion seasonally adjusted annual rate, measured in 2005 dollars, inching 0.14% above the final quarter of 2007, when the recession began. 

In the summer of 2009, the recession's official end, output plunged 4.14% below pre-crisis levels to a $12.81 trillion seasonally adjusted annual rate. 

It took 12 quarters to recoup the losses and, on a per-capita basis, the economy is still not as large as it was before the recession took hold. Such a prolonged recovery is unusual: It took eight quarters to bounce back from the deep recession of the early 1970s.

This recovery has been halting, following a recession that led to a retrenchment in spending and high unemployment. 

But people like Charles Todaro, a 56-year-old auto worker from Wheatfield, N.Y., are among those feeling more confident. Mr. Todaro had worked 10 months in the past two years as General Motors Co. has gone through cycles of laying him off and calling him back to the plant.

Even so, Mr. Todaro in December leased a new Chevrolet Cruze for about $129 a month. "It was a little gamble that I did," he said. Shortly after, the plant let him know they would be calling him back to a $28.50-an-hour job starting in January. "Are we living comfortable? Never, always on the edge," Mr. Todaro said, but now "I'm able to spend a few extra dollars here and there."

Consumer spending, which accounts for about 70% of demand in the economy, climbed 4.4% last quarter, adding to growth. That follows a 2.4% increase in the previous quarter.

But Americans aren't entirely at ease as the glut of workers is keeping a lid on wage growth. Compensation costs, including wages and benefits, were up 0.4% in the fourth quarter, the Labor Department said Friday, and 2% for the year. 

Consumer sentiment, meanwhile, slipped slightly in January. A Reuters/University of Michigan index released Friday fell to 74.2, from 74.5 in December, as perceptions of current economic conditions soured a bit. Analysts cautioned that sustained growth will rely on a faster pace of hiring early in 2011.

Americans' willingness to spend has helped sales at companies such as Columbia Sportswear Co., which reported a 13% jump in fourth-quarter profit Thursday.

The outdoor-apparel retailer noted that its products generally fill consumers' wants, not needs—a sign of discretionary spending. 

"We don't see the consumer as being cheap," said Michael McCormick, Columbia Sportswear's executive vice president of global sales and marketing. "They want to go spend a little money. It's been a few years." 

"We're pretty positive," about 2011, Mr. McCormick said, noting that the company has launched products and is adding personnel world-wide. 

In addition to seeing firming demand in the U.S., Columbia Sportswear expects Asia to continue to be a strong market. 

Rising exports from U.S. companies helped to push up growth last quarter. As imports declined, trade added 3.44 percentage points to GDP. 

However, trade isn't likely to keep contributing to expansion. As companies work to rebuild inventories—last quarter, inventory reduction subtracted 3.7 percentage points from growth—that will also lead to greater imports, which creates a drag on expansion. 

A stronger business climate spurred continued investment last quarter. Business spending slowed from its surge early in the recovery, but nonresidential fixed investment ticked up 4.4% last quarter after climbing 10% the prior quarter.

Cuts in state and local governments, meanwhile, could continue to curb growth for the next two years. State and local governments shaved 0.1 percentage point from growth last quarter as shortfalls prompted them to cut spending and increase taxes. 

Rensselaer County, N.Y., faced a multimillion-dollar shortfall for 2011 that resulted in both tax increases and layoffs. To balance the budget, the county laid off 23 public employees at the end of 2010 and raised its property tax by 2.5%. 

"Currently we would look at it as being worse next year," said Martin Reid, chairman of the legislature.

Friday's report offered the latest confirmation that inflation remained tame last year. 

The price index for personal consumption expenditures, excluding food and energy goods, rose 0.4% last quarter. The measure is the Federal Reserve's preferred gauge of inflation. The overall price index increased 1.8%.

 Write to  Luca Di Leo at luca.dileo@dowjones.com and Jeffrey Sparshott at jeffrey.sparshott@dowjones.com 