I walk up to the front door of my condo on the campus of the University of California, Irvine, and see a giant jar of pickled garlic. A glance to the left, and there is Claudia Schiffer scrubbing herself with a sponge in a tub of cottage cheese. If you read "Moonwalking With Einstein," you too may have trouble getting images like these out of your mind. But they are part of the "secret" method used by people around the world whose powers of recall can seem super-human.

Such memory athletes, using the "memory palace" method known to the ancients and first described by Simonides of Ceos around 500 B.C, convert concepts into distinctive images—the more lurid, the better—which they mentally place into actual locations they know well. Thus some people can memorize the order of a deck of cards in half a minute, look at 100 people and learn their names in 15 minutes and even (with the help of Ms. Schiffer) remember the items on a grocery list. 

Joshua Foer first became interested in high-recall individuals when he covered the U.S. Memory Championship as a journalist, growing curious about what drove contestants to master such a seemingly arcane skill. But something happened to him as he learned more: He wondered if he could do it, too. "Moonwalking With Einstein" chronicles the intense training he undertook to himself compete in the U.S. Memory Championship, introducing us along the way to memory researchers, mental athletes, and a few individuals with the innate ability to remember nearly everything. 

At the start of the project, Mr. Foer travels to meet Anders Ericsson, a psychologist who once studied a man known in the literature as "SF," who could remember 80 random digits after a single hearing. Dr. Ericsson later studied "JC," a waiter at Banana's restaurant in Colorado, who could memorize 20 complex food orders without writing them down. Now he would study "JF," whose memory was hardly as impressive: Mr. Foer's digit span—the number of digits he could listen to and repeat back—was about 9, quite normal. His ability to learn poetry was abysmal. 

Over the next year, Mr. Foer practiced daily, learning the "memory palace" and related techniques, including one that involves converting long strings of numbers into words and images. Then he returned for more testing. His digit span had doubled, to around 18. His ability to remember the names of people met at a cocktail party was also much improved. Still, many parts of his memory were just average, and he was not immune from forgetting where he left his car. 

 By Joshua Foer  Penguin Press, 307 pages, $26.95

The book jacket reveals—so I guess that I safely can, too—that Mr. Foer eventually won the U.S. Memory Championship. It's delightful to travel with him on this unlikely journey, and his entertaining treatment of memory as both sport and science is spot on—with one exception. Mr. Foer introduces us not just to remarkably memorious people but to a few who can't recall much at all. ("EP," for instance, lost parts of his medial temporal lobes to a virus and can't create new memories, even of what happened just a few seconds before.) While Mr. Foer's descriptions of neurological function are sound, his account implies that all our past experiences are actually lurking somewhere in the brain, waiting for the right cue to bring them back to consciousness—just as, he suggests, the facts in Wikipedia are lurking just "a mouse click away."

In fact, scientists have been debating the permanence of memory for decades, and many reject the idea that our entire past still persists in our brains. Memory is malleable. Some past experiences can be altered, distorted, contaminated or transformed, and the original traces permanently removed. Anyone who has experienced professional or personal enemies tampering with their Wikipedia pages will see the problems inherent in the author's Wikipedia analogy. 

As Mr. Foer's own occasional absent-mindedness should remind us, the human memory is a complicated, confounding subject. Yet, in the end, "Moonwalking With Einstein" proves uplifting: It shows that with motivation, focus and a few clever tricks, our minds can do rather extraordinary things.

—Ms. Loftus is a psychology professor at the University of California, Irvine. 