Spot trading in the European carbon market is likely to remain suspended until at least next week, as the European Commission and national emissions registries work to secure the market against more computer-hacking thefts. 

Earlier this month, hackers stole emissions allowances that were held companies and tracked by electronic national registries in the Czech Republic, Austria and Greece as part of the Emissions Trading Scheme. At least some are believed to have been resold. 

The European Commission, which oversees the carbon market for the European Union, last week said it was suspending spot trading at least through Jan. 26. Yet spot trading hadn't resumed on Thursday, as the commission awaited evidence that all EU countries that have not yet done so have boosted security. Until that happens, the physical delivery of the allowances, each of which gives the owner the right to emit one metric ton of carbon dioxide, can't take place.

The ETS is the EU's flagship tool to fight climate change by putting a price on carbon dioxide emissions and encouraging companies to invest in clean technologies, rather than having to buy more permits to emit more carbon dioxide. Some critics, however, have highlighted that the mechanism hasn't yet been able to push the carbon price high enough to be a trigger for large green investment. 

The thefts are having little immediate impact on companies, which tend to use futures contracts and which continue to trade. Spot trading accounts for less than 20% of the total market for carbon emissions.

EU-member representatives and commission officials will hold a conference call Friday afternoon to assess the situation, and no announcement about when spot trading will resume is expected before then, said Maria Kokkonen, spokeswoman for climate issues at the commission. 

"The wide preference is for quality over speed," she said. 

Market participants also weren't particularly worried about the extended trading suspension.

"Everyone wants things to be fixed once and for all," said one carbon trader. "They would like the requisite amount of security for account holders to be in place going forward, so if that takes two or three weeks, then the market would prefer to pay that price." 

The commission on Thursday reiterated its estimate that the maximum number of allowances stolen was two million. At a market price of €14.93 per allowance, that suggests maximum losses would be around €29.86 million. 

The biggest break-in appears to be in the Czech Republic, where more than 1.3 million allowances have been stolen. Thursday, Czech power company CEZ AS said 700,000 allowances disappeared from its account at the registry. Last week, Blackstone Global Ventures, a carbon-dioxide consultancy and allowances trader, said 475,000 allowances were stolen from its account.

Greece didn't provide an estimate of losses, though it confirmed Thursday that emissions-allowances trading has been suspended since Jan. 19, after hackers stole emissions rights from local accounts. Officials said police there are investigating the theft in cooperation with international police organizations. 

"There were serious recent Internet attacks that also affected Greece," the country's Ministry for the Environment, Energy and Climate Change said in a statement. "There was an abnormal movement of rights on the Greek system, and the Greek police have undertaken the case and are investigating in cooperation with international police organizations." 

Austrian officials have said 488,141 allowances are missing.

The commission and government representatives agreed last Monday on security measures that EU countries must take before trading can resume. Governments now have to provide an "independent report" showing that they are applying these guidelines, and then they can reopen their registries, the commission has said. 

—Selina Williams in London  and Nick Skrekas in Athens contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Sean Carney at sean.carney@dowjones.com 