FRANKFURT—German business confidence reached a new all-time high in January, the research institute Ifo said Friday, caused mainly by a renewed surge of optimism among exporters. 

Ifo's closely watched business-climate index rose to 110.3 from a revised level of 109.8 in December, and above a consensus forecast of 110. 

That is the ninth consecutive rise in the index and appears to be consistent with forecasts of another year of robust growth in Europe's largest economy, which expanded at its fastest pace in 20 years in 2010. 

It's also consistent with a stronger-than-expected reading earlier in the week in the more volatile ZEW expectations index, which rose to a six-month high. 

Ifo said the two subindexes that constitute the main index showed different developments in January. The subindex assessing current conditions fell slightly to 112.8 from 112.9, due largely to a post-holiday dip in sentiment at retailers and wholesalers. 

The subindex for expectations rose to 107.8 from 106.8. The improvement in expectations follows a sharp decline in the euro's exchange rate in December, making German goods more competitive on world markets. 

"The German economy has started the year with great vigor," Ifo said in a statement. "Especially in exports, the survey participants see much greater opportunities." 

Particularly striking was a sharp rise in the expectations of respondents in the construction industry, despite a month of heavy snow and destructive flooding. 

  Alexander Krueger, an analyst with Bankhaus Lampe in Düsseldorf, said he was "astonished that the bad weather hasn't been able to dampen the mood," something he put down to industry having full order books. 

"Even if the strong winter weather were to return in the coming months, it would only delay but not stop economic growth,"  Carsten Brzeski, an economist with ING Bank in Brussels, said in a research note. "The diversified export mix, the labor market and a further strengthening of private consumption should put growth in 2011 on a broad footing." 

Despite the stronger-than-expected index reading, the euro was a touch lower against the dollar immediately after the release. The shared currency traded recently at $1.3540, down from $1.3557 earlier but up from $1.3475 late Thursday in New York.