 SBI Holdings is planning a dual listing in Hong Kong and Tokyo that could raise as much as $500 million, in what would be the first listing of a Japanese company in the Chinese territory. The listing suggests the go-go market is continuing for IPOs in Hong Kong. 

 Goldman Sachs must contend with angry U.S. clients after pushing them to buy Facebook shares, and then pulling the offer. 

 The Japanese government took its first steps toward overhauling the tax system, picking key ministers to formulate a tax-increase proposal ahead of what is expected to be a bruising battle.  

 U.S. manufacturing has begun creating more jobs than it eliminates for the first time in more than a decade. 

 Almost one half of U.S. businesses surveyed in Shanghai complained of discrimination by domestic regulators.  

 Chinalco swung to an operating profit last year from a record loss in 2009 as prices of core products, including copper, recovered after the financial crisis. 

 JAL said it may not meet its goal of raising $609 million in capital from the private sector by the end of March, highlighting its difficulties in restoring its financial health. 

 Apple posted a 78% rise in profit and record sales of its gadgets in the holiday quarter, but executives shed no light on the sudden medical leave of CEO Jobs. 

 IBM reported its strongest quarterly revenue growth in almost a decade, an indication that companies are spending again on technology. 

 Portugal sold debt at lower yields than a month ago. The deputy finance minister said this indicates investors are more confident about the nation's ability to handle its debts. 

 Consumer sentiment fell in Australia in January, as floods in Queensland took a toll. 

Chevron plans to advance the startup of a $3.1 billion natural-gas project in the Gulf of Thailand to this year amid strong Asian demand for cleaner-burning fuels. 

 SK Telecom submitted a bid for Indonesian conglomerate Lippo's cable television and Internet company First Media.  

 Indian budget carrier IndiGo will begin flights to Singapore, Bangkok and Dubai in August. 

 The dollar fell against the euro and the yen on news that U.S. home construction fell to its lowest level in more than a year. 

 Afghanistan's President Karzai agreed to delay the parliament's opening by a month to give a tribunal more time to investigate fraud allegations, as the conflict over controversial legislative elections intensified. 

 Hundreds of Zambian miners working at Chinese-owned NFCA Mining rioted over a labor dispute with management, blocking traffic, union officials said. 

 Exports from China's small but critical rare-earth metal industry slipped last year, but still exceeded by a third the government's own quota allocation. 

A bomb exploded outside a school in northwestern Pakistan, killing one person and wounding 14 others, including children.

A 7.2-magnitude earthquake in southwestern Pakistan damaged at least 200 mud-brick homes but caused no casualties.

A suicide attacker driving an explosives-packed ambulance crashed through the front gate of an Iraqi guard force headquarters, killing at least seven people.