ABIDJAN, Ivory Coast—The government of presidential aspirant Alassane Ouattara over the weekend moved to squeeze off funding to his rival, Laurent Gbagbo, ousting a key banker and calling for a month-long suspension of cocoa and coffee exports. 

On Saturday, the Central Bank of West African States forced an ally of presidential incumbent Mr. Gbagbo to resign, effectively handing the country's purse strings Mr. Ouattara, who is recognized by most foreign countries as winning a recent presidential run-off.

The move ratchets up pressure on the embattled Mr. Gbagbo to step down. But it also increases the risk that deteriorating economic conditions in the Ivory Coast could fuel violence. The regional central bank, or BCEAO, gives financial instructions to commercial banks, which could become a target of popular anger if salaries aren't paid.

At least 260 people have been killed in violence since the disputed Nov. 28 presidential vote resulted in a stalemate. 

The resignation of Philippe Henri Dacoury-Tabley as central bank governor came at the request of regional heads of state during a meeting in Mali. The heads of state accused Mr. Dacoury-Tabley of allowing Mr. Gbagbo access to state funds, despite a ruling in December that the incumbent president's signature at the bank was no longer recognized. 

Mr. Ouattara, a former BCEAO governor, is expected to name a replacement within the next few days. He will have the option of using state funds to pay expenses, helping to bolster his international status as leading the legitimate government of Ivory Coast. 

A spokesman for Mr. Gbagbo called the central bank's decision "illegal and without effect." The spokesman appealed for calm and added that "the measures have been taken to ensure the banking system continues to function as normal," according to a statement read on state television.

Mr. Gbagbo, who has led the Ivory Coast for 10 years, has tapped the bank's coffers to pay army and civil-servant salaries. Since December, Mr. Gbagbo's administration is estimated to have withdrawn around $160 million from the central bank, according to Mr. Ouattara's government. Mr. Gbagbo's spokesman couldn't immediately be reached to comment on the figure, but his administration has acknowledged accessing bank funds.

Retaining the support of army officers and bureaucrats has helped Mr. Gbagbo resist mounting regional and international pressure to step down.

In another step to choke off funding for Mr. Gbagbo's administration, Mr. Ouattara's government issued a communique calling for the suspension of all cocoa and coffee exports for a month, beginning Jan. 24. Ivory Coast is the world's biggest cocoa grower, and port warehouses are currently stocked full of beans from the main annual harvest. The communique worried some traders, as it warns that those who violate the suspension could face sanctions,

"We all see that the Ouattara government is making gains by the day, but Gbagbo's lot are currently in charge," said a purchasing director of a cocoa exporter currently in the port of San Pedro. "A lot of the multinationals here have closed operations in what is normally one of the busiest periods of the year."

The European Union and the U.S. have imposed a series of economic sanctions and travel bans on Mr. Gbagbo and his allies. On Friday, the EU added Mr. Dacoury-Tabley and the local head of the BCEAO in Ivory Coast, Denis N'Gbe, to its list of those under individual sanctions, according to a European diplomat in Abidjan.

In December, finance ministers from the West African CFA monetary zone in December told the central bank to hand over control of the Ivorian state accounts to Mr. Ouattara, but Mr. Dacoury-Tabley, who was appointed to his post by Mr. Gbagbo, didn't do so.

In the turmoil, many Abidjan residents haven't been paid, or have been laid off by employers scrimping for cash. Mr. Gbagbo is expected to pay January salaries for civil servants and military at the end of this month, but some fear his access to state funds is drying up.

"Once they can't pay, I'm worried they'll just come and take what they need," said a manager of a car dealership in Abidjan. 