ATHENS—A largely peaceful protest Wednesday by tens of thousands of Greeks against new government austerity measures was marred by violence in central Athens late in the day, when hundreds of youths wearing ski masks hurled water bottles, firecrackers and other objects at police, who responded with tear gas and pepper spray. 

Still, the one-day protest was restrained by the standards of recent Greek actions. It came a year after a mass antigovernment demonstration turned deadly as unknown assailants firebombed a bank building, killing three workers. 

"There have been 24 detentions and two police officers have been hurt," said police spokesman Panagiotis Papapetropoulos. "There was a small group of protesters that threw objects at police, and there was some use of tmaneargas, but the clash was fairly minor."

Police estimated a modest turnout in the capital of some 20,000 people, while organizers put the number at around 30,000. The protest was backed by a nationwide general strike that effectively shut down most government operations. 

Throughout the day, public services across Greece ground to a halt as civil servants, teachers and hospital staff walked off the job, in one of the biggest demonstrations in months. Central and local government offices were closed, hospitals and ambulance services were operating on skeleton staffs, and schools and universities were shut. 

Transport services also were disrupted, with ferry and rail services suspended after dock workers joined the strike. Public transport around the capital, Athens, operated on a reduced schedule, and flight operations were hit by a four-hour walkout by air-traffic controllers. Journalists also joined in the strike, leading to a blackout of all radio and television news programs. 

The strike, the second called this year by the country's two main umbrella unions, comes just days before the government is to present Parliament with €26 billion ($37.4 billion) in further spending cuts and tax increases to slash the budget deficit over the next five years. 

  More interactive graphics and photos  

"These neoliberal and barbarous policies, which are driving workers and society into poverty for the benefit of creditors and bankers, are taking us back to the last century," said public-sector union Adedy in a statement. "They must not pass!" 

Greece's public-sector workers—such as teachers, local government staff and workers at state-owned enterprises—have been hardest hit by the overhauls so far. Their wages have been cut by as much as 25% in some cases, and some of their other benefits and entitlements also have been reduced. 

Vassilis Theodorakopoulos, a 53-year-old dental technician who works for the country's main public health-care fund, said he was protesting a 20% cut in his salary, as well as a plan to expand the working week for public servants to 40 hours—in line with the private sector—from 37½ hours currently. 

"Personally, I don't think there should be a difference between the public and private sector," he said. "What we are fighting for is a reduction in private-sector working hours." 

He said he also objects to a plan to eliminate free dental braces for children, his specialty.

In May last year, Greece narrowly avoided default with the help of a €110 billion bailout from the European Union and the International Monetary Fund in exchange for measures to cut its bloated budget deficit and reform its economy. 

The country has cut its budget deficit by about a third, to 10.5% of gross domestic product last year. New measures—expected to be outlined Monday—aim to bring the deficit to below 1% of GDP by 2015. 

The measures will include some €15.6 billion in spending cuts, and €10 billion in new taxes. Many of the cuts would come from reduced wage costs in the public sector, cuts in operating expenses at state-owned enterprises, and lower defense and health-care spending. 

Measures taken so far have weighed heavily on Greece's sputtering economy as reduced wages and pensions, along with higher taxes, have hit consumer spending, which accounts for about four-fifths of the economy. The country is entering its third year of recession after shrinking a worse-than-expected 4.5% last year, and with only a modest recovery expected later this year. 

Still, a recent public-opinion poll showed Greece's Socialist government enjoys some support among the wider public for its reforms, which are seen as correcting decades of overregulation in the economy and mismanagement in the public sector. 

According to a poll published in the center-left Ethnos newspaper earlier this month, 67.7% of Greeks think the government should proceed with economic reforms, and 63.7% supported the need for privatization or other measures to exploit state-owned assets. A further 59.7% said they supported abolishing the current lifetime job guarantee for public servants. 

A separate poll for the privately owned Mega television channel this week showed that 60.3% of Greeks want the bailout deal renegotiated, and 26% thought Greece should scrap the program altogether and abandon the euro. 