  Sergey Aleynikov is a criminal, a convicted thief. He belongs behind bars.

He was found guilty of stealing a proprietary computer program from Goldman Sachs Group Inc. He stole it on his last day of work. He tried to cover his tracks, encrypting the file transfer, deleting the program he used to steal it. Prosecutors said Mr. Aleynikov had been stealing code for the two years he worked at Goldman as a programmer.

But Mr. Aleynikov's case is problematic, especially the way it ended.

On March 18, the same day that U.S. District Judge  Denise Cote handed down Mr. Aleynikov's sentence of eight years and a month in prison, a different judge sent  William J. Cannon, 22, of Ukiah, Calif., to prison for seven years. Mr. Cannon was convicted of the attempted rape of a 16-year-old girl.

  Rodney Williams, 42, was convicted of voluntary manslaughter in Norfolk, Va., for shooting his victim eight times in a fight outside a sports bar, got 12 months in prison and a $2,500 fine.

Mr. Aleynikov, who never profited from the stolen computer code, also was sentenced to three years on probation and a $12,500 fine. Pretty stiff considering that  Samarth Agarwal, a trader at Societe Generale, was given three years for the same crime. Lawyers for Mr. Aleynikov filed an appeal Wednesday.

Ask yourself this: Of these convicted criminals, is Mr. Aleynikov the one who should rot in jail? Of course not.

It's hard to see why Mr. Aleynikov received such a long sentence. There were even questions about whether Mr. Aleynikov should've been charged criminally. Most trade secrets cases are handled civilly. Injunctions are often used to block the use of stolen information.

Much of the trial was behind closed doors because of the sensitive nature of Goldman's code. But there were questions about how important the code really was. Early in the trial, prosecutors argued that Mr. Aleynikov could have roiled financial markets with the code. But in a conference call with investors,  David Viniar, Goldman's chief financial officer, told analysts that the code was "a small piece of our business."

"I have never been party to a proceeding so thoroughly shot through with prejudice, malice and injustice," said Mr. Aleynikov's lawyer,  Kevin Marino. "The grossly excessive sentence imposed, more than four times that recommended by U.S. Probation, is perfectly consistent with the balance of that proceeding."

We all know the justice system is flawed. We all know that violent criminals come back angrier and more dangerous when they get out of prison, no matter how long they serve. Federal laws generally carry stiffer penalties than local laws.

It's one thing to under-sentence dangerous criminals, quite another to over-sentence white-collar criminals and even more outrageous to prosecute little fish when the big fish swim away fat and happy.

Case in point: The Securities and Exchange Commission has alleged in a civil proceeding that former Goldman director  Rajat Gupta passed to his friend, Galleon Group's  Raj Rajaratnam, non-public information about Goldman.

Mr. Gupta hasn't been charged criminally, raising eyebrows in the securities-law community. Goldman and the U.S. Attorney's office in New York declined to comment. Mr. Gupta has denied wrongdoing through his lawyer.

Legalities aside, Mr. Gupta was betraying Goldman and at the very least violating the company's confidentiality policy, by passing this information to a hedge-fund manager. Yet Mr. Gupta has endured only humiliation so far.

In the same court building where Mr. Rajaratnam is on trial for alleged insider trading, Mr. Aleynikov was sentenced to prison. Remember, the authorities caught up with Mr. Aleynikov before he made a dime off the stolen program.

That's eight years in the prime of his life, and there's nothing to suggest Mr. Aleynikov will have a prosperous existence when he leaves prison. He reportedly sold his home for about $400,000 to help pay legal costs and family bills.

Mr. Marino asked the judge for mercy. But Mr. Aleynikov didn't get it. After all, he is a bad guy. Not a killer or a rapist, but a thief—and given that he never enjoyed his spoils, not a very good thief.

But if Mr. Aleynikov decides to do it again, he should reconsider the computer programming bit. These things are better done from the top. Landing a spot on the Goldman board might be a good start.

 Write to  David Weidner at david.weidner@dowjones.com 