 Forces loyal to Libyan leader Col. Moammar Gadhafi launched a new round of attacks on rebel positions, keeping up a counteroffensive to prevent the opposition from advancing toward the capital of Tripoli, as his inner circle debated whether he should remain in power or relinquish his role. 

Libyan warplanes launched at least five strikes Tuesday near the oil port of Ras Lanuf, the Associated Press reported, with no immediate word on casualties.

A witness said Gadhafi's loyalists have launched an attack on Zawiya, the city closest to Tripoli that had fallen into opposition hands after heavy shelling by tank artillery and mortars. 

Gadhafi's government has invited rebels and tribal leaders to negotiate a political solution, and Western nations continued to take steps to prepare for a possible military intervention.

 The European Union will announce measures to widen the scope of its sanctions on Libya that are almost certain to include a freeze of assets held in Europe by the country's sovereign-wealth fund and its central bank, two senior European officials said.  

Hundreds of protesters gathered outside Kuwait's main government building to demand sweeping changes as another Gulf state joined the surge for reforms around the Arab world.

 Iran's hard-liners consolidated power after former President Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani stepped down from his post as head of the country's most powerful clerical committee.  

 Europe's next round of bank "stress tests" will allow regulators in individual countries to use different definitions of a key capital ratio when conducting the tests, according to people familiar with the matter, which might not provide investors with a consistent and transparent way to gauge the health of 88 lenders across the continent. 

 After a delay of almost two years, the U.S. and the European Union are close to finalizing an agreement on air safety that both sides say should improve oversight of aviation while saving millions of dollars annually. Under the pact, U.S. and EU air-safety agencies will establish mutual recognition the other's inspections and analysis.  

 A European Union proposal that would create a new system to litigate patents isn't compatible with EU law, the EU's highest court said. The opinion from the European Court of Justice is a setback in a decades-long effort by EU nations to come up with a single patent regime that would cover all of them. 

 British police arrested a 30-year old man in Glasgow, Scotland, in connection with a suicide bombing in Stockholm last December, marking the first arrest related to the high-profile terror attack. Police didn't identify the man but said he was a foreign national.  

 A French court suspended the trial of former French President Jacques Chirac on embezzlement charges related to his stint as Paris mayor until a higher court rules on a constitutional claim lodged by a co-defendant. The trial could resume June 20, the Paris court said. 

 Axel Weber, who will step down as president of Germany's Bundesbank at the end of April, plans to join the University of Chicago for a one-year stint as a guest professor starting in June, before returning to his old teaching post at Cologne University. 

 German manufacturing orders rose by a greater-than-expected 2.9% in January, amid strong domestic demand, particularly for intermediate goods, the economics ministry said.  

 Italian police arrested dozens of people suspected of links to Italy's most powerful drug-trafficking organization—the so-called 'ndrangheta—as part of a campaign to weaken the international network. 

In Spain, the body of a U.S. exchange student was found in a river in Madrid, 10 days after he went missing following a night out, a police official said. 

 Denmark's center-right government lost two ministers as the immigration minister was fired for wrongly denying citizenship to stateless Palestinians and the education minister resigned, citing personal reasons.  

Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner, visiting Germany, said he was impressed by the steps European leaders are taking toward "enormously difficult" reforms in the wake of the euro zone's debt crisis. 

A federal judge began vetting potential jurors in the insider-trading trial of hedge-fund executive Raj Rajaratnam.

Colombia's largest guerrilla group has freed all but one of the 23 workers for Canadian energy firm Talisman Energy who were kidnapped Monday in a brazen daylight operation.

In Mexico, gunbattles between rival gangs killed 18 people in the northeastern town of Abasolo on Monday, a day after seven police officers and an inmate died in an ambush of a convoy transporting prisoners in the western part of the country.

Strong growth in Asia Pacific is supporting the region's creditworthiness, but strong capital flows and rising inflation pressure pose big risks, Standard & Poor's said. 

 China's controversial "one-child" policy has once again come up for discussion during the annual meeting of the country's legislature and its top political advisory body, according to local media reports. 

 The political infighting that looks to unravel the administration of Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan is starting to draw investor attention and threatens to undermine the economy's tentative recovery, analysts say.  

Japan is looking to join the U.S., China and Russia with a stealth fighter that senior Japanese air-force officials say can be ready for a prototype test flight in just three years.

Japan's first trade deficit in two years weighed on its current-account surplus, which fell 47.6% from a year earlier in January, the Ministry of Finance said. 

Vietnam's central bank raised two of its key interest rates in another effort to tame inflation, which remains stubbornly high and is threatening the economic stability of one of Asia's most promising emerging markets. 

 A high court in Bangladesh upheld a central-bank decision last week that Nobel Laureate Muhammad Yunus must resign as head of the microfinance bank he founded, intensifying a struggle between Yunus and the government.  

In Pakistan, a car-bomb explosion close to a military intelligence agency in the eastern city of Faisalabad killed at least 20 people. 

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu made a rare visit to the Israeli-occupied Jordan Valley and vowed to keep a military presence in that strategic strip of the West Bank.