Private-equity firms Cerberus Capital Management and TPG and are among those expected to bid on hotels owned by Innkeepers USA Trust in a bankruptcy auction Monday, said people familiar with the matter. 

The expected bidders are all looking at different sets of Innkeepers' hotels, and are likely to make offers for the assets that include combinations of cash, debt and equity, the people said. Innkeepers is auctioning three sets of assets: 45 hotels with a mortgage serviced by Midland Loan Services Inc.; about 19 hotels with a mortgage owned by a Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. subsidiary; and another five hotels with separate mortgage debt.

The auction for Palm Beach, Fla.-based Innkeepers, which owns hotels that sport such brands as Marriott, Hyatt and Hilton in 19 states and the District of Columbia, is set for Monday at law firm Kirkland & Ellis. It is being held to see if Innkeepers' assets can be sold separately for a higher value than the $970.7 million offered for the entire company earlier this year by a venture of Five Mile Capital Partners and Lehman. 

Cerberus has teamed with  Chatham Lodging Trust,
CLDT


0.00
%




 a real-estate investment trust formed in 2009, and is expected to bid on all Innkeepers' hotels, the people said. TPG is expected to bid on all but the hotels governed by the Lehman mortgage, the people said.

Chatham's chairman and chief executive is  Jeffrey Fisher, Innkeepers' founder and CEO from 1994 until it was taken private by  Apollo Investment Corp.
AINV


-0.14
%




 in 2007. Mr. Fisher didn't return calls seeking comment.

Under the terms of the bid by the Five Mile-Lehman venture, creditors would have to agree to take "haircuts," reducing the size of their loans. Midland's mortgage on 45 hotels would be reduced to $622.5 million while Lehman would forgive its roughly $238 million mortgage on 19 hotels for $64.4 million in cash and about $139.3 million in equity. Five Mile, meanwhile, would invest about $208.9 million in cash.

Hersha Hospitality Management, a hotel-management company owned by the Shah family of hoteliers in Philadelphia, would run the hotels should Five Mile and Lehman prevail in the auction, the people said. Starwood Capital, another Hersha owner, is mulling whether to get involved in the Five Mile-Lehman bid, the people said.

Innkeepers filed for bankruptcy protection in July 2010, laboring under $1.42 billion in debt as consumers pared spending during the recession. Innkeepers is being advised by Kirkland and investment bank Moelis & Co.

—Eliot Brown contributed to this article.