House and Senate leaders of both parties promised to rein in government spending after examining a new report that detailed billions of dollars in duplicative federal programs.

The 345-page report from the nonpartisan Government Accountability Office said there were dozens of overlapping programs in areas like defense, transportation and education that could be consolidated to save taxpayers money. For example, redundant policies encouraging ethanol production cost the government $5.4 billion in lost revenue last year, the report said. 

The GAO report, whose details were disclosed by The Wall Street Journal Monday, triggered an unusual amount of bipartisan applause amid bickering by Democrats and Republicans over how to reduce the federal deficit. Lawmakers from both parties have long said there were redundant programs, but the report identified a list of them. 

See the report, 'Opportunities to Reduce Potential Duplication in Government Programs, Save Tax Dollars, and Enhance Revenue.'

"I think there are duplicative programs around here that we could eliminate," Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D., Nev.) said after the report was released Tuesday. "Those are some of the things we can do over the long term that could save some money."

Rep. Kevin McCarthy of California, the No. 3 Republican in the House, said the report "goes to show the waste in government. We will cut government just as the GAO report says."

Lawmakers were working to craft a package of cuts that could be included in a bill to authorize federal spending through September. Republicans and Democrats remained divided over how swift and sweeping the cuts should be, with Republicans calling for steeper reductions and Democrats warning that big cuts could hurt economic growth.

Still, both sides immediately supported the prospect of cutting or consolidating programs that the GAO, considered Congress's watchdog, had labeled potentially redundant and wasteful. 

Sen. Tom Coburn (R., Okla.), who requested the report, estimated potential reductions would save between $100 billion and $200 billion a year. 

Washington's focus has pivoted this year to the task of reducing the budget deficit, which is projected to reach $1.65 trillion in 2011. 

Republicans seized on the report's findings as support of their push for deep reductions in spending.

"Enough is enough," said House Majority Leader Eric Cantor (R., Va.). "Our Congress is about delivering results."

Several Democrats said the report offered a bipartisan road map for targeted cuts. Sen. Mark Warner (D., Va.) called the report a "useful tool," but said major cuts wouldn't be achieved even if all changes the GAO recommended were embraced. He said the government would have to address the cost of entitlement programs such as Medicare to significantly slow the growth of federal spending.

The Treasury Department said Tuesday the government could hit the $14.29 trillion debt ceiling as early as April 15, 10 days later than it projected a few weeks ago. If the government hits the cap, it can't issue new debt and could default on its obligations, something Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke described Tuesday as "chaos." Administration officials have urged Congress to raise the debt ceiling by the end of March. Republicans are demanding that spending cuts be part of any such deal.

The GAO report highlighted areas where multiple federal agencies either perform very similar duties or have nearly identical programs. The report said there were 18 different food- and nutrition-assistance programs, 20 programs to help the homeless, 56 for financial literacy and many redundancies in military operations. It also cited overlapping programs for teacher quality and job training.

The report could also serve as a template for White House officials, who are expected later this year to propose overhauling the structure of the government to reduce duplication, overlap and wasteful spending. President Barack Obama "has made it a priority to reform government and make it more effective and efficient for the American people," White House spokeswoman Amy Brundage said.

Budget experts said many of the proposed cuts could draw opposition from interest groups and lawmakers looking to protect pet projects. "Often times, there's no real simple and straightforward ways to slice these things up," said Jim Horney, director of federal fiscal policy at the liberal-leaning Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. "The ways you do it involve politics and different ideas of who should be controlling what."

—Naftali Bendavid contributed to this article.

 Write to  Damian Paletta at damian.paletta@wsj.com 