MEXICO CITY--The Bank of Mexico left its overnight lending rate target unchanged Friday, noting an improved outlook for the global economy and expectations that inflation will moderate in coming months. 

In its first monetary policy decision of the year, the Bank of Mexico left the key interest rate at 4.5%, where it has stood since July 2009. 

By keeping rates steady, Mexico's policy is beginning to contrast with the actions of most other emerging economies around the world that are dealing with inflationary pressures as commodities prices rise. This week, the central banks of Brazil and Poland raised key interest rates, following similar recent moves by peers in China, India, Peru and Chile. 

Prices for consumer staples in Mexico such as tortillas and produce have been rising, but the central bank said the uptick in the annual consumer price index at the end of 2010 should turn around in coming months. The CPI ended last year up 4.40%, rising more than economists had expected in December as volatile prices for fresh produce surged. 

Many of the recent price hikes are normal for the beginning of the year, the bank said in its monthly statement, adding that the inflationary impact of local tax increases that took effect at the beginning of 2010 are waning. 

"Annual inflation is still expected to resume a clear downward trend in 2011," the central bank said. Bank officials said they will continue monitoring inflation risks, particularly the prices of grains and other raw goods. 

Mexico's central bank, seen as one of the least likely among emerging markets to intervene against currency strength, said Friday that the peso's appreciation has helped to compensate for higher international commodities prices. The Mexican peso has strengthened in recent sessions to two-year highs versus the U.S. dollar.

The Bank of Mexico also cited improved expectations for global growth this year. Whereas the bank's last policy statement in November noted a possible slowdown in external demand, on Friday it said that "external demand recently appears to be regaining a higher pace of growth." 

Unlike other emerging economies that have managed to grow during the financial crisis thanks to demand from China, Mexico remains closely tied to the U.S. 

The central bank said domestic demand has had "a more notable and generalized expansion," with private consumption remaining dynamic and investment showing positive signs. 

The Mexican economy has turned around in 2010 after contracting by 6.1% in 2009 as the global crisis hurt demand from the U.S., its main trade partner. Estimates for 2011 GDP vary, but a survey of private economists published this week by local  Citigroup
C


0.89
%




 unit Banamex showed a median estimate for 4.1% growth. 

Neil Shearing, senior emerging markets economist at London-based Capital Economics, said that while the central bank's statement was "perhaps a little more hawkish" than last time, "there seems little to justify a hike in interest rates over the next 12 months or so" given lingering uncertainty about the global economy. 

The Bank of Mexico plans to release the minutes of its monetary policy meeting on Feb. 4. 



 -Write to  Paul Kiernan at paul.kiernan@dowjones.com 