 The double-Michelin-starred British chef talks to The Wall Street Journal Europe about how he starts his weekend. 

 After 15 years as a protégé of celebrity chef Gordon Ramsay, Marcus Wareing knows a thing or two about running restaurants. Currently chef patron of his eponymous restaurant, Marcus Wareing at the Berkeley Hotel in Knightsbridge, the 41-year-old will open his second London eatery, the Gilbert Scott, in May.

The Gilbert Scott pays homage to the chief architect of the original iconic Midland Grand Hotel, parts of which have now been refurbished as the new St. Pancras Hotel Renaissance. It promises to be London's answer to Gordon Ramsay at Claridges and Alain Ducasse at the Dorchester.

Reading the menu feels like stepping back into postwar Britain: Soles in Coffins (sole fillets cooked in a hollowed out potato), Pease Pudding (split peas with parsley), Manchester Tart (a traditional jam and custard pastry he recalls eating at school) and a Sweet Shop Bag (a paper bag full of licorice, barley cane and gobstoppers).

When Mr. Wareing isn't cooking up a storm in the kitchen, he devotes his entire weekend to his family. "If you're going to have a family, you might as well do it properly," he says. 

  How does your weekend begin?  

Every Saturday my two sons and I are up early to get our eldest, Jake, to football club for 10 a.m. He plays for AC Fulham at Hurlingham Park. Six-year-old Archie and I support from the sidelines. I shout a lot and get very competitive. I offer [Jake] advice at half-time. I find football is a great medium through which to teach the kids some life lessons, on and off the pitch. My wife, Jane, sometimes comes along with our 3-year-old, Jessie. The early start is tough as I am usually working until 2 a.m. on Friday night. But it is important to get outside with the kids and get some fresh air. I barely see them during the week. 

  What do you do after the game?  

We get home just after midday and eat lunch all together. At this time of the year, it is something warm and comforting but most importantly, effortless. After a week of slogging away in the kitchen, I can rarely get beyond Heinz tomato soup from a can. We have this with bacon butties or sausage sandwiches. It's very sociable, around the kitchen table. We have renovated the kitchen so I love spending time there. It feels all my own. I sometimes get Jake and Archie to practice reading to me and we discuss their week. After lunch, I'll read the papers. I always get the Times [and Sunday Times] on the weekend to read my favorite restaurant critics, Giles Coren, A.A. Gill and Michael Winner.

  How do you spend the afternoon?  

We recently moved into a new home in Wandsworth, West London, with a massive garden, play room and gym. The kids are enjoying the novelty of a pool table indoors. They play games in the afternoon while I head for my weekly workout. This I keep to religiously. I go for an hour's run around the local parks, Wandsworth, Clapham Common and Fulham. I follow this up with rowing and a boxing session. I have a boxing bag in the gym. People ask me whether I exercise to stay slim, because I am surrounded by food all day. But the answer is no. I work out to stay sane. It is the only time during the week I have to myself, and I love it. I have always been a very solitary person. I never listen to music, I use the time alone to think about challenges that week, and the week ahead. I also think about dinner that night. 

  What do you do on a night in?   

Saturday night we are usually in with the kids. I might whip up a curry with poppadoms, or a good steak and salad. Sometimes we'll get a fresh pizza base and cover it with toppings. Jane or I will cook—she makes a mean lasagna and is a great cook. The kids' favorite is a roast dinner. They are good kids, and after dinner they clear the table. Afterward, the whole family snuggles up in front of a roaring fire to watch a movie or some TV. We'll watch something that everyone likes, like "Harry Potter" or "Star Wars."

  Do you find some peace on Sunday?   

When the kids are in bed, it is Jane and my downtime. We usually relax in front of the TV on Sunday night with a chilled glass of Chablis. 