LONDON—The Bank of England on Thursday left its key interest rate unchanged at a record low of 0.5%, although that decision is likely to have been a very close call. 

With the U.K.'s annual rate of inflation already twice the BOE's 2% target level, political turmoil in North Africa and parts of the Middle East is pushing energy prices higher. 

There is now a real prospect that the U.K.'s annual rate of inflation will breach 5% in coming months, and stay above the central bank's target for longer than forecast. 

Rate changes since 2004 in dozens of countries.

Some of the nine members on the bank's Monetary Policy Committee fear such a development would lead workers to demand and get significantly higher pay rises, leading to further price rises as businesses seek to cover their increased wage costs, setting off a second round of inflation. 

However, at Thursday's meeting the majority of rate-setters opted to wait until they have more information about the strength of the U.K. economy in early 2011, following its surprise contraction in the final three months of last year. 

The exact breakdown of the vote won't be made public until March 23, but it is likely to have been close. In February, three committee members voted to raise the key rate, and six to leave it unchanged. 

But many economists believe that as long as it is clear that the economy has recovered from its fourth-quarter dip, it is only a matter of months before the central bank raises its key rate, and investors have penciled in a move as soon as May. 

"There are growing risks of inflation becoming more ingrained as firms attempt to bolster their profit margins and employees seek higher wage rises in the face of sharply increased costs of energy and commodities," said  Ian McCafferty, chief economic adviser to the Confederation of British Industry. "We continue to believe that a move away from the emergency 0.5% rate set during the financial crisis is likely in the second quarter. By acting early, the bank can keep inflation expectations under control, preventing the need for more aggressive action later on." 

The BOE also voted to keep the stock of asset purchases under its quantitative-easing policy unchanged at £200 billion ($324.1 billion). The bank's key interest rate has been at the lowest level in the bank's 317-year history since March 2009 and its asset-purchase program paused at £200 billion since February 2010. 

The decision was made against a backdrop of patchy economic data, giving no clear indication as to whether the recovery is once again gaining traction, or set to falter in the face of government budget cuts and falling real wages. 

A survey of purchasing managers in the U.K.'s dominant services sector indicated growth in the sector weakened in February after a rebound in January.

But construction activity accelerated and the manufacturing sector, buoyed by a weak pound, expanded at its fastest annual rate in 16 years in January, according to official figures released earlier Thursday. Manufacturing output expanded 1% in January from the previous month, and was 6.8% higher year-to-year. 

Clouding the picture were data showing retail sales in February were at their weakest since May 2009. Consumer spending is expected to remain subdued as planned tax rises and spending cuts hit shoppers' wallets. 

The BOE is keen not to throttle a fledgling recovery by raising borrowing costs but its inflation-fighting credentials are being sorely tested. 

The bank expects inflation to fall back to target in 2012, although  Charles Bean, deputy governor for monetary policy, warned in a speech on March 3 that it might stay above target for longer than expected. Mr. Bean said there is a risk oil prices will remain elevated because of the growing appetite for natural resources in developing economies—and that's before the possibility of a surge in crude prices if turmoil in north Africa and the Middle East intensifies. 

In the U.K., the British Retail Consortium said on March 9 that shop-price inflation increased 2.7% in the 12 months to the end of February, adding that the figure would have been higher if retailers had fully passed on a rise in value-added tax to customers. Figures from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development revealed annual inflation in the U.K. in January was the highest among major developed economies. 

The Monetary Policy Committee is deeply divided about what action to take. In February, the majority voted to keep the benchmark bank rate at 0.5% although two members,  Martin Weale and  Spencer Dale, voted for a quarter-point increase and one, long-time hawk  Andrew Sentance, for a half-point increase.  Adam Posen called for further asset purchases. 

The minutes of the bank's March meeting will be published on March 23 and will reveal whether any more of the nine policy makers on the MPC have joined the growing band of hawks advocating a rate rise. 

If the minutes show that Messrs. Sentance, Weale and Dale have been joined by a fourth policy maker, that should reaffirm investors' view that the bank will tighten policy within the next couple of months. 

But not all economists are convinced investors have got it right. "While the chances of a May hike are significant, it is far from a done deal," said  Hetal Mehta, an economist at Daiwa Capital Markets. "Indeed, that call will be heavily contingent on the strength of ...GDP figures. Our expectation of sub-trend growth...leads us to expect the first rate increase in August, when the economy is likely to be on a firmer footing." 

A rate rise in May would be a fitting swansong for Mr. Sentance, who is to step down after four and a half years. He was a lone voice for a rate rise from June 2010 until Mr. Weale joined him in January. He is being replaced on the MPC by  Ben Broadbent, a  Goldman Sachs Group Inc. economist who has displayed some hawkish leanings in newspaper opinion pieces and research publications. 