LONDON—U.K. house prices fell for a second consecutive month in December, but are likely to be relatively steady this year, the Halifax mortgage lender said Monday. 

The Halifax house-price index fell 1.3% in December from the previous month to an average price of £163,435 ($254,092), following a 0.2% drop in November. Economists had been expecting a drop of 0.5% in December. 

After a brief rally due to a lack of sellers, U.K. residential property prices came under renewed pressure in the latter half of 2010 as an increase in homes for sale was met by lackluster demand and still-tight mortgage-lending conditions. 

"Current signs that homeowners are becoming more reluctant to sell would, if continued, help reverse the imbalance between buyers and sellers,"  Martin Ellis, Halifax housing economist, said in a statement. "Nonetheless, uncertainty about the economy, weak earnings growth and higher taxes could put some downward pressure on demand." 

Prices in the fourth quarter of last year were 0.9% lower than in the third quarter—a much smaller decline than the quarterly falls of between 5% and 6% seen at the height of the recession in the second half of 2008, Mr. Ellis said. Low interest rates are likely to help support people wishing to buy and limit financial pressure on homeowners with mortgages to honor, he said. 

"Looking forward, we expect limited movement in house prices during 2011 but with the risks on the downside," Mr. Ellis said. 

Halifax, which is part of  Lloyds Banking Group PLC, said the average house price for the three months to December was 1.6% lower than the corresponding period the previous year, the sharpest drop by that measure since November 2009. 

"Given further modest month-on-month declines consistent with upstream indicators, we are probably likely to approach a low point of around -5% year-on-year by the spring,"  Alan Clarke, an economist at BNP Paribas, said in a note. 

Halifax focuses on the quarterly year-to-year comparison because it says it smooths out short-term fluctuations and provides a better picture of underlying trends in the market. On the more commonly used year-to-year comparison, house prices were 2.8% lower than in December 2009. 