Some revolutionary technology—from the CD player to high-definition TV—has been launched at the annual Consumer Electronics Show over the years.

But for every hit, there are plenty more misses.

Product makers try to stay on the cutting edge, which can lead to over-reaching and ending up with some wacky devices. The awkwardly named iSmell, a device that was supposed to emit odors as users surfed scent-enabled websites, never made it past the prototype stage.

For the 2,500 exhibitors expected this year, even a warm reception isn't a guarantee of success. Below, a look at some past products that won awards at the convention but didn't live up to expectations. 

 The Palm Pre (2009) 

Palm Inc. was a mobile device pioneer, but by 2009 it was struggling to keep up with competitors like  Apple Inc.
AAPL


-0.04
%




's iPhone and  Research In Motion Ltd.'s BlackBerry. So when it debuted its Palm Pre at CES in 2009, it was clear that the company was staking its future on the little device. 

Fortunately, the Pre was a critical success, winning the coveted Best In Show award, awarded since 2006 by technology site CNET.

About a year later, Palm said the Pre wasn't selling as well as hoped, and the company's shares plunged.

Still,  Hewlett-Packard Co.
HPQ


-0.75
%




 executives cited the phone's Web OS operating system as one of the reasons H-P bought Palm for about $1.2 billion in April.

 Verizon V Cast Mobile TV (2007) 

Verizon's V Cast Mobile TV brought live television shows to phones equipped with special chips —an innovative idea that was enough to garner a Best of CES award in the mobile category.

Mobile television has been a hit in other countries, but it didn't catch on in the U.S. "You know, there are people who love it, but the numbers are not nearly what we expected," said  Paul Jacobs, Qualcomm
QCOM


0.80
%




 chief executivethis past July. Qualcomm's FLO TV was the technology behind Verizon's service.

Qualcomm said in October that it was giving up on FLO TV, and the service will shut down this spring. 

 Creative Zen Vision: M (2006) 

The showroom floor has been littered over the years with potential iPod and iPhone "killers." Creative Technology Ltd.'s digital music players were described just that way, winning awards in 2004, 2005 and 2006. The Zen Vision: M won the CES Best in Show award and boasted better battery life and some features the iPod didn't have, like a voice recorder and FM tuner. 

But these didn't make it a hit. The iPod remained dominant. The Zen Vision has been discontinued. Creative continues to launch new devices, though.

 Seiko Wearable Wrist Companion (2001) 

Perhaps some CES award winners are just ahead of their time, like the cellphone wristwatch.

Seiko Instruments Inc. won a Best of CES award in the telephony category for its version, which used Bluetooth to connect to the user's nearby cellphone. The watch let users send and receive text messages and connect to the Web. 

Seiko acknowledged at the time that it had no immediate plans to market the device—although it predicted in a news release that it would be the first in "an extensive series of wearable technology products."

Chances are, though, that you aren't wearing one now. 

 Write to  Jennifer Valentino-DeVries at Jennifer.Valentino-Devries@wsj.com 