As fears of radiation-contaminated Japanese foods spread in Asia, Hong Kong parents have packed stores to get their hands on what they believe could be the last untainted supply of a highly sought-after product: Japanese milk powder. 

On an uncomfortably humid morning in Hong Kong's Prince Edward district, hundreds of people were lined up outside a shop that advertised "Japanese milk powder" in Chinese characters on its exterior. 

The shop is operated by East Trading West, a Hong Kong company that trades in Japanese goods, including baby formula. East Trading West last week was distributing tickets redeemable for milk powder purchases—with supplies limited to one eight-can box per person.

The company couldn't be reached for comment. 

"Customers tell me that Japanese milk powder is good for the development of the brain. It makes kids smarter. My suppliers in Japan have told me that it's good for the eyes, which is why you don't see many kids in Japan with glasses," said Tammy Leung, director of Hong Kong-based company Annapoli International Ltd. which imports formula. 

Even before the earthquake in Japan, the nation's milk powder has been a contentious subject—and a hot commodity—in Hong Kong. Mothers from mainland China have been coming to Hong Kong for the product for years, as prices are slightly lower across the border, and because the melamine scandal in 2008 has eroded consumers' confidence in dairy goods sold in China. 

The queue in front of the East Trading West shop Tuesday included parents, grandparents, domestic helpers—and, of course, babies. Some people came prepared with plastic stools; others simply sat on newspaper. Police tape cordoned off the line. 

A woman at the front of the line, who declined to give her name, said she had been there since 4 a.m. 

Local supermarket chain Wellcome this month said it found that staff members in its Sheung Shui branch, near the border with the mainland, violated company rules by selling more than the limit of three cans of formula per customer. A district councilor has since referred the case to Hong Kong's antigraft agency, the Independent Commission Against Corruption.

A spokesperson for Wellcome said the company has since "strengthened its internal communications" to make sure the rule is properly enforced. The ICAC declined to comment. 

Hong Kong's government has also weighed in. Speaking at a news conference March 20 on the potential of radioactive food imports from Japan, Hong Kong Undersecretary for Security Lai Tung-kwok said that while most foodstuffs imported from Japan make up only 3% of the market, almost a quarter of baby formula in Hong Kong comes from Japan, up from around 8% in 2008. Household brands in Japan, such as Meiji and Morinaga, are particularly popular in Hong Kong. 

He said the government is in close contact with importers and wholesalers to understand the supply situation, and that there is no need for people to hoard.

Hong Kong's Consumer Council also cautioned against hoarding by anxious parents, and warned that sellers shouldn't exploit the situation by increasing prices or deliberately restricting supply. 

But even those who aren't worried about radioactive imports have no choice but to be drawn into the panic. Edmond Chan, a father of two, had taken half a day off work to line up at 6 a.m. He said he wasn't particularly concerned about radiation, but that hoarding by others could result in a supply shortage, so he felt he needed to secure what he could. 



Ms. Leung said she's had to limit customers to buying two boxes, even though they want as many as 10. Because her Japanese suppliers are also facing logistical difficulties, she's also had to refuse offers by customers to put down large deposits, as much as 10,000 Hong Kong dollars (US$1,283), as she wasn't sure she could meet their demands. She said her company would start sourcing more milk powder from other destinations, such as Australia, in due course. 

Though some parents are loath to switch their babies' diets, Dr. Lee Ka-yan, a paediatrician in Hong Kong, said fundamentally all milk powders are the same. In fact, he cautions that mothers should stay away from Japanese milk powder that doesn't come with instructions in either Chinese or English or a helpline that parents can call should they have any queries.

"These products weren't even intended for the Hong Kong market in the first place. Bearing in mind that formula is the only thing that babies eat, this is quite reckless. I really admire these mothers. I ask them where they heard about Japanese milk powder; they said they read about it on the Internet." 

—Cathy Yan contributed to this article.