WASHINGTON—A Food and Drug Administration panel said Friday that removing menthol cigarettes from the U.S. market would benefit the nation's health, but stopped short of recommending that the agency ban the product.



However, the decision does suggest the FDA should at least consider whether to ban menthol.

"The availability of menthol cigarettes has adverse impact on public health by increasing the numbers of smokers," the panel said in a draft report to the FDA. The committee said it "has no specific suggestions" on how the agency should respond to its conclusions.

The panel is scheduled to submit a report to the agency next week. 

Menthol-flavored cigarettes account for about 30% of total cigarette sales in the U.S. and are favored by adolescents and African-Americans over non-menthol cigarettes. The panel said it was concerned that youth who smoke menthol-flavored cigarettes are more likely to become regular smokers than those who smoke non-menthol cigarettes.

The panel concluded that the minty flavoring makes it more likely that certain groups will take up smoking. It also said menthol makes it harder for some groups to kick the habit. 

The issue is of major importance to  Lorillard Inc., maker of the leading menthol-flavored brand, Newport. The product accounts for roughly 90% of the company's sales.  Altria Group Inc.
MO


0.14
%




 and  Reynolds American Inc.
RAI


-0.08
%




 also market menthol-flavored cigarettes but aren't as reliant on them for overall sales. The companies couldn't immediately comment on the panel recommendation. 

It isn't clear if the FDA will follow the recommendation, but FDA officials have said that, if the agency were to pursue such a course, it "would take years." 

Indeed, share prices of the major tobacco companies were higher Friday as some analysts predicted the FDA wouldn't move forward with the panel's recommendation. Lorillard rose 7.7% to $84.85 in late morning trading Friday on the New York Stock Exchange. Altria was up 1.3% to $24.75 and Reynolds American rose 2% to $33.51. 

Morgan Stanley analyst  David Adelman said the panel's report "is a better outcome than what the market was fearing" because it made no specific policy recommendation to the FDA. "What [the panel] has done is to take a very hard line on menthol, to highlight concerns to the FDA, but not to recommend any particular action or policy," Mr. Adelman said. "I remain of the view that it's unlikely that the FDA will ban menthol."

Credit-rating firm Moody's Investors Service also said in a report Friday that a complete ban on menthol-flavored cigarettes by the FDA is unlikely, but that the industry could weather a ban. Cigarette-sales volumes would decline about 8% to 10% in the year the ban is implemented, and then likely revert to the long-term average of declines of 3% to 4% a year, Moody's said. The industry, which enjoys strong profitability, could "absorb a revenue hit from a menthol ban," said  Janice Hofferber, vice president, senior credit officer at Moody's. 

Tobacco companies, in a draft summary of a separate industry report made available by the FDA, said the scientific data demonstrate that there is no difference in disease, initiation, cessation or dependence between menthol-flavored and non-menthol cigarettes. 

"As a result, there is no scientific basis to support the regulation of menthol cigarettes any differently than non-menthol cigarettes," the industry report said. 

The FDA was given the authority to regulate tobacco products in 2009. As part of the tobacco law, all tobacco flavorings except for menthol were banned on concerns the flavors entice children and adolescents to start smoking. The law called for an FDA advisory panel to report on the public-health effects of menthol in cigarettes. The FDA doesn't have a required deadline or timeline to act on the panel's recommendations. 

In fact, in deciding whether to remove menthol-flavored cigarettes from the market, the FDA is required to take into account other factors such as whether a ban would create other problems such as an illegal contraband market. 

The panel's chairman  Jonathan Samet, a professor at the University of Southern California who has studied smoking-related health issues, said the panel couldn't conduct an analysis on contraband and concluded that FDA would need to do so. 

—Melissa Korn contributed to this article.

 Write to  Jennifer Corbett Dooren at jennifer.corbett-dooren@dowjones.com and David Kesmodel at david.kesmodel@wsj.com 