BERLIN—Germany abstained from the United Nations Security Council resolution calling for military action against Col. Moammar Gadhafi's regime as it doesn't want to take part in any military action, German Chancellor Angela Merkel said Friday. 

But the country may compensate for that by assuming other North Atlantic Treaty Organization to free up its resources for the Libya mission, Mrs. Merkel said in a briefing on Libya. 

"We fully endorse the aims of the resolution. Our attitude can't be mixed up with neutrality," she said. 

Germany's foreign and defense ministers are in talks with NATO to see whether it could take over other tasks , Mrs. Merkel said. 

She said one possibility would be that Germany helps with radar flights over Afghanistan by Airborne Early Warning and Control aircraft. 

German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle earlier Friday had tried hard to avoid the impression that Germany is isolated among its Western allies. France, the U.S. and the U.K. had all voted in favor of the resolution. On Friday, Libya declared an immediate cease-fire in a response to the vote. 

Mr. Westerwelle also said that Germany's position was in line with that of other major countries, Brazil, India, Russia and China. 

"I can assure you that we get respect for our position, also among our European partners, and that was expressed in talks yesterday," he said at a briefing Friday morning. 

Late Thursday, Mr. Westerwelle said that Germany supported U.N. measures for stricter sanctions against the regime of Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi, but was skeptical about military intervention. 

"Here we see significant danger and risk. This is why we couldn't vote in favor of this part of the resolution," he said, adding that German soldiers won't participate in any military deployment. 

Mr. Westerwelle added Friday that Germany understands the "honorable motives" of those who opted for a military intervention, and that pressure on Col. Gadhafi needed to be stepped up considerably. 

"This dictator must end his civil war, his war against his own people," he said. 

—Emese Bartha contributed to this article. 











