Renault said it plans to file a complaint before the criminal court in Paris Thursday in a case related to suspected industrial espionage. Two unions have said they will press the company's management to say more on the spying scandal. 

 Volvo's new China-based owners and the Swedish company's management team are considering exporting Volvos assembled in China to the U.S.—a potentially risky move that might harm the brand's Scandinavian identity and could be among the first to bring China-made vehicles to the U.S. 

General Motors wants pay for union-represented U.S. workers be tied to employees' work performance and the company's financial health—much like the way its salaried workers are paid—in what would be a major shift in how generations of auto workers have been compensated. 

 European Aeronautic Defence & Space's cash-flow performance in 2010 was "excellent," but the aerospace company's profitability still isn't satisfactory, Chief Executive Louis Gallois said. 

Meanwhile, EADS's North American chief executive said he expects the U.S. Air Force's $35 billion tanker-aircraft deal to be awarded next month. Sean O'Keefe said he expected that a best and final offer would be submitted later this month, with the contract awarded next month. 

U.K. airport operator BAA said disruption caused by severe weather last month cost the company £24 million ($37.5 million). BAA, a unit of Spain's Ferrovial, operates London's Heathrow and Stansted airports and four others in England and Scotland.

Spirit AeroSystems Holdings, a supplier of parts for Boeing's long-delayed 787 aircraft, said it reached an agreement with the aerospace giant over claims involving development and production of the aircraft. Spirit, like other contractors, has been seeking compensation for program delays. 

A key Brazilian watchdog bureau is likely to endorse the planned merger of Brazil's TAM and Chilean flagship carrier LAN Airlines, an agency spokeswoman said, a pairing that would create Latin America's biggest airline and the world's 15th largest air carrier by revenue.

Qatar's financial regulator has authorized J.P. Morgan Chase, the U.S. investment bank, to start operations in the Gulf Arab state, as the country looks to attract top financial firms to grow its emerging business hub. 

 Industrial conglomerate ITT said it plans to split into three publicly traded companies, focusing respectively on aerospace and defense, water management and industrial products, in a move that people familiar with the matter said would likely avoid a proxy fight with a major shareholder. 

Cargill, one of the world's largest commodity processors and traders, said its second-quarter benefited from rising commodity prices and firming global demand. The largest U.S. private company by sales earned $1.49 billion in the quarter to Nov. 30, compared with $489 million in the year-ago-period. 

Dutch brewer Heineken said it has bought a controlling interest in five breweries in Nigeria, as it moves to quickly expand in one of the world's fastest growing beer markets and Africa's second-largest. The purchase from Sona Group will raise Heineken's market share in the country to approximately 68%. 

Tsingtao Brewery looks set to become the first Hong Kong-listed Chinese company to rely solely on its mainland accounting firm to prepare its financial statements, after Chinese and Hong Kong authorities recently agreed to relax reporting rules. 

The Trans Alaska pipeline, which carries some 630,000 barrels of oil a day from Alaska's North Slope, temporarily restarted at a lower-than-normal rate. Most Alaska oil production has been shut in since Saturday as the pipeline's operator has scrambled to replace a section of damaged pipe that is crucial for permanently restarting the system. 

India's Oil & Natural Gas Corp. expects further delays in signing a deal with Iran's state-run Petropars to develop phase 12 of the South Pars gas field as U.S. sanctions on Iran are making it hard to secure funding, a senior company official said. 

Dodsal Engineering and Construction, the United Arab Emirates-based contractor, has won the $490 million contract to build sulfur granulation facilities for Abu Dhabi National Oil Co. as part of its $12 billion Shah sour gas field development, a company official said. 

French hotels group Accor said it has signed an agreement to sell its 49% stake in casino operator Groupe Lucien Barriere for €268 million ($348 million). Accor said it will sell a 34% stake in the casino group to French financial holding company Fimalac for €186 million and another 15% back to the Lucien Barriere group for €82 million. 

Morgan Stanley Investment Management, the asset management unit of Morgan Stanley, said its first dedicated corporate mezzanine fund has closed with $956 million in capital from investors as it seeks to profit from an expected dearth of refinancing activity. 

Danish insurer Tryg named its financial chief Morten Hubbe as new group chief executive, a day after current CEO Stine Bosse announced she would step down from the post.

The company also appointed executive vice president Lars Bonde to its management board and said a new CFO will replace Hubbe as quickly as possible. 

 AIG has agreed to sell its Taiwan unit to a dark-horse bidder for US$2.16 billion in its second attempt to exit the market and recoup money it owes the U.S. government. A consortium dominated by Taiwan's Ruentex Group, which owns interests in supermarkets, cement and finance, signed the deal with AIG to acquire AIG's Nan Shan Life Insurance unit. 

 Asset manager Henderson Group said it has agreed to buy rival Gartmore Group in a deal valued at £335.3 million ($523.7 million) that will create one of the U.K.'s largest independent asset managers, with around £78.1 billion under management. 

A U.S. federal judge accepted the Justice Department's proposed $296 million agreement with Boston Scientific's Guidant subsidiary over allegations that the medical-device maker failed to report major safety problems with some of its defibrillators. 

Sky Deutschland, the unprofitable German pay-TV company, reported a a leap in subscribers in the crucial fourth quarter. Sky Deutschland added 131,000 customers in the final quarter last year to take the total to 2.65 million, up from 2.47 million a year earlier, after adding 45,000 in the third quarter.

Cliffs Natural Resources said it agreed to buy Canada's Consolidated Thompson Iron Mines for about 4.9 billion Canadian dollars (US$4.95 billion).

Genzyme and hostile-bidder Sanofi-Aventis didn't elaborate much on their ongoing talks at dueling presentations with investors, but both chief executives acknowledged some hope for an end to the months-long stalemate between the two companies. 

J Sainsbury's quality food products helped the supermarket chain post forecast-beating Christmas sales, led by its range of entertainment and non-food items that proved to be popular items.

UK Mail Group, the British mail and logistics company, said it expects to fall short of profit expectations following slower than expected trading and heavy snowfall during the winter. 

 Television makers and broadcasters are ramping up their efforts to fix the shortage of content available for 3-D TV, one factor slowing the product's spread. The latest effort: Sony and two TV broadcasters said they are launching Japan's first 3-D drama series, which the companies say could also be the world's first. 

 Advanced Micro Devices' board was concerned for nearly a year that Chief Executive Dirk Meyer wasn't doing enough to get the chip maker into markets for newer mobile devices, according to people familiar with the matter.  