On the eve of what was expected to be a contentious public hearing over the fate of P.S. 114, the Department of Education backed off its plan to close the failing school after weeks of complaints by teachers and some community groups that the agency itself is to blame for the school's poor performance. 

One factor in the turnabout was the involvement of the leader of the state Senate, John Sampson, a Democrat who could be a big player in Mayor Michael Bloomberg's push to change the teacher layoff law in the state.

Mr. Bloomberg, who is threatening to lay off 4,600 teachers, is pressing legislators this week to overhaul the law that mandates teachers be laid off on a seniority basis, regardless of merit. 

"This school is not going to be phased out," said Nathan Bradley, Mr. Sampson's chief of staff. The senator represents Brooklyn, including Canarsie, where P.S. 114—an elementary school for pre-kindergarten through fifth grade—is situated. 

Mr. Sampson was "very concerned about the decision to close the school" and "negotiated" the deal with Deputy Schools Chancellor Marc Sternberg and Deputy Mayor Dennis Walcott, Mr. Bradley said. Austin Shafran, a spokesman for Mr. Sampson, said the senator hasn't taken a public position on seniority-based teacher layoffs, but will after he's had an opportunity to review the legislation before the senate. 

The Panel for Educational Policy was supposed to vote on the closure of P.S. 114 Tuesday night. The DOE's reversal comes after weeks of insisting that a closure was warranted. 

The factors in the DOE's earlier push to close P.S. 114 included that the school was in the bottom 8% of citywide elementary schools in terms of learning growth in math, and in the bottom 14% of schools in English. The agency wrote in a report that if the school's downward trends weren't reversed, "P.S. 114 students will continue falling further behind their peers in other schools." 

Last month, the panel voted to close more than 20 schools; last year, the DOE's plans to close 19 failing schools were foiled after a successful lawsuit by the United Federation of Teachers and the NAACP, which charged that the DOE didn't follow the proper process in order to close the schools. 

At the heart of the school-closure battle is a philosophical divide about what to do with failing schools. The Bloomberg administration has closed dozens of schools in the past eight years, arguing that some are so toxic and have performed so poorly for so long that they can't be saved. Instead, the administration shuts the school down and replaces it with another school in the same building—but for the most part, the principal and the teachers are different. 

In the case of P.S. 114, it would have been shut to make room for a new district school and a new charter school. Now, the charter school will still open in the building, as declining enrollment at P.S. 114 has created space.

The plans for P.S. 114 became a lightning rod because of perceptions that the DOE had mishandled issues at the school and moved too slowly to remove a problematic principal. 

"For years, the parents and teachers of P.S. 114 have raised their voices to save this school. At long last, the Department of Education has heard them. I applaud Mayor Bloomberg and Chancellor Black for their decision to keep P.S. 114 open," said Public Advocate Bill de Blasio. 

The city's school closure policies are "out of control," complained Hakeem Jeffries, a state assemblyman who represents Brooklyn. He vowed to introduce legislation this week that would impose a one-year moratorium on the city's ability to close schools until the state Department of Education has an opportunity to study whether school closures benefit students. 

In a statement, the schools chancellor, Cathleen Black, said: "After extensive discussions with the PS 114 community and local elected officials about the struggles this school has faced and its capacity to better serve its students, we have decided to keep PS 114 open. In the coming days we will work to develop a comprehensive plan for the school that will give it a real opportunity for success."

For weeks, the DOE had dismissed many of the complaints, and said its plan to put in a new district school and a new charter school would give parents more choices and students a fresh start. It suggested that parents have already deemed the school a failure as evidenced by declining enrollments, to 760 students this year from 1,300 in 2000. 

The DOE said the school has failed to improve despite plowing nearly $1 million into the school over the past three years for math and literacy coaches, staff developers and other help. 

 Write to  Barbara Martinez at Barbara.Martinez@wsj.com 