California Gov. Jerry Brown has released his proposal to close the state's $25 billion budget gap, which makes up roughly a third of the state's general fund budget. The plan includes $12.5 billion in spending cuts, primarily to entitlements, and $12 billion from a five-year extension of the "temporary" income- and sales-tax hikes that the legislature passed two years ago.

Back then, six Republicans joined with Democrats to muster the two-thirds majority vote required by law to increase taxes. Those lawmakers were vilified by members of their party and conservative organizations for breaking the Americans for Tax Reform "no tax" pledge. Republican Mike Villines, the assembly leader who helped broker the compromise with Democrats, resigned shortly after making the deal. Mr. Villines and Republican state Senator Abel Maldonado both lost their bids for higher statewide office this year, partly because of lukewarm support from conservative groups. Three others who voted for the hikes have since retired, which has left a more conservative Republican caucus.

Mr. Brown, a Democrat, would have to pick off two Republicans in the assembly and two in the senate to obtain a supermajority for extending the tax increases. Conceding that Republicans are unlikely to go along with Democrats this time around, he has asked the legislature to put a proposition on a June special election ballot to extend the hikes. But getting the extension on the ballot would also require a two-thirds vote of the legislature, and anti-tax crusader Grover Norquist of the Americans for Tax Reform has warned Republicans that a vote for putting the extension on the ballot is equivalent to a vote to raise taxes.

Mr. Brown won't say what he plans to do if the legislature refuses to put the proposition on the ballot or if voters reject the extension as they did in 2009. He noted, however, that voters also rejected the state's redistricting commission numerous times before they approved it in 2008 and said a lot "depends on the context." Presumably, voters could be enticed to extend the tax increases now because they don't want to see cuts to K-12 and higher education that Mr. Brown has warned could happen barring an extension.

Mr. Brown added that he plans to campaign vociferously for the extension and will actively recruit business and labor backers. So far, however, Republicans and business groups have shown little support. Look for some cross-aisle bargaining in the coming weeks that involves conservative pet projects and causes.