WASHINGTON—European officials need to expand the region's financial rescue fund and subject their banks to more rigorous stress tests to quell a key threat to the global economic recovery, the International Monetary Fund said Tuesday.

A pair of reports released by the fund suggested its biggest area of concern remains Europe, where fears of a sovereign debt crisis and questions about the financial health of some of the region's banks have led to increasing market turbulence. The financial rescues of Greece and Ireland and the potential for other countries to need aid continue to hurt market confidence in the region, the IMF said.

The fund warned that absent a series of "comprehensive, rapid, and decisive policy actions," market fears could spread to the stronger European economies and to others around the globe The IMF expressed concern about the growing linkage between bank and government debt woes in some European countries, as doubts about banks' financial condition dovetail with questions about governments' abilities to service their debts, which in turn heighten fears about rising funding costs, in a worsening cycle.

"In particular, continued market pressures could result in serious funding pressures for major banks and sovereigns, increasing the likelihood that problems spill over to core countries," the IMF said.

Foremost among the fund's recommendations: a new round of tougher stress tests to assess the banks' health and an increase in the size and flexibility of the euro area's rescue fund, the European Financial Stability Facility. European Union officials are meeting in March, and the IMF said aggressive actions by policy makers could help calm fears about the region's financial health.

"New stress tests that are more realistic, thorough and stringent will increase clarity," the fund said. "Markets also need to be reassured that sufficient resources are available from the center to deal with downside risks and that the overall policy approach is consistent."

The volume of debt owed by euro-area banks expanded markedly compared with the size of the total economy during the financial crisis, according to the Centre for European Policy Studies. The banks' total debt rose to 127% of the area's economic output in 2010 from 111% in 2007, and up from 66 % in 1999. 

The fund also weighed in on the hot-button political issue of how to bolster U.S. economic prospects. President Barack Obama, in his State of the Union address Tuesday evening, was expected to call for a five-year freeze on non-security discretionary government spending as a step toward reducing the federal budget deficit, while many House Republicans have proposed cutting federal spending by $100 billion in the current fiscal year.

The IMF did not comment on either proposal, but said continued government efforts to stimulate the U.S. economy "are justifiable at this juncture," given high unemployment and stress in the housing market. However, the U.S. also needs to start work on a plan to improve its fiscal situation over time through several approaches, including changes to its entitlement programs, spending cuts, and an overhaul of the tax system, the fund said.

"The absence of a credible, medium-term fiscal strategy would eventually drive up U.S. interest rates, which could prove disruptive for global financial markets and for the world economy," the fund said.

The IMF said it expects the U.S. economy to grow 3% in 2011, up from its October projection of 2.3%, but just 2.7% in 2012. The fund also projected economic growth of 1.5% in the euro area this year, while China is expected to continue to lead the major economies with 9.6% growth in 2011.

—Riva Froymovich contributed to this article.

 Write to  Michael R. Crittenden at michael.crittenden@dowjones.com 