 The founder and publisher of "A Hedonist's Guide" talks to The Wall Street Journal Europe about how he starts his weekend.  

Tremayne Carew Pole likes opposites, enjoying either a quiet weekend in his native Cornwall or a hectic, partying one in London, where he lives and works. "They are both extremes," explains the 36-year-old head of the luxury city-guide series. "You have to have your yin and yang. If you don't take some rest, then you burn out partying quickly. As we get older, unfortunately it is much more difficult to party all the way through the weekend."

  What do you do on a Friday night?  

[My wife and I] normally leave work and jump in the car to drive to Cornwall, which is where I am from. [Sometimes] we have an early supper in London and then drive at 8 p.m....You are in Cornwall by 11:30 p.m. and [still have] time to have a couple of drinks with whomever you are staying with. [Or] we stop on the way and find a nice little local pub to have dinner in. We bring the pub guide with us....[Other times, we] stop off at my sister-in-law's pub, the Kingham Plough. She was Heston Blumenthal's sous chef for a while at the Fat Duck and produces an exquisite take on British Revival cooking in a charming pub setting.

  What do you do in Cornwall?   

I love having friends to stay, albeit at my parent's house. It's a beautiful house that is open to the public and although Antony has been in my family for nearly 300 years, the house and garden, which were visited by 100,000 people last year, is today managed by the National Trust. There's quite a lot of space there and the countryside there is so beautiful, it is worth taking people there. The important thing is not to burn out on the first night because if you all get together and haven't seen each other for a couple of months, the drinking can go on late into the night and then the next day you feel awful. 

  What is your Saturday morning like?  

Those with children are up quite early on Saturday. Otherwise, we would normally get up at about 9:30 a.m. and head out for a long walk somewhere. We are quite close to the coast. There is a cliff path that runs seven miles from a beautiful spot with a 12th-century chapel. The road goes through little Cornish fishing villages and dramatic cliff scenery. For lunch, we go to a local pub. None of them is spectacular. But there is a little restaurant with a view of the cliff tops, which serves very fresh fish and it looks out over the sea with big glass windows.

  What about the rest of the day?  

After lunch, depending on whether it is summer or winter, we will head to the beach. We take the children rock pooling and do a bit of surfing. There is also an opportunity to go sailing down by the river. And then Saturday night, we normally have a big dinner, which would be at home. We have 20 people around the table with a lot of good food and drink, late-night conversations and maybe a game of billiards. We just unwind and relax. That goes on to 3 or 4 a.m.

  When you stay in London, how do you spend your weekend?   

Friday night in London is party night. Because we are getting older, Sundays don't give you enough time to recover if you go out on Saturday night. We have dinner somewhere in London. I am a member of the Ivy and the food there is absolutely fantastic. I have some friends who run Barrafina and Quo Vadis, so maybe we go to dinner there or try somewhere new about town. Being the publisher of a restaurant guide, it is always good to try new places and to see what up-and-coming places you really like. 

  Underground parties  

There are a lot of underground parties that go on that you find out through websites or Facebook that are aimed at a 30-something generation....Jezebel is one of the clubs that organizes parties in old film studios in northwest London. Fatboy Slim and Kanye West came along to play at one of those parties recently. After dinner, we jump in a cab and head across town wherever the party is. You then go home at 5 a.m.

  And the next morning?  

By Saturday morning you are in a lot of pain. Saturday is a total write-off. You revive yourself with a bit of brunch at midday. I live on the King's Road, so I end up going somewhere like the Bluebird and have some Eggs Benedict and a Bloody Mary. 

 Write to  Javier Espinoza at javier.espinoza@wsj.com 