The risk, and opportunity, inherent in Garuda Indonesia's coming initial public offering is summed up neatly by an award the carrier received last year: World's Most Improved Airline.

Investors, including those in London, Boston and New York this week, will hear about the successful turnaround of a money-losing, heavily indebted carrier with a poor reputation for safety. A now-profitable Garuda flies a younger fleet and finished restructuring its debt in December. That most improved award, meanwhile, comes from Skytrax and speaks to quality of service.

It also began flying to Europe last summer. It had been banned from the continent—along with the rest of Indonesia's airlines—from 2007 to 2009 because of safety concerns.

Garuda's pitch is that its transformation has it optimally placed to profit from Indonesia's rapid growth and that it will use most of the IPO proceeds to expand its fleet. The company hopes to sell nearly 37% of itself for as much as $1.1 billion, which would be Indonesia's biggest IPO since mid-2008.

The number of domestic passengers in Indonesia will grow 60% by 2015, the Centre for Asia Pacific Aviation says. The market for international travel could more than double in the same period as tourists flow in and increasingly wealthy Indonesians begin to travel abroad.

Smartly, management has made the domestic market a priority. Building that base will give it a better shot against deep-pocketed rivals like Singapore Airlines once it begins to compete for long-distance travellers. Singapore and its regional arm Silk Air hold 12% of Indonesia's international market by capacity, CAPA says. That's not far off Garuda's leading 15% share.

But for all this, investors are being asked to pay a high price. Assuming Garuda hits its forecast 2010 profit of about $127 million, the deal's current price range of 750 rupiah to 1100 rupiah means the stock could go for between 16.4 and 24 times 2010 earnings. This is high by the standards of regional carriers, which are trading from 10 to 13 times earnings.

Paying some premium won't faze investors eager for exposure to Indonesia's consumers. But this bet is also dependent on Indonesia's ability to develop airport infrastructure, and management's ability to expand quickly without losing a grip on quality or safety. In November, a glitch in Garuda's new technology system had it cancelling and delaying flights for nearly a week. 

Garuda may one day become an icon of Indonesia's economic success, but not without some turbulence.

 Write to  Mohammed Hadi at mohammed.hadi@dowjones.com 