LONDON—Essar Energy PLC Monday beat forecasts with an 8% rise in 2010 earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization, but it highlighted delays to key projects and rising uncertainties over domestic coal sourcing, which analysts said could slow its ambitious expansion plans. 

The London-listed, India-focused power and oil- and gas-exploration company, spun out of Indian conglomerate Essar Group in London's biggest IPO in two years, said the start of its Salaya 1 and Mahan 1 coal-fired power plants would be pushed back to the third quarter and fourth quarter respectively. 

Although the rise in full-year Ebitda to $718.9 million from $663.7 million in 2009 exceeded analyst estimates of $684 million, the delay to some of the company's projects weighed on its share price. In morning trading, Essar's shares were down 21 pence, or 4.4%, at 454 pence. 

Deutsche Bank said it still saw strong growth for the group but added that "execution is proving more challenging than expected and problems across sourcing of domestic coal for all players in India seem to be increasing." However, Deutsche Bank said it was keeping its "buy" recommendation and 610 pence target. 

Another analyst, who declined to be named, said that while the slight delays were unlikely to be worrisome to long-term investors, those looking for a quicker return might be disappointed. 

Since its public offering last year, the company has embarked on an ambitious investment program, last month agreeing a $350 million deal to buy Royal Dutch Shell PLC's Stanlow refinery on the northwest coast of England. It is close to finishing the first phase of a major upgrade of its large new refinery at Vadinar, India. 

Essar Energy Chief Executive  Naresh Nayyar said 2010 had been a good first year for the company since it listed in 2010, aided by a significant improvement in the overall business environment, particularly in terms of refining margins. 

"Demand for energy in India is expected to continue to grow sharply and we remain focused on delivering our key projects, which in 2011 includes the first phase of our Vadinar refinery expansion and another 2,910 megawatts of power-generation capacity," said Mr. Nayyar. 

The company said pretax profit for the period was $365.5 million, above analyst estimates for profit before tax of $291 million. 

  Group revenue was $10 billion for the period. 

Mr. Nayyar said the sale of Royal Dutch Shell's Stanlow refinery is expected to be concluded this month.

"Shell has largely concluded the consultation with the employees. We expect to sign the agreement in the next week to 10 days. Thereafter the closing process will start and we expect to take ownership of the refinery in the second half of this year," he said. 

Shell last month agreed to sell Stanlow, the U.K.'s second-largest refinery, to Essar for $350 million. Including crude and refined-product inventories, total consideration of the deal is expected to be between $1.1 billion and $1.3 billion. 

Mr. Nayyar said that Essar would look to expand Stanlow's capacity when it takes control of the facility. 

"The refinery currently has a capacity of 14 million (metric) tons but is running at 75% of capacity. We are looking at various options for improvement both in terms of capacity utilization and to change its crude slate." 

He added that this process was still in its early stages. 

Essar Energy's shares closed at £4.75 ($7.7) Friday. Shares in the company, which has a market capitalization of around $10.3 billion, are up around 13% since their May IPO. 