A small group of top finance officials from the euro zone met in Luxembourg late Friday to discuss the currency bloc's aid programs for Greece and Portugal, as well as the next chief of the European Central Bank. But a number of conflicting media reports about the meeting's agenda underscored a sense of anxiety about the prospects for financially troubled economies in the euro zone.

A report on the German website Spiegel Online suggesting the meeting was due to discuss a Greek request to leave the euro zone prompted investors to sell the euro ahead of the event.

Euro-zone officials and Greek government recognized that Greece's debt problems were discussed, but they strongly denied the country was considering leaving the euro zone.

"We are not discussing the exit of Greece from the euro area, this is a stupid idea and an avenue we would never take," said Jean-Claude Juncker of Luxembourg, who heads the group of euro-zone finance ministers.

Asked about the possibility of rescheduling Greek debt, Mr. Juncker said that possibility has been excluded.

Instead, the participants discussed the likely need to provide Greece with additional aid loans from 2012, according to people familiar with the situation. 

The meeting included discussions on Jean-Claude Trichet's successor as ECB chief. Germany's Wolfgang Schäuble, French Finance Minister Christine Lagarde and European Commissioner Olli Rehn were also present at the meeting.

Greece already has a €110 billion ($157 billion) program of aid loans from other euro-zone governments and the International Monetary Fund. But that program envisages Greece returning to bond markets in 2012 to raise nearly €30 billion of financing.

Most euro-zone governments privately acknowledge that won't be possible, because bond investors won't lend to Greece at affordable prices. That reality is forcing Europe to discuss lending more money to Greece. Many economists expect the euro zone will have to provide Greece with all of its medium and long-term financing next year.

No decisions were expected to be made at Friday's meeting, which senior euro-zone officials described as a regular consultation that had long been planned.

The meeting was also due to discuss the presidency of the ECB. Italian central bank chief Mario Draghi is widely considered the front-runner in the race to succeed Mr. Trichet.

Mr. Draghi hasn't yet won the public backing of German Chancellor Angela Merkel, but senior German officials say she is unlikely to resist the Italian's nomination because there are no alternative candidates who have much chance of securing enough support around Europe.

—William Horobin contributed to this article.

 Write to  Marcus Walker at marcus.walker@wsj.com, Charles Forelle at charles.forelle@wsj.com and David Crawford at david.crawford@wsj.com 