LONDON—The violent crackdown on protesters in Bahrain has thrown a wrench in the "open, democratic society" message Bahraini officials have peddled abroad in recent months, undermining the kingdom's credibility with foreign investors as it seeks to diversify its economy by promoting growth in banking and tourism, analysts say. 

A year ago, the head of Bahrain's Economic Development Board traveled to international financial hubs such as London, holding meetings in swank hotels and pitching the tiny kingdom as "the gateway to Middle East" because of its rule of law, stable economy and its "open, tolerant and welcoming society," according to promotional literature from the board.

In a March 2010 interview with CNN, Bahrain's Crown Prince Salman bin Hamad al-Khalifa said he wanted to empower all the young people of the kingdom and transcend fissures in Bahraini society.

"They recognized that the precursor to more investment was a pristine international reputation," said  Alia Brahimi, a Mideast politics research fellow at the London School of Economics. 

But that narrative is crumbling amid the violent state crackdown on protesters, most of them members of the Shiite Muslim majority who claim they have been socially marginalized for years by Bahrain's Sunni Muslim ruling family. 

On Tuesday, a spokesman for the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights said the situation in Bahrain remains "very worrying," and that between 50 and 100 people have been reported missing over the past week. He also cited reports of arrests of political activists, human-rights workers and doctors and nurses as cause for concern.

Tensions escalated last week when Bahrain called in 1,000 troops from Saudi Arabia, which is sympathetic to Bahrain's Sunni rulers.

"All in all this is a hugely negative development for Bahrain and will weigh down economic growth significantly in the months and quarters to come," said  Raza Agha, Middle East economist at Royal Bank of Scotland Group PLC. "A lot of people were caught off-guard about how explosive the domestic sectarian situation was," he added. 

Messages left for the Economic Development Board in Manama weren't returned. The board's spokeswoman in London said her client couldn't be reached to comment. 

Bahrain, an island of a million people, half of whom are foreigners, has long been a hub for financial services. It has recently sought to promote that sector and others, such as tourism, as an alternative to reliance on its limited oil and gas reserves. Its hotels, bars and restaurants attract many visitors, including Saudis who drive in across a 16-mile causeway linking the island to the Arabian Peninsula. 

Financial services—including funds, insurance and Islamic finance—accounted for 27% of Bahrain's 2010 gross domestic product, while oil and gas accounted for around 13%, according to figures from to the Economic Development Board. Hotels and tourism accounted for some 8%.

The effort to develop a more diverse economy, focusing on tourism and financial services, has been led by the crown prince, who is seen to favor democratic reforms and who called for dialogue with the opposition when the protests started. The crackdown by security forces is thought to be led by older, hard-line factions in the kingdom.

Bahrain scored a win on the international stage several years ago when it secured a Formula One Grand Prix race. The organizers postponed the March 13 season opening, which attracts tens of thousands of people each year, because of the unrest.

Several global banks, including  Bank of America Corp.'s
BAC


3.91
%




 Bank of America Merrill Lynch and  Standard Chartered
STAN


-0.39
%




 PLC, have said that despite some temporary branch closures, business is progressing as usual amid the unrest.  Alastair Newton, a senior political analyst at Nomura in London, said most existing firms aren't likely to pull out in the near term, but he expects future investments will take a hit.

"The biggest difficulty will be persuading key personnel to move there," he said. "Senior staff want to go to places where they feel there is a high degree of safety."

—Alex Delmar-Morgan in Manama, Bahrain, contributed to this article. 