PARIS—Utility executives and a top nuclear official have robustly defended the nuclear industry in an intensifying debate over the suitability of atomic energy as a major energy source, as Germany signaled its determination to accelerate its transition away from nuclear power and towards renewables. 

Six days after an earthquake and subsequent tsunami in Japan left a nuclear power plant on its east coast leaking radiation and in danger of meltdown, triggering a global debate on nuclear energy, corporate and government interests who back nuclear energy remain on the defensive. 



Nuclear energy had been on the brink of a renaissance due to concerns about climate change and energy security, but all that is in doubt amid the worst nuclear crisis in a generation. 

Thursday, a top official with the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development insisted nuclear energy remained "essential" to Europe's energy supply, following staunch defenses hours earlier by French and German companies. 

Nowhere have the political effects of the Japan situation been more dramatic thus far than in Germany, where German Chancellor Angela Merkel had last autumn engineered a controversial move to extend the lifespan of Germany's nuclear plants by an average of 12 years. In a partial reversal earlier this week, Ms. Merkel on Tuesday ordered the closure of Germany's seven oldest nuclear plants pending a three-month security review. The seven plants affected account for just under 5% of Germany's power. 

"We will use the period of the moratorium to speed up the turnaround in energy," Ms. Merkel told the German parliament. "We want to reach the era of renewable energy as fast as possible." 

At the same time, Ms. Merkel suggested Thursday at least some nuclear energy would remain in the country's fuel mix for the foreseeable future. 

Nuclear energy accounts for just under 6% of total primary energy supply globally, according to data from the International Energy Agency. But under a scenario with more aggressive policies to mitigate climate change, the IEA projects the nuclear share of the energy mix will reach nearly 8% in 2020 and more than 11% in 2035. 

While shares in renewable energy companies have risen in the wake of the Japan crisis, analysts note that solar, wind and other renewables remain more costly than most conventional forms of energy and require costly subsidies. Some analysts believe natural gas is the best positioned fuel to replace nuclear energy in both the short and long term. 

Luis Echavarri, head of the nuclear energy agency of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, told Dow Jones Thursday that nuclear energy would remain "an essential element of electricity production" for Europe. 

Also defending the technology was German utility E.ON AG Chief Executive Johannes Teyssen. He said late Wednesday that the German government's decision to close down some nuclear reactors was purely politically motivated and not "justified from a safety standpoint." 

At the same, Teyssen conceded that "since Friday, the world, including the energy world, is a different one." 

While some nuclear producers have kept a low profile since the Japan crisis broke, some of the industry's leaders, including Italy's Enel SpA and French giants Electricite de France SA's and Areva SA, have strongly defended nuclear power. Shares in EDF and Areva, which plunged earlier in the week, have started to bounce back in recent days. 

Gerard Mestrallet, chief executive of GDF Suez SA, became the latest major executive to insist on a stay-the-course nuclear agenda. "We haven't taken any decision at this stage to change our strategy" in the wake of the developing nuclear accident in Japan, Mestrallet told reporters Wednesday night. 

— Alessandro Torello, Martin Rapp and Adam Mitchell contributed to this article.

 Write to  John M. Biers at john.biers@dowjones.com and Bernd Radowitz at bernd.radowitz@dowjones.com 