 London 

The runway collections this week showed off the city's reputation for fashion innovation, with a kaleidoscope of electric colors and cutting-edge prints. 

The runway collections presented in London this week showed off the city's reputation for fashion innovation, with use of electric colors and cutting-edge prints. 

Designers at the shows, which ended Wednesday, seemed to be in a cheery mood, at least in terms of color. "There's a strong trend for color and very loud color, you might say," said Colin McDowell, a longtime fashion writer and fixture at the London shows. 

Nowhere was that more evident than in the designs of Daniella Helayel and Roksanda Ilincic. The atmosphere at the show for Ms. Helayel's Issa brand—a favorite of Prince William's fiancée, Kate Middleton—was euphoric, with the final look, a bright red gown, summing up the party feel as the 1980 song "Celebration" played. Meanwhile, Ms. Ilincic's eponymous line punctuated oatmeal and black looks with "shockingly strong" oranges, purples and reds that the Serbian-born designer said she worked closely with mills to create. 

Many of the vibrant colors on the runway were showcased in strong graphic prints. From the prim yet decadent plants of Jonathan Saunders to Erdem's artsy collages and Mary Katrantzou's home décor, the use of digitally manipulated prints put London's creative talents on display.

"In the past five years, there have been so many prints going on, and it's kind of amazing because it allows you to express this desire for color," said Christopher De Vos, one half of the Peter Pilotto label. Peter Pilotto's youth-inspired collection was rife with chain prints that mimicked a checked pattern as they criss-crossed dresses and trousers and blurred into beams of color.

Erdem Moralioglu used vibrant color to a different effect. Erdem's darkly beautiful collection combined a modern artist's brush stroke of bright, chaotic patterns with luscious black velvet, chiffon and satin, moving away from his trademark feminine florals into something slightly more sinister.

Meanwhile, prints altered the mood of Jonathan Saunders's minimalist creations. This season, influenced by seductive 1940s photographs by Paul Outerbridge, the Scottish designer created patterns of flora and fauna in vibrant oranges, greens and blues that added an old-fashioned elegance to modern shapes. Mr. Saunders, whose background is in printed textiles, often begins his collections with hand-crafted designs and builds his pared-down silhouettes around them. He says that with this collection, it felt right to combine simple shapes "with the kind of opulent, opium, poppy prints and the jewel-like colors." 

Clements Ribeiro also went for a feeling of decadence. The label, designed by husband-wife team Inacio Ribeiro and Suzanne Clements, photographed antique documents of Ottoman and Persian textiles and morphed them into one another, using digital technology to blend and dissolve the patterns. When the prints were paired with Victorian jet beads, North African embroideries and longer, leaner silhouettes, the designers' collection took on a decidedly luxurious feel.

But no one is pushing the boundaries of printing quite like Ms. Katrantzou, a Greek designer who has made waves ever since she came on the scene three years ago. Last season, in her first solo catwalk show, she referenced interior design by sending out models dressed in skirts that resembled lamp shades and strong structured shapes, along with prints that replicated living spaces you'd expect to see in Architectural Digest. This season, Ms. Katrantzou built on that idea with designs inspired by Fabergé eggs and Meissen porcelain, moving deeper into the realm of decorative arts. 

Get the latest news and buzz from the fashion world. London fashion week recaps:

She said her spring collection had emboldened her to test the boundaries and push forward. "I was giving myself a master class in print and pattern and color," the designer said. She said that when she was creating the current collection, she "almost cried because my prints were controlling me." But by the time the designs hit the runway, her well-received trompe l'oeil and bias-cut dresses were fashion at its most innovative.

They were also London at its best, proving that this city, with its plethora of design colleges, is an incubator for the kind of talent that isn't afraid to question established rules. "I think the great vibe about London is that people aren't scared to express themselves," said Bridget Cosgrave, fashion and buying director at U.K. boutique chain Matches. "It's that sort of quirky individuality."

But the city's fall runways also included a refined, buttoned-up side that seemed an homage to history—and, perhaps, a delayed reaction to government austerity measures. Whether it was high ruffled collars and leather corsets over silk gowns at Giles, longer hemlines at Clements Ribeiro or Emilio de la Morena's sheer and structured refinement, designers seemed inspired by the prim past. But their creative twists offered a glimpse of London's future. 

 Write to  Beth Schepens at Beth.Schepens@WSJ.com 