Legend has it that Alfred Hitchcock was terrified of soufflés. From the moment his wife put the dish in the oven, the famed director was said to stare at the stove with increasing anxiety. When a beautifully caramelized and perfectly risen creation emerged 30 minutes later, he breathed a sigh of relief and exclaimed, "I can't stand the suspense." 

Soufflés—light and fluffy baked concoctions founded on an egg yolk and beaten eggs white base—possess an ethereal texture and delicate flavors particularly suited to spring. 

Despite rarified associations, a souffle can include even the most humble ingredients. In his 1934 classic "Ma Cuisine," the father of modern French cooking Auguste Escoffier included 80 impressive versions from which to choose. Master the recipe for a basic cheese, spinach, chocolate or vanilla soufflé and then give your imagination free rein. You can wow your guests and use up leftovers at the same time—just add bacon, broccoli or mushrooms to a savory soufflé or fold chocolate chunks, crushed praline or rum-soaked raisins into dessert variations. 

Two of my absolute favorites are the Vendome, which is great for brunch, as each portion has a whole poached egg hidden at its center; and the subtly delicious Rothschild, which in its original incarnation (named by its creator Antonin Careme for Jacob de Rothschild, his employer and the richest man in France), included flakes of real gold alongside the vanilla and candied fruits.

Just the thought of these airy culinary miracles confounds many cooks, but their preparation is actually quite easy to get the hang of. Years of practice have led me to tricks that guarantee perfect, hassle-free results every time. 

The old adage, "The diner waits for the soufflé; the soufflé does not wait for the diner," is rule number one: The finished dish must go directly from oven to table, as this comestible becomes considerably less edible if not eaten immediately. According to George Lang in "Lang's Compendium of Culinary Nonsense and Trivia," on an occasion when Escoffier could not control the exact timing of a dinner, he made 10 batches of soufflés starting three minutes apart to ensure that one would be ready at the exact right moment. I just seat friends at least five minutes before a first course soufflé leaves the oven. 

On the off chance that disaster strikes, describe the fallen soufflé—whether sweet or savory—as your grandmother's special pudding. Though devoid of fluffy magic, it will be equally tasty and no one will be the wiser. 

 Serves 8 

 Softened butter and grated Parmesan to prepare the molds 

 For the spinach:  3 tablespoons unsalted butter  3 tablespoons minced shallots  1½ cups frozen chopped spinach, thawed, drained and squeezed dry in a kitchen towel  ½ teaspoon fine sea salt 

 Soufflé base:  6 tablespoons unsalted butter  6 tablespoons flour  2 cups boiling milk  1½ teaspoons, plus large pinch fine sea salt  1/8 teaspoon freshly ground pepper  1/8 teaspoon cayenne pepper  1/8 teaspoon freshly grated nutmeg  6 egg yolks  10 egg whites at room temperature  1 teaspoon cream of tartar  1/3 cup grated Gruyère or a combination of Gruyère and Parmesan cheeses  3 tablespoons grated Parmesan to sprinkle on top 

 1. Butter 8 individual 1¼-cup soufflé molds or ramekins. Dust them with Parmesan and place on a baking sheet.

 2. For the spinach, melt butter in a large skillet. Add shallots and sauté until golden. Add spinach and salt and cook, stirring frequently, until done, about 5 minutes. Set aside.

 3. For the soufflé base, melt butter in a large saucepan. Whisk in flour and cook, stirring over moderate heat until butter and flour foam together for 2 minutes without browning. Remove from heat.

 4. Off heat, pour in boiling milk and beat vigorously with a whisk until well blended. Add 1½ teaspoons salt, peppers and nutmeg, return to the heat, and boil, stirring, for 1 minute. Sauce should be very thick. Remove from heat.

 5. Off heat, add yolks one at a time, beating well after each addition. Add cooked spinach mixture. Taste and adjust seasoning. (Seasoning should be strong as the flavor will be diluted when the whites are added.)

 6. To finish soufflés: Preheat the oven to 400 degrees. Whip egg whites with pinch of salt and cream of tartar. Start beating on low speed and raise the speed gradually as the egg whites mount. Once soft peaks form, stir a quarter of the whites into the soufflé base and then stir in cheese. Fold lightened base into remaining egg whites. 

 7. Ladle equal amounts of the soufflé mixture into the 8 prepared molds, and sprinkle the Parmesan cheese over the tops. Place soufflés on the middle rack of the oven. Immediately lower heat to 375. Bake approximately 20 minutes, or until risen and set. Serve right away.

 Serves 8 

 Approximately 3 tablespoons unsalted butter and 4 tablespoons granulated sugar to prepare the molds  8 ounces best quality bittersweet chocolate, coarsely chopped  2/3 cup plus 4 tablespoons granulated sugar  ½ cup warm milk  6 egg yolks  8 egg whites at room temperature  1/8 teaspoon salt  1 teaspoon cream of tartar 

 1. Preheat oven to 400 degrees. Butter and then sugar eight 1¼-cup ramekins, soufflé molds or little charlottes. 

 2. Melt chocolate in a double boiler over low heat. When chocolate is melted, remove pan from heat. 

 3. Whisk in 2/3 cup sugar and milk until the mixture is smooth. Then whisk in yolks, one at a time, until no traces of yolk remain.

 4. To finish the soufflés: Whisk egg whites with salt and cream of tartar. Start beating on low speed and raise the speed gradually as the egg whites mount. When whites are opaque and beginning to stiffen, very gradually add remaining sugar and continue to beat until soft peaks form. 

 5. Stir a quarter of beaten whites into chocolate mixture and then gently fold the lightened chocolate into the remaining whites.

 6. Ladle batter into prepared molds, set them on a baking sheet and place them on middle rack of oven. Immediately reduce oven temperature to 375 degrees and bake for 20-25 minutes or until  a knife blade inserted into the middle of a soufflé comes out clean. If you like your soufflés creamy at the center, remove them from the oven a bit sooner. Serve immediately. 

 7. Accompany with whipped cream or vanilla ice cream and/or chocolate sauce if desired.

 Serves 8 

 Softened butter and grated Parmesan cheese to prepare the molds  6 tablespoons unsalted butter  2 cloves minced garlic  6 tablespoons flour  2 cups boiling milk  1 teaspoon plus 1 pinch fine sea salt  ½ teaspoon freshly ground pepper  1/8 teaspoon cayenne pepper  1/8 teaspoon freshly grated nutmeg  6 eggs yolks  10 egg whites at room temperature  1 teaspoon cream of tartar  1/3 cup finely minced chives  1/3 cup minced Italian parsley  6 ounces coarsely grated Gruyere or a combination of Gruyere and grated Parmesan  

 1. Butter 8 individual 1¼-cup soufflé molds or ramekins. Dust with Parmesan and place on a baking sheet.

 2. For the soufflé base, melt the butter along with the garlic in a medium saucepan. Cook for 1 minute, stirring. Stir in flour and continue to stir over moderate heat until butter and flour foam together for 2 minutes without browning. Remove from heat.

 3. Off heat, add boiling milk and beat vigorously with a whisk until well blended. Add 1 teaspoon salt, peppers and nutmeg. Return to heat and boil, stirring, for 1 minute. Sauce should be very thick. Remove from heat.

 4. Off heat, add yolks, one at a time, beating well after each addition. Correct seasoning. Seasoning should be strong as the upcoming addition of the whites will dilute the flavor. 

 5. To finish the soufflés: Preheat the oven to 400 degrees. 

 6. Whisk egg whites with a large pinch of salt and cream of tartar. Start beating on low speed and raise the speed gradually as the egg whites mount. When soft peaks form, stir one quarter of the beaten whites into the soufflé base followed by chives, parsley and all but 3 tablespoons of the cheese. Then fold the lightened base into the remaining whites.

 7. Ladle equal amounts of the soufflé mixture into the 8 prepared molds, place them on a baking sheet and sprinkle the remaining 3 tablespoons cheese over the tops. Place on the middle rack of the oven. Lower the heat to 375. Bake 20 minutes, or until risen and set. Serve right away.

 1. To achieve maximum volume, egg whites must be room temperature or slightly tepid. However, eggs must be separated when they are cold, as a cold yolk is less likely to break than a warmer one. After separating, refrigerate the yolks. Let the whites come to room temperature, or place them in a metal bowl and swirl them over (but not touching) a low flame or boiling water until lukewarm.

 2. Very fresh egg whites do not whip up as well as older ones. Put a large pinch of salt in the egg whites, and if possible, leave them out of the refrigerator for a day or two before making a soufflé.

 3.  It is easier to use an electric mixer (standing or handheld) than to whisk by hand. For the best result, start on low and gradually raise the speed as the whites mount.

 4. After one minute of beating, add cream of tartar to help egg whites gain and hold volume. 

 5.  For sweet soufflés, begin adding the sugar gradually, a teaspoon at a time, when the whites are opaque and just beginning to hold soft peaks. Adding it too quickly will deflate the egg whites.

 6. The whites should hold soft (not stiff) peaks. Overly-beaten whites break up into little "icebergs" that willnot fold smoothly into the base. When in doubt, under-beating is preferable to over-beating.