A summer drink you make at home should be two things: refreshing and easy. That doesn't mean it's time to reach for the acid-green margarita mix. Just because you've started to wear shorts and sandals (never with socks though, OK?) doesn't mean that good taste needs to go out the window. 

For a simple way to get sophisticated flavor into a cocktail, look to European-style liqueurs. Aperol, a brightly colored Italian aperitif that tastes of oranges and rhubarb, is the perfect balance of sweetness and bitterness. There's also the golden St. Germain, an artisanal French-made liqueur crafted from elderflower blossoms that tastes somewhere between pear, lemon, grapefruit, passion fruit...and heaven. 

Pour either on the rocks in a highball glass, add champagne (those flavored sparkling sodas from San Pellegrino work brilliantly, too, if you're not a sparkling-wine fan) and, presto, you've fixed yourself one of the easiest, continentally suave summer drinks one can whip up in less time than it takes to remember Berlusconi's first name. (It's Silvio.) 

To fully appreciate Aperol and St. Germain, try these six cocktails from some of our favorite American bars. Ideally while wearing seersucker or madras. But never past Labor Day, OK? 

—Kevin Sintumuang

 from Joseph Brooke of The Edison in Los Angeles 

Think of this as a riff on the French 75 that, thanks to the St. Germain and the grapefruit juice, is even more sippable. Try it instead of a mimosa with brunch.

1 ounce London dry gin  1 ounce fresh-squeezed ruby red grapefruit juice  ¾ ounce St. Germain Champagne

 Shake everything but the Champagne with ice and strain into a flute. Top with Champagne. 

 from Michel Dozois of Ray's and Stark Bar at LACMA in Los Angeles 

This is a Euro-liqueur flavor bomb. The St. Germain's natural sweetness is complemented by Cynar and Campari, two incredible Italian bitter aperitifs. Both are acquired tastes. You may acquire them via this drink.

2 ounces St. Germain  1 ounce Cynar  ¾ ounce Campari Grapefruit wedge

 Stir with ice and strain into a coupe. Garnish with a grapefruit wedge. 

 from Dana Tough and Brian McCracken of Spur and Tavern Law in Seattle 

Don't worry. Infusing gin with tea is as easy as, well, making tea. This drink tastes like spring—the Earl Grey's floral notes marry nicely with the elderflower. 

1½ ounces Earl Grey–infused gin*  1 ounce St. Germain  ½ ounce lemon juice  Lemon wheel

 Shake with ice and strain into a highball glass over ice. Garnish with lemon. 

*Infuse 750ml gin with 1 cup loose leaf Earl Grey tea at room temperature for seven days. Strain out tea before using.

This drink is the unofficial official drink of Italy. Thankfully for us, it's not terribly difficult to make. Traditionally it's served in a wine glass, but I've always found a stemless Champagne flute with a few cubes and a straw a more elegant presentation.

3 ounces Prosecco  Splash of soda water  2 ounces Aperol

 Pour ingredients in the order listed. Stir gently with straw. 

 from Eric Wetz and Doug Pennington of Press Lounge in New York 

Don't let the neon color fool you; this is a balanced drink you may want to make by the pitcher. 

1½ ounces orange vodka  ½ ounce Aperol  ½ ounce lime juice  ¼ ounce simple syrup  Tangelo wedge

 Shake with ice and strain into a martini glass. Top with Prosecco. Garnish with a tangelo wedge.  

 from Bobby Heugel of Anvil Bar & Refuge in Houston 

Searching for something that uses both Aperol and St. Germain, I discovered this recipe on the blog of my favorite bar in Texas. They know how to make refreshing drinks down there. Warning: This is so crisp and non-boozy-seeming, it may be the only thing you drink all summer. 

1½ ounces Aperol  ¾ ounce St. Germain  ¾ ounce lime juice  Rosemary sprig

 Shake with ice and strain into a cocktail glass. Garnish with rosemary.  