FRANKFURT—Iberian and Greek debt issuance will show next week how willing investors are to buy Spanish, Portuguese and Greek paper, while markets are awaiting the euro-zone and European Union finance ministers' meetings Monday and Tuesday for hints about new financial aid to Greece, to approve Portugal's bailout and to review the Irish program. 

Bond supply will total around €20 billion, with Slovakia on Monday, Germany on Wednesday, and Spain and France on Thursday, compared with just over €14 billion this week from the Netherlands, Germany and Italy. Treasury bill supply will come from Germany, the Netherlands, France, Spain, Greece, Belgium and Portugal. 

Changes to Greece's existing rescue package aren't on the official agenda of the finance ministers' meeting but will surely be discussed, said RBC Capital Markets analysts, adding that they don't expect a decision on this before the June European Council meeting. 

Meanwhile, such a deal is seen as crucial to keeping Greece's Treasury bill yields at auction below the 5% level the country pays on its loans under the €110 billion ($156.63 billion) bailout from the European Union and International Monetary Fund agreed to last year. It is also essential to further ease pressure on European government bond markets, analysts said. 

"If a combined package for Greece is announced, it should lower market fears of an ugly debt-restructuring scenario and help to stabilize the decline in money-market rates," said Danske Bank analysts in a note, adding that until the announcement, the news flow should keep market participants alert. 

The most likely scenario for Greece is a "mild" restructuring combined with a new loan package from the EU and the IMF, in Danske analysts' view. They said a new loan package would likely stabilize the market and keep the European Central Bank on track for further interest-rate rises.

Greece is scheduled to sell three-month Treasury bills Tuesday. Just like at this week's six-month T-bill auction, the maturity falling in 2011 will be key to generating solid demand and likely keep the yield below 5%. However, to generate enough demand for six-month T-bills from July onwards, Greece will need a new aid package in place by end-June at the latest, covering Greece's financial needs for 2012 and 2013. 

Portugal, which has also requested financial aid, will sell €750 million to €1 billion of two-month Treasury bills Wednesday, once again modifying its preliminary issuance plan for the second quarter, which envisaged the sale of three- and 12-month T-bills on May 18. 

"Although the IGCP [Portuguese debt agency] retained the flexibility to adjust the guidelines, the extent of adjustment is quite substantial," said  David Schnautz, a rates strategist at Commerzbank in London. "From a money-market funding perspective, Portugal follows Greece's footsteps as the Greek PDMA [debt agency] has also stopped selling 12-month bills while being active in three-month and six-month maturities." 

Spain will sell 12-month and 18-month Treasury bills Tuesday and a tranche of the 5.5% April 2021 bond on Thursday, giving target volumes for the auctions Monday. The Treasury may decide later Friday to add a second line to the one scheduled to benefit from investors' benign stance towards Spanish debt. 

The Spanish auctions will provide further opportunities for the country to show that its fiscal program and restructuring of its banking system enable it to minimize contagion risks. 

"We see no real signs of contagion of the troubles in Greece/Ireland/Portugal to Spain," said Société Générale in a note, adding that Spanish bonds retain the confidence of investors that are long. "We continue to see demand for yield spilling over into Spanish government bonds and [Italian] BTPs from investors that are locked out of Greece/Ireland/Portugal." 

Citigroup strategist  Robert Crossley said Spain had effectively differentiated itself from Portugal over the past year by implementing more effective fiscal tightening, adding that "while there is a contagion risk and Spain's exposure to Portugal is significant, the risk is relatively small." 

Germany will auction €6 billion of the 2.75% April 2016-dated bobl Wednesday, while France will sell up to €10.5 billion in conventional bonds maturing in 2013, 2015 and 2016, as well as inflation-linked bonds maturing in 2016, 2019 and 2027. 

 Write to  Emese Bartha at emese.bartha@dowjones.com 