 Gettysburg, Pa. 

Hotels are hitting the showers—with crystal chandeliers, glass walls and even hammocks.

In an ongoing race to differentiate themselves from other hoteliers, new upscale properties are outfitting their shower stalls with multiple heads and other sleek features.

Guests at the Wyndham here, one of two hotels in the expansive Gateway Gettysburg complex, get a cavernous, 43-square-foot shower with five shower heads. Two are mounted on opposing walls at thigh level, two more heads at chest level and a fifth overhead. 

"The first thing I thought was, 'How do I use that thing? And when I use it, I hope it won't come at me like a firehose,' " said Amanda Witman, a Wrightsville, Pa., resident who held her wedding at the Wyndham in August.

But after trying it, Ms. Witman deemed the five-head shower "very relaxing, almost therapeutic. It was something special and different that we'll always remember about our wedding night, because I doubt we'll ever run into a hotel that has that again."

The shower is an obvious target for change as hoteliers strive to offer time-strapped travelers a quick escape in their rooms. "A lot of people want to have something that's just a bit different and more luxurious than what they have at home," said  Gene Kaufman, a New York-based architect who has designed more than 70 hotels. 

The revolution in elaborate showers primarily is taking place in newly built, upscale hotels, with nightly rates of $200 and up, depending on the market. In many cases, they have replaced bathtubs entirely, though tubs remain a fixture in the pricier luxury market.  Morgans Hotel Group Co.
MHGC


-0.16
%




's Mondrian SoHo hotel in New York City opened last month with marble-walled showers featuring 66-inch-high windows that provide sweeping views of midtown Manhattan. Portions of the windows on lower floors are opaque, so outsiders can't see in. Windows in higher floors aren't, because they're too high for prying eyes. 

In Morgans's Mondrian South Beach hotel in Miami, the shower head protrudes from the bottom of a hanging crystal chandelier. The shower walls are decorated in a blue-and-white tile mosaic of clouds. The W hotel in Mexico City provides spacious showers with hammocks that guests can lounge in.

Several hotels, including the Andaz in San Diego and Morgans' Sanderson hotel in London, have a glass wall between the shower and the guest room. That design allows more light into the bathroom, but also puts bathers on display for anyone else in their room. "That's not everyone's cup of tea, however," said  Matthew Richardson, chief of architecture, design and construction for Hilton Worldwide Inc. "You can give people the option of privacy by having curtains or shutters."

Many hoteliers trace the beginning of the hotel shower's latest evolution to  Starwood Hotels & Resorts Worldwide Inc.
HOT


-0.39
%




's introduction in 2001 of its Westin Heavenly Shower. The design entails two adjacent shower heads with adjustable spray patterns. Installed in all Westins, it was among the first dual-head shower designs to be rolled out across an entire hotel chain. Starwood now is working with bathroom-fixture maker Kohler Co. to design a second generation of the Heavenly Shower that is more water efficient.

Some of the more elaborate new designs for hotel showers are pricey to install. The five-head shower in the suites of the Wyndham Gettysburg cost developer  Robert Monahan Jr. and his partners an extra $1,500 per shower, mostly in plumbing costs. The chandelier showers in the Mondrian South Beach cost an extra $250 per unit.

At Morgans's Hotel Group's Mondrian in Los Angeles, the two-person shower with shower heads on opposing walls cost the developer an extra $1,000 per suite. Still, the extra costs aren't significant in the context of building a multimillion-dollar hotel. It's "not a lot of expenditure for a big impact," said  Mari Balestrazzi, Morgans vice president of design. 

There is a drawback. Some guests consider elaborate hotel showers to be impractical. That's the reaction that Linda Simard, a sales and marketing representative for a beer company, had to the Wyndham Gettysburg's five-head shower. She and other guests found the dual-control knobs confusing. And, when all five heads are turned on, the overall water pressure drops. Ms. Simard ended up using only the main head and leaving the others off.

"Your first impression when you walk in is, 'Wow, that is wicked cool,' " she said. "But it doesn't do anything for me. I just think it's overwhelming."

Curt Jacobsen, a Pasadena, Calif., resident who travels three of every four weeks to oversee delivery and implementation for a software company, is disenchanted with doorless showers. The format, common in hotels such as InterContinental Hotel Group PLC's Hotel Indigo boutiques, is meant to foster a spa-like atmosphere of openness. But, in some cases, it results in water on the bathroom floor. And the open doorway allows steam to escape that might otherwise keep a bather warm, he said.

  Caroline Counihan, a spokeswoman for IHG's Hotel Indigo, says, "By and large, we have not experienced any negative feedback regarding our spa-inspired bathroom experience."

Amid all this, the humble bathtub's popularity is swirling down the drain.

As business travel has become far more common over the years, hotels have been shifting their tub-to-shower ratio more in favor of showers. "Most people, when they're going to work in the morning, don't drop and lounge in a tub," said  Ted Hunter, Wyndham Worldwide Corp.'s
WYN


-0.68
%




 chief of development planning and construction.

Ten years ago, Holiday Inn, also owned by IHG, put tubs in 95% of rooms. Now, Holiday Inn puts them in only 55% of rooms in newly built hotels. Wyndham's new midmarket and upscale hotels have tubs in just 20% to 30% of rooms.  Marriott International Inc.
MAR


-0.25
%




's guidelines for new hotels limit tubs to no more than 25% of rooms.

The industry's new rule of thumb for newly built hotels: Tubs belong only in rooms with two double beds, since those are the most likely rooms to house families with children.

 Write to  Kris Hudson at kris.hudson@wsj.com 