His early-'80s catch phrase, "If you don't look good, we don't look good," now acts as a sort of campy tombstone epitaph to the disco era, on the level of "Gloria Vanderbilt bottoms are the tops." 

But Vidal Sassoon has risen again. The maestro of the '60s- and '70s-era geometric hairdos for actresses, models and socialites is having a second coming…at least by way of recognition.

A new Bond Street-to-Beverly Hills bio-documentary, "Vidal Sassoon The Movie" opened recently, prompting fashion magazines to break out the black-and-white archivals of his heyday. And the look back is long overdue. Mr. Sassoon is now 83 and living in an L.A.-area Richard Neutra house as cantilevered as his cuts—most famously, the one that put him on the map, the "wedge," which he gave actress Nancy Kwan in 1963. Here, he dishes on his most iconic hairstyles, and the ladies who sported them.

—David Kaufman

 Creative director, Vogue  "Grace came to us as a waif—but one look at her and we immediately said, Wow! She may not have had the classic beauty, but she had a great attitude, great bone structure. We perfected the five-point cut on her: following the natural line of the head, and not creating shapes where they weren't necessary. This wasn't being clever. We simply based the cut on how hair actually grows: three points at back, two on the side."

 Actress  "Mia had the most divine bone and head structure. You could cut one side short and one side long, and it would still look good on her. She came to us for the 'Rosemary's Baby' cut because her hair needed help after she had cut it herself. We knew we had to go short; but we just followed the line and shape of her face. That single cut made us as a company, and introduced us to Middle America. It was so popular, that men were coming in and asking for the style."

 Singer  "Dionne was a great long-time client and friend. She wore a wonderful curl, but it was a challenge for us back then to get that straightness and shine into her African-American hair. We literally devoted an entire team to figuring out waves and curls and perms. We got some absolutely marvelous results—straight, lovely, shiny hair for black women; soft, heavy, full curls for white women."

 1960s supermodel  "Suzy was the top model in Europe at the time—whatever other models earned, she'd make double. Along with fantastic legs, she had beautiful red hair with the wildest looks. I would take her into a cubicle, give her an old-fashioned set of rollers and curlers and put her under a dryer. I'd end by running my hands through her hair to give it that Parker curl. It was truly one of a kind. We called the cut the 'Suzy Parker.'"

 1. A haircut must always look natural, and respect the shape of the face. People often come in to hair salons with pictures of how they "want" their hair to look. But that usually doesn't work. It often means the person is just tired of looking at themselves.

 2. A great conditioner is the best tool for achieving the most beautiful shine. But never over-use them; "lacquering" can destroy the hair's natural fibers. 

 3. Coloring begins with the face, not the hair. It's really the only way for the natural color to best shine through.