Women may have fared better than men during the recession, but they are not making up lost ground as fast as men in the recovery.

The recent recession was labeled by some a "man-cession," because of sharp employment cuts in male-dominated fields. During the downturn, which ran from late-2007 to mid-2009, sectors such as manufacturing and construction shed millions of jobs, sending the unemployment rate for men into the double digits. But as the economy has rebounded, men have been recovering labor market losses faster than women. 

"2010 is a year where men had a recovery and women didn't," said Betsey Stevenson, the Labor Department's chief economist. 

The unemployment rate for men, on average, was 10.5% last year. By April it had declined 1.1 points to 9.4%, the Labor Department said Friday. Joblessness among women was less common: Their unemployment rate was 8.6% on average last year. But women are struggling to nudge their joblessness down. By April, the unemployment rate for women had fallen just 0.2 points to 8.4%.

A large part of the problem is that women are disproportionately represented in state and local governments—and that is where many jobs are being cut now. "It was a very broad and deep recession for everybody," said  Heidi Hartmann, president of the Institute for Women's Policy Research, but "where the cuts have affected women more than men is in state and local government."

So far this year state and local governments have cut 86,000 jobs. By contrast, the private sector has added 854,000 jobs. 

Since August 2008, state governments have eliminated 98,000 jobs, falling to a level 1.9% below that peak. Local governments, who employ more people than the entire manufacturing sector, have cut 409,000 jobs, a 2.8% loss from their peak total in September 2008. 

About 18.2% of employed women work in the public sector. They are nearly 50% more likely to hold public-sector positions than men, according to the Labor Department. 

States and cities tend to experience a delayed hit from recessions because of how they collect and spend tax revenue. That lag is more pronounced in this recovery because the Obama administration's stimulus package directed billions of dollars to states to help fill budget gaps. With those funds now largely exhausted, state and local governments have resorted to cutting jobs, shedding another 22,000 positions in April. 

With states facing wide budget gaps, there is no sign of the layoffs abating. In New York, the Syracuse school district is facing hundreds of layoffs at the end of the school year. 

Heather Alnutt, whose position as a substitute teaching assistant in Syracuse ends next month, already has discussed with her husband how they will cut back. 

"My husband and I weren't really ones to really spoil ourselves in the first place," she said, "but the occasional going out to dinner won't happen because we have a car that needs to be paid for."

Ms. Alnutt, who is 30 years old and has a son, as well as a baby on the way, has been the family breadwinner. She is looking for jobs in child care to tide her over until teaching posts open up again. 

 Write to  Sara Murray at sara.murray@wsj.com 