A Beverly Hills, Calif., estate owned by descendants of oil magnate  Edward L. Doheny has hit the market for $28.5 million. 

The estate comprises two lots spread across three acres. There's a 7,000-square-foot, four-bedroom, seven-bath house and a swimming pool. It's near the Greystone Mansion, which was also built by Mr. Doheny in 1928. (The Greystone has been the site of films like "Spider-Man.") 

Michael Niven, age 70, is the great- grandson of Mr. Doheny. He and his siblings own the property through their late mother's estate. Mr. Niven and his siblings, who include science-fiction writer Larry Niven, have decided to sell because they can no longer maintain the home. "Every time I go up and look at it, it pulls the heart strings," Michael Niven says. 

  Joyce Rey of Coldwell Banker Previews International has the listing. 

New York Yankee Mark Teixeira has taken his Westlake, Texas, home off the market in a one-year lease-to-purchase agreement. A tenant will pay Mr. Teixeira $13,000 a month and has exclusive rights to buy the property during the year of the lease. The home originally came on the market in 2007 for $5.75 million. It most recently listed for $4 million. 

In a gated community in a suburb of Dallas-Fort Worth, the 8,600-square-foot house, built in 2005, is on just over an acre and overlooks a small lake. "While we have had interested parties walk through the house, the depressed market has not produced any acceptable offers," Mr. Teixeira says in an e-mail message. The family who has rented the home "will undoubtedly enjoy the house as much as my family did."

Jeff Watson of the Michael Group had the listing. 

Film director Rob Cohen, whose titles include "The Fast and the Furious" and "xXx," has listed his six-bedroom, 6½-bathroom house on California's Point Dume for $5.95 million. 

Mr. Cohen, 61, and his wife, Barbara, 39, bought the home for $5.3 million in 2008. They extensively renovated the 4,234-square-foot Mediterranean-style home, adding a 15-person screening room, Brazilian mahogany floors and skylights. 

"The front of the house is very unassuming, but it's like a Swiss Army knife, it keeps opening up and surprising," says Mr. Cohen. He says he's selling because his wife would like a property closer to horse trails.  Lily Harfouche of Coldwell Banker— Malibu West has the listing. 

—Candace Jackson and Alexandra Cheney

—Email privateproperties@wsj.com 