A quarter-mile from the finish line of the New York City Half-Marathon, well below the realm of Manhattan's numbered streets, three runners were tearing down West Street. Each had led the race at various points through the chilly Sunday morning. But now Mo Farah, Gebre Gebremariam, and Galen Rupp were running close enough to worry about tripping over each other. 

Rupp, one of American distance running's brightest young talents, was the first to fall away. Then Gebremariam found an extra gear and, for a long moment, looked as if he had done just enough with the finish line in view. Until Farah appeared over his left shoulder.

"Just stay with him," Farah said he told himself as he closed in on Gebremariam. "Maybe he's gone too early."

He had. Farah of Great Britain sprinted away from Gebremariam and won his first half-marathon in 1 hour, 23 seconds. Gebremariam, the New York Marathon's defending champion, trailed him by two seconds. Rupp took third in 1:00.30 to complete his first race over 13.1 miles.

Two other top Americans—Meb Keflezighi and Ryan Hall—failed to have an impact, finishing more than two minutes off the pace. Keflezighi had been nursing a sore knee since tripping over a dog on Friday, and Hall was simply using the race as a tune-up for next month's Boston Marathon.

In the women's event, Caroline Rotich of Kenya outkicked her countrywoman Edna Kiplagat on the home stretch to shatter the course record by 33 seconds and break the tape in 1:08.52. Kiplagat finished in 1:09.00, with Kara Goucher of the United States three seconds back—both women also beat the year-old course record.

Once Rotich crossed the finish line, she celebrated wrapped in a Kenyan flag. But it was her ties to Japan that were discussed in the aftermath of the race. Like many promising Kenyan runners, she was recruited as a teenager to move more than 6,000 miles from home and run in distance relays for a Japanese high school. Hers was in Sendai, a city devastated by this month's earthquake and tsunami.

This week, Rotich also shared a hotel room with Yuri Kano, who was granted a late entry into the race after the marathon she was due to run Sunday in Nagoya was canceled. Kano capped her emotional trip to New York by finishing 21st.

For Goucher, 32, the race was the latest step in her comeback following the birth of her first child last September. It was only her third competitive outing this season in preparation for Boston. 

"Honestly, I wish it was a mile longer," she said. "We made that turn at three miles to go and I felt like it was a track race."

Rupp and Farah, who have only recently begun the transition from track, may have felt the same way. Both disciples of distance running guru Alberto Salazar, they jockeyed for position through the whole second half of the race.

But Rupp's day was nearly ruined around Mile 7 in Central Park when Peter Kimais, the 2010 champion, fell in front of him. Rupp was tangled up and fell over, bouncing on his right hip. Neither runner was hurt. As if to make the point, they surged back to the front together.

Shortly after they turned the corner from 42nd Street onto the West Side Highway, Rupp had even put some daylight behind him, although his lead was brief. By Mile 11, around 15 blocks later, the sharks were circling. Rupp was swallowed up by three others, including Farah and Gebremariam, setting the stage for the riveting conclusion. 

"It was just a matter of hanging in, hanging in," Farah said. "And as you get close to the line, just sprint."