Food magnate Donald John Tyson changed the American diet by revolutionizing poultry farming and putting boneless chicken breasts on menus throughout the U.S.

Mr. Tyson died Thursday at age 80 after battling cancer. The factory-style techniques he pioneered helped turn chicken into America's No. 1 meat in the early 1990s, surpassing pork and beef.

Few corporations were as closely identified with one personality for so long as Tyson Foods was with Don Tyson, who became chief executive in 1967. He stepped down as CEO in 1991. 

"He liked to describe himself as just a dumb chicken farmer from Arkansas but he brought science and management to what had been a mom-and-pop business," said David C. Nelson, a former Credit Suisse agribusiness equities analyst and now a global strategist at Rabobank. "In an industry full of buttoned-up M.B.A.s, he was down-to-earth."

Mr. Tyson's father was an Arkansas chicken hauler turned chicken raiser who expanded into feed mills and processing plants. After attending the University of Arkansas, Mr. Tyson joined the family business. Mr. Tyson became CEO when the car in which his father and stepmother were traveling collided with a train. He continued his father's drive to control all steps of chicken production, such as contracting with farmers to raise company-owned chicken the company's way.

Some family-farm organizations attacked this arrangement, saying it put too much power in the hands of big meat companies. Environmentalists said the factory approach harmfully concentrated pollution from animal waste.

But tight quality control over everything from breed to feed allowed Tyson Foods to create a national brand of meat, something that few packers had dared to do. The company figured out how to peddle chicken in all sorts of processed forms: boneless, skinless, hormone-free and in microwavable entrees. Chicken consumption boomed.

While famous in Arkansas for his fun-loving ways, Mr. Tyson irritated some corporate-governance advocates, who complained the company operated more like a family-run empire than a publicly traded entity. Mr. Tyson's son, John Tyson, eventually succeeded his father as CEO for a time and continues as chairman. Don Tyson controlled nearly 70% of voting shares at the time of his death. The company said Thursday that control of the shares would pass to a group that includes relatives and former Tyson Foods executives.

The Tysons have been close to another famous Arkansas family, the Clintons. President Bill Clinton pardoned a Tyson Foods executive who had been convicted of giving an illegal gratuity to Mike Espy, his first agriculture secretary. In 1997, Tyson Foods pleaded guilty to giving Mr. Espy illegal gratuities. The company paid a fine of $4 million and prosecution costs of $2 million.

In 2005, Mr. Tyson paid a civil penalty of $700,000 after the Securities and Exchange Commission alleged that the company didn't properly disclose some of his lavish perks. Mr. Tyson didn't admit or deny any wrongdoing.

While Mr. Tyson came to the office in the uniform worn by the company's line employees, he knew how to enjoy the trappings of executive power. In 1979, he had the chairman's office built to resemble the White House Oval Office. The crown molding was adorned with egg carvings.

—Email remembrances@wsj.com 