TUCSON, Ariz.—They met on the pavement outside a supermarket, surrounding a gunman in the midst of a shooting spree. 

Roger Salzgeber wrestled the man down from behind, Bill Badger approached from the front, and Patricia Maisch grabbed his extra ammunition. Four days later, they had an informal reunion, where they met President Barack Obama. 

Afterward, in the University of Arizona arena where Mr. Obama addressed the nation, the former strangers bound together by the tragedy recounted how they had helped subdue Jared Lee Loughner, the man accused of killing six people and wounding 14 others at a political gathering outside a supermarket.

"You had the clip he was trying to stick back in there," Mr. Salzgeber called over to Ms. Maisch. "You weren't letting go of that clip for anything." 

"No I was not," she replied. "As a matter of fact, I carried it into Safeway."

Many lives, until then disconnected, were suddenly fused outside the supermarket in this Oro Valley city on the morning of Saturday, Jan. 8, creating a bond that for many may never be broken. They were people from different places, ethnic backgrounds and religions. Some were victims. Some were people who, when the shooting paused, corralled the man who had been aiming at them. 

"We will be friends for life," said Mr. Badger, a 74-year-old retired Army colonel.

The Pima County Sheriff's Department has described them as heroes, along with 24-year-old Joseph Zamudio, who ran to the scene and also jumped on top of Mr. Loughner after he was already pinned to the ground. 

Mr. Salzgeber, Mr. Badger and Ms. Maisch exchanged few words at the scene. They found one another before the president's speech, cordoned off from the crowd by the police.

"We had a chance to look at each other and hug one another," said Mr. Salzgeber, 61, who said he wakes at night imagining the sound of gunfire.

An interest in politics brought them all together. Each had received an invitation by telephone to attend a "Congress on Your Corner" event featuring U.S. Rep. Gabrielle Giffords. 

Ms. Maisch, 61, was raised in St. Louis. She moved to Tucson in 1983 with her husband and started a heating and cooling business.

Mr. Badger, a South Dakota native, joined the National Guard in 1953 and later the Army, spending years working in Atlanta and at the Pentagon. He came to Tucson in 1985 to oversee an aviation-training facility. 

Mr. Salzgeber came from Chicago to attend the University of Arizona in 1968. He stayed after college and opened a wholesale cactus and succulent nursery. He had never volunteered in a political campaign until vandals, in the midst of the health-care debate, damaged Ms. Giffords's office window. He found the Democrat's enthusiasm infectious.

All of their memories of the shooting are somewhat fragmented. Mr. Salzgeber was talking to Gabriel Zimmerman, an aide to Ms. Giffords, about tractors when shots were fired and Mr. Zimmerman, 30, ran toward the lawmaker. Mr. Salzgeber hit the ground. Mr. Zimmerman was killed.

"I believe I was the last person he talked to," Mr. Salzgeber said. 

Mr. Badger recalled watching the shooter methodically firing down the line of people seated for their chance to chat with Ms. Giffords. When the gunman fired at him, Mr. Badger ducked and the bullet grazed his head. 

The shooting paused, and a man walked past him. Mr. Badger said he didn't know it was the gunman until someone hit Mr. Loughner over the head with a chair, though no one else recalls seeing this and authorities haven't confirmed it. Then, Mr. Badger said, he got up and grabbed Mr. Loughner by the left arm and neck. 

Mr. Salzgeber took the right arm, and they knocked him down on top of Ms. Maisch.

The three all plan to stay in touch, but one thing troubles Mr. Badger. "Whoever hit the man with a chair hasn't come forward yet," he said. Mr. Badger wants to meet that person, too.

 Write to  Michael Rothfeld at michael.rothfeld@wsj.com 