Just about anyone with a cellphone knows that Verizon Wireless, the nation's leading wireless operator, will soon be carrying Apple's iPhone, after more than three years when it was available in the U.S. only through AT&T Wireless.

On Wall Street, most of the attention lately has focused on  Verizon Communications,
VZ


-0.64
%




 whose shares have gotten a lift because investors think it will benefit from getting access to the popular iPhone. Verizon owns a 55% stake in Verizon Wireless.

Yet the better iPhone play could be  Vodafone Group (VOD), the U.K. wireless giant that has a 45% interest in Verizon Wireless. Vodafone trades on the New York Stock Exchange at a lower price/earnings ratio than either Verizon or  AT&T
T


-1.08
%




 and probably has a stronger business mix as a pure wireless company.

Vodafone, whose U.S. shares trade around $28, is valued at less than 10 times projected profits of about $3 a share in its fiscal year ending March 2012. Verizon, at $35, fetches about 15 times estimated 2011 profits of $2.25 a share. AT&T, at $28, trades for 11 times projected 2011 earnings.

Vodafone has a lower dividend yield than Verizon, 4.8% versus 5.5%, but Vodafone has a lower payout ratio. This means that it uses a smaller percentage of its profits to fund the dividend. In turn, this indicates that its payout is more secure and has more room to rise. Vodafone's dividend equals half its profits, while Verizon's dividend accounts for about 85% of projected 2011 earnings. Verizon says its dividend is safe.

"It's bizarre. If you take out Verizon Wireless from the two companies, Verizon's wireline business trades at a premium to Vodafone's wireless business, which is clearly superior," says Craig Moffett, an analyst at Sanford Bernstein. Mr. Moffett is one of the few Wall Street bears on Verizon and carries a $25 price target. Verizon's core wireline business now operates around break-even amid declining revenue, as more Americans give up traditional telephones.

Mr. Moffett's U.K.-based Bernstein colleague, Robin Bienenstock, is bullish on Vodadone and carries a $32 price target. She sees room for Vodafone to boost its dividend at a 7% annual clip in the coming years. Vodafone also is buying back stock.

Vodafone could benefit if Verizon Wireless starts paying dividends to its two owners in the next year. It has been using cash flow to pay down debt. Vodafone also could get a boost if Verizon buys out its 45% stake, which could be worth $80 billion or more.

Few American investors focus on European telecom stocks, but Vodafone is worth a look with its attractive European wireless business and a 45% stake in the lucrative and valuable Verizon Wireless.

—Andrew Bary is an associate editor of Barron's. For more stories, see barrons.com.