 (James Taranto is still working on his assignment, but he promises to return Friday. In the meantime, here is a sample of our Political Diary e-newsletter. If you like what you see, click here to subscribe.)  

 Kudos on Getting bin Laden, but I Still Need a Job 

In the wake of Osama bin Laden's death, President Obama's approval rating has risen to its highest level since July 2009 in the new Quinnipiac University poll. But his numbers on managing the economy haven't budged.

The poll of 1,409 Americans finds them favoring the job President Obama is doing by 52% to 40%, up six points from his 46% approval rating in Quinnipiac's last survey, with most of the gains coming from men.

But if the economy is likely to dominate the 2012 elections, Mr. Obama still has some explaining do. By the same 20-point margin in Quinnipiac's last poll, voters disapprove of his handling of the economy. When asked if Mr. Obama deserves re-election, respondents agree by 46% to 42%. That's a measurable but not dramatic increase from the three-point deficit Mr. Obama had on the re-election question in Quinnipiac's last survey.

"The killing of Osama bin Laden has helped President Barack Obama's popularity but not massively," says Peter Brown, assistant director of the Quinnipiac University Polling Institute. "The number of people opposed to his re-election has dropped, although they seem to have moved to 'undecided,' rather than to the pro-Obama column."

The numbers on which party voters trust most to handle the deficit haven't budged much, either. They tipped to Republicans 46% to 42% before bin Laden's death, and 44% to 42% afterwards.

 -- John Fund 

 The Other Presidential Candidates 

The field of GOP candidates for tonight's presidential forum in Greenville, S.C., has been set. The event, which will be the first of five debates broadcast on Fox News, will feature former Pennsylvania Sen. Rick Santorum, former Minnesota Gov. Tim Pawlenty, Texas Rep. Ron Paul, former New Mexico Gov. Gary Johnson and former Godfather's Pizza CEO Herman Cain.

The field so far may look a little underwhelming, but other Republicans appear on the verge of jumping in the race. Indiana Gov. Mitch Daniels gave a speech at the American Enterprise Institute in Washington yesterday (see below) and met with a group of AEI's top donors beforehand. Although Mr. Daniels drew fire from social conservatives last year by calling for a "truce" on social issues in the face of the "red menace" of the nation's debt, he is attracting considerable interest from key figures in that movement.

"Mitch Daniels has been one of the best governors in the country from either party," says Ralph Reed of the Faith and Freedom Coalition. "Combined with his breadth of experience in the private sector and executive branch, this would make him a strong addition to the GOP field and an appealing candidate."

In addition, former Utah Gov. Jon Huntsman has ended his stint as President Obama's ambassador to China and has already launched a political action committee as a step toward a presidential bid. Mitt Romney, the former Massachusetts governor, is an almost certain candidate even though he is skipping tonight's Fox forum. Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee has announced he will address a group of largely Southern GOP activists in New Orleans in mid-June, traditionally a key event attended by presidential hopefuls.

 -- John Fund 

 Daniels Touts Fiscal Bona Fides 

Indiana Gov. Mitch Daniels swept through Washington on Wednesday and gave the Beltway what may be his final appearance before he announces whether to seek the GOP nomination for president in 2012. 

A fiscal hawk whose budget cutting as governor has scored him high marks from fellow conservatives, Mr. Daniels offered a PowerPoint presentation in front of a packed house at the American Enterprise Institute to tout the landmark education reforms he steered to passage last week in the Hoosier State.

Along with the presentation came a couple of study guides for reporters. Nothing with fancy letterhead and a logo. No, these were packets done simply in Microsoft Word. It's all part of the flash-free way Mr. Daniels is presenting himself. If he runs for president, he'll run using his efforts in Indiana as his model.

One of the handouts was 12 pages long -- actually, six pages with type on both sides. The packet contained scores of provisions that will be eliminated from different school districts now that collective bargaining for teachers will be limited to salaries and wage-related benefits. Some of the provisions were a little obscure, such as dictating the temperature of classrooms and the paint color of teachers' lounges.

The other handout showed all of the governor's legislative successes in the 2011 session. It's a document that the Daniels administration has blasted to reporters via e-mail at least a half-dozen times already. Most of the achievements relate to education reform, which is what Mr. Daniels was on hand to discuss at the AEI event on Wednesday. But there again, he reminded, "I need to tell you that Indiana is a state that's in the black."

It was an indication of where Mr. Daniels might focus if he runs for president. And he drove the point home by choosing not to spend much time answering a question about foreign policy and his take on the killing of Osama bin Laden.

 -- Erin McPike, RealClearPolitics.com 

 Health-Care Choice Denied 

Last week Arizona Gov. Jan Brewer infuriated many fellow Republicans in the state legislature by vetoing a GOP-sponsored bill called the Arizona Interstate Health Insurance Act. It would have allowed Arizona employers and individuals to pick and choose a certified health insurance plan anywhere in the country and allowed Arizona insurance companies to sell policies offered in other states.

Arizona has more than 1.5 million uninsured residents, so the goal was to cut that number by 20% or more by offering lower-cost plans with fewer mandates.

Arizona currently has 33 mandates about health coverage. All insurance policies sold in the state must cover a certain number of treatments, such as postnatal care, even if the individual purchaser will never need that coverage. These mandates add to insurance costs. A study by the National Center for Policy Analysis found that states with fewer mandates typically have much lower insurance costs and, even better, fewer uninsured residents.

So why the veto? Ms. Brewer said that the bill would have "changed Arizona's benefit requirements based on legislative decisions in other states." She also complained that the bill would involve "risks to our citizens who may be subject to other states' regulatory procedures." Supporters of the bill believe that some of Ms. Brewer's top advisors, who are former health-insurance industry employees and lobbyists, talked her out of signing it.

Too bad. The Arizona bill would have been a model for other states, and may have been widely duplicated. Supporters of the bill tell me they will try to overcome Ms. Brewer's objections next year, but for now Georgia is the state moving fastest toward health-care choice. The Georgia legislature has passed a bill that allows in-state insurers to offer individual health-insurance policies that are available in other states. Republican Gov. Nathan Deal is expected to sign it.

 -- Stephen Moore 

 Not a Political Diary subscriber? Click here to sign up.  