HONG KONG—Attorneys for accused murderer Nancy Kissel wrapped up their defense Tuesday, laying out their argument that the U.S. citizen is guilty of a lesser charge of manslaughter, not murder, in the 2003 death of her investment-banker husband.

Lead defense counsel Edward Fitzgerald's closing argument, which began Monday, sought to poke holes in the prosecution's claim that Ms. Kissel lied and demonstrated selective memory about the events surrounding the night she killed her husband, Robert Kissel.

The jury is expected to begin deliberations Thursday, following instructions from the judge.

The case for manslaughter hinges on showing that Ms. Kissel was suffering from a depressive disorder that diminished her responsibility for the crime and that she was provoked in a way that caused her to experience a sudden and temporary loss of control. The law, Mr. Fitzgerald has said, recognizes "concessions to human frailty."

"We're not saying 'no responsibility.' We're saying 'diminished responsibility,' " he said in court Monday.

Ms. Kissel, 46 years old, admits to killing her husband but testified that he was physically and sexually abusive for years. She was convicted in 2005 of murder. But on appeal, Hong Kong's highest court ordered a retrial, finding procedural errors in the original trial.

At the retrial, the defense presented testimony from mental-health experts who said Ms. Kissel suffered from a depressive disorder that ran in her family and exhibited symptoms of battered-wife syndrome—conditions which, on their own, should be enough to show diminished responsibility, Mr. Fitzgerald argued.

Lead prosecutor David Perry argued that Ms. Kissel doesn't have a mental disorder and lied about being abused to avoid a murder conviction. Mr. Perry presented evidence meant to show that Ms. Kissel was of sound mind, plotting to kill her husband by drugging him with a sedative-laced milkshake and bludgeoning him to death with a lead statuette. She had grown to despise her husband, Mr. Perry argued, and was having an affair with an electrician who lived near the Kissels' Vermont vacation home.

In his closing arguments, Mr. Fitzgerald said that while Mr. Perry accused Ms. Kissel of lying, the prosecution presented no mental-health experts to counter the defense's evidence.

The defense also contended that there was a violent confrontation on the night Ms. Kissel killed her husband. Ms. Kissel testified that her husband was wielding a baseball bat, while threatening to divorce her and gain custody of the couple's three children.

Blood-spatter analysis and bruising on Ms. Kissel showed that Mr. Kissel was alert and engaged in a fight, the defense argued. 

The prosecution argued that Mr. Kissel was sedated in bed.