The Pythagorean theorem is the geometrical touchstone of the masses, one of the least forbidding of all mathematical suppositions. Even math-phobes have the name of that ancient Greek geometer filed away in their consciousness. Presidential aspirants looking to burnish their intellectual credentials might follow the example of James A. Garfield, who developed a new proof of the Pythagorean theorem in 1876, while serving as a representative from Ohio; five years later he was in the White House. 

By Robert Kaplan and Ellen Kaplan  Bloomsbury, 304 pages, $25 

In 1939, Hollywood paid tribute to the bygone sage—well, sort of: after receiving his "Doctor of Thinkology" diploma in "The Wizard of Oz," the Scarecrow spouts an erroneous version of the Pythagorean theorem. (In a "Simpsons" reference to that gaffe, an uncharacteristically brainy Homer nevertheless repeats the Scarecrow's mistake. D'oh!) But Charlie Eppes, the Ph.D. mathematician on the TV procedural "NUMB3RS," writes down the theorem correctly and solves the crime to boot. 

My own introduction to the Pytha gorean theorem came in a geometry lesson around eighth grade. The theorem's underlying beauty only hit me later, however, after a memorable scene in a prime-time television documentary about the rise of Western civilization. As the narrator intoned off-screen, a hand—presumably that of Pythagoras himself—laid a slate right triangle on the ground. Along each of the three sides, the hand patiently assembled a square out of small, uniformly sized stone tiles. The result: The total count of tiles within the squares bordering the triangle's two shorter sides matched that within the square bordering the hypotenuse. What a straight forward, yet extraordinary, sight. The Pythagorean theorem, rendered in stone.

We are more used to seeing the theorem in its algebraic face—a simple sum, with a superscript caveat: a2 + b2 = c2. If a is 3 and b is 4, then c must be 5. Mere food for the calculator—until we overlay the theorem's visual analog, a right triangle with sides of length a, b and c. This last, the hypotenuse, might be a diagonal brace nailed to a door, a siege ladder tipped against a fortification or a wooden beam propping up a wall. Or it might be a pure abstraction, the longest side in a triangle of the mind.

With its enduring fame, the Pytha gorean theorem deserves its own biography, and mathematicians have responded. Robert and Ellen Kaplan's "Hidden Harmonies: The Lives and Times of the Pythagorean Theorem" enters a crowded field of general-reader books on mathematics, including Eli Maor's "The Pythagorean Theorem: A 4,000-Year History" (2007). Mr. and Mrs. Kaplan, authors of "The Nothing That Is: A Natural History of Zero" and "The Art of the Infinite: The Pleasures of Mathematics," survey the mathematical, cultural and philosophical landscape that parallels the development of the Pythagorean theorem.

Right up front, they declare the consensus of historians of mathematics: Pythagoras did not in fact create his eponymous assertion; at most, he might have provided the first compelling proof of its validity. The authors instead trace the roots of the theorem to the dawn of civilization, and to a host of mathematicians, named and anonymous. Old Babylonian scribes left tantalizing hints of its practical implications on clay tablets as early as 1800 B.C. Around the same time, ancient Egyptian surveyors nosed around its edges in estimating areas of tracts flooded by the Nile. Pythagoras and his rule-bound, ritualistic sect arrive on scene in the sixth century B. C. and make only a brief appearance in "Hidden Harmonies."

Pythagoreans reveled in number theory, geometry and the quantitative underpinnings of music. Material objects were but a corruption of pure, eternal mathematical forms. Pythagoras himself is an elusive figure, an inseparable fusion of myth and fact, who spared no effort to elevate himself among his adherents. He believed in the transmigration of souls, conversed with animalsand saw mathematical harmonies everywhere. It is easy to imagine him devoting attention to the special relationship among the sides of a right triangle. Pythagoras is said to have sacrificed 100 oxen to celebrate the completion of his proof—about which a skeptical Lewis Carroll deadpanned, "It would produce a quite inconvenient supply of beef."

Given how little we know about Pythagoras, the authors understandably place more emphasis on later contributors who re-proved and refined the theorem and subsequently elevated it from the realm of flat Euclidean geometry to that of the curved multidimensional space of Albert Einstein and his contemporaries. The sheer number of published proofs of the Pythagorean theorem boggles the mind; there were 367 alone in a compilation by early 20th-century professor Elisha Scott Loomis. Einstein himself developed a proof when he was a youngster. So did his near contemporary, Indian mathematician Bhaskara, whose proof involved a rat being pursued by a Pythagorean-inspired hawk.

"Hidden Harmonies" targets a dual readership: mathematicians seeking historical and philosophical insight into their work, and mathematically adept amateurs on the lookout for an analytical challenge. Though marketed to a general audience, the book can be tough going. The authors reveal their intended audience in phrases like "recall from your days of trigonometry that cos (r – s) = cos r • cos s + sin r • sin s." Geometric and algebraic proofs abound, although the thorniest derivations are tucked into appendices. Radian measure, the law of cosines, irrational numbers, Euler's formula, Fourier series—all make appearances here. The complexity is leavened by Mrs. Kaplan's charming, fine-lined diagrams and portraits.

For the most part, the authors succeed in explaining the arcane aspects of the subject, and they are diligent in situating the Pythagorean theorem within the historical rise of mathematics. That they revel in the subject is clear, yet their enthusiasm comes at the cost of literary gloss that occasionally rises to breathless heights. ("This cages Luzin's monster, making mathematics safe again—at least until the next kraken wakes.") Why include such distracting asides when the story itself generates sufficient narrative momentum to bear the reader along?

—Mr. Hirshfeld, professor of physics at the University of Massachusetts Dartmouth, is the author of "Eureka Man: The Life and Legacy of Archimedes."