HELSINKI -- Center-right European Union leaders meeting in Helsinki Friday pushed for stricter economic reforms across the 27-member bloc, as they opened they way for changes to Ireland's bailout package. 

The meeting brought together members of the EU's dominant European People's Party, the conservative European bloc whose members head 15 European governments, including Germany and France. This is the first in a string of meetings this month of high-level EU officials that are supposed to culminate in a sweeping set of economic reforms by a self-imposed March 25 deadline. 

The leaders signaled that Ireland's 67.5 billion euro loan package could be amended. Ireland's next likely prime minister, Enda Kenny, attended the meeting and proposed that interest rates on the loans be lowered, a promise he campaigned on. 

"There was no voice against," said Latvian Prime Minister Valdis Dombrovskis. "I clearly see the point here." 

He added that leaders also discussed extending the maturity on Ireland's loans. 

Still, "the German position is [that there can be] a change to the Irish program only alongside additional measures that will make the country more competitive and less debt-laden," said an official close to the discussions. 

On the sidelines of the event, German Chancellor Angela Merkel cited the same conditions for retooling aid, although she did not single out Ireland. 

"If specific measures are possible, then further conditions, further duties will also be necessary," Ms. Merkel said. 

But Ireland is trying to push back against pressures to increase its 12.5% corporate tax rate, among the lowest in Europe, but seen in Ireland as central to the country's economic recovery. 

On reforms ahead, European Commission President Jose Manual Barroso said that Ireland's "best way is to face reality." 

"There are some painful measures that need to be taken," he said. 

Mr. Kenny was still meeting late Friday evening with EU President Herman Van Rompuy to discuss his desire for a reworked Irish aid package. 

Another official present at Friday's discussions said the negotiations with Ireland would fit within the larger context of making the euro zone's temporary bailout facility, the European Financial Stability Facility, more flexible. But this would also need to be part of a broader comprehensive package of changes, the so-called German-led "competitiveness pact," the official said. 

The pact is an agreement Ms. Merkel wants from euro-zone leaders to coordinate fiscal policy more closely and undertake some painful economic reforms, such as raising retirement ages and synchronizing corporate tax rates. 

EPP leaders agreed to move ahead on the competitiveness pact Friday, party members said. However, Finnish Finance Minister Jyrki Katainen said the comprehensive economic package due by the end of March--billed to combine both a form of the pact and a permanent euro-area bailout fund to replace a temporary facility that expires in 2013--could be different than initial proposals. 

"The comprehensive package may be different than a few weeks ago" because the situation has changed, said Mr. Katainen, citing economic reforms in Spain as an example. 

Still, Mr. Katainen said that private investors must share responsibility in future bailouts. 

"It's important when it comes to the permanent crisis-control mechanism, starting in 2013, to include how private investors could also be made responsible," Mr. Katainen said. 

The Helsinki event gave leaders outside of the euro zone the opportunity to be heard on the competitiveness pact as well, having been largely shut out so far. 

Latvia's prime minister said there had been concerns by EU members outside the currency bloc on being left out of certain procedures. 

However, Mr. Dombrovskis said the EPP meeting concluded that topics which fall in the arena of all 27 states will be decided on a "community" basis, while euro-zone-only topics can be decided amid the 17 countries that share the euro currency. 

"It's important this [upcoming March 11] summit does not become a summit to discuss issues of all 27 member states," such as the internal market, he said. 

--Patrick McGroarty and Arild Moen contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Riva Froymovich at riva.froymovich@dowjones.com 