ABBOTTABAD, Pakistan—Pakistan's leaders, already battling to control the diplomatic, political and military fallout from the U.S. raid that killed Osama bin Laden inside their country, face one particularly divisive question: What should they do with the house where al Qaeda's leader lived?

The dilemma over the compound where U.S. Navy SEALs shot bin Laden dead is whether to demolish it to prevent the site becoming a shrine to a man widely admired in Pakistan, or to turn it into a tourist attraction akin to Hitler's bunker.

While President Obama has decided not to release photographs of Osama bin Laden taken after the al Qaeda leader was shot to death Sunday by U.S. forces, other photos taken at the compound have been released by Reuters. 



U.S. forces sank bin Laden's body in the Arabian Sea so that his grave wouldn't become a pilgrimage site for al Qaeda supporters. The terror group, which issued an online statement Friday confirming its leader's death, vowed to continue attacks on Americans and urged Pakistanis to overthrow their leaders.

Already, bin Laden's former home here has turned into a local attraction. Hundreds of people, most of them appearing to be curious gawkers, have gathered daily following his death early Monday local time to snap pictures, swap gossip and peer into the compound from the roofs of neighboring buildings.

Adding to the surreal scenes around the walled compound for much of this week was the presence of a young Pakistani man who bears a striking resemblance to a young bin Laden. At one point, as a small crowd gathered around the man, police asked him to leave the area. 

On the ground

Diagram from the U.S. government

Photos inside and out

The deputy head of the regional government suggested the site could become a permanent tourist destination for Abbottabad, which he characterized as one of Pakistan's most tolerant cities and least touched by militant violence. Such a move, he said, would help boost the economy of a city still stunned by the revelation that it has been for five years hosted the world's most-wanted man.

"One thing we're hoping is that more tourists will come to visit now," said the official, Mohammed Azfar Nisar, Abbottabad's assistant coordination officer. "They are already there. in fact. Even if we don't make it into a museum, people will still come. This could be a blessing in disguise for us."

A senior police official said he favored destroying the building as soon as possible. He cited fears that local militants could use the complex as a symbolic rallying point, or stage an attack on the crowds of journalists and spectators around it to avenge bin Laden's death.

"I would not want it to be something like a museum or a shrine," said the police official. "The thing should go away—he [bin Laden] has created enough of a problem already."

Legally speaking, the house belonged to a Pakistani man who U.S. officials say was born in Kuwait, had worked as a courier for bin Laden and was shot dead in the raid along with his brother.

Land records reviewed by The Wall Street Journal showed that a man using the name Mohammed Arshad Waled Niqab Khan purchased the land for the complex from four sellers for a total of about $50,000 over the course of 2004 and 2005. 

The records give no details of Mr. Khan's identity, other than that he came from an area called Tangi in Charsadda district in northwestern Pakistan. U.S. officials say the buyer's name matched the alias used by the bin Laden courier.

He bought the last plot from Qazi Mahfouz ul-Haq, a lecturer at the Frontier Medical College in Abbottabad, who also runs a small private clinic.

Dr. Mahfouz confirmed that he sold his plot to Mr. Khan in 2005 for about $25,000. Mr. Khan had already purchased the three other plots in 2004 and told Dr. Mahfouz he wanted the extra plot to build a house for his "uncle."

"He was a very ordinary man—nice in his talking, but nothing special or extraordinary," said Dr. Mahfouz, 41.

Neighbors say Mr. Khan and his brother had several children between them. Pakistani officials have confirmed that they took 17 people, including eight or nine children, into custody after the raid. By Pakistani law, the house should pass to his children and other immediate family members.

U.S. officials have said the property is worth $1 million. Local property dealers estimate such a house would sell for $250,000 to $300,000.

The compound had separate living quarters for four families, with two occupied by bin Laden and his son, and the other two by his courier and the courier's brother, according to a senior Pakistani intelligence official. The areas had separate kitchens and gas meters.

Local officials said the federal government had yet to decide what to do with the house, which remained sealed and under police guard Friday. One Pakistani newspaper quoted an unidentified security official saying it would be demolished in a few weeks.

The debate over the house's fate reflects many Pakistanis' ambivalence toward bin Laden. Many here openly admire him for his role in resisting the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan in the 1980s, and for masterminding the attacks on the U.S. on Sept. 11, 2001. 

Pakistani Islamists organized protests in several cities Friday, including Abbottabad, Peshawar, Multan and Quetta—the capital of Baluchistan province and a place where Western intelligence officials believe Taliban leaders often seek refuge.

In Abbottabad, about 1,000 people protested at a local bazaar, burning tires, blocking the main road and shouting slogans such as "Down, down, USA!" witnesses said. 

In the capital, Islamabad, the former head of the radical Red Mosque, Maulana Abdul Aziz, praised bin Laden while addressing reporters after prayers.Mr. Aziz was arrested trying to escape from the Red Mosque shortly before security forces stormed it in 2007, killing dozens of people inside. He was released in 2009 pending trial for murder and other charges.

"The U.S. and its allies dubbed Osama as terrorists but the whole Ummah [Muslim diaspora] understands that he is a great Mujahid [holy warrior]," Mr. Aziz said. "Now, if he is killed...then we are sure that he is a martyr." 

Most Pakistanis don't espouse bin Laden's extreme interpretation of Islam, or his vision of an Islamic caliphate. Support for bin Laden in Pakistan had dropped from 52% in 2005 to 18% in 2010, the last year available, according to a survey by the Pew Research Center's Global Attitudes Project. Friday's protests were small by Pakistani standards, and largely confined to supporters of Pakistan's Islamist political parties.

The majority of Pakistanis, however, share the Islamist parties' fierce opposition to the U.S. role in the region, especially Central Intelligence Agency drone strikes on the tribal areas. The U.S. continued its drone-strike campaign Friday, with Pakistani officials saying drone-launched missiles killed 15 people, including foreign militants, in North Waziristan on the Afghan border, according to the Associated Press.

The debate over what to do with the house is reminiscent of the one over the bunker in Berlin where Adolf Hitler committed suicide in 1945. For more than 60 years, its location near the Brandenburg Gate was concealed from the public for fear that it would become a pilgrimage site for neo-Nazis. 

In 2006, ahead of an influx of tourists for the soccer World Cup, local authorities erected a small plaque marking the spot for tourists.