TAIPEI—A general at the center of Taiwan's worst spy case in 50 years is suspected of leaking sensitive details to China about an electronic defense system being sold to the island by U.S. contractor Lockheed Martin Corp., according to a senior member of Taiwan's parliamentary national defense committee.

Maj. General Lo Hsien-che was arrested in late January for allegedly leaking military secrets to China, highlighting a "smokeless" intelligence war across the Taiwan Strait that defense analysts say is deepening, despite flourishing economic ties over the past several years.

Analysts say that a surge in trade and travel between the two former enemies has made it much easier for the two former Cold War rivals to spy on each other. This has created a dilemma for Taiwan's Kuomintang government, which needs the economic boost from growing business links with China but is also deeply concerned about national security. China is determined to unify Taiwan with the Chinese mainland—and has never renounced the use of force to achieve this.

The island is heavily dependent on U.S. arms sales for its defense, and the spy case has sparked concern in Taiwan about the willingness of the U.S. to continue selling advanced weapons systems to Taiwan given the risk that their secrets could fall into Chinese hands.

The lawmaker, Lin Yu-fang , a member of the ruling Kuomintang, said Gen. Lo is suspected of handing over details about Taiwan's Po Sheng—or Broad Victory—program, a system to integrate ground, naval and air forces with command centers that is being sold to Taiwan by Lockheed Martin. A Lockheed Martin spokesman said the company had no additional information.

The 51-year-old general was recruited by a Chinese agent while he worked as a military attaché in Thailand in 2004 according to Taiwan's Ministry of National Defense.

Mr. Lin said the government has worked fast to respond to the most recent flare-up in the intelligence war, instituting new measures to polygraph test every Ministry of National Defense official after they return from trips abroad. He added that because Gen. Lo was not an engineer, and was unable to gain access to critical software and hardware components of the Po Sheng program, preliminary assessments are that the damage from the case is limited.

  Wendell Minnick, the Asia bureau chief of Defense News, an independent defense trade periodical, said he believed that Gen. Lo could have caused damage in other ways because he had access to sensitive international military cables while working as an attaché. He may also have worked as a "talent spotter" recruiting other officers to spy for China, Mr. Minnick said.

China has long sought details of the Po Sheng program. The technology featured prominently in a 2008 case in which an employee at a U.S. Department of Defense agency, Gregg Bergersen, gave out secret information about the program to a naturalized U.S. citizen from Taiwan named Kuo Tai-shen with the understanding the leaks would lead to business opportunities for Mr. Bergersen. But Mr. Kuo sent the information to a Chinese official in Guangzhou, according to an affidavit relating to the case. He was sentenced to more than 15 years in prison while Mr. Bergersen received a 57-month sentence and three years supervised release.

The Chinese focus on the Po Sheng program shows its intense interest and progress in developing the capability to disrupt Taiwanese communications ahead of an attack, according to Mr. Minnick. He added the arrest itself was also an impressive achievement for Taiwan's counterintelligence.

A spokesperson for the American Institute of Taiwan, the de facto U.S. embassy in Taiwan, said it was working with Taiwanese authorities on the case. Taiwan's Defense Ministry said an investigation into the case is ongoing and no more details are available at this time. China's Taiwan Affairs Office was unavailable for comment.

Although it remains to be seen what impact Gen. Lo's case will have on a new round of U.S. arms sales, Taiwan's penetration by China has already affected what types of arms the U.S. is willing to sell to Taiwan, according to former deputy defense minister Chong Pin Lin.

U.S. Defense Department spokeswoman, Cmdr. Leslie Hull-Ryde, declined to comment directly on whether the episode had jeopardized U.S. arms sales to the island, saying it would be inappropriate to comment on an ongoing investigation. She said that "in accordance with the Taiwan relations Act, we make available to Taiwan defense articles and services necessary to enable Taiwan to maintain a sufficient self-defense capability." She was referring to the Congressional act that governs U.S. relations with Taiwan.

Military analysts say that although an intelligence war has been going on for decades, Taiwan's recent opening to China has given mainland spies new opportunities.

"I go to your home and you come to my home, and that's what's happening right now, they have spies here and we have spies there....and this will continue to happen, we have to be very careful," says Mr. Lin, the KMT legislator.