Spiraling unrest in key U.S Arab allies—including Yemen, Bahrain and Saudi Arabia—has heightened pressures on regional leaders as they struggle to find successful responses to the waves of anti-government anger in the Middle East that will also allow them to stay in power.

The White House and the international community have responded with less vigor than they have against Libya in other Arab regimes that have used force to try to choke off domestic opposition. That has fueled criticism among Arab activists that there is a double standard in the West's policy for the region.

Yet as Washington and other governments have faced a dilemma over how to react to the protests, Arab rulers themselves haven't yet found a balance of opposition and acquiescence in their response to internal calls for change.

Yemeni President Ali Abdullah Saleh, a key but controversial partner in America's fight against terror, dismissed his government Sunday in his latest attempt to assuage domestic dissent after a crackdown by security officers on Friday killed between 35 and 50 peaceful protesters, according to Yemeni officials and doctors in the capital San'a.

The bloodshed helped coalesce what for years had been a fragmented opposition to Mr. Saleh's decades-long rule in Yemen. Over the weekend, key tribal and religious figures joined Mr. Saleh's traditional political opponents to demand his resignation. Additionally, more than a dozen top government officials have resigned their posts in the past few days, adding to a perception that Mr. Saleh is flailing. 

"The president is in a tight position with fewer places to turn. People in San'a sense weakness," said a Yemeni official.

Yemen's opposition parties have refused a government invitation to participate in an official investigation into Friday's bloodshed, according to a Yemeni official, and it was unclear what role—if any—the opposition would have in a new government. 

In neighboring Saudi Arabia the government also is struggling for answers, as its normally stolid political scene shows some cracks. After a rare television appearance Friday by King Abdullah bin Abdelaziz Al-Saud, in which he reiterated a prohibition against political demonstrations, some two dozen Saudis went ahead Sunday with a planned protest outside the Ministry of Interior, according to activists. 

The demonstrators have been demanding access to relatives they say have been detained and held for months without charge, in violation of Saudi law. 

Saudi officials didn't immediately respond to requests for comment on reports of arrests among the protesters. 

The kingdom views with alarm the increasing instability in bordering Yemen and also Bahrain, where the Sunni royal family remains locked in a political struggle with the small nation's majority Shiite citizens. Saudi Arabia sent 1,000 troops to Bahrain last week in a move the two kingdoms said was intended to quell the unrest but was criticized by Bahraini opposition figures as escalating the domestic conflict.

Bahrain's leading opposition party, Al Wefaq, said it welcomed statements made by U.S. Secretary of State Hilary Clinton over the weekend that the Bahraini government should focus on political solutions, not military ones, to the unrest. 

In response, the party softened its position on the conditions necessary for it to enter into a dialogue with the Bahraini leaders. In an interview with The Wall Street Journal on Sunday, Jawad Fairooz, a senior lawmaker with Al Wefaq, stressed that despite what he called a "dramatic" crackdown by government forces against peaceful protesters, negotiations could begin as soon as foreign troops left Bahrain and the country's own military was pulled from the streets.

There was no immediate response from the Bahraini government to the Al Wefaq statement.

 Write to  Margaret Coker at margaret.coker@wsj.com and Joe Parkinson at joe.parkinson@dowjones.com 