The head of New York City Ballet,  Peter Martins, refused a breathalyzer test after being stopped at a DWI checkpoint on New Year's Day, an incident that resulted in his arrest and misdemeanor drunken-driving charges, according to police.

New details of the Jan. 1 episode emerged Thursday, as a spokesman for the Westchester County police said Mr. Martins, the company's ballet master in chief, was detained after officers noticed his 2005 Bentley Continental sedan swerving in and out of its lane on the Saw Mill River Parkway in Yonkers, even though traffic at the checkpoint was "virtually at a standstill."

"He was having difficulty even at that very reduced speed," police spokesman Kieran O'Leary said.

Mr. Martins and a spokesman for New York City Ballet didn't respond Thursday to requests for comment. In a statement issued Wednesday through a spokesman for the company, Mr. Martins, 64 years old, said he had been advised not to discuss the incident because it was a legal matter.

Alone in his two-door Bentley, worth an estimated $160,000, Mr. Martins also drove onto the shoulder of the parkway and struck the curb several times—at one point mounting it with his tires—before reaching checkpoint officers, according to police. In addition to criminal charges of drunken driving, lodged against him based on officers' observations and a sobriety test, said Mr. O'Leary, Mr. Martins was issued two summons, one for failure to use the designated lane and another for driving on the shoulder.

Police said he is due in Yonkers City Court on Jan. 18, the same day NYCB is scheduled to open its winter repertory season at the David H. Koch Theater.

Because police say Mr. Martins refused a breathalyzer test, he also must appear before a state Department of Motor Vehicles administrative-law judge. If a judge confirms his refusal, Mr. Martins faces suspension of his license for at least one year and civil penalties of at least $500.

The Danish-born Mr. Martins is a towering figure in the world of dance. Handpicked by New York City Ballet's founder, George Balanchine, to run the company after Mr. Balanchine's death, he has exerted almost complete artistic control over the institution since 1981, when he became ballet master.

Prior to assuming the directorship, for which he earned a total of $723,000 from the ballet and related organizations in 2009, according to NYCB's tax filings, he was a principal dancer with the company.

NYCB has also been something of a family business for Mr. Martins: both his wife,  Darci Kistler, and his son,  Nilas Martins, are former principal dancers. He began his career at the Royal Danish Ballet.

 Write to  Erica Orden at erica.orden@wsj.com 