There are numerous ways for smart people to quickly part with their money, but few come close to investing in a start-up restaurant. Many, if not most, fail to gain traction and within three years, more than half close.

And yet there are those that take off immediately and never look back. A supreme example of this is London's Bocca di Lupo (www.bocadilupo.com). Launched at the end of 2009, the Italian restaurant in Soho was making a paper profit within weeks and now has days when turnover nudges €20,000. So what is the new concept here? A menu based on well-listed regional dishes, such as pappardelle with ox cheek, black pepper and tomato; skate fish cheeks with gremolata; or rustic pork and foie gras sausage with farro and porcini (their own creation)—all of which can be had as main courses or, for half the price, as starters. 

The impetus behind Bocca di Lupo is a talented 30-year-old chef called Jake Kenedy and his investor uncle, David Cleevely, 57, a telecommunications and Internet entrepreneur. Mr. Cleevely went about the creation of the restaurant with the same rigor he says he requires of all his investments, though he confesses: "If someone came out of the blue with this idea, undoubtedly I would have turned them down. However, because it was my nephew, I had to make sure I wasn't just being nice to him." 

They decided to only look at prime real estate, but quickly discovered a major obstacle: "For a prime site, you need an awful lot of money," Mr. Cleevely says. "Also, if you are competing against a well-established chain of restaurants, no one is going to give it to you." Instead, he purchased the freehold on a site in Soho in 2008. Although the total price, including the purchase and renovation of the building, came to around £2.5 million, Mr. Cleevely figured that if it failed, disposing of an asset was far easier than dealing with a short lease. "If you rent somewhere and go belly up, you have to continue to pay the rent until the lease expires, so in the longer run, it is much better to own the underlying asset," he says. Such prudence and foresight proved unnecessary; within a matter of weeks, the business was breaking even. Positive reviews by food critics and a Michelin Guide Bib Gourmand award, recognizing its value for money, have helped keep the restaurant packed.

Despite the success of Bocca di Lupo, Mr. Cleevely says starting a restaurant is a true risk. "It either grows slowly and never quite makes it, or it moves rapidly and is profitable within six months," he says. "A bit like drilling for oil, you are taking a step into the unknown, as you never know how the diners are going to react."

And not all restaurants are fortunate to have the backing of a wealthy investor. Passage 53 (www.passage53.com) in Paris, which just won its second Michelin star in less than two years of existence, started with virtually no capital. "No one had any faith in our ideas and the banks refused to give us any loans, so I had to use all my own money," says Guillaume Guedj, a 33-year-old former broker of classic German sports cars who opened the restaurant in April 2009 with Shinichi Sato, a talented 33-year-old Japanese chef. "That is why we ended up here." The location—a tiny space in a 200-year-old arcade once notorious for its courtesans but now occupied by stamp, coin and secondhand shops—may be unusual, but it is an integral part of Passage 53's charm. 

The creative flair of Mr. Sato, with his background at Mugaritz in Spain and L'Astrance in Paris, helped the restaurant become a success soon after opening. When one asks Mr. Guedj for a breakdown of figures, he admits that he really can't give an accurate account. "At the beginning, we were so busy, we only slept three hours a night. But we started this for love and passion, not to make money," he says. 

Here, there was also a family connection; Mr. Guedj's stepfather is Hugo Desnoyer, the most acclaimed butcher in Paris. "He was a great inspiration and, through his fantastic product, we created our first dish, which made us famous—veal tartare mixed with oyster and green apple." Is Mr. Guedj content to remain in the cramped location now that they have two Michelin stars? "We probably need somewhere more comfortable, but we are happy where we are," he says. "People often ask us if we could do another Passage 53 and I am not sure we could. You cannot have an adventure like this two times in a row."

Perhaps the most successful start-up in recent times is Copenhagen's Noma (www.noma.dk), now considered the best restaurant in the world, following its San Pellegrino award last year. Its inception came when Claus Meyer, a well-known Danish food writer and TV presenter, decided to create a Scandinavian restaurant that highlighted Nordic cuisine and selected René Redzepi, a young Danish chef who had worked in the U.S. (the French Laundry), France (Le Jardin des Sens) and Spain (El Bulli), to lead the effort. They put up €60,000 and were given a €300,000 loan by another investor to open the restaurant in 2003. "We had the definite intention to define a new Nordic cuisine that embraced the Arctic and brightened the world by virtue of its great taste and unique character," Mr. Meyer says. "However, we also wanted to create a great restaurant and earn a profit." Within a year, they too were profitable.

These examples are hardly typical of the difficulties involved in starting a restaurant, but in each case, the owners/chefs had a definitive vision, which enabled them to create something highly innovative, yet still appealing to the existing tastes of diners. It may sound simple, but that is the hardest thing to achieve; it is a leap of faith, which is either rewarded or vanishes without any impact—except on you and your investors.

 Write to  Bruce Palling at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 