Few bands can shroud themselves in mystery for years—let alone decades—and still enjoy the cultish position occupied by Steely Dan, the on-again, off-again duo of Donald Fagen and Walter Becker. 

Known for their precision jazz-rock-funk sound and quasi-narrative tunes, these at-times reclusive musicians have been mythologized—and, on occasion, mocked: The "Yacht Rock" series of phony documentaries turned them into grooving nerds with "dark sarcastic" lyrics. 

The latest chapter in Steely Dan lore includes something that longtime fans might have considered inconceivable: modern dance. Choreographer David Parsons has created a new work set to four Steely Dan songs: "Aja," "The Royal Scam," "The Fez" and "Reelin' In the Years." The dance, titled "Run to you," is part of the Parsons Dance Company's upcoming run at the Joyce Theater from Jan. 26 to Feb. 6.

Mr. Parsons has described "Run to you" as "a reflection on the human traits of positivity and negativity." And the four parts of the work suggest emotions ranging from love to aggression, as well as sheer exuberance. "You have to get into the vibe. That's a word we used a lot," said Mr. Parsons after a recent rehearsal.

The 51-year-old choreographer explained that he has a longstanding affinity for the music, as well as a personal connection. "I knew Donald Fagen from working on a dance-theater piece with him about 20 years go," he said.

That piece was created by five dancer-choreographers who produced a show together in the mid-1980s at Marymount Manhattan College. In addition to Mr. Parsons, one of the dancers was Marianne Dello Joio, who at the time was giving Pilates lessons to Mr. Fagen. She invited him to collaborate with the dancers, and he created original music for it called "The Squash Lesson."

Flash forward to June 2010, when Mr. Parsons ran into Ms. Dello Joio, who was still in touch with Mr. Fagen. Mr. Parsons mentioned that he was interested in setting a dance work to Steely Dan songs, but needed appropriate permissions.

"I said, 'Let me give him a call,'" recalled Ms. Dello Joio. "It took a long time. One day, after I had almost given up and I thought that David would have to move on, I gave one more call."

It worked. "He was very generous with me," Mr. Parsons said of Mr. Fagen. "I like artists who make their own worlds. They have control over their world, their art."

Mr. Parsons, who founded his own troupe in 1985 and is a former lead dancer for the Paul Taylor Dance Company, has certainly carved out a space for himself in the dance world. His work often incorporates technology or humor, and while it doesn't shy away from serious ideas, it is largely free of pretention. Past collaborators have ranged from Dave Matthews to Donna Karan.

Steely Dan has been crafting its own identity since 1972, producing dozens of songs that could conceivably be used onstage. But Mr. Parsons said his picks came quickly and naturally. 

"Run to you" takes its title from a lyric in the 1977 song "Aja," which starts off the piece with a somewhat romantic mood. A couple appears, then more dancers join them in fast-moving swarms. "We just wanted to have people connect," said the choreographer.

The mood grows darker with the title track from the 1976 album "The Royal Scam." Dancers push or bump one another, then collapse as if physically ill from their own sinister behavior. Redemption, though, is reached, and everybody has a hip-shaking good time in the next song, "The Fez," also from 1976.

"So funked OUT," said Mr. Parsons, making his eyes as big as ping-pong balls. "I love funk. It's not about major dance moves. I told them: 'Just give me attitude.'"

The finale is set to the 1972 hit "Reelin' In the Years," which still receives a fair amount of air time on classic-rock radio stations. Mr. Parsons chose not to worry about using a widely familiar song. "I just tried not to think about that," he said.

In addition to "Run to you," the company's season includes two other premieres. Mr. Parsons's "Portinari" is a duet inspired by the Brazilian painter Candido Portinari. The third premiere "Love, oh Love"—set to music by Lionel Richie, Kenny Rogers and Diana Ross—is by guest choreographer Monica Bill Barnes. Mr. Parsons, taking another cue from the music world, regularly invites other choreographers to create dances for his company. "I'm a mentor. It's not easy out there. They do it a lot in the jazz world. Why not dance?" he said.

As for his own work, Mr. Parsons had just returned to New York from a company tour and finished creating "Run to you" in time for a full rehearsal. The company heads back out on the road before the Joyce season starts on Wednesday. "I wish I had as many previews as 'Spider-Man,'" he said.

So will the members of Steely Dan be showing up at the Joyce? 

Mr. Fagen did not return requests for comment, but Mr. Parsons speculated: "I think Donald will be very pleased."

 Corrections & Amplifications:  

The name of the lead singer of the band Steely Dan is Donald Fagen. His name was misspelled in an earlier version of this story.

 Write to  Pia Catton at pia.catton@wsj.com 