"Does it sing?" 

At my old law firm, that was code for "Is your brief finished?" Admittedly, if you're not a lawyer, the prospect of a singing legal brief will probably leave you cold. But there's truth to the musical metaphor. An elegant legal brief (a written argument submitted to a court) has all the harmony of great prose. 

Winning over a skeptical audience is the ultimate test of any writer, whether a novelist eliciting sympathy for a flawed character or an essayist driving home a controversial point. The writer of a legal brief faces a double challenge: not only a skeptical audience, the judge, but also an adversary eager to pounce on any flaws in his argument. 

What lawyers understand better than most writers is that the really hard work takes place before setting pen to paper. The key to a good brief is boiling down all your arguments to a single theme. Coming up with a theme is not as easy as it may sound. Contrary to that old legal chestnut, res ipsa loquitor ("the thing speaks for itself"), things rarely do the talking. Lawsuits arise from messy situations, and there are many different ways to depict the same set of facts. 

Imagine the case of a young man who murders his uncle and claims his inheritance under the old man's will. The uncle's widow, naturally, objects to the nephew's claim. If you represent her, your theme might be "A man must not profit from his own misdeed." But, the nephew's lawyer will want something like "A court must not thwart a dead man's express wishes."

With the right theme, a legal brief can tell a compelling story. It's no coincidence that many lawyers who have gone on to pursue successful literary careers, like John Grisham and Scott Turow, started out as trial attorneys. 

Having settled on a theme, a good brief writer expounds it in the plainest language possible. That means banishing legalese—the pompous, stilted prose typical of boilerplate legal documents. Everybody hates legalese, even judges. I learned that lesson as a young associate, representing a prisoner in a civil-rights case. The first draft of my oral argument began: "Plaintiff John Doe is currently serving a custodial sentence in the New York State penal system." The partner took out his red pen and corrected me: "John Doe is a prisoner at Sing Sing." That was the last time I tried to dazzle my audience with jargon. 

A good brief must also sweep away any doubts that might distract the judge from the merits of your argument. Is there an obvious weakness to your case? Concede it upfront; you'll clear the air and allow the judge to focus on the facts that support your theme. Yes, the nephew murdered his uncle. But he knew the kid was a reprobate, and his will says nothing about disinheriting him for bad behavior.

A good brief writer edits relentlessly, chipping away at anything that does not advance the theme. Did you find an obscure 18th-century Scottish legal treatise that supports your argument? Good for you. Tell your parents, but leave it out of the brief. It's hard to resist the temptation to put all your erudition on display. The reward is prose that sings all the more sweetly. 

—Mr. Freedman is the author of "The Party of the First Part: The Curious World of Legalese" and host of the Legal Lad podcast.