NEW YORK—Crude-oil futures shot higher to settle at a 2½-year high on concerns that Middle East unrest is spreading to major oil-producing states. 

Light, sweet crude oil for April delivery settled $2.66, or 2.7%, higher at $99.63 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange. Brent crude oil on the ICE futures exchange gained $3.62, or 3.2%, to settle at $115.42 a barrel. 

Oil markets focused on reports of increasing violence in Libya, where opposition forces and those loyal to Col. Moammar Gadhafi continued to fight for control of the country. But the potential spread of upheaval to wealthier countries that produce a larger portion of the world's crude supplies—such as Iran and Saudi Arabia—pushed U.S. futures toward $100 a barrel.

Iranian security forces fired tear gas Tuesday at protesters who were demanding the release of opposition leaders, according to an opposition website. Meanwhile, Saudi Arabia's Tadawul stock market dropped 6.8% as investors worried about intensifying turmoil in neighboring Bahrain. 

"This isn't a one-off, this is going to continue. We have a military coup in Egypt, we have a civil war in Libya, we have the fear of contagion," said  Stephen Schork, head of oil-trading adviser the Schork Report. "This is not like the fall of Eastern Europe. We have an absolute power vacuum here, nobody knows how this is going to play out."

Iran is the second-largest oil producer in the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, exporting 2.4 million barrels a day, according to the U.S. Department of Energy. 

Saudi Arabia, the largest OPEC producer, increased production to a rate of nine million barrels a day, up 500,000 barrels a day, to make up for falling Libyan production. Kuwait has also indicated it could employ its spare production capacity of roughly 200,000 barrels a day if more of Libya's output is shut down.

  Tom Bentz, an oil analyst and broker with BNP Paribas Commodity Futures, said anything related to unrest in or near Saudi Arabia is going to provoke "a big reaction" in oil prices. "Especially since we already have two-thirds of Libyan production out of the market," he said. 

The market is well-supplied for the moment, particularly in the U.S. where weekly inventory data Wednesday are expected to show rising crude-oil stockpiles. Analysts surveyed by Dow Jones Newswires expect oil inventories increased by one million barrels last week, along with a 100,000-barrel increase in gasoline stocks. Distillate inventories, including heating oil and diesel, are seen down one million barrels. 

The American Petroleum Institute, an industry group, is due to report its own data at 4:30 p.m. EST Tuesday. 

Still, further disruptions to production in the region, particularly in large oil exporters, could be more than the Saudis could handle for an extended period. In that case, oil-importing countries would likely need to call on strategic reserves to meet demand. 

 Write to  Jerry DiColo at jerry.dicolo@dowjones.com 