Instead of paper checks, Oregon officials pay weekly unemployment benefits by loading the money onto debit cards that come with several unusual fees.

After she found a job last year, 48-year-old  Jennifer Schmidt of Riddle, Ore., was charged an "inactivity fee" of $2 by  U.S. Bancorp for not using her debit card once she stopped drawing unemployment.

The $2 fee sank the balance on her card into the red, triggering an overdraft fee of $17.

"How is it possible that the bigwigs in government can't get a better deal for us?" she says.

More than 40 U.S. states use prepaid debit cards to funnel unemployment benefits, child-support payments and other funds to recipients.

Getting rid of paper checks and postage is hard to resist for cash-strapped governments, which last year steered $53.2 billion in unemployment benefits and child-support payments to prepaid debit cards, up 33% from 2009, according to Mercator Advisory Group Inc., a research firm in Maynard, Mass. Such cards made up 32% of the overall prepaid debit-card market in 2010.

Banks are barreling into the business, led by  J.P. Morgan Chase
JPM


0.22
%




 & Co., the second-biggest U.S. bank in assets, which has contracts with 21 states.  U.S. Bancorp,
USB


3.76
%




 based in Minneapolis, has contracts with 16 U.S. states. The nation's largest bank by assets,  Bank of America Corp.
BAC


3.21
%




, has deals in five states and will start issuing debit cards for California's unemployment benefits in July. 

One reason why financial institutions like prepaid debit cards: They largely escaped the recent crackdown by U.S. lawmakers and regulators on fees, interest rates and billing practices for credit and debit cards.

Last year, 10 state treasurers successfully prodded lawmakers to shield prepaid debit cards from part of the Dodd-Frank financial-overhaul law that limits so-called "swipe fees" charged to retailers. Prepaid debit cards also are exempt from a 2009 law that outlawed fees for infrequent card use. In addition, most of those cards aren't subject to Federal Reserve rules requiring debit-card users to agree before banks can charge them for overdrawing the balance in their account.

  Richard Davis, U.S. Bancorp's chairman, president and chief executive, said last month that prepaid debit cards and other products will help the company recover roughly half of the revenue likely to be lost from swipe-fee rules being written by regulators. The banking industry is lobbying to repeal or delay the rules.

The combined regulatory changes for credit and debit cards are expected to cost financial firms about $26.2 billion a year in revenue, according to  R.K. Hammer, a credit-card consulting firm in Thousand Oaks, Calif.

About 10 states have started issuing government benefits through prepaid debit cards since Dodd-Frank was signed into law last July. The fees each state negotiated vary widely. The U.S. government isn't moving as quickly, though the Treasury Department launched a pilot program in January that encouraged 600,000 taxpayers to get their 2010 federal tax refunds on prepaid cards instead of paper checks.

Government agencies usually sign a contract with a bank to issue the plastic, which looks like traditional debit cards and is equivalent to cash. Some states give recipients the option of having money deposited electronically into their checking account. But prepaid debit cards are the only way to get unemployment benefits in Kansas, Indiana and Maryland.

Some of the fees commonly charged on prepaid debit cards were widespread in the U.S. banking industry but have faded because of fierce competition and criticism. 

For example,  PNC Financial Services Group Inc.
PNC


0.84
%




 subtracts 50 cents from the unemployment benefits of Indiana residents every time they check their balance at one of the Pittsburgh bank's automated teller machines. Recipients also get just one free cash withdrawal per week; other cash withdrawals cost $1.25.

Those two fees don't apply to PNC checking-account customers. A spokesman declined to comment. 

  Madeline Aufseeser, a senior analyst at Aite Group LLC, a research firm in Boston, says such fees "are the only means that issuers have to offset the cost of the prepaid cards." 

Oregon State Treasury spokesman  James Sinks says prepaid debit cards are "an alternative for unbanked customers" who otherwise would face even higher check-cashing fees. Since 2007, Oregon's deal with U.S. Bancorp for unemployment and child-support benefits has resulted in $11.5 million in cost savings, the agency says.

In 2009, the U.S. government urged states to drive a harder bargain with debit-card providers, including free ATM withdrawals. But federal officials lack any authority over the states' contracts. Prepaid debit cards for 2010 federal tax refunds, issued by a unit of Bonneville Bancorp of Provo, Utah, and managed by  Green Dot Corp.
GDOT


0.46
%




, Monrovia, Calif., came with unlimited transactions at nearly 15,000 ATMs. 

In March, more than 600 people protested outside U.S. Bancorp branches in Oregon, demanding the elimination of fees on debit cards tied to government benefits. At the bank's shareholder meeting last month, Mr. Davis deflected a question about the spat, saying Oregon officials have "a role in the matter."

A U.S. Bancorp spokeswoman declined to comment. Mr. Sinks, the Oregon spokesman, says state officials will push for "the lowest fees possible" when the unemployment contract is reviewed in December.

  Loree Levy, a spokeswoman for California's Employment Development Department, says officials were determined to squeeze a good deal out of Bank of America during negotiations about using debit cards for unemployment benefits.

The Charlotte, N.C., bank agreed not to charge inactivity fees or for cash withdrawals at its ATMs. "I think we won," she says.

  Margaret Scopelianos, who runs Bank of America's government card programs, says the bank strives to provide "real value to cardholders."