Welcome back to the playoffs, Knicks. Here's your prize: The defending Eastern Conference champions. The Knicks' first playoff series in seven years will be against the 55-26 Celtics, the talented but potentially flawed gold standard of the conference.

 The matchup was official late Monday night after the Celtics fell to the Washington Wizards and Philadelphia lost to Orlando.

The third-seeded Celtics and sixth-seeded Knicks will play Wednesday in the all-but-meaningless regular-season finale, then will tip-off the playoff series on either Saturday or Sunday in Boston.

On the surface, the matchup looks like a meeting of opposites. The Celtics' core of Paul Pierce, Ray Allen and Kevin Garnett has navigated two runs to the NBA Finals in their three years together and are the closest thing to a proven commodity in the conference. The Knicks, meanwhile, were struggling to find an identity until late last month.

The Knicks complete their four-game, regular-season series against the Celtics Wednesday in Boston.

 October 29  Celtics 105, Knicks 101 

 December 15  Celtics 118, Knicks 116 

 March 21  Celtics 96, Knicks 86 

 All is not as it seems in Boston, however. They've struggled since trading center Kendrick Perkins to Oklahoma City, going 14-12, the same record as the Knicks since their season-altering trade for Carmelo Anthony.

On Tuesday, Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni would not answer a question about whether the Celtics were vulnerable now. He did, however, acknowledge it's hard to know how these Knicks, full of playoff newcomers and new additions, will play next week.

"I don't think we're battle tested," D'Antoni said. "So I don't know what we have, but I do know we have a lot of talent."

There are similarities between the teams. Both have a so-called ''Big Three,'' with the Knicks featuring Anthony, Amar'e Stoudemire and Chauncey Billups.

 As for matchups, that will depend on many factors including the health of Shaquille O'Neal and Jermaine O'Neal, both of whom could make the Knicks pay for their lack of a talented big man. The two O'Neals have combined for just 61 appearances this year.

Despite an 0-3 record against the Celtics in the regular season, there was optimism among the Knicks on Tuesday. Billups, the playoff-tested point guard, said he feels the Knicks are "the most dangerous first-round team in the NBA."

He said there's been defensive improvement to go along with "a lot of weapons." Anthony said he's looking forward to the matchup, but wasn't about to match Billups's boldness.

"They have a group of veteran guys who've been around the block. I'm pretty sure that come playoff time, they'll be ready," he said.

D'Antoni said that the Knicks were trying to win Tuesday night against the Chicago Bulls in their regular-season home finale, but that Wednesday night's matchup in Boston "might be a little different."

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 