BANGALORE -- Private equity investments in publicly traded companies in India may increase this year, after continuous drops over the past five years, on lower valuations as stock prices take a tumble. 

Such transactions, known as private investments in public enterprises, dropped to less than 10% of all private equity investments made last year from as much as 35% in 2005, as investors judged that valuations were excessive.

On Friday, the Bombay Stock Exchange's benchmark index Sensex rebounded after nine straight days of declines, its longest run of losses in a decade. The index gained 1.7% to 18,518.81.

Many owners have turned to private equity funds to raise fresh capital as volatile equity markets have made it difficult for them to raise money from the public, according to a recent survey by consulting firm Bain and Co.

Bain's India Private Equity Report 2011, produced in collaboration with the Indian Private Equity and Venture Capital Association, was based on reviews of 50 Indian and foreign investors.

Private equity funds also prefer such investments in public companies as these allow the funds to sell their investments in just a year or two, compared with the average four- to five-year wait for exits in privately held firms.

Also, these investments are attractive as corporate governance, transparency and accountability of listed firms are perceived to be significantly better than privately held firms. However, investors pay the price, a premium of 20% to 30%.

"[Private equity investments in public companies] will continue to be a very important part of the private equity industry in India as in many segments similar businesses are often valued far more reasonably in public markets than in private situations, especially in sectors where a lot of capital is chasing companies and entrepreneurs," said K.P. Balaraj, managing director, WestBridge Capital, which is set to invest in such deals.

He expects significant activity across all stages of investment—venture, growth and public—in five years, given the large number of funds pursuing investments and the rapid increase in entrepreneurial activity.

"These will be great times for entrepreneurs, but as an investor, I would worry about too much capital chasing too few quality deals in private equity and what it may imply longer term for valuations and returns," Mr. Balaraj said.

Other funds that are keen on such deals in India include Norwest Venture Partners, Ascent Capital, ChrysCapital and Warburg Pincus. 

"From time to time, as opportunities crop up we will look at these deals," said  Raj P. Kondur, director, Ascent Capital. Ascent is yet to invest in a public company from its third fund of $350 million.

Investing in public companies have expanded the deal universe for funds. However, some investors believe such investments go against the primary principle of private equity investing.

"The real purpose of our capital funding is to provide growth capital for companies that are scaling up," said  Harshal J. Shah, chief executive of Reliance Venture, the venture-capital arm of  Anil Ambani's Reliance Group. "We are not keen on [public company] deals. As a growth investor, our focus is on getting the best returns while doing a substantial value-add to our portfolio firms. Private equity investments in public companies don't allow that."