This week marks the one-year anniversary of the passage of ObamaCare, and already House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi and fellow Democrats are holding events to "celebrate" the law's birthday. Americans, according to the latest polls, are refusing to join the party. 

Democrats are fanning out across the country this week to put a positive spin on the infant law, no easy task in light of the past year of headlines. Thanks to ObamaCare, seniors have lost Medicare Advantage plans, while millions of other Americans have been forced to find new health options. Premiums are soaring, states have warned that the law's provisions could bankrupt their treasuries, Congress has already voted to repeal at least one part of the law, and courts have ruled against ObamaCare's constitutionality. That hasn't stopped Mrs. Pelosi from holding several press events to laud the law, and from recycling dubious statistics. The Washington Post went so far as to call Mrs. Pelosi's recent claims that the law has created jobs and will cut the deficit "false or exaggerated." 

No surprise then that the latest Kaiser Health Tracking Poll shows a significant erosion of even the timid support the bill had upon passage. A year ago, 35% of respondents said they and their family would be "better off" as a result of the legislation; today 26% feel that way. A year ago, 28% believed their quality of care would be better under ObamaCare; today that number is 20%. Around passage of the legislation, 31% believed the cost of their care would get better; only 23% now believe that promise. Only 2% of those questioned believe their health insurance premiums have been going down; fully half say their premiums are going up. And more people now say their family has been "negatively affected" by ObamaCare than those who say their family has benefitted. 

These dismal polling numbers are coming on the back of a year of public familiarity with the law, a point at which Democrats hoped Americans would be warming to its provisions. Hardly. Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid gave a floor speech last week that praised ObamaCare as "a milestone in the history of this country"—and he may have a point. A year on, ObamaCare is proving itself to be one of the more sweeping, if least-liked, government programs ever jammed by Democrats down the country's throat. 

To read more stories like this one, please subscribe to Political Diary.