The public dissatisfaction spreading across the Arab world has not gone unnoticed in Baghdad. Unlike the governments currently in the spotlight, Iraq's is not a dictatorship. Nevertheless, Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki is fully aware of the growing danger of unfulfilled promises among a population still waiting for the benefits that the overthrow of Saddam Hussein was supposed to bring.

Electricity in particular remains a pressing concern. Although generation levels have increased by more than 50% since 2003, demand has risen at a similar rate, leading to frequent and unpredictable shortages and an increasingly irate Iraqi public. Last summer, the country's electricity minister was forced to resign following demonstrations at which a number of civilians died. Recent weeks have seen protests grow in number and intensity.

The government at last seems to be listening. At a conference last month in Istanbul, over 400 delegates including Hussain al-Shahristani, the deputy prime minister for energy and former oil minister, heard the outcome of a comprehensive study into rebuilding Iraq's electricity sector. The report, co-authored by Iraq's Ministry of Electricity and infrastructure-development group Parsons Brinckerhoff, showed that capital investment of over $26 billion in the next five years would enable Iraq to satisfy its electricity requirements by the summer of 2014. But meeting this deadline will require decisions to be made quickly, as well as a massive, coordinated program of investment and construction across the whole sector.

The plan proposes the construction of additional power stations, enhancements to Iraq's transmission and distribution network, and new programs to overhaul or better maintain existing infrastructure. It also considers opportunities for further private investment in electrification, and the regulatory and financial regimes necessary to attract it.

On the problem of getting electricity to all of Iraq's provinces, the report recommends building power stations close to consumption centers and moving fuel to them, rather than generating power near the sources of fuel and transmitting it over long distances, as is the norm elsewhere. Such a strategy justifies the construction of new power plants throughout Iraq's provinces—a political boon for local authorities seeking to make progress on this issue more visible to their constituents.

These are all important, concrete steps toward addressing a problem that menaces not only Iraq's political and social stability, but its economic prospects as well. If delegates were surprised by the scale of investment required to implement the plan presented last month, then even more startling was its calculation that failing to provide sufficient electricity in Iraq could cost its economy about $40 billion per year. The size of this figure has provoked considerable discussion, but not lost on anyone is the fact that even if the calculation is wrong by a factor of ten, it still justifies the proposed investment.

Questions remain about how competently the Iraqi government can carry through such a plan given its relative inexperience and history of shambolic budget disbursement and project management. But there are positive signs. The attendance at the Istanbul conference indicated a high level of commitment among Iraq's leaders. That Mr. Shahristani publicly announced the huge sums and quick time scale needed to rebuild the system at all, moreover, shows that the new government is willing to "get real" about the prospects for Iraqi electrification. The budget that Iraq's parliament approved last month also underscores the government's commitment by prioritizing social investment. 

We can also be encouraged by the recent appointment of Raad Shalal to the post of electricity minister. A skilled engineer, he has the right technical background and experience, understands how the Ministry works, and is clever and decisive. And though he lacks the political experience of his predecessor, Mr. Shalal has Mr. Shahristani to provide top cover, as well as the will of the entire government to succeed.

It will still be at least three years before demand can be met though, and shortages are inevitable in the interim. If Iraq's government is to avoid a repeat of last year's protests, it must keep explaining its plans and be open about the sacrifices involved. Meanwhile, Western governments and industry should be prepared to assist in this reconstruction with all the energy and resources they possess. Iraq is still the newest post-dictatorship democracy in the Middle East, at least for the time being, and the successful emergence of a thriving economy there could set the tone for the entire region.

 Mr. McNinch is a former British Army engineer and served as principal energy advisor to Coalition military commanders in Iraq in 2008 and 2009. He remains engaged in helping Iraq to develop its energy infrastructure. 