

After two positive sessions in a row, Japanese shares fell Wednesday as news of radioactive contamination in Tokyo tap water prompted a late selloff, while weak results from China Coal Energy Co. and China Life Insurance pressured Hong Kong stocks.

Many other markets advanced, with Chinese stocks posting solid gains on hopes low share valuations and strong economic growth will boost the market. Property developers led the way.

The day's performance was again marked by caution amid worries over the strength of the U.S. economic recovery, rising crude-oil prices, turmoil in the Mideast and North Africa and sovereign-debt issues in the euro zone.

"The market's not convinced that the U.S. economy is improving at the rate they would like, and the Mideast is still a major distraction," said RBS head of sales Justin Gallagher, who described investor activity in Sydney as "appallingly quiet."

"The market is really struggling with uncertainty and there are very few catalysts for people to have much conviction," he said.

China's Shanghai Composite rose 1% to 2948.48, Australia's S&P/ASX 200 gained 0.2% to 4652.40, Taiwan's Taiex added 0.4% to 8545.08 and India's Sensex rose 1.2% to 18206.16.

Staging a retreat, South Korea's Kospi slipped 0.1% to 2012.18 and Hong Kong's Hang Seng index fell 0.1% to 22825.40, while Japan's Nikkei Stock Average tumbled 1.7% to 9449.47.

Losses in Tokyo steepened after the Tokyo metropolitan government asked families not to let infants drink tap water after finding higher-than-allowed levels of radioactive iodine.

Shares of Tokyo Electric Power dropped 4.5% after staging a sharp rebound in the previous two sessions amid easing fears over radiation from its earthquake-damaged Fukushima Daiichi nuclear-power plant. The fall came despite media reports that Japanese banks and financial institutions were considering providing emergency loans totaling more than two trillion yen ($24.7 billion) by the end of March to enable the utility to conduct repairs and boost electricity supply.

Shares of Terumo dropped 4.1% after the medical-equipment maker lowered its fiscal-year net-profit outlook, citing the impact on production due to the quake and rolling blackouts.

Many exporters also lost ground on worries about the quake's impact on earnings. Toyota Motor Corp. shed 1.2% and Fujitsu. lost 6.6%.

On the upside, Taiheiyo Cement rose 3.4%; the company announced after the market close on Tuesday that it will pay a final dividend of ¥2.50 a share.

In Hong Kong, shares of China Coal plunged 9.1% and China Life dropped 2.1% a day after each reported weaker-than-expected results for 2010. China Coal also had a downgrade by HSBC, to neutral from overweight.

Chinese property developers led an advance across sectors, with Poly Real Estate Group adding 3.9% in Shanghai and China Vanke climbing 2.4% in Shenzhen.

While the Shanghai-listed shares of China Coal dropped 1.4% after its earnings report, other coal miners gained, with China Shenhua Energy climbing 2% and Yanzhou Coal Mining adding 4.7%.

"In China, we believe there is solid evidence that the People's Bank of China is succeeding in containing inflationary pressures and that the threat of overheating of the Chinese economy is no longer a major issue," strategists at Samsung Securities wrote in a research note. "We consider China to be about three-quarters of the way to controlling inflationary pressures. In the short-to-medium term, the change in emphasis should benefit the banking and real-estate-equity sectors"

Australian shares were supported by a rise in energy sector shares as crude-oil prices straddled the $105-a-barrel level. Woodside Petroleum rose 0.7% and Santos climbed 2.1%. But those same oil prices hit Virgin Blue Holdings, which tumbled 6.1% after the carrier warned that fuel costs and the New Zealand earthquake will crimp its full-year profit.

Among other markets, New Zealand's NZX 50 rose 0.3%, Singapore's Straits Times index gained 0.7%, Indonesian shares rose 1.1%, Thailand's SET gained 0.8% and Philippine stocks ended little changed.

Major currency pairs moved in a range during a choppy session as many players avoided making major bets ahead of a vote on austerity measures by Portugal's Parliament later in the day; the nation's main opposition party said it will vote against them.

Investors were also cautious amid continued uncertainty over Japan's nuclear problems and the military operations in Libya.

"People want to see how things go with the nuclear reactors, and there is also the uncertainty with the geopolitical situation in northern Africa and the Mideast," said Shuichi Kanehira, a senior foreign-exchange dealer at Mizuho Corporate Bank.

The U.S. dollar was buying ¥80.89 from ¥80.95 in late New York trade Tuesday, while the euro was at $1.4188, from $1.4195, and at ¥114.77, from ¥114.95.

Lead Japanese government bond futures were up 0.33 at 139.73 points, lifted by the Nikkei's losses, while the yield on the 10-year cash JGB was down 0.03 percentage point at 1.215%.

Spot gold was at $1,428 per troy ounce, down 80 cents from its New York settlement Tuesday. The May Nymex crude-oil futures contract was off five cents at $104.93 per barrel on Globex, coming off the day's high of $105.38. 

 Write to  Colin Ng at colin.ng@dowjones.com and Leslie Shaffer at leslie.shaffer@dowjones.com 