SENDAI, Japan—The earthquake and tsunami waves that rattled Japan on Friday came down with particular brutality on the country's northern Pacific coast.

Hundreds of towns and villages in Japan's northeast were devastated by the 8.9 magnitude quake that was centered some 100 miles off the area's coast— dealing a blow to part of the nation already reeling from decades of population losses and long slump in its agriculture and fisheries sector.

Buildings and homes collapsed, trapping people inside. Fires raged into the night, with a blaze in one town stretching for what appeared to be miles. A coastal train couldn't be accounted for.

Saturday's daybreak revealed the whole of Minami Sanriku-Machi, a coastal town of 18,000 people in the prefecture of Miyagi, was washed away, except for several midrise concrete structures and buildings perched on surrounding hills.

Two hundred people were evacuated on the roofs and high floors of the town's only public hospital, rising up from what used to be town center, now buried under black dirt. At least seven patients died overnight. Others waited without drinking water or food. 

"We have about 20 patients who need treatment and shipments to other hospitals," Mitsuya Sakuma, a hospital official, told Japan's national broadcaster, NHK, in a phone interview. "We are hoping for immediate evacuation." 

In all, hundreds were killed when the tsunami hit the coast of Miyagi, a prefecture known for rice and beef production and its intricate coastline. The quake also derailed, and possibly washed away, a train running along the city's coast, police told Kyodo News. It isn't known how many people were aboard the train that was running near Nobiru Station on East Japan Railway Co.'s Senseki Line, connecting Sendai to Ishinomaki.

In a residential neighborhood about six miles east of Sendai— Miyagi's prefectural seat and, with 1 million people, the closest big city close to the epicenter—police found bodies of 200 to 300 people who appeared to have drowned in elevated waters brought inland by the tsunami.

While Japan's meteorological agency said some areas of Miyagi and neighboring prefectures experienced tsunami towering over 30 feet, the exact sizes of largest waves were unknown, as many tsunami gauges had stopped functioning. 

Kesennuma city, a fishing community of 74,000 people in northern Miyagi, appears to have suffered the tsunami's worst damage, as Friday's quake and waves were followed by a fire that tore through residential and commercial blocks. Flames started after the tsunami caused a spill at an oil tank by the port, according to the Yomiuri Shinbun daily, then spread along the coast and crept up along the river toward the city center. Footage taken by a self-defense force aircraft showed a fire burning in Kesennuma that appeared to stretch for miles. 

The number of casualties from the fire wasn't clear, and Japanese media said many residents remained missing. 

Saturday morning, television footage showed a body of dark brown water sweeping over patches of dry brown fields and neat rows of houses in a farming area along the Natori River, swallowing cars, trucks and houses along the way.

The Sendai Airport, which faces the Pacific coast and the Natori River that cuts through Sendai from north to south, was inundated by water, leaving the terminal building looking like a lonely island and airplanes resembling boats on the ocean. Dirty water covered two runways. At one point, a few dozen people had evacuated to the roof of the terminal building. 

As day broke Saturday, at least two small planes were spotted among piles of debris near the airport, mixed in with several vehicles, trees and advertising signs. 

South of Sendai, lowlying areas were flooded and homes and other buildings on the beachfront sustained damage. Viewed from the air, fast-moving water flowed back toward the ocean, carrying all manner of flotsam. Long strips of debris, speckled with multicolored pieces of buildings, extended in chains miles out to sea.

Thirteen miles south of Sendai, near the outlet of the Abukuma River, the concrete seawall was punctured at regular intervals, as if blown up by explosives. 

Water that had swept in from the ocean inundated vast stretches of land, leaving a trail of mud and sand covering almost everything at ground level. 

Six miles farther north toward Sendai, near the coastal town of Arahama, tens of thousands of trees that lined the shore were stripped bare and snapped at the base like matchsticks. 

A high-school baseball stadium was entirely filled with tons of mud and sand dredged up from the depths of the sea. 

Only foundations were visible where buildings once stood. Residual water was interspersed with debris-strewn fingers of land extending miles inland. 

Low-flying government rescue helicopters, including Japanese Self Defense Force Blackhawks,hovered low over houses with roof tiles ripped asunder, looking for survivors.

Farther up the coast toward Sendai, entire roads and bridges were washed away. 

A few cars could be seen carefully navigating twisted and sand-strewn roads in an apparent attempt to flee, or survey the damage to their communities.

No more than a handful of pedestrians could be seen for hundreds of miles up the coast. 

The tsunami washed away much of Wataricho, a town of 35,000 south of Sendai that sits at the mouth of Abukuma River, stranding people in the remaining dry land. One Twitter user wrote that she was stranded upstairs in her house there. 

"A tsunami just hit. I am taking pictures from the second floor of my house. The flooding continues and I am afraid of being left behind. Please come to my rescue!!" She sent three more tweets over the next five hours, each one asking for rescue. It wasn't clear whether she was rescued.

While the Tohoku region surrounding Miyagi traditionally focused on agriculture, particularly rice production, now some three quarters of the area's population live in urban areas. 

In Fukushima, another poor, hard-hit prefecture in Tohuki, an elderly-care facility collapsed, trapping more than a dozen residents underneath. On the main strip of Ofunato city in nearby Iwate prefecture, several shop buildings had collapsed, some vans were knocked over on their sides, and trees had partially been uprooted and buried under debris, according to NHK footage.

 Write to  Yuka Hayashi at yuka.hayashi@wsj.com 