England's cricket team starts the final Test against Australia in Sydney on Monday having already retained the Ashes title. Permit me a moment while I read through that sentence again, because I still don't quite believe it myself. The last time an Ashes series in Australia ended with English hands grasping the urn, the oldest member of the current England team, Paul Collingwood, was 10.



Amid all the English euphoria and Australian hand-wringing, it's easy to overlook one factor that has critically contributed to making this such a madly fluctuating roller-coaster ride of a series: the state of the pitches. The general rule in Test cricket is to choose to bat first if you win the toss, because the pitch will only become more difficult to bat on; frequently the first-innings score is the highest of the match. That hasn't been the case in this series. Not only have England chosen to bowl first in both of the past two games, but the first-innings scores of 260 for England and 245, 268 and 98 for Australia have also all been well below par.

Australian officials have reportedly encouraged the country's groundsmen to prepare pitches that give the bowlers as well as the batsmen a fair crack of the whip, and for that they should be commended. It's made for a gloriously unpredictable series and one that shows just how much pitches affect the outcome of games. 

There's no other sport in which pitch conditions are so important. It affects how many runs are scored in the game, and more importantly what types of players are more likely to be successful. Something as basic as the amount of grass on the pitch help determine how the ball deviates off it. 

In England and New Zealand, partly due to the pitch and partly to the cool atmosphere, the ball often swings in the air. An abrasive pitch can accelerate the development of a separate phenomenon, reverse swing: As the ball gets older and the difference between its shiny side and its rough side becomes more marked, the ball tends to swing in the direction of the shiny side. 

Some wickets—the WACA in Perth, where Australia had its lone win of the Test against England, or Kingsmead in Durban, South Africa, where India recently triumphed over South Africa—are fast and bouncy. This favors fast bowlers but can also benefit certain batsmen, particularly those whose main strength is in playing horizontally batted shots, propelling the ball at a 90-degree angle from the wicket more than straight. The ball comes off the bat faster—and disappears to the boundary faster, too.

Pitches in South Asia can often be slow, with low bounce, making it difficult to take wickets and often to score runs quickly too. As a Test goes on, pitches like these often become dry and dusty, aiding spin bowling. 

The prevailing conditions in a country tend to shape the type of cricketers it produces; India and Sri Lanka tend to produce fiendish spinners and wristy batsmen, adept at maneuvering the ball into gaps in the field, while England produces lots of swing bowlers and South Africa has produced few international spinners worthy of the name.

In other words, there aren't just several types of pitch, but several variables that can all go a number of ways—producing, in theory, fascinating endless variety. In recent years this hasn't always been the case. Pitches in South Asia in particular have produced a slew of dreary run-fests—boring games on incredibly slow, easy pitches that tend to end in draws, because neither side can get the other one out twice and the runs rack up gradually over five long days. A few examples just within the past year include Pakistan versus South Africa in the United Arab Emirates, New Zealand's series in India and India's in Sri Lanka.

When a match finishes inside three or four days instead of the full five, organizers suffer financially. That can give them incentive to produce flat, bland surfaces. The game's authorities need to strike a balance between preparing pitches that produce exciting games and those that fill the coffers by ensuring that those games last the duration. 

The problem isn't confined to international cricket; fast bowler Steve Harmison of Durham, and formerly England, famously referred in 2009 to "chief executive pitches" being prepared in the English County Championship—ones that suit the financial aspirations of clubs rather than the playing aspirations of teams or, crucially, spectators' aspirations to be entertained.

Doing that has to be counter-productive. With cricket needing to compete with other sports, and Test cricket always battling for attention with its brash youngest sibling Twenty20, it needs to give spectators value for money. People who buy tickets for Test cricket know what they're getting into, and they expect to be entertained by the game's most heralded, if misunderstood, format.

The solution lies in stricter enforcement of the mandatory minimum number of overs that teams have to bowl in a day—at the moment they're fined for slow play, but evidently not enough for it to work as a deterrent; amending the rule that leads to umpires taking the players off the field for bad light when there's no physical danger to the batsmen, needlessly denying thousands of spectators the entertainment they've paid heavily for; and, critically, making sure that games are played on pitches that produce exciting cricket, an even contest between bat and ball and, at least most of the time, a winner. The current series in Australia and South Africa are steps in the right direction.