 'Gruesome Playground Injuries,'  Monday, New York 

Some audience members at the Off Broadway play "Gruesome Playground Injuries" will sit on the stage, watching the action like a crowd gathered around a schoolyard brawl. It's a fitting setup for a play that chronicles the physical hurt and destructive behavior that binds two childhood friends together into adulthood. The production, which opens Monday at New York's Second Stage Theatre, stars Jennifer Carpenter (from TV's "Dexter") and Pablo Schreiber (last on Broadway with "Desire Under the Elms"). The play's author, Rajiv Joseph, is making his presence known in New York this season: His 2010 Pulitzer Prize finalist, "Bengal Tiger at the Baghdad Zoo," opens in March with Robin Williams making his Broadway acting debut.

 Gabriel Kuri, Institute of Contemporay Art, Boston, Feb. 2-July 4 

A tapestry woven to look like a giant receipt from Superama (Wal-Mart's Mexican chain) and marble slabs topped by complementary hotel shampoos are featured in Gabriel Kuri's first solo museum exhibition in the U.S. The exhibit, "Nobody needs to know the price of your Saab," which originated at University of Houston's Blaffer Art Museum, now travels to Boston's Institute of Contemporary Art. The Mexico City-born artist is known for his clever use of everyday objects in collage and sculpture to comment on consumer culture. He is making an impression on the contemporary art scene and was recently commissioned to design the look of New York's 2011 Armory Show. 

'Brick City,' Sundance Channel,  Sunday

Number of shopping bags hanging from ceiling fans in a 2004 work by Gabriel Kuri, 'Thank you clouds'

Fresh off a Golden Globe win for "Carlos," its gritty mini-series about an international terrorist, the Sundance Channel returns to a gritty documentary series set closer to home. "Brick City," which follows Newark Mayor Cory Booker as he tries to navigate the troubled city's socio-economic storms, begins its second season on Sunday. Major plot points in the six-episode run include balancing the city's budget, Mr. Booker's reelection campaign and the high-profile shooting death of a filmmaker in the city's apartment projects.

 Bob Marley & the Wailers  'Live Forever,' Tuesday 

On Sept. 23, 1980, Bob Marley staged what would be his last concert. Adding to its significance, the reggae star had collapsed just a few days earlier, leading to his discovery of the cancer that would kill him eight months later. The recording of that show in Pittsburgh, capturing the Wailers' knotty grooves and the singer in ebullient voice, has long circulated via bootlegs, many of them incomplete. This official release includes Marley's final musical statement from the stage, "Get Up Stand Up."

—Ellen Gamerman, Monika Anderson, Amy Chozick, John Jurgensen