ISTANBUL—Tens of thousands of Turks turned out Tuesday to mourn the death of Necmettin Erbakan, the country's first Islamist prime minister.

Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan cut short a trip to Europe to attend the funeral, where a packed crowd outside Fatih Mosque chanted: "Mujahid [fighter for God] Erbakan," punching the air. Rows of mourners in side streets around the mosque and on the main boulevard knelt to pray. 

In a mark of the central role Mr. Erbakan played as lifelong political leader of the country's religious conservatives, attendees at his burial service in Istanbul ranged from President Abdullah Gul to generals from the military that drove Mr. Erbakan from office in 1997. 

Mr. Erbakan died of natural causes Sunday in an Ankara hospital. His body was brought to Istanbul after a smaller funeral service in the capital on Tuesday morning.

Mr. Erbakan became prime minister at the head of a coalition government in the 1990s but was driven from power after just a year. The Turkish military saw him as a threat to Turkey's secular nature and issued a number of public-policy demands and veiled threats that eventually prompted him to step aside. 

Mr. Erbakan died one day before the Feb. 28 anniversary of the so-called postmodern coup that deposed him and ushered in a period of repression for Islamist ideas and their supporters. 

A number of articles in Turkey's press described his death, and the military's response to it, as drawing a line under that era. 

Chief of the General Staff Isik Kosaner praised Mr. Erbakan's "great services to our country as a valuable man of science and politics."

Mr. Erbakan's views, unlike those of his successors in Turkey's current government, remained unabashedly anti-Western and Islamist. His son, Fatih Erbakan, said in a speech to the crowd that his father had taught "Muslims in Turkey and the world that Islam is not only making your prayers, fasting and going on the hajj, but it is also to make Jihad in the path of Allah and to work for the happiness of all humanity and for an Islamic union."As prime minister, Mr. Erbakan declined an invitation to a European Union summit—he opposed Turkey's seeking membership in a largely Christian club. He traveled widely in the Arab world, where he sought to refocus Turkey's relations. Visiting Libya, he supported the government against terrorism allegations related to the 1988 bombing of Pan Am flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, by a Libyan. He also created a group of the most populous Muslim countries, called the D-8, as counterweight to the G-7 group of industrialized nations.

Yet he consistently opposed the use of violence and supported the democratic process, distinguishing him and his movement from some other prominent Islamist movements around the world. Several of the military officers who were involved in his 1997 removal are currently on trial, accused of plotting a further, unrealized coup against the current government of the Islamic leaning Justice and Development Party, or AKP, in 2003.

Mr. Erbakan's stint as prime minister in a coalition government was a short episode in a lengthy career as Turkey's pre-eminent religious conservative politician, which began when he established the Milli Gorus, or National View, movement in 1969. The movement's core tenet was that the attempt to imitate the West was the root cause of the Muslim world's decline. 

He headed a series of political parties that were created, then shut down by the military as a threat to Turkey's secular foundations, and then reformed under new names. 

Messrs. Erdogan and Gul were both members of Mr. Erbakan's Refah, or Welfare Party, when he stepped down from office in 1997—Mr. Erdogan as Istanbul mayor and Mr. Gul as Mr. Erbakan's foreign policy adviser. The party was then banned by the Constitutional Court, and Mr. Erbakan was temporarily barred from politics.

The two younger men eventually broke away to form the AKP in 2001, abandoning many of the Islamist aspects of the Milli Gorus movement. The AKP, for example, launched membership talks with the EU once in power. Mr. Erbakan and other traditionalists formed their own party, Saadet, or Felicity, but have struggled to compete. 

The AKP won elections in 2002, and is widely expected to secure a third term in office in elections set for June 12. The Felicity Party won just 2.3% of the vote at the last elections in 2007. The party split again last year when Mr. Erbakan pushed aside a new leadership that was trying to draw Felicity towards the political center.

 Write to  Marc Champion at marc.champion@wsj.com 