In "Scenes from the Suburbs," directed by Spike Jonze, armed troops patrol communities at war with each other. Music by the Grammy-winning band Arcade Fire forms a soundtrack, but the band doesn't appear on screen. Instead, Mr. Jonze cast a handful of Texas teenagers who helped improvise dialogue for the script. "Scenes" premiered at the recent South by Southwest Film Festival—it's 30 minutes long.

Thirty years after the founding of MTV, Mr. Jonze's film isn't strictly a "music video," but it's an example of the ambitious work that's springing up to replace them. There once was a time when lavish videos by Michael Jackson, Madonna and Guns N' Roses were as big as the songs they accompanied. Record labels signed off on extravagant concepts—Puff Daddy chased by helicopters, the Backstreet Boys in a spaceship—as they waged an arms race for hits on MTV, which offered exponentially more reach than any radio station. 

"Those videos cost one million, two million, and they all started to look the same. We tried to tell them, 'You don't have to make it about the bling,' " recalls  Van Toffler, president of MTV Networks Music and Logo Group. 

Audiences eventually wearied of them and MTV, chasing ratings, moved on to reality shows ("Jersey Shore"). And when digital music shoved CD sales down a hole, the labels' video budgets tumbled in after. Aside from a handful of high-production outliers, especially Lady Gaga, most videos in the viral era get made on the cheap, typically for less than $100,000. 

So out of the ashes, with cheap new tools, a growing number of music acts and directors are trying to do something more ambitious: change the medium itself. They're using interactive technology sponsored by the likes of Google and Intel to break out of a formula that hasn't really varied for more than 30 years. What they're not doing: a few minutes of music matched to a parade of visuals and lip-synching, whether it was Madonna voguing on MTV, or OK Go doing a treadmill dance on YouTube. 

Instead, a recent video by the '80s band Devo for the song "What We Do" gives viewers control of the camera, enabling a 360-degree view of various scenes, including an arm-wrestling match and a fat man cavorting in a diaper. Last week, MTV gave emerging singer Andy Grammer an award for a video to "Keep Your Head Up," which put viewers in the director's seat, allowing them to send the singer into different goofy scenarios with the click of a button. A video for the singer Robyn's "Killing Me" grabbed her fans' words off Twitter and integrated them into a collage of 3-D animation. 

Leading this wave of experimentation is Chris Milk, who has been working for five months on a top-secret project funded by Google. Mr. Milk has experience in old-school spectacle. In 2006, it took him less than two weeks to coordinate a shoot at the Grand Canyon starring Kanye West as an Evel Knievel character and Pamela Anderson as his girlfriend in hot pants. "3 Dreams of Black," is expected to debut next week, and its challenges haven't involved exotic locations or needy pop stars. Instead, he's been grappling with how to hand control over to viewers. 

 Set to the eerie song "Black," with vocals by Norah Jones, the online-only video features stampedes of animated creatures that viewers can guide through otherworldly landscapes. The video breaks ground by using new technology that enables a Web browser to process complex graphics in real time, something Google hopes "Black" will call attention to. 

Other tech companies are taking a similar tack: Through the Creators Project funded by Intel, Mr. Milk orchestrated a scene during the climax of Arcade Fire's headlining set at the Coachella music festival last month, when 2,000 inflated balls cascaded into the crowd, each glowing with color-changing LED lights. For Intel, it combined a live event, free souvenirs, media coverage and videos all over the Web—often with the company's name attached. 

Last month in Los Angeles, Mr. Milk sat in a dim conference room of exposed brick and iron beams with a half-dozen artists and producers from Mirada, a conceptual design and animation studio founded by movie director Guillermo del Toro. Meeting about three times a week since February, the team had refined the animation for "Black." A herd of wildlife changed shapes as it charged across a TV screen, with raccoons morphing into mountain lions into horses and so on. The team took notes as Mr. Milk asked for tweaks, including brighter explosions of flowers when the creatures crashed into objects. Appearing in the stampede was a dog modeled on Winter, the real and slightly overweight pet sprawled on the conference-room floor next to Mr. Milk. 

"I don't have any children, so this is as close to nepotism as I can get," said Mr. Milk, who wears dark-framed glasses and his long red hair brushed back. 



The video will signal the public debut of "Rome," an album project involving Danger Mouse, aka Brian Burton. The producer is perhaps best known as a member of the group Gnarls Barkley. Five years in the making, "Rome" is Mr. Burton's collaboration with composer Daniele Luppi on music inspired by spaghetti western films. For their recording sessions in Italy, the duo hired veteran musicians who played on Ennio Morricone's scores for films by Sergio Leone in the '60s, including "A Fistful of Dollars." Some songs are instrumentals; the others feature singing by Ms. Jones or Jack White. The album will be released May 17. 

Growing up on Long Island, Mr. Milk channeled his obsession with the "Thriller" video by dressing up his brother and friends as zombies to shoot them with his grandfather's camcorder. 

 At a 2009 technology conference in Portugal, he met  Aaron Koblin, now a creative director at the Google Creative Lab. The two bonded over a conversation about crowdsourcing, which eventually led to  the Johnny Cash Project. To the posthumously released song "Ain't No Grave," Mr. Milk created a montage of old, unseen footage of the singer. His team designed a digital art tool that viewers around the world used to paint their own interpretations of the footage, frame by frame. The result is a mesmerizing flip-book effect, one which continues to evolve as more viewers contribute.

Google didn't fund the Cash video, which was nominated for a Grammy award last year, but it spurred the company to get directly involved with Mr. Milk. The company offered developers, data and funding for his next idea, which was designed to personalize the music-video experience with a nostalgic punch. To the tune of the Arcade Fire song "We Used to Wait," the video played out in a cascade of browser windows, using Google's maps and street visuals to take viewers back to their old hometowns when they enter information. Titled " The Wilderness Downtown ," the project won two Webby awards this week. For Google, it was a way to showcase its Chrome browser, yet the company allowed Mr. Milk to strip its logo off its street views and customize them with sepia coloring. "Cash," "Wilderness" and "Rome" each run on their own free websites.

Mr. Milk's videos have become increasingly important to Google's agenda of "pushing the Web forward," according to Mr. Koblin. Mr. Milk's projects don't make money. He's able to focus on such creative work by "keeping my overhead low" (he drives a 1996 Volvo station wagon) and taking the occasional high-paying advertising job. His last big commercial gig was a Chevrolet campaign tied to the 2010 Winter Olympics, relatively conventional spots focusing on family moments. 

"There's no shortage of work out there for Chris, but he's extremely selective. I admire his discipline. I may loathe it at times," says Jon Kamen, head of @radical.media, the production company that signed Mr. Milk in 2000. 

 Across the industry, the business of music videos has seen recent dramatic shifts. Three out of four major music companies now channel their videos through Vevo, an online video player and distributor launched in late 2009. After years of licensing their videos to sites all over the Web—and seeing measly financial returns—the labels now rely on Vevo to distribute their videos online and sell ads against them. By focusing on slick presentation and sponsored video premieres, the company has pushed ad rates higher. Vevo, whose traffic includes the videos it funnels into sites such as YouTube and Facebook, is the biggest music provider on the Web, attracting 54 million unique viewers last March, up from 37.5 million in the same month last year, according to ComScore Video Metrix. 

"The old model cheapened the value of music videos," says Vevo President and Chief Executive  Rio Caraeff. "We want to restore the premium lustre."

Money is trickling back to the labels: A label whose videos rack up 10 million streams on Vevo could collect around $70,000.

The new economics of music videos have sent the medium in two different directions. On the high end, million-dollar clips are almost unheard of now, but "event" videos can occasionally carry price tags of up to $500,000. The cost of the recent Dr. Dre and Eminem video for "I Need a Doctor" included a Ferrari worth about $75,000. "We crashed it. You don't crash cars anymore," says Kathy Angstadt, head of visual content for Interscope Records. 

Where to find the best classical, jazz and pop videos online

Covering the arts from opera to ballet,  www.classicaltv.com  gathers performance videos through licensing deals with institutions including the Metropolitan Opera House and the Bolshoi Theater. Many video streams are free to watch, others have to be rented, such as the Met's "Magic Flute" ($4.99) and a package of Pavorotti duets ($1.99).



There's no shortage of videos of jazz greats online, but some of the best material—say, Billie Holiday doing "Fine and Mellow" on a 1957 TV broadcast with Lester Young, Gerry Mulligan, Coleman Hawkins and more—exists as grainy bootleg footage uploaded to YouTube. Aggregator sites such as  jazztube.com  link to highlights, and YouTube offers its own jazz channel.



MTV has a huge inventory of videos online, but is missing acts such as Lady Gaga, Justin Bieber and the Black Eyed Peas because of a licensing dispute with Universal Music Group. Vevo.com , a video service backed by three major labels, including Universal, is an alternative. To keep up on cutting-edge and overseas videos, go to  videos.antville.org .



Lady Gaga's latest video, "Judas," which broke Thursday, required about 150 dancers and extras on set at once. "It felt like an old-school video production," says Ms. Angstandt, a 11-year veteran of Interscope, noting that a more common mandate is to work creatively on a smaller scale, including the band TV on the Radio's decision to make low-budget videos for every song on its recent album. 

The Beastie Boys bounced back into the public eye with a half-hour video for the new song "Make Some Noise," essentially a cameo-fest for the roughly 30 celebrities on screen, ranging from Stanley Tucci to Seth Rogen. Director (and Beastie Boy) Adam Yauch says it was the group's most expensive video yet. "This probably cost five times what anybody is spending on making a video now," he said. "Luckily, I didn't have to pay the cast." 

But for the vast majority of acts, budgets are a shadow of what they were 10 years ago, a fact that many say has forced a renaissance of creativity. In the last year, 20-year-old Tyler, the Creator built a cult following by releasing free music in volume on the website of his L.A. rap crew, but his profile spiked when he put a stark visual to his sound. In the "Yonkers" video, released online in February, he perches on a stool against a white background, rhyming with slow menace about madness and doing violence to certain pop stars by name. His only props: a large cockroach and a noose. The $8,000 budget included an insect handler and a videographer, but Tyler directed the video himself. "It's not the cost, it's the person behind the camera that matters," he says. On YouTube, "Yonkers" has nearly eight million views.

Mr. Milk thinks the medium is ripe for reinvention, if only he had a new term for "music video." He's been making do with "interactive film," but he realizes its shortcomings. "Anything you come up with that people haven't heard before sounds either ridiculous or incredibly pretentious," he says.

 Write to  John Jurgensen at john.jurgensen@wsj.com 