TOKYO— Longreach Group, a private-equity fund, will announce Monday that it has closed the first round of fund raising for its second $750 million Japan fund, defying arguments that the country's devastating natural disaster will have a negative impact on raising capital and deal-making.

"Japan will endure its grief and rebuild as a stronger country,"  Mark Chiba, group chairman and partner of Hong Kong-based Longreach, said in an interview. "We can be both a wise investor and a contributor to that future."

Longreach has raised $125 million toward the new fund. 

Some deal makers and investors are betting that Japan's natural disaster will spur more investment opportunities over the coming months.

"This extreme external shock should be a further catalyst to the ongoing trend of major Japanese groups seeking to leverage their core strengths, and over time we may therefore see an acceleration in exits from noncore activities," said one merger-and-acquisition banker in Tokyo.

As Japanese companies, particularly sprawling conglomerates, scramble to rebuild their businesses, secure a steady stream of supplies, and contend with damaged factories, industry observers say that the country's natural disaster will accelerate disposals and asset sales. In particular, Japanese conglomerates and shareholders are likely to challenge the rationale of owning so many listed subsidiaries, especially at a time when companies are more focused than ever on strengthening their core competencies and capturing a greater share of the global market.

Berkshire Hathaway Inc. chief  Warren Buffett, on a recent trip to South Korea, said: "It will take some time to rebuild, but it will not change the economic future of Japan....Frequently, something out of the blue like this, an extraordinary event, really creates a buying opportunity. I have seen that happen in the United States, I have seen that happen around the world. I don't think Japan will be an exception."

Longreach has been raising capital for its new fund for nine months. Some investors committed to their investments after the quake hit. Longreach's main focus at the moment is on opportunities in the technology conglomerate sector.

"Our lead investors are pre-eminent U.S. foundations and endowments," Mr. Chiba said. "They understand the opportunity as well as support Japan; if anything, the disaster has strengthened their commitment." 

Longreach—founded in 2004 by Mr. Chiba, formerly the chief executive of UBS Securities Japan—has completed a series of deals in Japan and specializes in the mature industrial technology, financial services, business services. and consumer sectors. 

Most recently, Longreach acquired Sanyo Electric Logistics Co. last year from its parent  Sanyo Electric Co. and minority public shareholders in a deal valued at about 17 billion yen ($209 million).

Before the earthquake and tsunami hit Japan, the private-equity market was seeing nascent signs of recovery following a dearth of deals. Credit had dried up and deal making slowed dramatically during the 2008 financial crisis. Japan has always been a challenging market for private-equity funds, because deals typically take much longer to complete and exit. Conglomerates have a tradition of supporting their weaker subsidiaries, and owners and managers have long cast suspicion upon buyout funds, though this mindset is slowly changing. 

A high-profile bid to take over Takefuji Corp., the failed consumer lender, was brewing before the quake struck Japan, with TPG Capital, Cerberus Capital Management, J Trust, Tokyo Star Bank and Korea's A&P Financial chosen as the five finalists in the bidding. The bidding for the company, which was slated to take place March 22, has been delayed.

Earlier in March, private-equity firm Carlyle Group said it would buy Japanese ball-bearing maker Tsubaki Nakashima Co. from  Nomura Holdings Inc. for 66 billion yen including debt, marking the country's largest acquisition by a private-equity firm since Boston-based Bain Capital bought telemarketer Bellsystem24 Inc. from  Citigroup Inc.
C


0.77
%




 for $1.1 billion in late 2009, according to data tracker Dealogic. 