NEW YORK—A former Guantanamo detainee sought leniency from probation officials in their recommendation for his sentence in a conspiracy to bomb two U.S. embassies in Africa, citing his mistreatment while in U.S. custody and the information he provided to U.S. authorities, according to a court filing Friday.

Ahmed Khailfan Ghailani, 36 years old, was convicted in November of one conspiracy count in the 1998 bombing of two U.S. embassies in Africa, but acquitted of 281 other counts. 

He was the first former detainee of the prison in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, to be tried in a U.S. civilian court and his case was seen as a key test for the Obama administration regarding civilian trials for major terrorism suspects.

In court papers Friday, federal prosecutors in Manhattan said Mr. Ghailani's lawyers asked U.S. Probation and Pretrial Services to depart from federal sentencing guidelines in drafting a sentencing recommendation. The conspiracy charge carries a sentence of 20 years to life in prison. 

In leniency, his lawyers cited his mistreatment in U.S. custody and that he provided the U.S. information while in the custody of the Central Intelligence Agency and the U.S. Defense Department.

While in CIA custody, Mr. Ghailani was subject to so-called enhanced interrogation techniques, which his lawyers have said equated to torture. Mr. Ghailani has been in U.S. custody since July 2004 and held at Guantanamo since September 2006. He was held for a period of time at secret CIA "black sites."

Probation officials rejected those arguments and recommended he receive a life sentence, according to the government filing Friday. Prosecutors urged the judge in court papers to come to a similar conclusion. Sentencing is set for Jan. 25.

Mr. Ghailani separately filed papers with the court. However, those papers were filed under seal and weren't publicly available late Friday. A security officer must review the papers for classified information before they can be made available.

A lawyer for Mr. Ghailani didn't return a phone call seeking comment Friday. 

 Write to  Chad Bray at chad.bray@wsj.com 