Since being launched in late 2009, Foodies at 41 has scored cooking lessons at some of the best eateries in New York City.

Members of the club have made ice cream at Grom Gelato, thin-crust pies at Keste Pizza & Vino and Halloween-themed truffles at Christopher Norman Chocolates in the Financial District.

Last week, they spent a morning in the kitchen with Thomas Keller, the lionized executive chef of Per Se, learning to make hand-rolled pasta with vegetables.

Forget about joining Foodies at 41. Its members are first- to fifth-graders at Public School 41 in the West Village.

The club was founded by PS 41 parent Marc Spero. He came up with the idea during a family dinner at Blue Ribbon Sushi in Greenwich Village. Sophia Spero, 8 years old, and Hudson Spero, 6, had been dining out with their parents since they were in diapers. They were adventurous eaters who would happily scarf down everything from sea urchin to anchovies. 

"The owner of Blue Ribbon was so impressed with Sophia's appetite and enthusiasm he told her she should become a chef," Mr. Spero recalls. "She loved the idea, but only if her friends cook along with her."

So Mr. Spero asked a few of his favorite Greenwich Village businesses about hosting an informal children's group, and Foodies at 41 was born.

The first outing in 2009 was a "cheese education" course at Murray's Cheese on Bleecker Street. Later came the pizza-making course at Keste. "We don't do enough to teach kids about where food comes from and what food means," says Keste owner Roberto Caporuscio, who charges adults $4,000 apiece for his 10-day pizza courses. "Just as I did with my own daughter, I explain the history of pizza, let them touch the dough and learn about the ingredients."

Today, the group meets almost bimonthly during the school year with 20 to 30 kids—along with a handful of parent-chaperones—attending the Saturday morning outings. The events cost just $15 to $20 per participant, and have become popular with parents as well as children. "We've never even been to Per Se," says Robert T. Magill, a legal recruiter whose nine-ear-old son Sam will be there next week. "These are definitely not your typical public school experiences."

Mr. Keller, a neighbor of Mr. Spero, said he was happy to help out. "I have always said that respect for food means respect for life," he said. "I believe it's critical that we teach this principle to kids as early on as possible...[and in] the importance of knowing where food comes from."