While most advanced economies struggle to control their deficits, Hong Kong has the opposite problem: a massive surplus. Last week Financial Secretary John Tsang unveiled the city's budget for 2011-12, but it was the final reckoning on last year's finances that drew most attention. Revenues exceeded spending by $9.1 billion last year, Mr. Tsang announced, the sixth surplus in as many years. This naturally raises the question: Why does the government keep taking more out of its citizens' pockets than it needs?

Many in Hong Kong are starting to resent the government's wealth when they themselves are struggling amidst rising prices. A poll taken after Mr. Tsang's speech last Wednesday suggested that only 36% of Hong Kong people approve of his performance, 17.4 percentage points fewer than last year. Members of the Legislative Council threatened to veto the new budget, saying that it does not go far enough to aid the city's poor. Various political groups and unions are planning to march on Government House in protest.

Part of the problem is that the government has conditioned the public to expect a raft of new giveaways at budget time. Each year the financial secretary nods in the direction of rebating excess reserves but only offers one-off sweeteners that please no one entirely. This year's goodies include rent relief for public housing tenants, a subsidy for residential electricity bills and a $770 injection into residents' pension accounts. This last measure in particular has drawn ire among civil-service unions, which say that many of their members have been excluded from the fiscal gravy.

The more fundamental issue is that these great piles of cash are allowed to accumulate in the first place. This year the city's fiscal reserves are estimated to hit $75.8 billion, or 34% of GDP. This doesn't count the Exchange Fund, which is supposed to back the Hong Kong dollar; the fund totaled $268.9 billion at the end of last year, almost double the monetary base.

The government has a host of excuses to justify its hoarding. It fears the fiscal drain that any economic downturn would bring, particularly in lost revenues from land sales. The local property market does indeed provide a substantial and volatile contribution to the city's fiscal takings, but the degree of government caution today is excessive. Even a massive recession such as the one that followed the 1997 Asian financial crisis would only put a small dent in the current reserves.

Amid the uncertainty that Mr. Tsang highlights, Hong Kong's best option is to play to its strength as a low-tax, low-regulation environment for business. Hong Kong residents enjoy top marginal tax rates of 15% for salaries and 16.5% for company profits; these were once considered remarkably low, but the city's Asian peers are catching up. Hong Kong's comfortable fiscal position makes it well-placed to solidify its status as the preferred destination for footloose capital. Across-the-board tax cuts would further incentivize growth and entrepreneurship while avoiding the economic distortions and political stickiness of ad hoc rebates. 

Hong Kong Chief Executive Donald Tsang has repeatedly waffled on his 2007 promise to cut the corporate tax rate to 15%. If the ongoing public embarrassment of pointless surpluses does not spur the city's leaders to action, then perhaps the erosion of its regional competitiveness will.