The impulse to collect can take strange forms. People hoard the oddest things: string, match boxes, trash. Though the pack rat typically cuts a reclusive figure, Gavin Pretor-Pinney is an exception: a man who loves the open air and collects impalpable things that will never clutter shelves, gather dust or annoy spouses.

The author of "The Wavewatcher's Companion" and "The Cloudspotter's Guide," Mr. Pretor-Pinney is the founder of the Cloud Appreciation Society, "a global organization that fights 'blue-sky thinking,' " which I had not realized could be considered bad. Clouds should not be maligned, he argues, simply because they can be gray and bring bad weather. His "Cloud Collector's Handbook" is a portable adjunct to his society's website, addressed to anyone who spends time gazing at the sky, more or less idly, wondering about the names or nature of its vaporous denizens.

In its sleek, small format, "The Cloud Collector's Handbook" is meant to be a practical guide that can be tucked away in a pocket, ready for those moments when you spot a juicy cloud but don't know what to call it. The model is clearly bird-watching, whose enthusiasts have all sorts of field guides for their wanderings. Each entry in the cloud handbook includes color photographs of a particular type of cloud (all taken by members of the Cloud Appreciation Society) and a space for sky-watchers to inscribe the proud moment and place where they spotted . . . well, what was that, exactly?

Most likely, it was one of the 10 great species of clouds, beginning with low- altitude cumulus ("cotton-wool puffs"), stratocumulus ("a low layer or patch of cloud") and stratus (a "gray overcast layer"). Above 6,500 feet can be found altocumulus ("clumps or rolls") and altostratus (a "drab and featureless" haze), as well as the storm clouds nimbostratus ("dim, miserable") and cumulonimbus ("the shape of a blacksmith's anvil"). Only at the highest levels—up to 45,000 feet—do we find the ice-crystal clouds cirrus ("like white locks of hair"), cirrocumulus ("like grains of rice") and cirrostratus ("a light, milky whitening of the blue").

This initial phase of orientation and categorization soon segues, as it does with bird-watching, into the madder pleasures and obsessions of the hunt—the quest to bag the really rare beast. Surely there are more clouds in heaven than are dreamt of in our philosophy, or at least our vocabulary. Many of us have admired dreamy, turreted formations without knowing that they are called "castellanus." As for those enigmatic cloud-streets—formations that extend in parallel lines and seem to diagram vanishing points in the sky—they are called "radiatus." Somehow, this classification, with its majestic Latin names, captures the grandeur of these phenomena even while giving each cloud an aspect of familiarity: That we can name something so far above us forges a bond, a sense of connection. 

To encourage aspiring cloud-spotters to look more closely, Mr. Pretor-Pinney grades cloud sightings with points, assigning more points to the finds that are less common. The "crown jewel," he reports, is a particular type of undulatus known as a Kelvin-Helmholtz cloud, which appears only fleetingly and looks like a series of Hokusai's waves breaking across the sky, as if the Japanese master had wielded a cloud-brush on this greatest of scrolls. 

Then, too, a cloud can have clouds of its own, so to speak, accessory features of varied sorts. A young, crisp cumulus can develop a "pileus"—a delicate, evanescent cloud-cap, which Mr. Pretor- Pinney disconcertingly likens to Donald Trump's comb-over. If you miss this fleeting apparition, perhaps you will enjoy the longer-lasting "velum," a stripe or patch of cloud sometimes found loitering around the base of sturdy cumuli. Mr. Pretor-Pinney compares a "pannus"—the dark cloud-shred that can emphasize the underside of a lowering, stormy sky—to a "cloud version of hooligans, killing time outside a McDonald's on a Saturday night." 

Such vivid figurations may help us recall meteorological phenomena and their terminology, though to people the heavens with unsavory characters—not to mention aerial fast-food joints—seems a bit mundane. Yet Mr. Pretor-Pinney is by no means the first to anthropomorphize these apparitions of air and mist. The sky is a great mirror into which we gaze at ourselves.

 By Gavin Pretor-Pinney  Chronicle, 143 pages, $14.95

Already children find shapes in the enigmatic forms of clouds, whose exalted otherness suggests both the familiar and the numinous. As storms gathered, the Greeks discerned the aura of Zeus, wielding kingly power through his thunder. In ancient texts, the Chinese described a celestial hierarchy— Comptroller-General of Clouds, Under-Secretary of the Department of Lightning—that resembled their imperial bureaucracy, down to its detailed organizational chart. Certain Native Americans recognized in clouds the spirits of their ancestors, benevolent yet tactfully stationed far above, capable of showering their blessing in the form of rain. Part of the fascination of the sky is its ever-present invitation to escape the all-too-human into another, better (or at least different) world.

In this short volume, Mr. Pretor- Pinney does not much concern himself with myth or even history, though for centuries human industry has been darkening the skies with sooty clouds of our own creation. He also prefers straight taxonomy to explaining the physics of clouds. If you want a broader introduction to the science of weather in general, consider two even sleeker volumes: the old "Weather" Golden Guide (originally published in the 1950s but reissued in 2001 by St. Martin's) or Jay Pasachoff's "Peterson First Guide to Clouds and Weather."

In the end, though, the prose of science is not adequate to the poetry of this airborne world. Mr. Pretor- Pinney's primer implicitly invites an entire literature as yet unwritten. Much could be said about skies in art—from Tiepolo's Baroque skyscapes to the fogs so essential in many Chinese paintings. Certain skies in the real world even seem to mimic or parody certain painterly styles—some Romantic (extravagantly colored, fantastically dramatic), others severely classical (spare, geometric). One can even imagine a new discipline of meteoro-criticism, analyzing the latest sunset: "Wait! Isn't that a Kelvin-Helmholtz cloud? My God—cher Maître!—you've done it again!"

—Mr. Pesic is tutor and musician-in- residence at St. John's College in Santa Fe, N.M., and the author of "Sky in a Bottle" (2005).