TUCSON, Ariz.—Jared Lee Loughner, the 22-year-old accused in a mass shooting that killed six and injured 13, pleaded not guilty to 49 federal charges in a courthouse here Wednesday.

The judge granted a motion from federal prosecutors for Mr. Loughner, who could face the death penalty, to submit to psychological exams and a hearing to determine if he is competent to stand trial.

Mr. Loughner arrived in court wearing a khaki-color prison jumpsuit. He smiled for much of the nearly two-hour proceedings.

Several people identified by court officials as members of Mr. Loughner's family were present, though they declined to speak to the media or identify themselves.

Two of the family members—an older man and a woman—slumped their shoulders as the charges were read.

Mr. Loughner's indictment includes counts of murder and attempted assassination in the Jan. 8 shooting outside Tucson that killed two U.S. government employees and four others, including a 9-year-old girl. Thirteen people were wounded, including U.S. Rep. Gabrielle Giffords, who is recovering from a bullet wound to her brain at a Houston hospital.

If Mr. Loughner is found incompetent to stand trial, he will remain in prison and undergo therapy until competency is restored. 

Mr. Loughner's defense attorney, Judy Clarke, argued that a psychological exam would disrupt the relationship of trust she is trying to build with her client.

But Judge Larry Burns said that while he deferred to her judgment on whether Mr. Loughner could aid in his own defense, he felt the court needed to know whether Mr. Loughner could understand the proceedings.

"The problem is we're just sort of in limbo" until the court can determine if Mr. Loughner is competent to stand trial, the judge said.

In each of his three court appearances, Mr. Loughner has smiled through the proceedings and mostly remained silent.

"I have concerns given the defendant's affect," Judge Burns said.

Mr. Loughner spoke only once during the hearing. When he was asked if Jared Lee Loughner is his true name, he responded "Yes it is."

 Write to  Tamara Audi at tammy.audi@wsj.com 