NEW DELHI—A new rule that would allow Americans and other foreign individuals to buy Indian mutual funds may not find takers any time soon. 

On Monday, Indian Finance Minster Pranab Mukherjee said in his annual budget address that he will soon allow foreign investors to buy stock mutual funds managed by Indian fund companies. So far, only foreign institutional investors who are registered with the Indian capital markets regulator, the Securities and Exchange Board of India, can buy India-managed funds.

Mr. Mukherjee said the change to the rules was part of his effort "to liberalize" equity investments in India.

So far, fund companies are still waiting for regulatory details. While the nascent Indian mutual-fund industry could use new sources of assets, this new rule won't result in a bonanza. 

Indian fund companies would face a difficult and costly task of marketing their products to investors abroad and servicing foreign investors. They also face competition from a number ofIndia-dedicated mutual funds already available in foreign countries.

For instance, American fund companies, such as Franklin Resources Inc., already offer around a dozen India-dedicated mutual funds and exchange-traded funds to individuals. These include a few niche funds, such as those that invest only in Indian infrastructure stocks, or stocks of small Indian companies. Some foreign investors may prefer to invest with a fund house they know well. 

"Indian fund houses will have to work very hard to establish their credentials and position themselves as fund houses which have a very good track record," says  Deepak Chatterjee, managing director and chief executive officer at SBI Funds Management Pvt. Ltd. 

Despite that, Mr. Chatterjee thinks the new rule is "path breaking" and will benefit the fund industry. 

Several large Indian fund houses expect to tap overseas investors once the rules become clearer. 

"Building up the international business is important to us," says  Milind Barve, managing director of HDFC Asset Management Co., one of India's largest fund companies by assets under management.

Mr. Barve says foreign investors should consider India-based funds because many of them have had "stronger performance than some of the India-dedicated funds run outside the country." 

Some foreign money managers say there is an appetite for India-based funds because they offe

r more choices to individuals abroad. 

"Individual investors in the U.S. and Europe want to participate in the Indian growth story," says  Nandita Agarwal Parker, principal at Karma Capital Management LLC, a U.S.-based private fund manager. She believes that the Indian government "is trying to diversify the flows that are coming to India." 

Among the details that are still unclear is how foreign fund buyers will meet Indian government rules on verifying investor details. Investors will be required to meet "Know Your Customer" norms prescribed by the Reserve Bank of India, which include sharing details like an individual's Permanent Account Number (an Indian tax ID). It's not clear what information foreigners will have to provide.

Taxation is another grey area. Typically, Indian funds deduct a "withholding tax" on any gains in mutual funds. "Will these investors have to pay withholding tax, and if so, how much?" asks  Rajesh Krishnamoorthy, managing director of fund-distribution Web site Fundsupermart.com. 

Nonresident Indians are already able to buy India-based funds, so long as they have an Indian bank account. 

The new rule "sounds good on paper, but we need to see the fine print," says  Jaya Prakash K., head of products at Franklin Templeton Asset Management (India) Pvt. Ltd., a unit of Franklin Resources. He says "there might be some impact, but not as much is being made out."

 Write to  Shefali Anand at shefali.anand@wsj.com 