The new Congress is being sworn in today, and there will be lots of new faces. But the real power will still be held by senior members, with almost all committee chairmanships going to the member who has waited for power the longest.

Retiring Rep. Brian Baird said one of his biggest frustrations in Congress was this seniority system. The Washington state Democrat, who is leaving office voluntarily at age 54 after a dozen years of service, said he wished the power on committees was allocated on a merit system. "We don't elect the top Congressional leaders on the basis of seniority, but except in very rare instances the people running the committees are those who have sat the longest," he told me. 

Republicans have imposed a six-year limit on the length of time committee chairs can remain, overturning the Democrat's practice of allowing chairs to serve indefinitely. But the problem afflicts both parties. The House Science and Technology Committee, one of the panels most concerned with the future, will be chaired in this Congress by Republican Ralph Hall of Texas. Mr. Hall, a courtly man, is one of the most popular members of the House. But at age 87, he was born before commercial radio really came on the market. The ranking Democrat on the committee is Eddie Bernie Johnson, a fellow Texan, who at age 75 was born before Amelia Earhart disappeared. Mr. Baird is unconvinced that either member is the most qualified to plot the nation's technology future.

He notes that his own party seems particularly prone to keeping aging members in positions of leadership. The top three leaders of House Democrats are all at least 70 years old. And as Michael Barone, the co-author of the Almanac of American Politics, points out "the ages of the ranking Democrats on the Appropriations; Ways and Means; Education; Energy and Commerce; Financial Services; Foreign Affairs; and Judiciary committees are 70, 79, 65, 71, 70, 69 and 81."

"There is a wisdom that comes with greater years," Mr. Baird acknowledged. "But sometimes in Congress that isn't the case with everyone. We'd be better off with picking chairmen on the basis of who has the best ideas and vision rather than longevity."