NEW DELHI –  Honda Motor Co.
HMC


0.78
%




 said Monday it will soon enter the 100-cubic centimeter motorcycle market in India as the Japanese auto maker inks a strategy to surpass Hero Honda Motors Ltd. to become the largest selling motorcycle maker in the country. 

"Our target is to be number one in India in the next decade,"  Shinji Aoyama, Honda Motorcycle & Scooter India Pvt. Ltd.'s outgoing president and chief executive, said. 

"Expansion of production capacity and entering mass market would be the first steps to do that," he told reporters. 

Hero Honda sells nearly three times as many two-wheelers as Honda Motorcycle. In the April-February period, it sold 4.76 million two-wheelers compared with Honda Motorcycle's 1.41 million. 

Honda Motorcycle expects vehicle sales to grow 27% in the financial year that starts on April 1 to 2.1 million vehicles and it is likely to sell 1.65 million units this year through March, Mr. Aoyama said. 

Mr. Aoyama will take over as general manager for motorcycle business planning at Honda in Japan from the new fiscal year and will be replaced by  Keita Muramatsu, currently general manager of motorsport division at Honda. 

According to industry data, entry-level motorcycles with 100cc-125cc engine capacities comprise more than half of the over 9 million motorcycles and scooters sold in India each year. Offering products in this category will be crucial for Honda Motorcycle in realizing its ambition to be the largest two-wheeler maker in India. 

Hero Honda controls more than half of India's motorcycle market with 15 two-wheeler models, including six 100cc models such as the Splendor+, Passion Plus and CD Dawn. 

Mr. Aoyama didn't specify the timeframe in which the entry-level motorcycle could be introduced. 

Honda Motorcycle has so far been prevented from introducing a lower-priced entry-level motorcycle in India because of Honda's relationship with Hero Honda. But in December, Honda agreed to sell its 26% stake in Hero Honda to its Indian joint venture partner, Hero Group, for about 38.42 billion rupees ($853 million).

"We have not been able to enter mass motorcycle market with a lower priced product. Entering this market is a first priority for us," Mr. Aoyama said. 

Honda currently sells one 110cc motorcycle, the CB Twister, although at a higher price than competing models from Hero Honda, Bajaj Auto Ltd. and TVS Motor Co. It also sells scooters Aviator, Activa, Dio and motorcycle models Shine, Stunner and Unicorn. Monday, it introduced a 250-cc motorcycle, the CBR250, priced at 143,000 rupees at showrooms in New Delhi. 

The company will consider building more factories to overtake sales of Hero Honda, Mr. Aoyama said. 

It will consider doubling production capacity at its upcoming second factory at Tapukara in the northwestern state of Rajasthan as it expects to fully utilize the plant's entire capacity in the first year of operations. 

The Tapukara factory is scheduled to open in July-August and will have an initial capacity of 600,000 vehicles a year. 

Honda Motorcycle also has a factory in Manesar in north India's Haryana state, where it can make 1.6 million two-wheelers a year. 

"We will do whatever it takes to get closer to Hero Honda. Whether it's third or a fourth plant, we'll do it," Mr. Aoyama said. 

 Write to  Nikhil Gulati at nikhil.gulati@dowjones.com 