AJDABIYA, Libya -- Rebels opposed to Col. Moammar Gadhafi's Tuesday fled this strategic post after government troops took the city in a stealth assault, overwhelming the only major population center on the way to the rebel capital Benghazi and making a crucial stride towards snuffing out the four-week-old uprising. 

 Demoralized rebel fighters streamed out of the city, trying to regroup along a four-lane highway to Benghazi that was packed with speeding ambulances and cars of fleeing Ajdabiya citizens.

"

Advance, unite in numbers. Yes, he owns planes, yes he owns missiles, but we have God with us and we'll achieve victory or death!" urged a frantic broadcast Tuesday afternoon on the Voice of Free Libya, the rebels' Benghazi-based channel. "This is our last stand."

Libyan government forces first pounded central Ajdabiya with air strikes, Grad rocket launchers, and Navy artillery Tuesday morning, multiple witnesses said. Then, Col. Gadhafi's troops disguised as civilians penetrated the city from the west and the southwest, quickly overruning Ajdabiya's center, said  Ali Faraj Hammada, the head of Ajdabiya's revolutionary committee.

"Anything that moves, anything that drives, they shoot it down," he said as he careened in a blood-soaked car with rocket-propelled grenades strewn on a back seat to a rebel checkpoint position on the eastern exit from Ajdabiya. "The houses and the mosque have been destroyed. Many are killed."

Scanning the skies, rebel fighters randomly shot from anti-aircraft guns as one of their commander screamed at the men to disperse along the highway, so as not to make an attractive target.

Although a rebel spokesman claimed his forces continued to control Ajdabiya, people in the city said that soldiers loyal to Col. Gadhafi were patrolling the streets Tuesday evening. 

Just a day earlier, Mr. Hammada was confidently predicting that the ragtag rebel force, helped by defected army soldiers, would be able to hold off Col. Gadhafi's forces for months. Retreating rebel soldiers said that Col. Gadhafi's troops have seized rebel tanks and artillery pieces in Ajdabiya once the defenders scattered under the shelling.

The unexpectedly quick collapse of rebel lines in Ajdabiya put Col. Gadhafi within striking distance of routing the rebel force, which is defenseless against his air strikes. The international community has yet to act on the Libyan rebel authorities' plea for a no-fly zone.

"We've been betrayed," shouted a crying civilian as he rushed to abandon Ajdabiya in his battered car. Scattered groups of bewildered rebels parked their pickups with mounted anti-aircraft guns on the highway to Benghazi as random gunfire rang out in the surrounding desert. Other rebel military vehicles sped straight to Benghazi.

"They bombed us with everything they've got, and they're now in the center of the city," said  Kamel al Arabi, a fleeing resident, his possessions bundled into his car.

Ajdabiya, a city of some 170,000 people, sits on the strategic crossroads. In addition to threatening Benghazi, control of Ajdabiya would allow Col. Gadhafi to send his forces to the Egyptian border, bypassing and encircling the rebel heartland. The rebels' land border with Egypt is their main link with the outside world, and a vital supply line.

A day before the assault on Ajdabiya, Col. Gadhafi's warplanes dropped leaflets on Ajdabiya, warning that the invasion was imminent and urging the residents to hunt down the "traitors;"

the leaflets described the rebels as an unholy alliance of al Qaeda and the "Zionists."

In its desperate broadcasts that aimed to rally the resistance's sagging spirits on Tuesday, the Voice of Free Libya hit back at Col. Gadhafi, accusing the Libyan leader of being a Zionist agent himself, denying any al Qaeda links, and airing the pre-Gadhafi national anthem.

As the day progressed, the radio made a series of increasingly fantastic claims, saying that pilots of the rebel air force - which rebel officials have been saying for days does not exist -- have launched kamikaze attacks on Col. Gadhafi's units, and insisting that rebels somehow captured three government warships.

Muneef Halawa contributed to this article.

 Write to  Yaroslav Trofimov at yaroslav.trofimov@wsj.com 