  Nasdaq OMX Group Inc.
NDAQ


0.04
%




 and  IntercontinentalExchange Inc.
ICE


0.25
%




 have continued talks in recent days about a possible joint bid for  NYSE Euronext, but the two companies still are working to overcome hurdles, according to people familiar with the matter.

One of the biggest sticking points is how much to bid for NYSE Euronext, which announced in February an agreement to be acquired by Frankfurt's  Deutsche Börse AG
DBOEF


0.53
%




. Both ICE and Nasdaq have tentatively agreed that they would need to pay more than $40 a share, or roughly $10.5 billion, for NYSE Euronext, and that the value of the businesses Nasdaq wants represent slightly more than half the value of the company, these people said.

Some analysts predict that Nasdaq and ICE would need to pay at least $43 a share, most likely in a combination of cash and stock, to have a chance at snaring NYSE Euronext. NYSE shares on Friday closed at $34.48, and the Deutsche Börse deal values the company at about $35.75 a share.

ICE, based in Atlanta, and Nasdaq, of New York, haven't agreed on the maximum amount they could pay for NYSE Euronext, according to people familiar with the situation. ICE and Nasdaq also have disagreed about whether Nasdaq could look for another partner if the ICE talks cool off. ICE wants the plan to be exclusive, while Nasdaq is interested in preserving flexibility in case the ICE combination falls through later, these people said.

Nasdaq and ICE have been examining a joint bid for NYSE Euronext since the exchange operator said it would become part of a new company 60%-owned by Deutsche Börse shareholders through what the two companies called a "business ­combination."

Nasdaq is interested in NYSE Euronext's stock-trading and stock-options businesses; ICE is ­interested in the company's London-based Liffe futures-trading business. While talks between Nasdaq and ICE continued last week, the remaining issues could take some time to address. People close to the companies say Nasdaq Chief Executive  Robert Greifeld and ICE CEO  Jeffrey Sprecher are watching for signs of antitrust trouble for the Deutsche Börse-NYSE Euronext deal in Europe as part of the process of determining if and when to launch a rival bid.

Nasdaq and ICE have bought numerous trading platforms and exchanges in recent years and are known for cutting costs aggressively, sometimes eliminating more than 50% of the expense base at acquired companies. Nasdaq has expanded into Europe and is primarily focused on stock trading and selling technology to other exchanges. ICE is a big player in commodities trading and is making a push into the over-the-counter derivatives market, where Wall Street firms trade privately with one another.