As electoral upsets go, results from Saturday's voting in Singapore are impressive. The opposition Workers' Party surprised with its capture of the five-seat constituency at Aljunied, unseating Foreign Minister George Yeo of the ruling People's Action Party in the process. Parliament now has six elected opposition members, a record, while the PAP's total share of the vote sank to 60% from 67% five years ago.

The Workers' Party certainly benefited from good timing. This election coincided with growing discontent with PAP economic policies. New social media allowed that discontent to bubble up to the surface. A greater number of talented candidates joined the opposition ranks, boosting their parties' credibility with voters. 

There was also an element of strategic smarts at work. Credit here goes to Workers' Party leader Low Thia Khiang, for his decision to pour resources into contesting the kind of multi-seat "group representation constituency" that's normally hard for opposition parties to win. Doing so required assembling a compelling slate of five candidates who campaigned vigorously over a larger geographic area than a normal district. 

But those factors alone will not lead to lasting opposition success. Saturday's result offers some lessons on the way forward. Above all, Singapore's often fractious opposition parties need to focus on ideas and policies instead of personalities and petty point-scoring. Mr. Low's party won votes in large part because it gave voters a policy alternative.

Some of those proposals, such as a pledge to end favoritism toward government-linked companies in government procurement, make sense. Others, such as a promise of more restrictive immigration rules, don't. Regardless, voters knew what they were getting from the Workers' Party and how it would differ from the PAP. That's a model other opposition parties, often guilty of policy haziness, need to follow. 

Ideological and policy clarity would also help parties launch on a needed round of consolidation. Singapore's electoral system favors well-organized, well-funded parties like the PAP. Mr. Low's Workers' Party has shown the opposition can rise to that challenge, but only if it's united. Greater policy focus might help overcome the current emphasis on strong personalities that hinders consolidation or cooperation and only confuses voters.

Finally, the victory in Aljunied shows the importance of positive thinking. In a contrast with some opposition politicians of yore, Mr. Low clearly aspires for a day when the Workers' Party could displace the PAP as Singapore's ruling party. That day is far off, but campaigning like it's possible showed voters Mr. Low is in the game to win. That matters for building credibility and attracting political talent to the opposition bench.

Whether or not the PAP or some other party is best to rule Singapore is a matter for Singaporeans to decide. We have no particular truck with any one party over another. But it will be easier for voters to make that call if they enjoy a real choice on election day. That will be the real victory for Singapore.