NEW YORK—Crude futures ended higher as heavy fighting continued near Libyan oil facilities and the oil market braced itself for the possibility of a long-term loss of Libyan exports.

Light, sweet crude for April delivery settled up $1.02, or 1%, at $105.44 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange, the highest settlement price since Sept. 26, 2008. Brent crude on the ICE futures exchange headed the opposite direction, settling down 93 cents, or 0.8%, at $115.04 a barrel. 

Forces loyal to Col. Moammar Gadhafi launched airstrikes near rebel positions at the outskirts of Ras Lanuf, a rebel stronghold and the site of a major oil complex, according to witnesses. Fighting was also reported near other Libyan oil installations. 

With little end to the conflict in sight, market participants were girding for a long-term disruption to Libya's oil supplies. The country was producing about 1.6 million barrels of oil a day, mostly supplying Europe, prior to the conflict. The International Energy Agency has estimated as much as one million barrels a day have been removed from the market.

"The problem isn't that there's a lack of supply—the problem is about a future lack of supply," said  Bill O'Grady, chief market strategist at Confluence Investment Management in St. Louis. 

Oil prices continued their advance even though Saudi Arabia and other Organization of Petroleum Exporting countries have pledged to raise production for lost Libyan crude. Those increases, however, have been undertaken unilaterally by member countries in order to offset lost supply. 

Leading OPEC members on Monday signaled that the organization as a whole has no plans for a production hike.

"We [in OPEC] agree that there is no oil shortage on the market," Algerian energy minister Youcef Yousfi said. 

Despite the reduction in Libyan crude output, most developed countries remain well-supplied with oil in storage and have the option of releasing crude from strategic reserves to help ease prices. 

Over the weekend, the Obama administration signaled it is considering tapping the U.S.'s 727 million-barrel emergency reserve to take the pressure off rising gasoline prices, a step the U.S. hasn't taken since Hurricane Katrina in 2005.

In addition, Western officials continued to debate the possibility of military intervention in Libya amid reports of civilian deaths. President Barack Obama on Monday said officials from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization were considering "potential military options" during a meeting in Brussels. 

Any "competent military offensive" to hasten the end of the Libyan conflict would likely lead to a sharp pull-back in prices, said  Stephen Schork, author of the energy newsletter the Schork Report. 

"In Libya we have a $10- to $15-a-barrel premium built into this," Mr. Schork said, noting that a correction is due sooner or later. He attributed the decline of Brent crude prices to the possibility of OPEC production increases. Brent crude is the benchmark used widely in Europe and Asia, the recipients of much of the oil from OPEC members. 

The conflict in Libya is likely to overshadow the U.S. government's weekly oil inventory report, due Wednesday at 10:30 a.m. EST. The report is expected to show an increase in crude supplies of 400,000 barrels, according to analysts surveyed by Dow Jones Newswires. Gasoline stocks are expected to decline 1.5 million barrels. The American Petroleum Institute, an industry group, will release its own survey on Tuesday. 

—Benoit Faucon contributed to this article.

 Write to  Dan Strumpf at dan.strumpf@dowjones.com 