ABUJA, Nigeria—Nigerian President Goodluck Jonathan won a resounding victory in the country's ruling-party primary, the party announced Friday, making him the prohibitive favorite in April general elections to run Africa's most populous country. 

Mr. Jonathan won nearly 80% of the vote at the People's Democratic Party primary, which pitted him against former vice president Atiku Abubakar, who claimed late Thursday that the voting process was marred by irregularities. 

Some observers had warned that a victory for Mr. Jonathan could split the PDP, Nigeria's largest party, and lead to a spike in ethnic tensions that have already led to dozens of deaths across the country in the past several months.

The disagreement within the ruling party is rooted in a PDP agreement that stipulates power should be rotated every eight years between Nigeria's mainly Muslim north and mostly Christian south. Mr. Jonathan, a southerner, took over the presidency last year when his predecessor, Umaru Yar'Adua, a northerner, died in office amid his first four-year term. Mr. Abubakar, who is from the north, has alleged that Mr. Jonathan's decision to run could further divide the country.

Those worries appeared to fade on a hazy Friday morning as voting results made clear Mr. Jonathan had won by a large margin. Mr. Abubakar lost in even his home state, Adamawa. 

The party's primary started with a festive flourish Thursday evening when delegates, many dressed in matching outfits and hats, streamed into Abuja's Eagle Square to cast votes one by one. The event's master of ceremonies stood on a stage, naming each arriving dignitary. During lulls, a DJ played smooth jazz and traditional dancers did backflips and formed human pyramids.

Now that he has the PDP mandate, Mr. Jonathan will be difficult to beat in April 9 elections to run one of Africa's fastest-growing economies and a major oil producer. Since Nigeria emerged from military rule 11 years ago, every PDP candidate has gone on to the win the presidency.

Before voting began Thursday, each candidate made a speech to the some 3,600 delegates gathered from Nigeria's 36 states. 

During his speech, Mr. Abubakar sharply criticized Mr. Jonathan's record. 

"Our country is more divided than ever," Mr. Abubakar said, drawing the only boos of the night from delegates. "Physical infrastructure has collapsed…There appears to be no one in charge."

Mr. Jonathan, a former professor known for his calm demeanor, gave an uncharacteristically animated speech about issues such as health care and education reform, which he pledged to address if he is returned as president. 

As he left the podium, supporters in the crowd chanted, "We want you!" 

Voting, broadcast live on national television, was slow. Each ballot was counted and read aloud by election moderators. At one point the moderator whispered to his counterparts, "Faster, faster, faster."

Mr. Abubakar's campaign manager, former Senator Ben Obi, alleged that the delegate list had been tampered with to minimize the number of eligible voters from northern Nigeria. "The lists have been doctored," Mr. Obi said. 

A member of Mr. Jonathan's campaign denied the allegations. "In politics there are bound to be conflicts," Dan Orbih, the PDP chairman of Edo State and a supporter of Mr. Jonathan, said when asked about the dispute. "We're trying to nurture democracy today. It's a process."

The results were announced around daybreak Friday. 

The third primary candidate, Sarah Jibril, won just one vote.

The general election season officially begins Saturday, when voter registration centers open across the country.