Top-quality Old Master paintings are harder to buy in today's marketplace than they were during the early 20th century, when industrialists and financiers like Henry Clay Frick and Andrew Mellon assembled the vast collections that now adorn America's great museums. But art collectors with sufficient patience, discernment and funds can still practice connoisseurship of the old school, creating collections of the highest quality while maintaining a careful sense of balance.

"Golden" gorgeously documents the ensemble of 17th-century Dutch and Flemish paintings that Eijk and Rose-Marie van Otterloo, of Marblehead, Mass., have assembled over the past two decades. Works by Rembrandt, Frans Hals, Jan van Goyen and Jan Steen anchor a collection that is both personal—Mr. and Mrs. Van Otterloo were born in the Netherlands and Belgium, respectively—and comprehensive: These 67 exquisite pictures provide a concise overview of the main currents in Dutch Golden Age art.

The Netherlands in the 17th century was a seafaring nation, as evidenced in this volume's many images of naval vessels, fishing boats and merchant ships by such celebrated artists as Willem van de Velde and Ludolf Bakhuizen. Salomon van Ruysdael's "River Landscape With a Ferry" (1649) is an especially fine example of Dutch landscape painting, whose atmospheric qualities influenced later artists, from John Constable to Vincent van Gogh. The Dutch Calvinist values of rectitude, sobriety and restraint shine through in the Van Otterloo's spare, light-filled church interiors by Pieter Saenredam, Emanuel de Witte and Gerard Houckgeest, while a handsome cityscape by Jan van der Heyden (one of the great masters of this genre) portrays a tree-lined canal in Amsterdam as a veritable paradise on earth, blessed by material prosperity and civic contentment.

The Flemish component of the collection, though fairly small, includes standout works by Jan Brueghel the Elder and David Teniers. A keenly observed composition of oysters, sweetmeats and dried fruit by Antwerp artist Osias Beert forms a link to the collection's many outstanding Dutch still lifes. Similarly, a small winter landscape by Flemish artist Jacob Grimmer reminds us that the collection's numerous Dutch ice scenes—including a splendid village skating party by Hendrick Avercamp—derive from a Flemish tradition initiated by Pieter Bruegel the Elder.

 By Frederik J. Duparc  Yale, 404 pages, $65

Though the collection has fewer "gaps" than many museum collections, there are some significant lacunae. One is any work by the Utrecht Caravaggisti, artists who introduced the innovations of Caravaggio to the Netherlands and profoundly influenced Rembrandt. An excellent genre portrait of a courtesan—a typical Caravaggist subject—by Amsterdam painter Jacob Backer mitigates this omission to some extent. 

All great collectors rely on advisers, and the Van Otterloos have chosen theirs carefully. The catalog's author, Frederik J. Duparc, retired in 2007 as director of the Mauritshuis in the Hague and now serves as the Van Otterloo's primary art adviser, in which capacity he succeeded Simon H. Levie, a former director of the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam. This high level of professional expertise helps explain the museum-like scope and rigor of a collection formed over a relatively brief span of time. That said, no museum in the world has dedicated funds to collect Dutch art at such a pace. 

The Van Otterloos have been enthusiastic and public-spirited custodians of their treasures, generously lending pictures to numerous museums. The jewel of their collection, Rembrandt's "Portrait of Aeltje Uylenburgh" (1632), is so much in demand that the couple seldom has any time with it at home. All the works cataloged in "Golden" are currently part of a touring exhibition that, perhaps, will give the Van Otterloos an opportunity to contemplate where they'd like the collection eventually to reside. Their preference is for it to remain intact in a public institution—a transfer that would echo the benefactions of the great Gilded Age collectors. 

—Mr. Lopez is editor at large of Art & Antiques.