  TOKYO—The head of Tokyo Stock Exchange lashed out at some foreign investors for being "selfish" in calling for the market to shut down following the earthquake earlier this month, saying their main motivation was to flee Japan.

"The foreign firms have called for a shutdown because they wanted to run away," TSE President  Atsushi Saito said in an interview with the Wall Street Journal on Wednesday. "I don't really mind because I see that as selfish."

Immediately after the quake, several foreign banks, including one major U.S. financial institution, lobbied for a temporary shutdown of the exchange to avoid a market meltdown. Later, as Japan's nuclear crisis worsened, others said they needed to ensure the safety of their employees and wanted the market closed while they were away.

At a news conference on Tuesday, Mr. Saito expressed his disappointment that many foreigners—from the U.S., France, the U.K., China and Hong Kong, among others—had been urged to leave the country by their governments. Their flight was at least in part due to the more alarmist tones the foreign media took in coverage of the disaster, especially over the risk of radiation poisoning, compared with the local news, which emphasized how problems were being addressed.

Mr. Saito, the 71-year-old former executive vice president of Nomura Securities Co., said a closure didn't cross his mind during the crisis. 

Striking a cautious tone, he said he expects a difficult path for upcoming integration talks with the Osaka Securities Exchange Co., the Tokyo Exchange's smaller rival, which operates a derivatives-trading platform.

"If our directions are different, there is still the possibility that the talks will fall through," he said, adding the negotiations would be like "walking through the rubble."

Following the earthquake, Mr. Saito said he spoke with OSE President  Michio Yoneda by telephone and agreed to hold talks once markets and the damaged Fukushima Daiichi nuclear-power plant stabilize. Faced with global market consolidation, Mr. Yoneda had earlier said he hopes for a decision to be made within about three months.

When the earthquake jolted northeastern Japan shortly before the market closed on March 11, Mr. Saito launched a task force to implement a business-continuity plan. No damage was found on the exchange's server, underwater cables or data center, although three brokerages reported minor malfunctions in their systems.

The exchange's response went smoothly, according to its contingency manual, and by after 7:00 p.m. local time, Mr. Saito was heading home by car, replying to dozens of messages from exchanges abroad, including one from longtime friend and NYSE Euronext CEO  Duncan Niederauer.

"I told him I'm fine and that there was no problem with our system," Mr. Saito said. Caught in a quake-triggered traffic jam, he went straight to bed after arriving home after midnight. 

As troubles emerged at the nuclear complex, officials at the TSE and the Financial Services Agency scrambled through the weekend to make sure that planned blackouts wouldn't affect data centers at either the exchange or at brokerages. Mr. Saito stayed home, but the message was clear: The markets would open on Monday.

The Nikkei Stock Average plunged 16% in the first two full sessions following the earthquake, and grief over the disaster turned to fear as Prime Minister Naoto Kan warned of radiation risks, urging anyone within about 30 kilometers of the plant to stay indoors.

"People were spooked by the invisible radiation," Mr. Saito said, who added he received a call from a foreign executive at a U.S. asset-management firm on March 15. "He asked me if I'm going to close the TSE and begged me to keep it open."

Some brokers seemed surprised that the TSE hadn't requested advice from overseas. Mr. Saito said the temporary shutdown of the New York Stock Exchange following the Sept. 11, 2001 World Trade Center attack wasn't a parallel, since the quake hadn't struck Tokyo's financial center.

Separately, Mr. Saito said the quake hasn't affected the exchange's plan to list its own shares, but indicated the initial public offering is unlikely to take place by the end of the year.

Calls for the market to close temporarily seem to have subsided, but the TSE still faces the risk that more foreign investors will leave the country if the nuclear crisis continues. Key foreign brokerages have expressed their intention to stay. That is important because a TSE rule requires trading to be suspended if brokerages accounting for more than 20% of trading volume can't do business.

"Japan has faced a disastrous situation, but it is still a safe country," Mr. Saito said. "A period of turmoil and upheaval calls for cool judgment."

"All I can say is come back," he said, referring to the foreigners who have left.

—Doug Cameron contributed to this article.