TOKYO – Nippon Life Insurance Co. is in final talks to buy about a 26% stake in India's Reliance Life, the maximum that a foreign entity can own under local regulations, a person familiar with the matter said Friday. 

Japan's largest life insurer by revenue will likely invest about 60 billion yen ($720 million) in a unit of Reliance ADA Group, the person said. 

If completed, it would be one of the largest overseas investments by a Japanese insurer in Asia. A spokesperson for Nippon Life declined to comment. 

Reliance Life–part of the diversified business group led by  Anil Ambani--is the only private life insurance company in India without a foreign partner. It is wholly owned by Reliance Capital Ltd. 

A Reliance Capital spokesman declined to comment. 

In midmorning trade Reliance Capital shares were up 1.3% at 534.5 rupees ($11.8) on the Bombay Stock Exchange, while the benchmark Sensex was down 0.4%. 

Entering emerging markets such as India would help Nippon Life further boost profitability at a time when Japan's population is shrinking and its life-insurance industry is seen as saturated. 

Rival Dai-ichi Life Insurance Co., which listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange in April and is actively seeking out overseas acquisitions, in December agreed to buy  Tower Australia Group Ltd. for about 99.6 billion yen. Under the agreement, Dai-ichi will boost its stake from 28.96%, making the insurer a wholly owned unit. 

Experts say a stake sale will give Reliance Life the funds it needs to spur growth in the capital-intensive business. Most private insurers in India have been unable to turn profitable due to the high cost of acquiring new customers. 

Unlisted Nippon Life, the country's biggest life insurer, has formed several business tie-ups with foreign financial institutions including U.S. Prudential Financial Inc. and Northwestern Mutual Life Insurance.

The insurer's incoming president,  Yoshinobu Tsutsui, said at a press conference last month that his company will consider forming a strong alliance with foreign financial institutions. 

Mr. Tsutsui is currently a senior managing executive officer and will become president on April 1. 

Japan's life-insurance sector has been relatively slow to consolidate so far compared with nonlife insurers because most life insurers remain mutualized. 

Faced with a sharp decline in auto and housing policy sales at home, Japanese nonlife insurers are more active in overseas acquisitions. 

  MS&AD Insurance Group Holdings Inc.
MSADY


-1.45
%




 bought a 30% stake in Hong Leong Assurance Bhd. in Malaysia for about 27 billion yen, and  NKSJ Holdings
8630


1.27
%




 acquired a majority stake in Turkey's Fiba Sigorta Anonim Sirketi for 27 billion yen.

—Romit Guha in Mumbai contributed to the article.

 Write to  Atsuko Fukase at atsuko.fukase@dowjones.com 