The formal gold-embossed invitation was for a violin recital. The venue was the "United Nations, (ECOSOC, NLB)." No street address, just acronyms characteristic of the U.N. 

Making up for the economy of the address, the violinist's name—Dr. L. Subramaniam—was long, and, with its title, seemed to vouch for medical rather than musical expertise. Dr. Subramaniam is indeed a registered physician: His South Indian mother, a musician, wanted him to have a solid academic qualification even though he'd been a child prodigy who had once performed solo, at age 6, before an audience of thousands at an open-air music festival. 

Last week, the non-practicing doctor, now 63, traveled from Washington D.C., where he had appeared at "Maximum India," the Kennedy Center's three-week arts celebration, to New York to perform an evening of classical music for guests of Ambassador Hardeep Singh Puri, Indian envoy to the United Nations—including U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.

A stage was erected in the conference hall, which has seats at long tables equipped with headphones for simultaneous translation, and an oriental carpet was laid down for the cross-legged musicians to sit. On one side stood a tall, multitiered, brass temple lamp that is traditionally lit at the beginning of classical performances to symbolize the sacred nature of art. 

"The United Nations is about bringing people and ideas together. Many cultures and traditions mingle here," said Ambassador Puri as he introduced the violinist. "Dr. Subramaniam will speak to us in the universal language of music. He'll require no interpreters to convey his message. He will speak a language that is devoid of arcane jargon and abbreviations." 

The Secretary-General, pointing to the empty interpreters' booths, echoed those sentiments: "This is one language where the nuances don't have to be interpreted." Forty years ago, Mr. Moon's first diplomatic posting was in New Delhi. "That's where I learned all that diplomacy. That's where I enjoyed Indian music, which helped me relax, reflect and recharge." 

Dr. Subramaniam was to play two improvisational pieces on the violin, accompanied by his teenage son, Ambi, and four percussionists (playing different South Indian instruments). Choosing a "pure Indian" program, rather than the global fusion he is known for, he explained the intricacies of his use of multiple speeds and the formal structure of a classical Indian concert, before launching into a piece that showcased the technical sophistication of Indian music. The second, purely improvisational, piece drew huge applause from the assembled crowd of international delegates amd U.N. staffers. Later, Dr. Subramaniam would say, "Playing at the U.N., with so many representatives from all over, was like playing for the whole world." 

Dr. Subramaniam's uniqueness lies in his use of the violin, the most popular Western instrument, which was introduced as an accompanying instrument in 19th century South India. His father, a professor of music, was the first to make it a solo instrument in South Indian music, expanding its range and developing new performance techniques. He eventually formed a violin trio with his three sons. After Dr. Subramaniam qualified as a physician, he left this father's trio to pursue a Masters degree in Western music at the California Institute of the Arts. After his U.N. concert, he credited his father, his only teacher, for his success: "I developed techniques based on his vision so the whole Indian music scene has changed."

Dr. Subramaniam's talent and love of composition led to international fame. In 1975, Zubin Mehta, the Indian conductor of Western classical music, commissioned a piece for him to play with the New York Philharmonic: Dr. Subramaniam created "Fantasy on Vedic Chants," in memory of his late mother. Since then, he has composed fusion pieces for the Philharmonic orchestras of London, Berlin, Moscow and Beijing, and played with such jazz musicians as Stephane Grappelli, Herbie Hancock and Ravi Coltrane. The Kirov Ballet and Alvin Ailey have danced to his music, and he has made some 200 recordings. 

Now his joy is teaching and performing with his talented son. "I was taught by and performed with my father," he said. "Now I teach and perform with Ambi. The tradition continues." 