(See Corrections and Amplifications item below.)

Global trade has doubled and bilateral pacts have sprung up since the stalled Doha round began. While countries say they haven't given up on the decade-long world trade negotiations, the hurdles to a deal, already substantial, have increased recently.

A report issued at last week's World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, warned that Doha, named for the Qatari capital where the talks began, would perish if not completed this year. 

"It's time for heads of government to do more than simply repeat the rhetoric," said one of the authors of the report,  Peter Sutherland, director of the World Trade Organization at the time of its founding in 1995. 

Others echoed his warning. After all, the Uruguay Round, the second-longest, took a mere eight years, from 1986 to 1994. "If we don't get the deal done this year it is hard to see how the Doha process can have any further credibility," U.K. Prime Minister David Cameron said in a speech Friday in Davos.

To be sure, some of the dire talk may be intended to create momentum where none exists. Global trade deals routinely stretch on for more than a decade. No major country every truly gives up on a deal because to do so would be to signal that the global trading system—and the era of globalization—may have reached its limit. 

Trade ministers from key countries, gathering in Davos over the weekend, said they would keep trying and would meet in July with an eye toward finishing the round by December. "There is a window available to conclude the deal this year," said Indian commerce and industry minister Anand Sharma. 

But beneath the optimistic rhetoric, some officials heaped even more demands on the negotiations. "We have to have a very balanced and ambitious package that's not currently on the table," said U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk. Developing countries needed to concede more on services, he said. European Union Trade Commissioner Karel De Gucht said that limits on state subsidies should be added to the deal—a direct swipe at China.

Messrs. De Gucht and Kirk's complaints underscore one reason why the talks have stalled. The Doha round, launched in a spirit of international cooperation following the Sept. 11 attacks, had a simple premise: Rich countries would cut farm subsidies and tariffs; in exchange, emerging economies would open their markets for services and industrial goods. Poor countries interpreted that to mean they would have to do nothing but reap the benefits—a stance that rich countries find impractical and a political loser. In addition, some countries considered poor when the talks began—China and India—now are the world's fastest-growing large economies. The rich countries want a lot more out of them in terms of trade and investment liberalization.

So far, the concessions offered by developing nations are considered so minimal, they haven't attracted the support of business and farm lobbies in the U.S. and Europe. Without their support, governments in the U.S. and Europe won't sign on to a deal.

A month after Doha was initiated in November 2001, China joined the World Trade Organization, just as a decade of record growth in global trade was unfolding. Total global annual exports doubled to $13 trillion in 2010 from $6.5 trillion in 2001. China's exports have grown to $1.4 trillion a year from $266 billion. All without Doha.

The trade growth isn't all thanks to China. Other factors include lower shipping costs and the rise of global supply chains. Bilateral and regional free-trade agreements also have made a difference—since 2001, more than 100 have been initiated.

The U.S. is close to concluding a pact with South Korea. The EU has deals on the table with India, Canada, South Korea and a group of Latin American countries. All these accords have whittled the estimated gains from the Doha round's global pact, chipping away at the political motivation to pursue a deal. "Every study decreases the estimated benefits," of a world-wide trade agreement says a senior EU official. 

While these agreements serve the interests of the countries involved, they could harm the overall global trading system. "The problem [with bilateral or regional trade agreements]…is that it recreates the mercantilism of the past," said Mr. Sutherland, the onetime WTO director. 

These deals have given rise to the question: What if Doha fails?

The biggest risk, say trade officials, is not what will be lost in terms of cutting tariffs. It's in the loss of reputation that the WTO would suffer. 

Just because trade prospered in the last decade without Doha doesn't mean it will continue to do so, many economists warn. "The status quo is not necessarily sustainable," says  Jeffrey Schott of the Washington-based Peterson Institute. "If Doha failed, there would be serious institutional damage to the WTO," which is managing the trade talks. 

Mr. Schott and others praise the court-like system the WTO uses to adjudicate trade disputes between the organization's 153 members. For example, on Monday, the WTO is due to issue its latest report in the battle between the EU and U.S. over airplane subsidies.

Two economists,  Aaditya Mattoo and  Arvind Subramanian, say Doha has become irrelevant because the world has changed so much since 2001. They have called for a new trade round to succeed a failed Doha. 

But what would such a round look like? It would, they say, include a "serious conversation about energy." Oil and gas have never been governed by the WTO, allowing oil-producing countries to establish cartels and set production quotas.

Currencies also have become part of the puzzle. Here, Messrs. Mattoo and Subramanian have proposed giving the WTO a role in making sure countries don't use their exchange-rate policies to distort trade. Trade officials could fight climate change by eliminating tariffs on biofuels and other environmentally friendly goods. WTO Director-General, Pascal Lamy, regularly signals that he isn't interested in involving the organization in currency battles. 

Many economists point out that tariffs are so generally low now that the biggest obstacles to trade are now non-tariff trade barriers, such as safety standards and licenses. When EU and U.S. trade negotiators meet, they rarely discuss tariffs. Instead, they argue about issues such as toy-safety standards, genetically modified foods or the chemicals that go into beef or poultry feed. 

For the past 10 years, the world's 49 poorest countries have had tariff-free access to the EU's 500 million consumers, the world's richest economic bloc. Yet trade hasn't taken off, because shipping to the EU means complying with a long list of regulations, something impoverished African farmers have a hard time doing. 

All that means the WTO should focus on fighting non-tariff trade barriers, they say. 

 Corrections & Amplifications 

Peter Sutherland, the director of the World Trade Organization when it was founded in 1995, wrote a recent government-commissioned report on the Doha Round of global trade talks with Jagdish Bhagwati of Columbia University. This column incorrectly implied that Mr. Sutherland was the report's sole author.

 Write to  John W. Miller at john.miller@dowjones.com 