Texting. Ringing phones. Overpriced M&Ms. Dax Shepard. Oh, the many reasons to avoid the movie theater. Makes you want to just stay home and fire up the Jiffy Pop, doesn't it?

I can keep going with why the cineplex is less appealing than the DMV. In fact, why not? Tickets cost $15. Stale popcorn costs $15. Stupid Fandango "convenience fees." Commercials before trailers. Sticky floors. Mall rats. Sequels based on sequels that started off as Disney rides. Sequels of sequels based on TV shows that were based on toys. Sequels that are prequels of movies based on a comic book of which there were two sequels—and a spinoff. And did I mention Dax Shepard?



So those are the reasons why this summer I'll be getting most of my cinematic entertainment, with the exception of a handful of movies, at home, through the Internet, on my couch.

But watching flicks in the living room isn't just about avoiding movie theater annoyances. We're witnessing a special little moment in home entertainment right now: There are more quality, full-length films to be discovered and rediscovered through a wireless router than there are at the multiplex. And all for less than the cost of a jumbo box of Junior Mints.

I'm not talking about renting "127 Hours" through iTunes or getting red envelopes of DVDs in the mail. There's a system that's even better: on-demand, unlimited movie subscriptions from Netflix, Hulu and Amazon. For around $8 a month, you can stream just about anything you want.

The beauty of these movie buffets, aside from the absence of late fees or 24-hour shelf lives (as is the case with many Internet rentals), is that there's practically no barrier to watching films you might not have considered when paying a la carte.

Example? "Timecop." You're not going to watch it for $3. But if you can watch it instantly? For "free"? Yeah, you'll probably press play and, unless you have a thing against time-traveling thrillers, or Jean-Claude Van Damme or the girlfriend from "Ferris Bueller's Day Off," you'll probably enjoy it.

Another example? "Wild Strawberries" or "Rashomon." I used to call these "coaster" movies because, more often then not when they arrived in the mailbox from my overly ambitious Netflix queue they would end up on my coffee table underneath a Miller Lite as I viewed something, you know, without subtitles. Now that these finer works of the canon cinematique can be instantly streamed I can watch and enjoy them when I'm feeling arty rather than force myself to just to get disc 2 of "Archer." 

Disclaimer: The streaming selection on all three services are padded with B- and C-list movies like "SanFranpsycho" and you may be frustrated that more recent releases aren't available quickly enough. Still, for $8 a month there's an impressive number of films that are worth your time (some of which I've noted in the chart above).

So which service is right for you? Film snobs should not overlook Hulu, which has, in addition to the best selection of current TV titles, the rights to several exclusive Criterion Collection movies—the most highbrow group of films on the planet. With a subscription to Hulu Plus, you'll get these as well as access to a wide variety of TV shows and movies, all with fewer ads to deal with than the free Hulu you veg out on at the office.

Just a few months old, Amazon Prime Instant Videos is part of the $80 annual membership to Amazon Prime, a program that entitles you to free two-day shipping for things you purchase on the website, among other benefits. It's not bad, but you search for movies as you would socks or books or anything else in the Amazon eco-system. Hopefully it will get slicker as it grows. 

 Netflix, however, as the streaming pioneer, has the biggest and best selection of films you can watch instantly, including many from the Criterion Collection. There are no ads and its apps, available on the greatest number of devices (everything from your Nintendo Wii to your iPad), are the most elegant of the three.

 HULU  — Fewer ads, more shows and Criterion Collection movies is what you get with Hulu Plus. $8 a month, hulu.com 

 NETFLIX  — The most comprehensive streaming service out there. From $8 a month, netflix.com 

 AMAZON  — Watch more than 2,000 videos with a "prime" membership. $80 a year, amazon.com/prime 

I know what you're thinking. Am I telling you to curl up on your couch with your laptop as you would on a 747? No. Getting this streaming goodness on your TV is easy. The simplest solution is the Roku streaming player (from $60, roku.com). Just connect it to your TV as you would a DVD player or a set top box and you'll have access to all three subscription streaming services. Certain Tivo boxes, game consoles, and Internet connected disc players and televisions also have apps running these services. And, while it may be inconvenient, you can just connect your computer to your television. If you don't have a computer with an HDMI port, you'll need to get the right cables and dongles. A pain, but, hey, so is spending $10 on Skittles.

The cinema studies student in me is wagging its copy of "Godard on Godard" as I write this and asking: Shouldn't films be watched in movie houses as the director intended? Isn't the reason people talk in theaters because we're so accustomed to watching films at home? Why haven't you seen "Socialism" yet? 

Yes, young folk these days may no longer think of theaters as sacred temples to celluloid, but it's also the first generation that has every season of "Lost" and all of Akira Kurosawa's films at the ready to be watched, absorbed and pondered with just a few keystrokes. No red envelopes, no snooty video clerks, no sticky floors. Maybe they will become such über-cineastes that they'll force Hollywood to stop making sequels of sequels based on toys found in cereal boxes. But if not, I wouldn't mind a "Timecop 3."