 Toyota reported a 77% drop in net profit for the January-to-March quarter to ¥25.4 billion ($314.2 million) due to production disruptions caused by the devastating March 11 earthquake and the effects of the strong yen. 

For the full fiscal year ended March, the world's biggest auto maker by sales volume said net profit nearly doubled to ¥408.18 billion, compared with ¥209.46 billion a year earlier.

Separately, Toyota said it expects a recovery in production from June in Japan and overseas, instead of an earlier outlook for a recovery in Japan from July, and overseas from August. 



General Motors is revamping its China strategy, shifting its focus inland to rural markets where demand for no-frills cars and microvans is key to achieving its goal of doubling its annual vehicle sales in China.



 HSBC said it will cut costs by $2.5 billion to $3.5 billion over the next three years, sell businesses and retreat from retail banking in markets where it doesn't have scale, as new Chief Executive Stuart Gulliver tries to improve returns in a tougher regulatory and economic environment. 

He said the bank will review its U.S. credit-cards business and retail network and focus on emerging markets such as Mexico and Brazil to grow retail-banking revenue. 



Bank of America Chief Executive Brian Moynihan faced contentious questions from several shareholders at the annual meeting for the U.S.'s largest bank by assets, particularly regarding its mortgage problems. 



 BNP Paribas announced management changes that will see current Chief Executive Baudouin Prot replace Michel Pebereau as chairman, while Chief Operating Officer Jean-Laurent Bonnafe will become CEO. 



The U.S.'s biggest banks are willing to pay as much as $5 billion to settle claims by federal and state officials of improper mortgage-servicing practices, according to people familiar with the situation.



Japan's three megabanks are set to report combined net profits for last fiscal year of more than ¥1.3 trillion ($16.1 billion)—the largest since the global financial crisis—thanks to bond-trading gains and lower credit costs. But the question brewing for investors is: What about this fiscal year? 



Hitachi said fiscal fourth quarter net profit quadrupled to ¥18.73 billion ($231.7 million) on smaller tax payments compared with the year-earlier period, but said the recent Japanese earthquake's effects resulted in a fall in operating income for the period. 

For the full fiscal year through March, Hitachi posted a net profit of ¥238.87 billion, swinging from a net loss of ¥106.96 billion a year earlier.

Luxury company Hermès International posted a 26% rise in first-quarter sales to €637 million ($917.3 million), capping a series of brisk sales reports from a sector that has strongly rebounded this year.



 AIG formally announced a plan to sell at least 300 million shares, a stock offering far smaller than originally envisioned.  



 Italian prosecutors have placed four people under investigation on allegations of insider trading and stock-market manipulation, according to court documents and people familiar with the matter, as part of an inquiry into how French dairy company Groupe Lactalis built a stake in Italian rival Parmalat, clearing the way for an eventual takeover bid. 



 ArcelorMittal, the world's largest steelmaker, said first-quarter net profit rose 67% to $1.07 billion from a year earlier and it expects shipments and steel prices to continue to rise in the second quarter.  



Tesco, the world's third-largest supermarket chain by sales, said it has appointed Sir Richard Broadbent as chairman, replacing David Reid who is retiring in November this year. Broadbent will give up his current role as deputy chairman at U.K. bank Barclays.



J Sainsbury, the U.K.'s third-largest supermarket chain by sales, reported a 9.4% increase in full-year profit to £640 million ($1.05 billion) and said it is confident of progress in the forthcoming year despite the uncertain economic environment. 

 Danish oil and shipping company A.P. Moller-Maersk reported an 85% increase in first-quarter net profit to 6.35 billion kroner ($1.23 billion), helped in particular by stronger container-shipping business.  



Google has set aside a half billion dollars for the potential resolution of a U.S. government investigation related to online advertising, the latest in the search giant's continuing skirmishes with regulators around the world. 

Separately, Google threatened to pull its popular Street View application from Switzerland if the country's highest court doesn't overturn a ruling that would force Google to blur out every face that appears on the service. 



Yahoo disclosed in a U.S. regulatory filing that China's Alibaba Group has transferred ownership of its online-payments company to a new entity controlled by Alibaba Chief Executive Jack Ma.



Groupon, the leader in the burgeoning online deals market, is taking a larger percentage of overall revenue from some coupons sold through its overseas affiliates than it does in the U.S.



 A security vulnerability on Facebook for years gave advertisers and other third parties a way to access users' accounts and personal information, according to security firm Symantec. But Facebook said it had fixed the problem and found no evidence of the issue resulting in private information being leaked.  

Tencent Holdings said first-quarter net profit rose 61% to 2.87 billion yuan ($442 million), as the operator of the QQ chat service benefited from a U.S. acquisition and improved revenue from online games and other Internet services. 



AT&T Chief Executive Randall Stephenson appeared before U.S. lawmakers to defend his company's $39 billion bid to acquire rival wireless carrier T-Mobile USA, arguing the merger would benefit consumers.

Lawmakers concerned about the merger also grilled Philipp Humm, the chief executive of Deutsche Telekom unit T-Mobile USA, during the hearing.



Daimler and Rolls-Royce are considering raising their joint bid of €24 ($34.56) per share for German diesel-engine maker Tognum, three people familiar with the matter said. 



E.ON said first-quarter net profit of €2.27 billion ($3.27 billion) was similar to the same period last year but reported a 23% drop in operating earnings on poor margins in its power generation and gas wholesale business. 