PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla.—The bell tolled for Oliver Perez at 8:08 a.m., about five seconds after he walked in the door. A Mets employee intercepted him on the way to his locker and led him down a corridor to the team's executive offices. Moments later, his Mets career was over. And with that, the celebration began.

Fans rejoiced like it was 1986. A lazy Monday in Florida became Christmas in March. It was as if the Mets had just signed Albert Pujols, traded for Roy Halladay and reincarnated Tug McGraw.

Except nothing remotely as beneficial for the 2011 Mets happened here.

By releasing Perez, the Mets made themselves a more likable team, which is no small feat. But to suggest they made themselves a better team is to overstate Perez's significance.

This season was never going to be about Perez, the much-maligned, $36 million lefty. And it was never going to be about Luis Castillo, who signed with the Philadelphia Phillies on Monday after the Mets released him Friday. 

Those two players may have been symbols of the past, but they were merely sideshows of the present. 

For all the attention they got this spring, there are about 50 more important reasons the Mets will win or lose this summer. Among them: Carlos Beltran's knees, Johan Santana's shoulder, Jose Reyes's legs, Chris Young's shoulder, Chris Capuano's elbow and Jason Bay's power stroke.

That isn't to say the Mets made the wrong moves in cutting Castillo and Perez. Whatever edge Castillo had in talent over his competitors for the second-base job wasn't substantial enough to justify the headache that would come with keeping him. And Perez's audition for a roster spot was a charade to begin with.

If anything, the Mets waited too long to release them, allowing them to overshadow just about everything else going on in spring training.

"It's time to move on," manager Terry Collins said. "It's time to turn the page, and now let's talk about who is going to be here and what this club is going to be about right now."

Even general manager Sandy Alderson acknowledged last week that Perez and Castillo had become a distraction, though he believes he made the right move in bringing them to camp.

"I didn't want to do anything rash or reflexive, given what I had heard about the situation here," Alderson said. "So I think it was important to bring them into camp and then once brought to camp, give them a legitimate opportunity."

There are tangible benefits that come with releasing Perez and Castillo. Perhaps no group of baseball fans have felt more alienated from their team in recent years than Mets fans.

 And short of subjecting Perez and Castillo to a public flogging in Times Square, cutting them was about the easiest thing the Mets could do to build some goodwill with their fan base.

But while those two players can no longer hurt the Mets on the field, the impact of their onerous contracts will still be felt this season. Perez had $12 million remaining on the three-year, $36 million contract he signed before the 2009 season. And Castillo had $6 million left on the four-year, $24 million deal he signed in late 2007.

Other teams can sign them for the major-league minimum salary of $414,000, but the Mets will still be on the hook for the rest. No matter what, they will end up paying more than $17 million this season to two players who will not appear in a single game for them.

That's no small amount to swallow for a team that had to borrow $25 million from Major League Baseball because of a cash crunch in November. And it's no coincidence that the remaining players at Castillo and Perez's positions were all acquired on the cheap.

The only second baseman the Mets acquired over the winter was Brad Emaus, whom they took from the Toronto Blue Jays in the Rule 5 draft for a grand sum of $50,000. The two starting pitchers the Mets signed, Young and Capuano, are guaranteed a combined $2.6 million this year.

So, yes, the Mets have taken important steps lately in ridding themselves of the remnants of their ugly past.

 But whether the immediate future looks any brighter has little to do with what was happening in Alderson's office shortly after 8 a.m. Monday.

It has far more to do with what was happening around noon on Field 2, where Beltran took live batting practice and caught fly balls in the outfield. Not far away, Santana played catch.

It's not clear whether Beltran, who has played in only one spring training game, will be ready for opening day. It seems improbable that he'll remain healthy all season. 

And there is some doubt about whether Santana, who is recovering from shoulder surgery, will return by July, as the team is predicting.

If all that happens, Mets fans might have something to celebrate. But if it doesn't, Monday might well turn out to be their happiest day of the season.