HONG KONG—The issuance of Chinese-currency debt by Anglo-Dutch conglomerate Unilever N.V. highlights continued interest in yuan bonds despite regulations making it complicated to use that money within China.

On Monday, Unilever, the consumer products giant, announced that it had joined the likes of  Caterpillar Inc.,
CAT


-0.70
%




 and McDonald's Corp., in issuing so-called dim sum bonds in Hong Kong's growing offshore yuan market.

The amount raised is tiny by normal standards of the debt market: Unilever issued notes worth 300 million yuan, or about $45 million, due March 2014. But the deal serves a valuable political function. China is eager to promote the internationalization of its currency and companies with deep roots in China are keen to show support for Beijing's push.

At the same time, companies with a big foothold in China have been increasingly interested in raising yuan to pay for their expansion plans, reducing the need to hedge if they bring in dollars or other foreign currencies.

Issuers are also able to borrow at lower interest rates, reducing their cost of capital, because of demand from a growing pool of yuan accumulating in Hong Kong with few investment outlets. Yuan deposits in Hong Kong in January hit 370 billionyuan, or about $56.4 billion.

In addition, investors often are willing to accept a lower interest rate because they assume that the yuan will appreciate.

In a sign of that demand, Unilever was able to price its bond at par to yield 1.15%,. The order book totaled 2.9 billion yuan, a person familiar with the deal said Monday. Hong Kong investors took 58% of the offering, Singapore investors took 34% and demand from elsewhere in Asia accounted for the rest, the person said.

Analysts said that the popularity of the offering could encourage similar deals. People familiar with the situation say there are currently a number of companies going through that process.

"I think other European issuers will tap the market," said Guy Stear, head of Asia research at Sociéteé Générale in Hong Kong.

Still, many corporate issuers remain cautious about the dim-sum bonds. Chinese regulators, preoccupied with heading off inflation, haven't streamlined the process of repatriating offshore yuan debts.

That means that each time a company raises yuan, also known as renminbi, outside of mainland China, it has to complete the same time-consuming applications as for any foreign direct investment.

"The overall scheme is lacking standardized and clearly signposted means for remitting renminbi that already exists for U.S. dollars," said HSBC analyst  Donna Kwok. "But that doesn't mean it won't take off" once inflation slows down, as many expect in the second half of the year, she said.

So far this year, issuance of dim sum bonds in the first quarter of the year totaled $1.33 billion, not including the Unilever deal, according to Dealogic. That is down 70% compared with the last three months of 2010, even as new Chinese debt issuance overall has hit a record $42.6 billion. By contrast, the amount of debt raised through synthetic yuan bonds , which mimic the returns of a yuan bond, but are actually denominated in dollars, surged to $2.6 billion. 

 Write to  Shai Oster at shai.oster@wsj.com and Natasha Brereton at natasha.brereton@dowjones.com 