KABUL, Afghanistan—A suicide bomber killed the ally of a powerful Afghan border police chief and 16 other people at a public bathhouse in a southern Afghan town that borders Pakistan, an Afghan official said. 

Friday's attack came amid a violent day in Afghanistan with three coalition service members killed by improvised explosive devices in two separate incidents in southern and eastern Afghanistan. 

But the bloodiest attack was the midday suicide bombing in the border town of Spin Boldak. There were conflicting accounts of what exactly happened; Afghan officials in the area put the death toll at 17, with 21 wounded, and said the bomber detonated his explosives in a crowded bathhouse, or hammam, as bathers washed themselves before Friday prayers. The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack, saying 18 police officers were killed. It said the attack was carried out by a man from Kandahar.

The U.S.-led coalition said in a statement released from Kabul that the attack took place in a bazaar and killed an Afghan border policeman and at least 12 Afghan civilians. It's not uncommon to see differing accounts of such incidents in Afghanistan, where communication networks are poor and it can take time for officials to sort out what happened.

The bomber was targeting Haji Ramazan Aka, a local power broker and "close cooperator and friend" of Spin Boldak's border police chief Col. Abdul Razziq, according to Haji Abdul Ghani Yar, district chief of Spin Boldak. Other Afghan officials described Mr. Aka as an Afghan Border Police commander, although that couldn't be immediately confirmed.

"The goal of the enemies of Afghanistan is to frighten away the public. With these attacks they show they are wild people," Col. Razziq said in a brief telephone interview.

Col. Razziq controls southern Afghanistan's lucrative border crossing with Pakistan and emerged last year as a coalition favorite for taking on the Taliban in Kandahar province, the insurgents' heartland and the focus of the U.S. surge. Feared by the Taliban, Col. Razziq has himself been the target of several previous insurgent attacks; he also has been dogged by allegations of drug smuggling and sometimes abusing civilians, which he has repeatedly denied.

The Taliban often target Afghans working with the government and security forces in a bid to frighten others from doing the same.

