'This is no eulogy for the Gulf" writes Rowan Jacobsen in the opening pages of "Shadows on the Gulf." Adopting a sort of defiant cheerfulness, the author offers to take readers on a tour of places unaffected by the 2010 BP oil spill, those lovely lands of grass and water and shimmering light, of tight-knit communities of fishers and bayou dwellers that dot the coasts of Louisiana, Mississippi and Alabama. "Most of the Gulf Coast has not been touched by the oil spill," Mr. Jacobsen reports, "and is beautiful and vital as ever." 

Yet these early avowals of glass-half-fullism notwithstanding, it's hard not to hear the mournful sounds of a pipe organ on nearly every page. And you have to wonder why all the people—oystermen, oilmen, shrimpers, tourists—are so grim-faced, as if shuffling past what appears to be a Gulf-sized casket. 

"Shadows" is not specifically about the Deepwater Horizon blowout and its aftermath—although it plays a central role in the narrative. It's brimming with engaging information about a little-known region and leavened with moments of grace. South Louisiana, in particular, has long had "Here be dragons" scrawled on it in maps; not many have a solid mental image of the Louisiana coastline, and those who do tend to be involved with oil or oysters. 

The land is a strangely amorphous border between solid and liquid. It lacks the crisp lines of white sandy beaches or walls of high-rise condos one finds in Florida or Texas. Instead it offers miles of flaxen marshes bent by the winds—what Mr. Jacobsen describes as "the flattest landscape imaginable, a prairie on the water." 

And, it turns out, much of that pristine landscape exists now chiefly in our imaginations. Some 9,000 miles of canals have been plowed through the Louisiana marshes like a gridiron, mostly to accommodate oil exploration and drilling, and these have vastly accelerated the pace of coastal erosion. As Mr. Jacobsen notes, the map of Louisiana many of us remember from social-studies textbooks—the one that looked like a doughty work boot—was based on decades-old surveys and hasn't existed for years. The boot's sole is badly frayed. Today the Louisiana coastline loses a football field's worth of land to erosion about every 38 minutes. 

The Gulf Coast is a living thing—the ocean takes away, and the river replenishes. But the taking away quickened with those canals and the rising seas, and the replenishing all but ceased when the silty Mississippi was dammed up within modern levees over the past century. The massive load of soil and silt it carries from the Midwest is no longer distributed around the delta during spring flooding but is given the bum's rush out the mouth of the river and off the continental shelf. 

The delta's loss bodes ill not only for longtime residents—the Gulf is encroaching on the city limits of New Orleans with alarming swiftness—but also for marine life, including the oysters and shrimp that lure people to the Crescent City. The wetlands, as Mr. Jacobsen puts it, "are the birthing center and kindergartens of the ocean, the places where the next generation of marine life gets its start." This is familiar terrain for the author, who has written widely about food's connection to place and is the author of "A Geography of Oysters" (2007).

Mr. Jacobsen also digs, although less deeply, into the more tangled political ecosystem of Louisiana and the southern Gulf. One of the more oddly mesmerizing spectacles in the wake of the BP spill was the array of sputtering Louisiana politicians mouthing bland platitudes about the environment but aiming most of their fury at Washington for having the temerity of even thinking about reining in the oil industry. 

Death panels have played a curious role in health-care policy debates of late. But you haven't (yet) heard much about their counterpart in the land policy debate. One of the more compelling sections in "Shadows on the Gulf" outlines the emerging tussle over whether to abandon the smaller towns close to the eroding coast. Every couple of weeks, the Gulf papers feature a reporter parachuting in to interview stubborn residents who refuse to leave some coastal town. (" 'We're a resilient people,' they say. Then again, I'm still waiting for the group that, when faced with natural disaster says, 'We're not particularly resilient,' " Mr. Jacobsen notes wryly.) 

Mr. Jacobsen estimates that the federal government has spent $1 million per resident on battered Grand Isle alone, "with nothing to show for it." One of the last of Louisiana's inhabited barrier islands, Grand Isle is today a beleaguered outpost, with houses raised on towering stilts. "Like a porcupine holding its ground against an onrushing automobile," he writes, "the 'never retreat' attitude may be suicidal this time." 

This is a sweet spot of American confusion—everyone loves plucky, never-say-no folks who fight for their way of life. But does that still hold when estimates for coastal restoration "start at $100 billion" to keep the never-say-no's where they are? 

 By Rowan Jacobsen  Bloomsbury, 231 pages, $25

At each turn of the page of "Shadows on the Gulf," I hoped for some bend in the narrative toward the optimism the author suggested at the outset. At least I hoped for a signpost that pointed down a pathway toward a brighter future. It never appears. 

Some of the book, especially the last third, feels a little rushed and perfunctory. And the prescriptions with which Mr. Jacobsen concludes—"get everyone involved" and "use dredged sediment"—seem little more than over-generalized sentiments. I have the feeling that the author anticipated laying out a sound argument for doing what needs to be done to save the Gulf Coast and its people but found that he couldn't marshal sufficient facts to make the case. He ends up waking a somewhat erratic path between savior and "sky is falling" prophet. 

But Rowan Jacobsen succeeds in painting the "sort of cubist portrait of a beautiful and sometimes contradictory region" he envisioned. And this fragmented portrait turns out to be all the more beautiful and melancholy for being accompanied by the persistent, doleful sounds of a pipe organ.

—Mr. Curtis, a contributing editor of the Atlantic, lives in New Orleans.