WASHINGTON—The Food and Drug Administration's No. 2 official is leaving the agency after a busy 21-month tenure that included clashes with drug and device makers over tougher regulation.

Deputy Commissioner Joshua Sharfstein, 41 years old, is taking the top public-health job for the state of Maryland, a spokesman for Maryland's governor said, with an announcement scheduled for Wednesday. 

The FDA is losing a regulator who has pushed for a greater emphasis on drug safety. For example, he helped bring about an unusual review of the diabetes drug Avandia last year that resulted in much tighter curbs on its use.

The departure could have an effect on the FDA's coming release of new guidelines on medical-device approvals. Any significant restrictions will likely cause a backlash in the device industry, which has allies among Republican House leaders.

The new chairman of the House oversight committee, Darrell Issa (R., Calif.), says he wants to take a closer look at FDA issues, having already chastised Dr. Sharfstein in a hearing last September over delays in the withdrawal of defective lots of the pain pill Motrin in 2009. Some House lawmakers also want to investigate the FDA's move in December to withdraw approval of the drug Avastin to treat breast cancer. 

Dr. Sharfstein and FDA Commissioner Margaret "Peggy" Hamburg declined to discuss his departure.

After arriving in late March 2009, when he briefly served as acting commissioner, Dr. Sharfstein took on the FDA's device division, where a device for knee surgery had been cleared in late 2008 over the repeated objections of a half-dozen FDA scientists and managers.

His review, prompted by articles in The Wall Street Journal in 2009, led to the FDA's announcement that it planned to revoke the approval of the knee device. The FDA also said it would likely toughen guidelines for an abbreviated device-approval process that is popular with the industry.

Under Dr. Hamburg and Dr. Sharfstein, the agency is issuing more warning letters over manufacturing and marketing violations, while largely stopping the practice of letting companies spend months negotiating the content of these letters, according to industry lobbyists in Washington.

Another change that has alarmed the industry is the focus by the FDA on punishing individual executives and corporate lawyers, not just companies, over alleged wrongdoing. In November, a former lawyer for GlaxoSmithKline PLC was indicted in a Justice Department and FDA investigation into Glaxo marketing practices. The company has said it was cooperating with the government. The lawyer has pleaded not guilty.

Dr. Sharfstein's review of Avandia, the troubled diabetes drug, opened a rift with the longtime head of the FDA's drug division, Janet Woodcock, who had defended the drug as a useful option for patients. The sides came to a truce in September, with restrictions that all but ended new prescriptions of the drug while allowing patients still on it to continue to use it.

Administration officials face restrictions if they leave to work for lobbying firms but not if they move to other government posts.

A physician and researcher, Dr. Sharfstein served as an aide to Rep. Henry Waxman (D., Calif.) and was public-health director for the city of Baltimore before joining the FDA. 

His plans to take the Maryland job were reported earlier by CQ HealthBeat.

 Write to  Alicia Mundy at alicia.mundy@wsj.com 