While the cost of Friday's earthquake in Japan is still unknown, the area of the country most directly affected by the quake has about $300 billion of insured property, according to disaster-modeling company AIR Worldwide. 

An additional $400 billion of insured property lies in areas that were less impacted but likely still sustained costly damage, said  Jayanta Guin, senior vice president of research and modeling at Boston-based AIR. 

AIR also examined prefectures most directly affected by the tsunami that followed quickly on the heels of the quake, and concluded that $24 billion of insured property sits within three kilometers of the shore in those areas. Of that amount, $5 billion was within one kilometer of the coast. 

The actual insured losses from the quake and subsequent tsunami will undoubtedly be significantly smaller, because many properties in those zones will report little or no damage. But the figures from AIR are an important step in the process of estimating the cost of the disaster. 

The insurance industry is anxiously awaiting those estimates from AIR and its rivals, because an official tally of the losses can take months. 

Analysts who track insurance companies—but lack the sophisticated models used by the disaster modelers—guessed in the hours after the quake that claims could be $10 billion to $25 billion. One analyst said it could be as high as $50 billion. 

Even at the low end of the range, the losses would mark Friday's event as the second or third most-expensive earthquake for the insurance industry in history.

The only quakes that rival it are the $15.3 billion earthquake in Northridge, Calif., in 1995 and last month's temblor in Christchurch, New Zealand, where claims costs are still being tallied. 

However high the insured losses run, total economic losses are likely to be significantly more. Japanese homeowners and businesses have been reluctant to buy insurance to cover all of their potential losses because the cost of the protection has been perceived as too high. 

Mr. Guin said AIR estimates about 10% to 12% of commercial property exposures are insured against earthquakes outside of Tokyo. 

 Write to  Erik Holm at erik.holm@dowjones.com 