The U.K. is looking to crack down on a widespread pay practice at financial firms as part of its recently unveiled budget plan, a move that could mean higher tax bills for employees using the technique.

This pay practice in question uses loans made by employee benefit trusts, or EBTs, to allow senior staff to pay much lower taxes on share incentive schemes or deferred bonuses. The technique involves housing the deferred portion of a bonus, either shares or cash, in an EBT, then issuing a loan to the employee. The loans have been subject only to tax on the interest, an effective rate of just 2%, and were often extended indefinitely. 

The government has now issued legislation to clamp down on this form of loan. In announcing the U.K. budget this week, Chancellor of the Exchequer  George Osborne vowed to "end the practice of disguised remuneration, which sees highly paid employees offered tax-free, lifetime loans that are never repaid."

According to Treasury estimates, the changes will net the government an additional £3.77 billion in tax over the next five years, and will affect up to 50,000 people and some 5,000 firms, many of them working in financial services.

Those firms and employees are now facing huge tax liabilities and are struggling to adapt to, or in some cases get around, the changes, which were first put forward in draft legislation late last year.

But as of December 2010, when the draft legislation was introduced, any such loans are subject to full income tax, up to 50% for top earners.

According to BDO tax accountant  Amanda Flint, someone who had borrowed £100,000 from an EBT would have paid just £2,000 a year in tax under the old rules, for example. 

Now, that person is facing a tax of £50,000 for top ratepayers when that loan matures.

Tax lawyers say that financial firms and their employees are uncertain as to how to respond to the changes, and are scrambling to get their tax affairs in order. 

Allen & Overy partner  Paul McCartney said: "Effectively any money that is in trusts has been locked up since Dec. 10 last year [when the draft legislation came out] as trustees, employees and employers sought to understand the legislation and its implications before taking any action."

Berwin Leighton Paisner tax partner  Neal Todd said he had received calls from clients concerned about the issue. 

"Tax payers will look at any possibility they can because the sums involved are quite significant. Understandably as those changes have upset a lot of the planning that people had in place," he added,

However, he thought it was unlikely that financial firms and their employees would be able to get around legislation. Those with loans outstanding will just have to take the pain.

"As a tax planning technique, I think EBTs have been nailed. That was the government's intention and there is now not much room for maneuver," he said.

The government is due to publish the final draft of the EBT rules in the finance bill next month, which will go before Parliament in July. 

—More at efinancialnews.com 