Facing pressure from Democrats, Gov. Andrew Cuomo sought Thursday to connect an extension of the state's rent rules with the budget due at the end of the month, as well as a property tax cap favored by Senate Republicans. 

"I think they are relevant," he told reporters. "My preference would be to see them done in the budget." 

Democratic legislators earlier sent a letter urging Mr. Cuomo to include the extension in the budget, as they view expanding regulations for tenants as one of the few issues where they could gain ground in a year that many other priorities face the budget ax. They have also pushed for an extension of an income tax on high-earners, a concept the governor and Senate Republicans have resisted. 

The rent laws sunset in June. The remarks were a rare broach of the topic by Mr. Cuomo, formerly the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development. He has not articulated specifics views on the issue other than to voice favor for extending the laws in some form. 

In past years, their expiration has ignited battles in the Legislature, and Senate Republicans tried to eliminate the rules altogether.

This year, discussion has been more sedate and has centered around an extension. The real estate industry and Senate Republicans, to which the industry is a major donor, have pushed for limited changes to the existing laws. The Real Estate Board of New York, which has been helping to fund advertisements backing the governor, is also pushing for an extension of a tax credit for developers and for legislation that addresses some recent court rulings that hurt landlords. 

"They need to be addressed and resolved," the board's president, Steven Spinola. 

In recent weeks, real estate executives have been in discussions with Assembly Democrats on the issue, multiple people involved with talks said. 

Central to the debate are rent stabilization rules, which limit rent increases on about 1 million apartments citywide. Under current law, landlords can deregulate vacant apartments when the rent hits $2,000 a month. Rent regulation advocates have pushed to abolish that provision and leave apartments regulated regardless of their rent, while the real estate industry would prefer to leave it at the current level. 

Assemblyman Vito Lopez, chairman of the chamber's housing committee, said he thinks a deal could be reached, possibly this month, although the various camps are still far apart. 

 Write to  Eliot Brown at eliot.brown@wsj.com 