BANGALORE -- Wipro Ltd. Friday reported weak third-quarter earnings and unveiled a management shuffle at its core information-technology business in a reflection that the Indian software exporter hasn't been able to take advantage of a recovery in outsourcing demand in recent quarters like its peers.

Wipro, based in Bangalore and listed in Mumbai as well as New York, named T.K. Kurien the new chief executive of its IT business, effective Feb. 1. Mr. Kurien replaces Girish Paranjpe and Suresh Vaswani who served as joint CEOs for the past three years and have resigned.

The company, India's third-largest software services exporter by sales, reported results that lag those of sector leaders Tata Consultancy Services Ltd. and Infosys Technologies Ltd. Tata Consultancy and Infosys reported a bigger rise in net profit for the same quarter thanks to an uptick in global technology spending.

"I don't think we should be making excuses. We have underperformed in quarter three relative to competition," Chairman Azim Premji said at a news conference.

Wipro shares ended down 4.6% at 456.05 rupees on the Bombay Stock Exchange, while the benchmark index lost 0.2%.

He said the company's comparatively lower presence in sectors such as banking, financial services, insurance and healthcare--which have driven growth at rivals--has hurt Wipro.

Given the rising demand for outsourcing, the company felt it needed a "simpler, faster, leaner" structure and decided to have a single chief executive to improve performances, he added.

Wipro said in a statement consolidated net profit for the three months ended Dec. 31 rose 9.6% to 13.19 billion rupees ($290 million) from 12.03 billion rupees a year earlier, based on international accounting standards. That was a tad below the 13.22 billion rupees average of estimates in a poll of 27 analysts. Wipro blamed lower number of working days because of the holidays in December and lower foreign-exchange gains for the worse-than-expected results.

Revenue grew 12% to 78.29 billion rupees from 69.77 billion rupees, missing the 80.25 billion rupees analysts had forecast.

IT services revenue, which accounts for more than three-fourths of total revenue, rose 19.3% from a year earlier to $1.34 billion driven by the addition of 36 clients and higher billing rates for its services. But Wipro expects its IT services revenue in the current quarter to grow 3% to 5% sequentially, slowing down from 5.6% growth in the just ended financial third quarter.

The company saw 1.5% growth in business volume compared with the financial second quarter, underperforming Tata Consultancy's 5.7% rise, Infosys's 3.1% increase, and HCL Technologies Ltd.'s 6.5% gain.

Incoming chief, Mr. Kurien, said Wipro will make most of its investments in segments that are growing, including financial services and healthcare.

The operating margin at the IT services segment was little changed at 22.2% compared with the financial second quarter, despite fewer working days and a fall in the number of staff on billable projects. Margins were supported by higher billing rates, among others, Chief Financial Offer Suresh Senapaty said. They, however, were lower than the 50-60 basis sequential increase estimated by the market.

The company's foreign-exchange gains slumped to 91 million rupees from 394 million rupees a year earlier. Wipro earns 82.5% of its revenue from the U.S. and Europe. The company, like most of its local peers, converts its non-dollar foreign currency revenue into the dollar and then into the rupee. The rupee rose an average 3.5% against the U.S. dollar.

"With relative growth prospects (compared with peers) remaining sombre and wage hikes likely to follow in future quarters, Wipro's margin performance will remain subdued through 2011," brokerage CLSA said in a note. Staff attrition levels are much above peers, it added.

The company ended the quarter with 119,491 IT services employees after adding 3,591 people during the period. 

 Write to  Dhanya Ann Thoppil at dhanya.thoppil@dowjones.com 