 French police arrested and were questioning two employees from Renault's security department about their actions during a troubled internal corporate espionage probe at the auto maker. 

 BYD said its 2010 net profit fell 34% to 2.52 billion yuan ($383.3 million) using international accounting standards as the Chinese battery and car maker, backed by Warren Buffett, contended with fierce competition and a reduction in government incentives for auto purchases.  

 Sberbank, Russia's biggest bank, will buy the country's oldest investment bank, Troika Dialog, for $1 billion in cash plus a possible future payment that depends on the investment bank's results. 

BASF sold its stake in fertilizer and salt company K+S for €1 billion ($1.4 billion), which equates to pretax proceeds of €900 million for BASF. The German chemical company said it placed some 19.7 million shares with institutional investors in an accelerated bookbuilding transaction.

Diageo is in the running to buy spirit maker Stock Spirits Group, a person familiar with the matter said. First-round bids for the U.K.-headquartered drinks maker, which is reportedly worth more than $1 billion, were due by the end of February, people familiar with the matter said last month. 

Novatek, Russia's biggest independent gas producer, said fourth-quarter net profit rose 29% to 12.11 billion rubles ($422.3 million), driven by growing gas production, rising prices and increasing domestic market share. 

 BP rejected a proposal that its Russian joint venture TNK-BP join an alliance with state oil producer Rosneft, while its Russian partners in TNK-BP rejected a compromise offer by the U.K. oil major, as pressure grows on BP to resolve the dispute. Separately, BP said it would invest $680 million to buy 83% of Brazilian bioethanol producer Companhia Nacional de Acucar e Alcool. 

French insurer AXA said it received regulatory approval to sell its 15.6% stake in Taikang Life, China's fourth-largest life insurer, for $1.2 billion to a consortium of Taikang shareholders. 

Daniel Mudd, the former chief executive of Fannie Mae, said he has received a notice of possible civil-enforcement actions from the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, the latest clue that federal investigators have expanded their years-long probe into the troubled mortgage finance giant. 

 The U.S. government's investigation into the collapse of Lehman Brothers Holdings has hit daunting hurdles that could result in no civil or criminal charges ever being filed against the company's former executives, people familiar with the situation said.  

 A decade after he flouted publishing's grim economic realities by launching a weekly news magazine in the U.S., British-born magazine publisher Felix Dennis is betting on another long-shot, agreeing to purchase Mental Floss, a bimonthly magazine started in 2000 by Duke University students looking for an outlet for their obsession with trivia. 

GlaxoSmithKline and U.S. partner Tolerx said their experimental drug otelixizumab failed to achieve its target in a late-stage clinical trial for Type 1 diabetes. 

Nomura Holdings is in talks to sell Japanese restaurant chain Skylark to private-equity firm Bain Capital in a deal that could be worth about 300 billion yen ($3.66 billion) including debt, a person familiar with the matter said. Skylark was one of the nation's pioneer restaurant chains, and has grown to about 3,680 restaurants in Japan and overseas in places such as Taiwan and Hawaii.

 Ontario Teachers' Pension Plan, one of Canada's biggest and most active investors, is exploring selling its 66% stake in Maple Leafs Sports and Entertainment, the owner of the Toronto Maple Leafs professional hockey franchise. MLSE also owns the Toronto Raptors professional basketball team and Toronto FC, a professional soccer team, as well as other sports assets. 

 A top executive of BlackBerry-maker Research in Motion said Indian security agencies are making "rather astonishing" demands for increased powers to monitor email and other data traffic, raising serious privacy issues that threaten to harm the country's reputation with foreign investors.  

Google granted $8.9 million in bonuses and $50 million in equity to four senior executives for 2010, but the Web giant's co-founders and its chief executive didn't receive additional compensation according to a regulatory filing with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. Also, Google will soon test a service that matches advertisers with website publishers, including its own YouTube video site, as it tries to become a middleman for selling video ads on the Internet. 

Nokia will pay its new chief executive, Stephen Elop, a more than $6 million signing bonus for joining the world's largest handset maker. Elop, recruited from Microsoft, received a payment of €2.3 million ($3.2 million) in October and is entitled to a payment of $3 million in October 2011, according to a filing with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. 

 Apple's iPad 2 went on sale in the U.S. on Friday, as the new version of the popular tablet computer landed in the hands of faithful fans and enterprising individuals. 

Apple will launch the iPad2 in 26 other markets, including the U.K., Japan, France, Germany and Mexico on March 25, and will roll out the tablet computer in more markets in coming months.

 Telecom Italia's controlling shareholders have agreed to a reshuffle at the helm of Italy's largest phone operator that will see Chief Executive Franco Bernabe moving to the role of executive chairman at the end of his three-year mandate in April, with a new chief executive, Marco Patuano, to focus on turning around Italian operations, people familiar with the situation said.  

 A majority of the board of Kuwait-based Zain approved a joint offer by Saudi Arabia's Kingdom Holding and Bahrain's Batelco Group to buy its 25% stake in its Saudi operations, raising hopes that U.A.E.-based Etisalat might still yet succeed in its pursuit of a 46% share of the Kuwaiti telecom.  

Cable & Wireless Worldwide said Chief Financial Officer Tim Weller will leave the U.K. telecommunications group in July to pursue new challenges a year after its demerger from Cable & Wireless PLC, with deputy CFO Ian Gibson to take his place.

Areva, the French state-controlled nuclear-engineering group, will sign a strategic partnership for its nuclear-reactor program with Rolls-Royce Group. 