 Women who give birth during the fall and winter are twice as likely to suffer from postpartum depression than if they deliver in the spring, according to a study in the American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology. Seasonal variations in mental disorders are well documented, but few studies have examined seasonal births and postpartum depression. From 2006 to 2007, 2,318 new Swedish mothers, 76% of whom had no previous psychiatric history, completed questionnaires containing a post-natal depression scale five days, six weeks and six months after giving birth. Results showed that women who gave birth from October to December were twice as likely to develop postpartum depression at six weeks and six months than women who delivered from April to June. The risk of postpartum depression was 43% higher for women who gave birth from July to September and 22% higher from January to March. There was no risk associated with deliveries from April to June. Researchers said reduced exposure to daylight may alter the activity of serotonin, causing mood disorders. Mothers giving birth in the fall might benefit from closer postpartum support and follow-up from doctors, they said.

 Caveat: The amount of daylight varies greatly in Sweden compared with other countries. Postpartum depression was self reported by questionnaire instead of a psychiatric interview. The study was carried out at one hospital in Sweden, and the findings may not have general application.

Title: Seasonality patterns in postpartum depression  

  • Work and heart disease: Men and women who regularly work 10 hours or more a day are at significantly higher risk of suffering a heart attack than those who work seven to eight hours, according to a study in the Annals of Internal Medicine. Risk for heart disease is traditionally based on cholesterol and blood-pressure measurements, smoking habits, age and gender. Recent studies have found a higher rate of coronary death and disease in people working overtime. In this study, the working hours of 7,095 civil servants in London were measured by questionnaire from 1991 to 1994. Work done at home was included. Workers were monitored until 2004; 192 heart attacks were recorded. Over half the subjects, 54%, worked seven to eight hours a day, 21% worked nine hours, 15% worked 10 hours, and just over 10% worked 11 hours or more. Risk of heart attack was 45% higher among people who worked 10 hours or more, and 67% higher after 11 hours or more. As working long hours has become more common, information about time spent at work may help to predict a person's risk for heart disease, researchers said.

 Caveat: The subjects were mainly low-risk individuals and didn't include blue-collar workers, so the findings may not apply to high-risk groups in the general population.

 Title: Using Additional Information on Working Hours to Predict Coronary Heart Disease. A Cohort Study 

• Gels for joints: An injectable gel that delivers medication directly into a diseased joint only when needed may be safer and more effective than current treatments for rheumatoid arthritis, according to a study in the Journal of Biomedical Materials Research. Most inflammatory joint diseases are treated with drugs that are taken orally and dispersed throughout the body. Side effects are common. A new drug-delivery system developed by researchers in Boston uses an injectable fibrous gel, which is programmed to release medication in response to enzymes produced during arthritic flare-ups. Using dye instead of drugs, researchers tested the technique on the joints of healthy mice and on synovial fluid drawn from arthritic human joints. When the gel was exposed to enzymes, the dye was released. Inhibiting the enzymes stopped the release of dye. Agitating the gel without enzymes didn't release dye. The gel remained stable within normal joints for at least eight weeks and didn't spontaneously burst. Enzyme-responsive gels could potentially be used to treat many conditions, including cancer and cardiovascular diseases, researchers said. 

 Caveat: Further studies are currently under way on arthritic mice. Researchers have applied for a patent on the technique, which has not yet been tested on humans.

 Title: On-demand drug delivery from self-assembled nanofibrous gels: A new approach for treatment of proteolytic disease 

• Breast cancer: A protein secreted by human mammary glands, the site of most cancerous breast tumors, suppressed the growth of malignant breast tumors in mice but had no effect on healthy cells. The protein's discovery points to a possible pathway for breast-cancer treatment, according to a study in Science Translational Medicine. The protein, called interleukin-25 (IL-25), was the most potent of six factors secreted by healthy mammary cells that were tested on breast-cancer cells in laboratory cultures. In a separate experiment, eight mice implanted with breast tumors received daily injections of IL-25, while seven received a placebo. After a month, tumors in untreated mice had tripled in size while treated mice were unchanged. No signs of toxicity were observed in the mice. IL-25 was also tested on both healthy and cancerous human breast cells and only cancerous cells responded. The California-based researchers believe IL-25 binds to a receptor protein found in 19% of invasive breast cancers but is absent in healthy cells. Future research should explore IL-25's cancer-fighting properties and its relationship to the receptor, they said.

 Caveat: The mechanism by which the IL-25 receptor helps cancerous cells grow and multiply remains to be determined, researchers said. 

 Title: IL-25 Causes Apoptosis of IL-25R-Expressing Breast Cancer Cells Without Toxicity to Nonmalignant Cells  

• Beta-blockers and melanoma: Taking beta-blockers for a year or more significantly reduced the spread of malignant melanoma, an aggressive form of skin cancer, in a study of 121 patients published in the Archives of Internal Medicine. Beta-blockers are frequently prescribed for angina, hypertension, migraines and cardiac arrhythmias. Research has suggested beta-blockers may also reduce the risk of prostate cancer. In this study, researchers in Italy compared the growth of malignant melanoma tumors in 30 patients taking beta-blockers for at least a year and 91 others not taking beta-blockers. After 2½ years, cancer had progressed in 3.3% of patients on beta-blockers and in 34.1% of those not on the medication. Cancer was detected in the sentinel or closest lymph node of 3.3% of beta-blocker patients and 19% of the non-beta-blocker group. None of the 24 patients who died of melanoma during five years of follow-up took beta-blockers. Researchers said beta-blockers may interfere with processes that contribute to metastasis, but more research is needed to understand how they inhibit malignant melanoma tumors. 

 Caveat: Researchers weren't able to fully adjust the findings to account for cardiovascular conditions for which the beta-blockers had been prescribed. The different pharmacological properties of beta-blockers weren't considered.

 Title: Treatment with Beta-Blockers and Reduced Disease Progression in Patients With Thick Melanoma  

• Herpes transmission: The genital herpes virus can be transmitted from one person to another when the disease appears to be in an inactive state, without obvious signs or symptoms, according to a study in the Journal of the American Medical Association. Herpes simplex virus type 2 is one of the most common sexually transmitted infections. An estimated 23.6 million new cases are diagnosed world-wide every year. Most infections are acquired from people who are unaware they have the virus. In this study, 498 Oregon residents with confirmed genital herpes took genital swabs for 30 days. The subjects included 410 people with a history of genital herpes symptoms before their diagnosis and 88 without prediagnostic symptoms. Results showed the virus was present on 20.1% of days in subjects with a history of genital herpes symptoms and 10.2% of days in subjects without a history. The quantity of virus shed or detected was almost identical in both groups. Risk of transmission is high in people with unrecognized genital herpes, researchers said. More public education and infection programs are recommended.

 Caveat: Subjects were recruited from a larger study of genital herpes virus shedding. It's possible that a study conducted in the general population might have different results, researchers said.

 Title:  Genital Shedding of Herpes Simplex Virus Among Symptomatic and Asymptomatic Persons With HSV-2 Infection 

• MRI and Alzheimer's: Magnetic resonance imaging can help identify patients with an early form of dementia, called mild cognitive impairment, in people who are at risk of developing Alzheimer's disease, according to a study in Radiology. Many people with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) are able to lead normal lives. Some develop other conditions, some remain stable for a number of years, but the majority eventually develops Alzheimer's disease. From 2005 to 2010, two MRI brain scans were taken 12 months apart on 317 patients with MCI, 164 with Alzheimer's and 203 healthy controls. The subjects were recruited from the U.S. and Canada and followed for 24 to 36 months; their average age was 75. The scans measured the thickness of the cerebral cortex, the area of the brain that plays an important role in memory, language and attention. Based on the first MRI, researchers predicted the one-year risk of MCI patients progressing to Alzheimer's from 3% to 40%. By combining the two MRIs and comparing the one-year change in brain volume with the controls, they calculated the risk of MCI conversion to Alzheimer's in the subsequent year from 3% to 69%. By comparison, Alzheimer's develops in 1% to 2% of the general population a year. MRI will be a useful tool if effective treatments for Alzheimer's become available, researchers said.

 Caveat: The diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease wasn't verified by microscopic examination in any patient. Subjects may not be representative of the general population, which includes diverse groups of patients with memory problems.

 Title:  Mild Cognitive Impairment: Baseline and Longitudinal Structural MR Imaging Measures Improve Predictive Prognosis 

 Retina in a dish: Embryonic stem cells from mice spontaneously formed into the shape of a three-dimensional retina in a laboratory experiment in Japan. If the technique can be adapted to human cells, it could lead to retinal transplants and a new generation of treatments for blindness, according to a study in Nature. The retina, located at the back of the eye, contains light-sensitive cells that are important for seeing. Retinal degeneration is a leading cause of blindness in diabetics and people with age-related macular degeneration. Using a new technique, researchers added a protein gel to floating clusters of mouse embryonic cells. Over the next eight to 10 days, the cells underwent a dynamic change, progressively folding inward to form a two-walled, cup-like shape resembling an early stage of eye development. Researchers noted that the transformation occurred in a self-directed fashion without a lens or other supporting tissues, a result they hadn't anticipated. The experiment showed the cells functioned normally and communicated with one another. 

 Caveat: It isn't known if human stem cells would undergo a similar transformation.

 Title: Self-organizing optic-cup morphogenesis in three-dimensional culture 