U.S. intelligence agencies believe Osama bin Laden's second-in-command and other al Qaeda leaders may try to accelerate plots in the works to prove the terror network is still potent following its leader's death, officials said.

Ayman al-Zawahiri is widely considered even more radical than bin Laden, but he is struggling to keep al Qaeda relevant at a time of popular uprisings inspired by others throughout the Arab world.

Mr. Zawahiri, a 59-year-old Egyptian doctor and an Islamic insurgent since the age of 15, has long served as al Qaeda's chief ideologue and its operational leader since helping create the terror outfit 1988.

Though lacking bin Laden's fortune and charisma, Mr. Zawahiri "has been absolutely pivotal to al Qaeda's strategy, development and evolution," said  Bruce Hoffman, a terrorism expert at Georgetown University. "By no means are we dealing with a lightweight. He talks the talk and walks the walk."

Senior Obama administration and intelligence officials said they know of no specific plots, but the U.S. has put its embassies on heightened alert. 

Top U.S. national-security officials including Central Intelligence Agency Director Leon Panetta briefed lawmakers behind closed doors on Tuesday about the operation that killed bin Laden and the future of al Qaeda.

U.S. intelligence agencies think Mr. Zawahiri "is going to have to accelerate plans in the pipeline to prove al Qaeda is still a factor," a U.S. official briefed on the matter said. 

A U.S. counterterrorism official said Mr. Zawahiri and other key al Qaeda leaders may try to launch attacks in the wake of bin Laden's killing. 

U.S. and European officials said al Qaeda affiliates in Yemen and North Africa might also speed up plans for similar reasons. 

A senior U.S. intelligence official said it was unclear whether Mr. Zawahiri will take over for bin Laden.

"Zawahiri is clearly less popular than bin Laden was among the rank and file," the official said. "He may be the presumed successor, but it's unknown what the group's ultimate decision may be."

Mr. Zawahiri's current whereabouts are unknown. The U.S. believes he is in the Afghan-Pakistan region, with some intelligence suggesting Mr. Zawahiri is hiding in North or South Waziristan along the Afghanistan border.

Records from interrogations of detainees at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, show that Mr. Zawahiri, who like bin Laden has a $25 million American bounty on his head, moved residences in May 2005 to what was described as "a good place owned by a simple, old man."

 The life of a 59-year-old Egyptian-born doctor who became a jihadi  

 1965: Joins underground jihad cell, later part of al-Jihad

 1981: Arrested after assassination of Egyptian President Anwar Sadat

 1985: After prison, meets Osama bin Laden in Pakistan

 1988: Cofounds al Qaeda

 1991: Becomes leader of Egyptian Islamic Jihad

 1997: Masterminds terrorist attack in Luxor, Egypt

 1998: Writes al Qaeda's Fatwa against U.S.

 1999: Starts researching weapons of mass destruction

 2001: Helps plan Sept. 11 attacks

 2002: Emerges as operational leader of al Qaeda

 2005: Takes responsibility for London bombings

 2007: Insists al Qaeda behind Sept. 11 attacks, blasts Iran for blaming Mossad

 2011: Offers al Qaeda's response to Arab spring, bemoans democracy

— Source: WSJ research

U.S. counterterrorism officials think Mr. Zawahiri could face internal dissent as he tries to consolidate power.

"I think he has a lot of detractors within the organization, and I think you're going to see them start eating themselves from within more and more," said John Brennan, President Barack Obama's terrorism adviser, at a briefing Monday.

But other terror experts say Mr. Zawahiri's experience and credibility as a jihadi, including jail time, his extreme piety, and his ruthlessness all speak in his favor even if a leadership challenge emerges.

"This is not a popularity contest; al Qaeda wants effective leaders. I would expect Zawahiri would be the last man standing" if there were a leadership fight, said Mr. Hoffman. 

Mr. Zawahiri (pronounced za-WA-hi-ri) embraced radical Islamic ideas at an early age, and joined a jihadi, or insurgent, cell when he was a teenager. That cell later became part of Egyptian Islamic Jihad, a group fighting to overthrow the Egyptian government. He was imprisoned for his role in the 1981 assassination of President Anwar Sadat. 

After his release, Mr. Zawahiri helped push bin Laden toward a more-militant stance during the Afghan resistance against the Soviets in the 1980s. By the end of the decade, he had helped found al Qaeda and later wrote its declaration of war on the U.S. He also pioneered al Qaeda's research into weapons of mass destruction, devised a justification for suicide bombings and killing fellow Muslims, and helped plan the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. 

He is a tireless self-promoter of his numerous books, which attack the Muslim Brotherhood, ridicule democracy and lambast repentant jihadis. He has been al Qaeda's public face in a series of audio and video tapes in recent years, where he has called for terror attacks on more than a dozen countries and organizations, from China to the United Nations.

He has hosted online question-and-answer sessions, where he justifies al Qaeda's attacks on civilians, rails against Iran and plugs his own writings. 

And since the beginning of the so-called Arab spring, Mr. Zawahiri has been charged with giving al Qaeda's response to a popular uprising that undermines most of its ideology.

That wave of largely peaceful protests that toppled governments in Tunisia and Egypt. The terrorist group has long preached that violent resistance is the only way to topple what they see as corrupt rulers, and al Qaeda has a visceral hatred of democracy. Both tenets are threatened by the Arab spring.

In a series of five audio and video messages released in recent weeks, Mr. Zawahiri has applauded the departure of former Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, but ridiculed the popular uprising. He particularly stressed the need for Egypt to embrace Sharia, or Islamic law.

"Those who seek to alienate Sharia from governance so America can be content will spread among you usury, adultery, insobriety, moral dissolution, familial schisms, and all kinds and forms of crimes," he said, according to the official transcript.

Mr. Zawahiri's "recent missive indicates that he is struggling to accommodate jihadism to the emerging reality of the Middle East." said  Nelly Lahood, an expert on extremist Islam at West Point's Center for Combatting Terrorism.

 Write to  Keith Johnson at keith.johnson@wsj.com 