NEW DELHI –India plans to tax part of an insurance claim made by  Adidas AG
ADDYY


-0.42
%




 following a fire that damaged a warehouse in the country, according to a probe report by the tax department. 

Adidas AG received about 900 million rupees ($20 million), while Adidas India Marketing Pvt. received 470 million rupees towards claims against the fire in 2009, according to the report seen by Dow Jones Newswires. 

Adidas India told the tax department that since the premium for the global insurance policy was taken out by Adidas AG, the insurance claim received abroad isn't taxable. 

However, the department's investigation found that various email exchanges between executives of Adidas India and the parent company show that the insurance compensation received abroad belonged to the local unit. 

"The entire scheme of things appears to be arranged by the Adidas group in such a way so as to evade paying taxes on this amount in India," the tax department said in its internal report. 

The tax authority's move follows a slew of recent claims over cross-border deals, such as that of Loop Telecom and Vodafone International Holdings B.V. 

Vodafone International, owned by the U.K.'s Vodafone Group PLC, is battling a court case with the tax department, which is seeking about $2.52 billion for its failure to deduct taxes while paying for Hong Kong-based  Hutchison Whampoa Ltd.'s 67% stake in Indian telecommunications operator Hutchison Essar Ltd (now Vodafone Essar). 

The tax department also alleges that Adidas' local unit isn't cooperating with the tax department on the information sought by authorities on details such as which company paid the premium for the insurance policy. 

The tax department's investigation wing has recommended Adidas India be taxed on the 900 million rupees paid to Adidas AG. 

Adidas India acknowledged that a fire had broken out at its warehouse, but didn't comment on the insurance and tax claims. 

"As a responsible international organization, Adidas complies with the legal and statutory practices defined by various regulatory bodies of the country we operate in,"  Andreas Gellner, managing director of Adidas India, said in an emailed response. 

"We will deal with everyone fairly but firmly...Adidas is no exemption," Central Board of Direct Taxes Chairman Sudhir Chandra told Dow Jones Newswires. 

A tax analyst said there is no reason why an overseas parent company would insure for products that are in India, which has to be done through the Indian unit. 

Broadly, any claim for the loss of goods within India is taxable in the country, Dinesh Kanabar, deputy chief executive at consulting firm KPMG India, said. 

 Write to  Prasanta Sahu at prasanta.sahu@dowjones.com and R. Jai Krishna at krishna.jai@dowjones.com 