Yonkers resident  Katherine Bannigan was one of four people who spent Saturday afternoon in a meadow of the New York Botanical Garden, learning to scale the towering trunk of a sweet gum tree whose branches began 20 feet overhead.

For the participants in one of two recreational tree-climbing workshops offered by the garden each year, the class was a combination of grueling upper-body work and dogged, slow progress rewarded with a bird's-eye view of the Bronx.

It was also virtually the only legal way to climb a tree in New York City.

The Botanical Garden forbids tree climbing, citing liability issues as well as concern for human and arboreal welfare. In fact, there are an estimated 2 million trees in city parks and on public land, and not one is legal to climb. Doing so can result in a citation and $50 fine. 

"There is a built-in human desire to climb things and we understand that, but we need to keep the people and the trees safe," said  Adrian Benepe, the city's parks and recreation commissioner.

So if Ms. Bannigan was to return to the garden and scale another gum tree sometime soon, "garden security would collect you and remove you to the outside of the fence and you could face penalties from the police department," said  A. Wayne Cahilly, the manager of the Botanical Garden's mapping department.

Mr. Cahilly, who created the tree-climbing class for novices and taught it for 18 years, appeared aghast at the thought of climbers attempting to shimmy up the garden's woody perennials.

"It's the same as trying to touch the paintings in the Met," he said.

Perhaps, but the Metropolitan Museum of Art doesn't offer classes that teach patrons how to handle Tintorettos and Renoirs.

"We want to give people the chance to do something they aren't normally allowed to do," said Saturday's instructor,  David Fedczuk, a garden climber and pruner. He did acknowledge that the class may enable some illegal activity: "I know recreational tree climbing is an underground sport like bungee jumping. If it isn't illegal somewhere, it will be if it gets popular."

As with smoking, trans fat and salt, New York was more laissez-faire about tree-climbing in the 1970s and '80s. Ms. Bannigan first climbed the garden's trees as a 10-year-old. Saturday's class made the Bronx native, now 45 years old, nostalgic.

"It was like returning to my childhood playground," she said. 

Mr. Fedczuk, the other Bronx native in the group, taught himself to climb in the garden. He said he would find isolated areas in the garden's 250 acres and shimmy up a trunk. Once in the canopy, he would pull the ropes off the ground to avoid detection, he said.

"There are still a few places here you could probably get away with doing that, but I'm not supposed to tell you that," Mr. Fedczuk, who is now 36 and lives in Connecticut, said as he tied knots to secure climbers into harnesses, his arms covered in scratches from rough bark and errant branches.

Mr. Benepe said he can't remember a climber being punished with a fine during his tenure at the parks department; usually, he said, park staff just asks climbers to come down.

Mr. Feczuk advises his students to climb on their own private property—a somewhat unlikely proposition for most city residents—or to lobby a state or national park for permission before making a climb.

"Since hunters climb trees to hunt in the parks, you should at least ask for the same rules to apply to you," Mr. Fedczuk said.

The preparation to climb a good-size tree takes at least an hour. For the unskilled, it can take up to 45 minutes of strenuous upper- and lower-body muscle manipulation to ascend and descend. On Saturday, it seemed that the physical demands of climbing, and not the law, would be the most effective deterrent for would-be climbers. 

"Right at the top it is quite scary. I used all my upper-body strength clinging to the trunk," said  Dan Ward, a banker who lives in Williamsburg. "It is just so much work. I think I would rather admire the trees from the ground."