 Paris 

The French government thinks it knows the solution to its slow growth and loss of industry: Be more German.

French auto makers expected in 2010 to make little more than half the number of vehicles they did in France five years earlier; German car production is around the same as it was five years earlier. France expects to post 1.6% economic growth for 2010, and less than 2% in 2011 and 2012, according to the European Commission; Germany is forecast to post 3.7% for 2010 followed by 2%-plus the following two years. France's budget deficit is forecast to be about 4.8% of gross domestic product in 2012; Germany's is expected to fall below 3%, according to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.

"I admire the German model," French President Nicolas Sarkozy said recently. "We need to learn from some aspects."

The government is now carrying out a detailed comparison of its tax system with that of Germany, which has lower corporate and payroll taxes than France. "The point of departure for this study is convergence with Germany," France's budget minister, François Baroin, said in December. "It's to make our economy more competitive."

Germany traditionally has grown more from investment and exports, which are now booming thanks to demand from China, and it generally has run lower budget deficits than France.

France, by contrast, has grown mainly through consumption over the past decade. This has been helped by public spending. The government hasn't recorded a budget surplus for more than three decades. But that model has been threatened by the last two years of economic crisis, which have pushed up France's budget deficits.

The government in France doesn't yet face the kind of financing problems that confront Ireland and Greece, which both have required international bailout packages, or Portugal and Spain, which now pay 3.6 percentage points more than Germany to borrow. Despite recent speculation, ratings agencies have so far maintained France's triple-A bond ratings, and it pays just 0.4 percentage point more than Germany to borrow.

One reason ratings agencies approve of France is its determination to reduce its budget deficit. Among other tax increases for 2011, the top rate of income tax—on earnings over €70,830 ($94,118)—will rise to 41% from 40%.

Tax increases could hurt Mr. Sarkozy ahead of France's 2012 presidential election, though. In 2007, he was elected after pledging to reduce taxes: He addressed France's growing legion of tax exiles and implored them, "Come back!" 

Mr. Sarkozy doesn't want the tax increases to weigh on French businesses, which already face some of the highest payroll taxes in the world. One move to relieve some of their burden came in 2009, when the government abolished a regional tax on capital spending peculiar to France. This, said the government, would reduce the tax burden on corporations by some €12 billion in 2010.

The government is also considering whether to abolish France's wealth tax and its "fiscal shield"—a device that means no taxpayer need pay more than 50% of his or her revenue in taxes.

Mr. Sarkozy thinks the wealth tax causes businesses and rich taxpayers to leave France for countries with less costly regimes; the shield was designed to stem the outward flow. But government figures show that the wealthy are still leaving France. And the shield is unpopular in a country where many people don't like the government sending big refund checks to the rich.

"When Germany got rid of its wealth tax it also got rid of its tax shield," Mr. Sarkozy said in November. "We have to create a tax system in which our taxes would be comparable and compatible" with taxes in Germany.

Still, the net government receipts from the wealth tax and tax shield were about €2.4 billion in 2009, and Mr. Sarkozy admitted that he might try to make up the shortfall with a new tax on capital. Another idea being floated by lawmakers is a rise in the value-added tax.

Eventually, economists say, France might have to grapple with the size of its government. France's total tax burden—from income tax to payroll taxes—is 42%, compared to 37% in Germany and 24% in the U.S., according to the OECD.

"Tax reduction is impossible because we have such high expenditure," says  Mathilde Lemoine, an HSBC economist. "There's a limit to how German France can be because the French state is so large."

The trouble is that cutting spending and benefits is politically risky. When Mr. Sarkozy raised the basic retirement age to 62—still lower than in other big economies—from 60 this autumn, workers went on strike, blockading ports and oil refineries.

 Corrections & Amplifications  French auto makers think that in 2010 they made little more than half the number of vehicles they did in France five years ago, and France expects 1.6% economic growth for 2010, while Germany is forecast to post 3.7%. A previous version of this article incorrectly indicated that these figures were for 2011.

Also, France's budget deficit is forecast by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to be 4.8% of GDP in 2012. An earlier version of this article incorrectly stated that number as 7%.