LONDON—The halt in home foreclosures will result in the U.S. economic recovery taking longer than was anticipated just several months ago,  HSBC Holdings PLC Chief Financial Officer  Iain Mackay said.

The moratorium on foreclosures imposed by HSBC and other U.S. banks, following regulators' concerns over irregularities, is "having a direct downward pressure on property prices," Mr. Mackay said Monday. HSBC has since restarted foreclosures in some areas.

In its quarterly results released Monday, the U.K. bank reported a $400 million impairment charge in its U.S operations, which reflects "a change to underlying assumptions" about the housing market and economy, he said.

"We always expected it to be a very slow recovery; we expect it to be slower now," Mr. Mackay said.

His comments come after U.S data show that home values in the first quarter posted their largest decline since late 2008. 

The bank reported a net profit of $4.15 billion, up from $2.63 billion in the same quarter last year, driven in part by revenue from Hong Kong and elsewhere in Asia.

Costs, however, continued to rise. The bank's ratio of costs relative to income hit 60.9% in the first quarter, compared with 58.9% in the fourth quarter of 2010 and up from 49.6% a year ago.

The jump was due to investment in fast-expanding markets and staff costs in competitive environments such as Asia and Latin America, the bank said.

Management has said that its target for the cost-to-income ratio is about 52%. 

The results underscore the strategic challenges new Chief Executive  Stuart Gulliver faces as he seeks to refocus the bank's operations with a strategic plan to be rolled out this week.

The performance of HSBC's U.S. division is often seen as a bellwether for the U.S. housing market. The bank was among the first to call the U.S. subprime crisis in early 2007. It has since racked up $40 billion in charges in its U.S. consumer-finance business, the former Household International Inc., most of which is now being wound down or sold.

Citigroup analyst  Ronit Ghose said the results were "a mixed bag."

"They've got strong capital and strong revenues in emerging markets. There's just costs they have to get under control," he said. He also pointed to a $47 billion influx of new deposits in the quarter as "a big positive."

Growth was strongest in Asia, Latin America and the Middle East. 

On Wednesday, Mr. Gulliver is expected to deliver an update on strategy that will detail plans to cut costs and retreat from sagging markets and business lines, as well as laying out the bank's intentions for investments in areas in which it sees longer-term opportunity.

One big question is plans for the U.S division, parts of which analysts said don't fit into the bank's focus.

HSBC is winding down most of its U.S consumer-lending business, but it still possesses a credit-card business and a retail network of 470 branches in the U.S. 

HSBC operates in about 87 countries.

"I don't think we are at an ideal business mix," Mr. Gulliver said during a conference call Monday. "I want to see a shift in revenue in the group toward the emerging markets, but I don't want to do that simply [by] making less in the developed world." 

Mr. Mackay also said Monday that the euro-zone debt situation "is still evolving." 

"Sensible actions have been taken [by European ministers] and need to be allowed to work through the system," he said.

In London, HSBC's shares fell 0.5%, to 648.20 pence ($10.63).

 Write to  Margot Patrick at margot.patrick@dowjones.com 