India's environment minister approved plans by South Korea's  Posco
PKX


-2.48
%




 to build a $12 billion steel factory, in a sign that the government is willing to compromise on large projects to keep economic growth on track. 

Monday's decision by Minister for Environment and Forestry  Jairam Ramesh has been long-awaited after he rejected several other projects because of environmental concerns. Such decisions, bringing new energy to environmental enforcement in the rapidly growing nation, made him unpopular with some corporate leaders.

Even though his decision includes a list of conditions, Mr. Ramesh's approval of Posco's plans—the country's largest-ever foreign investment—is likely to offer some hope to investors. That's especially true in the steel sector, where projects valued at more than $80 billion have been delayed because of problems with land acquisition and environmental clearances. 

Mr. Ramesh's approval came five years after Posco said it planned to set up a plant capable of producing 12 million metric tons a year in the mineral-rich eastern province of Orissa. But he made approval subject to more than two dozen conditions and withheld approval for around 50% of the project area pending further review. 

Posco India Managing Director  G.W. Sung said the company "accepted the ministry's decision with humility and gratitude." He said the company would make efforts to conserve the land and marine environment around the site and find sustainable options for residents to maintain their livelihoods. He said Posco would "plough back a part of earnings" from the project, as required by the government, into community-welfare activities in the area. 

Environmental clearance in India had been a given for many years, albeit marked by a lengthy bureaucratic process. But in the last two years, Mr. Ramesh has made such clearances tougher to obtain. Last year, he rejected London-based  Vedanta Resources
VED


2.30
%




 PLC's bid to mine the Niyamgiri Hills for bauxite, signaling rigorous application of environmental and tribal-rights laws. 

Mr. Ramesh has shown some flexibility recently, granting conditional approval to projects such as one of India's largest residential projects in western India. 

"The [Posco] decision would indicate that the government is moving in a direction of optimal environmental safeguards, instead of a maximalist approach that entails banning of projects on environmental grounds. Ecology and development can't be a zero-sum game," said  Amit Mitra, secretary-general of the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry. 

"I am an optimist and hope that the conditions imposed on Posco don't make the project itself unviable," he said. "I think that the government should impose conditions that are pragmatic, deliverable and transparent and not ones that bring death to a project." 

Posco said it will have "little difficulty" meeting the conditions imposed by the government. 

Some analysts were skeptical, however. "Uncertainties still remain," said  Chung Ji-yun at Seoul-based HI Investment & Securities. "The conditional approval is not a real advancement for Posco."

Mr. Ramesh withheld approval on more than 2,000 acres of land, pending assurance from the provincial government that tribal residents don't live in the area or will be compensated for the loss of homes and livelihoods. 

Mr. Ramesh also imposed 28 conditions related to controlling pollution, maintaining a green area for 25% of the land around the project and spending 2% of annual net profit from the plant on social welfare in the areas surrounding the site. 

He restricted approval to the project's first phase: building a factory with a capacity of four million tons a year, a 400-megawatt power plant and a port for raw materials and finished goods. Approval of the port carries 32 conditions related to conservation and pollution control. 

As the company scales up to full capacity, each subsequent stage would need additional clearances. 

Posco's current capacity is 36 million tons a year from its two plants in South Korea. It expects steel plants proposed for Indonesia and India and production in China to raise its combined capacity to 64 million tons but hasn't given a time frame for completing those projects. 

"In a couple of years, Posco badly needs burgeoning markets such as India to continue to grow," said  Eom Jin-seok at Seoul's Kyobo Securities.

While Mr. Ramesh's move removes official hurdles for Posco, the project may continue to face protests from landowners who claim the project will uproot their homes and destroy their livelihoods. 

"We vehemently oppose the clearance given to the project. There will be a protest meeting tomorrow, where we will chart the future course of the protest," said  Prashant Paikary, a spokesman for Posco Pratirodh Samiti, a group protesting the Posco project. "Our aim is make our voices heard in New Delhi." He said several villagers don't intend to sell their homes and land to Posco. 

—Saurabh Chaturvedi in New Delhi contributed to this article.

 Write to  Prasenjit Bhattacharya at prasenjit.bhattacharya@dowjones.com 