TORONTO—The earthquake and tsunami that ravaged northeast Japan could put near-term pressure on Canada's forest-products sector, threatening to dry up new orders while Japan copes with the immediate aftermath of the disaster. 

But in the longer term, Canadian forest-products companies like  Ainsworth Lumber Co., Interfor Ltd. and  TimberWest Forest Corp., could see substantial increases in exports to Japan as the country rebuilds homes damaged or destroyed by the quake. 

Japan is a big importer of Canadian timber and other products. Those three firms are Canada's biggest forest-products exporters to Japan, according to Dundee Capital Markets analyst  Richard Kelertas. 

TimberWest generates about 10% of its revenue from Japan, while Interfor and Ainsworth generate 15% and 20%, respectively, he said. He estimates those percentages could double in the next 12-18 months amid rebuilding demand. 

Officials from all three firms weren't immediately available for comment on Saturday. 

According to British Columbia's Ministry of Forests, Mining and Lands, Japan accounted for 12% of the province's forest-products -sector export value through February. In December, the province's forest-product exports totaled 822 million Canadian dollars ($842.9 million), according to the ministry. British Columbia is home to the bulk of Canada's forest-products industry. 

Mr. Kelertas said he doesn't expect any export disruption to last long, as he believes Japan will look to rebuild quickly and stockpile product before prices soar. In the interim, Canadian firms may look to divert exports that had been earmarked for Japan to China, assuming product specifications, such as sizing and wrapping, are closely matched, he said. 

Wood will be a major construction material in the residential rebuilding of Japan, Mr. Kelertas said, as its elasticity makes it more earthquake resistant than concrete. Indeed, he said this trend was already in evidence before this week's devastating quake. To give a benchmark of the possible scale of the rebuilding effort, Mr. Kelertas noted that the Chinese government has spent about one trillion yuan (about $152 billion) since a magnitude-7.9 quake struck Sichuan province in May 2008. He said he expects the damage wrought by the Japan quake to be of similar if not higher magnitude. 