For years, the 13-inch laptop was the size of choice for über-air-mile earners—portable enough to fit into any briefcase, but also packed with the power to handle everything from serious PowerPoint presentations to Duke Nukem with freeze-free aplomb. "Portable" is a relative term, however, as anyone who's had to lug around one of these typically 4- to 5-pound computers can attest. The salvation for road warriors with carry-on fatigue lies in the 11-inch laptop, which is big enough to have a spacious keyboard yet doesn't weigh as much as a sack of flour. Many have fast processors, built-in mobile broadband and battery life that can get you across oceans on a single charge. Here are four favorites sure to make your fellow passengers envious. 

—Tom Samiljan

 1. Apple MacBook Air 11-inch  Impossibly thin—it could fit in a manila envelope—the first MacBook Air set the standard to which all other ultraportables would be compared. This second generation comes available in a smaller, 11.6-inch version yet still manages to feature a full-size keyboard, a zippy Intel Core Duo 2 processor and its iPad-level slenderness and weight (2.3 pounds) makes it barely noticeable in any backpack or large handbag. But the most impressive feature? Its all-Flash memory means it starts up in less than 30 seconds. $1,000, apple.com  

 2. Acer TimelineX 1830T  The matte-black Timeline X epitomizes the small-size, no-compromises trend with its multitasking and gaming-friendly Intel Core i7 processor, built-in surround-sound speakers, HD 11.6-inch widescreen and HDMI output—plenty of features to fit into a laptop that weighs just under 3 pounds. The keys are full-size (though crammed a bit close together), making typing a cinch. But this compact powerhouse's biggest draw is its battery life, which will keep you computing on even the smallest of Economy Class tray tables for up to eight hours. $900, acer.com  

 3. Sony Vaio X Signature Series  As small and slim goes, Sony's Vaio X takes the cake. Despite its minimal footprint it has an 11.1-inch screen and is just a half-inch thick the ultra-ultraportable packs in generously spaced keys for serious typing. The limited-edition Signature series, pictured here, is numbered and housed in a tastefully blinged-out gold carbon-fiber body. It also includes two batteries: the ultra-slim variety (3.5 hours) and a slightly thicker long-life model (14 hours). Though its Atom processor is a bit sluggish, the X handles video surprisingly smoothly. $1,500, sonystyle.com  

 4. Lenovo Thinkpad X100e  With a thin red border around the typical Thinkpad-style keyboard—a retro touch reminiscent of the original Tron—the X100e is so sharp looking, it's hard to believe Lenovo designed it for the workplace. Other than the standout styling of the Midnight Red version, this ultraportable is all business, featuring three USB ports, an 11.6-inch HD display, a full-size keyboard and Bluetooth. It may not be the slimmest (1.2-inches thick) or the lightest (3.3 pounds), but it is by far the sexiest for business and a relative bargain. $500, shop.lenovo.com  