This year's NCAA tournament—the first to feature a 68-team format—probably isn't going to go down in history as the greatest ever played.

Nearly half the schools in the field (31 to be exact) have double digits in the loss column. Last year there were 20. The bottom end of this tournament's at-large contingent looks like the hardwood version of the Statue of Liberty's huddled masses. From Villanova to Michigan State to Florida State, teams are staggering onto the stage with all manner of hardships. It's hard to imagine this group making us forget all-time classics like the Villanova-over-Georgetown tournament of 1985. 

And yet, as the derby goes into full swing Thursday, there's an argument to be made that this is the most exciting field the sport has seen in years.

Last year at this time, Arizona was sitting out the NCAA tournament for the first time in a quarter century. St. John's, the seventh-winningest program in Division I history, was about to fire coach Norm Roberts and start over. Marquee teams like North Carolina and Connecticut were moving through the National Invitation Tournament. UCLA and Michigan weren't even doing that: Both were sitting home after sub-.500 seasons. 

One year later, all these schools have rebounded, a coincidence that has created a bracket that's bursting with brand names. Of the 15 winningest schools in NCAA tournament history, 14 are in this year's field. (Rebuilding Indiana is the only exception.)

While the NCAA tournament is often thought of as a celebration of upsets, egalitarianism and the little guy, it has always benefitted from a healthy supply of blue blood. According to the NCAA, the most-watched games in tournament history, in total households, were the 1992 Duke-Michigan final (20.9 million) and 1993 North Carolina-Michigan final (20.7 million), followed by 1994's Arkansas-Duke final and Georgetown-Villanova.

Last year's thrilling final between Duke and upstart Butler was wildly popular (16.3 million), but that may have been due in large part to the iconic Blue Devils, who have been involved in nine of the 25 most-watched games.

This tournament is also dotted with star players trying to come back from significant injuries, heightening the chances for a surprise. Georgetown began the season winning 21 of its first 27 games and ranking No. 11 in the country. Then point guard Chris Wright broke his hand on Feb. 23, sending the Hoyas into an 0-4 skid. Wright is expected to play in Georgetown's opener Friday—making the No. 6-seed Hoyas an intriguing unknown.

If Florida State star Chris Singleton can return from a broken foot, he would make the 10th-seeded Seminoles lineup look a lot more ferocious. And then there's the comeback that has no known precedent: Kyrie Irving, the Duke freshman point guard who looked like one of the nation's top players before a toe injury Dec. 4. He may return after missing virtually the entire season. 

Another twist this year: some of those big-name programs aren't exactly in vintage form. The first-round game that symbolizes this is No. 7-seed UCLA against No. 10-seed Michigan State—two traditional contenders that, this year, aren't expected to last long. 

But at least they're here.