PORT-AU-PRINCE—Haiti's chief prosecutor formally re-opened a 2008 case charging Jean Claude "Baby Doc" Duvalier with a slew of criminal charges including murder, the latest twist in a bizarre odyssey that has kept the country on edge for days. 

Haiti's former dictator Jean-Claude Duvalier unexpectedly returned to the country after nearly 25 years in exile.

"The charges are government corruption, embezzlement of funds, money laundering, and assassination," said Chief Magistrate Harycidas Auguste on Tuesday. He said the original 2008 case had been lost and buried under the ruins of the courthouse destroyed during the January 2010 earthquake. "It took months to reconstruct it, but we did," he said. 

Mr. Duvalier, looking frail, and visibly shaken, walked out of Mr. Auguste's office surrounded by members of a Haitian SWAT team. 

The former dictator's unexpected arrival Sunday after nearly 25 years of exile stunned the nation, and appeared to further enmesh Haiti in the political crisis caused by the country's botched attempt to hold presidential elections in November. 

There was no clear indication of Mr. Duvalier's motives to return to Haiti, and prosecutors wasted no time in taking legal action against him.

One of his lawyers, Gervais Charles, confirmed the charges against Mr. Duvalier are the same as in the 2008 case, but said that the government hadn't been able to reconstruct the legal dossier. "They have nothing," said Mr. Charles. 

In the past, Mr. Duvalier, who didn't speak at the courthouse Tuesday, has denied the charges. 

Mr. Charles said Mr. Duvalier, who isn't under arrest, would remain in Haiti to make himself available to the investigating magistrate. Under Haitian law, the judge has 90 days to investigate the case, after which the magistrate can either indict Mr. Duvalier or dismiss the charges.

Mr. Duvalier emerged from the courthouse and into an excited mob of hundreds of supporters. He sped off in a convoy, presumably headed to his hotel. Hundreds of his followers chased after his car. 

Earlier, opponents and supporters had lined the road from his hotel, jeering and cheering as Mr. Duvalier, dressed in a dark blue suit, was taken by police in a sport-utility vehicle to the courtroom.

Haiti, the poorest country in the Western Hemisphere, is struggling to rebuild after last year's earthquake devastated the capital, and as a cholera epidemic continues to rage through squalid tent camps housing about one million refugees. 

Mr. Duvalier ruled Haiti from 1971 to 1986 when he was deposed by mass demonstrations and U.S. pressure. He has been living quietly in France ever since. 

Haitian officials have accused Mr. Duvalier, and his father, Francois, known as "Papa Doc," who ruled Haiti from 1957 until his death in 1971, of stealing hundreds of millions of dollars. 

Mr. Duvalier is also battling a Swiss effort to confiscate about $5 million that he holds in Swiss bank accounts, and return the funds to Haiti, according to Haitian and Swiss lawyers involved in the case.

A law allowing Swiss authorities to seize funds deemed of illicit origin and return them to foreign nations is set to come into force on Feb. 1. From that date, Swiss authorities will have the power to initiate a case against Mr. Duvalier, a spokesman for Swiss Foreign Ministry said Tuesday. 

Pending possible legal actions against Mr. Duvalier, Swiss authorities have frozen the funds. Mr. Duvalier has challenged that decision through Switzerland's Federal Administrative Court.

Earlier, Mr. Charles had said the Haitian government had no reason to question Mr. Duvalier.

International human-rights organizations, as well as Haitian victims of his regime have been demanding Mr. Duvalier be arrested on charges ranging from embezzling millions of dollars to causing the deaths of thousands of Haitians during his rule. 

"It was rule by terror, up to 2,000 people disappeared under Duvalier son's regime," says Georges Michel, a Haitian journalist and historian who says he was beaten up during a protest by Ton Ton Macoutes, the Haitian secret police used by both Mr. Duvalier and his father, the founder of the dynasty.

"It's as if it was yesterday. The Duvalier regime...committed crimes against humanity, war crimes, torture -- transnational crimes."

Mr. Duvalier entered Port-au-Prince on Sunday using an expired Haitian diplomatic passport. 

Analysts say Mr. Duvalier's arrival could complicate Haiti's attempt to find a way out of its latest political crisis since results were released for the first round of presidential elections held in November. 

Haitians rioted after electoral authorities declared that Jude Célestin, who has the backing of President René Préval, had placed second, behind former first lady Mirlande Manigat, eliminating ballader Michel Martelly, known as "Sweet Micky," from the second-round presidential runoff. 

On Tuesday, a White House spokesman said current or former political leaders should be focused on ending the country's political crisis. 

In a bid to end the impasse, the Organization of American States sent a team of election specialists. The mission presented Mr. Preval with a report that recommended Mr. Celestin be dropped in favor of Mr. Martelly. Mr. Preval has said he has "reservations" about the report, which he received last week. The decision about whether Mr. Martelly or Mr. Celestin advances to the second round, originally scheduled for January 16th, must be made by Haitian electoral authorities. 

OAS Secretary General Jose Miguel Insulza met with Mr. Preval and other Haitian officials Monday in the Haitian capital to discuss the report. Many fear the unsettled political situation could further hold up billions of dollars in aid promised by the international community to help Haiti recover from the earthquake which killed more than 230,000 people a year ago. 

Mr. Duvalier appears to have little political support. Last year only about 100 mostly elderly supporters came out to demonstrate in support of the Duvalier dynasty, a Haitian official said. But officials fear that Mr. Duvalier's return will anger supporters of Duvalier's political foe, former President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, a divisive figure who still commands much popular support, and who now will increase demands that Mr. Aristide's return as well. Deposed in 2004, Mr. Aristide lives in exile in South Africa. 

 Write to  David Gauthier-Villars at David.Gauthier-Villars@wsj.com 