World leaders cheered the U.S. announcement that Osama bin Laden had been killed as a victory for the global effort against terrorism, even as they took steps to prepare for possible retaliatory strikes. 

Congratulations came from U.S. allies across the world Monday as governments expressed hope that Mr. bin Laden's death could help antiterror efforts. "His death makes the world a safer place and shows that such crimes do not remain unpunished," said European Commission President José Manuel Barroso and European Council President Herman Van Rompuy in a joint statement. "This is a major achievement in our efforts to rid the world of terrorism." 

"We can only rejoice about what happened last night," said French Finance Minister Christine Lagarde on Monday. She cited a rally in early Monday trading in the U.S. dollar as a sign of renewed investor confidence. The dollar later retreated as buying gave way to fear of reprisals

Israeli leaders also offered their congratulations to U.S. President Barack Obama and the U.S. forces who killed the al Qaeda leader. Already close relations between Israel and Washington grew stronger in the wake of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, forged by a common feeling among their leaders that they were acting in tandem as a bulwark against Islamic radicalism.

"The state of Israel shares the joy of the American people on this historic day of the elimination of Osama bin Laden," said a statement by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. "This is a resounding victory for justice, for freedom, and for the shared values of all democratic countries fighting shoulder to shoulder with determination against terror."

U.K. Prime Minister David Cameron said the news would bring a "great relief" to people across the world. The U.K. has been targeted in attacks inspired by Mr. bin Laden's al Qaeda terrorist organization, including the deaths of 56 people in an attack on the London transport system in 2005. "It is a great success that he has been found and will no longer be able to pursue his campaign of global terror," Mr. Cameron said. "This is a time to remember all those murdered by Osama bin Laden, and all those who lost loved ones." 

"Osama bin Laden was one of the most brutal terrorists in the world. He had the lives of thousands of innocent people on his conscience," German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle said in an emailed statement. 

Colombia's government, which has been fighting domestic terrorism for decades, congratulated the U.S. on the success of its strike. 

United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon called Mr. bin Laden's death "a watershed moment in our common global fight against terrorism." Recalling being in New York on Sept. 11, 2001, Mr. Ban said," Personally, I am very much relieved by the news that justice has been done to such a mastermind of international terrorism."

Turkish President Abdullah Gul also hailed the news, stressing it should serve as a warning to terrorist leaders elsewhere that they would be caught "dead or alive." Al Qaeda has claimed responsibility for multiple terrorist attacks in Turkey, killing more than 60 people and wounding hundreds in 2003.

A Saudi official said he hoped that "elimination of al-Qaeda leader is a step towards combating terrorism, dismantling its cells, and destroying the deviant ideology and those who support it." Many other Arab governments did not publish officials statements, but some officials said privately that they celebrated Mr. bin Laden's demise. 

In Gaza, Hamas leaders spent the morning in closed meetings before Hamas Prime Minister Ismail Haniyeh issued a statement condemning the killing. "Killing Osama Bin Laden is a continuation of the U.S. policy of oppression. We condemn the assassination of a muslim mujahed," Mr. Haniyeh said.

Hamas's statement is unusual as it has taken great pains over the years to separate itself from al Qaeda's ideology of global jihad, arguing that its resistance against Israeli occupation is to fulfill the local grievance of Palestinian statehood. Hamas has also come under fire numerous times over the past few years from al Qaeda leaders for not embracing global jihad.

A leader in the Fatah party, Azzam al-Ahmad, said of Mr. Haniyeh's comments. "It's his own point of view and we respect his point of view." Mr. al-Ahmad is in Cairo this week for power-sharing negotiations between the rival Palestinian factions. Hamas and Fatah hope to sign an Egyptian-brokered agreement on Wednesday morning. "Al Qaeda is not a part of the struggle against israel. It's far from the Palestinian situation. I don't think that it's going to have an effect" on the negotiations, Mr. al-Ahmad said.

The Muslim Brotherhood, Egypt's most powerful Islamist political group, condemned what it called the assassination of Mr. bin Laden in a statement distributed to reporters on Monday. 

Even the Libyan rebels weighed in. "Osama Bin Laden's death is considered the death of a big part of evil in the world," said Col. Ahmed Bani, the military spokesman for the rebels in Benghazi. "Religion does not allow us to dance with joy for his death but we feel comfortable knowing he's dead." 

Meanwhile, India reacted with "grave concern" to news that Mr. bin Laden had been hiding out "deep inside" Pakistan before his death, and called on Islamabad to arrest militants connected to the attacks on Mumbai in 2008 that killed more than 160 people.

Many nations took step to safeguard against attacks by al Qaeda. 

Japan said it will ramp up security at military facilities to guard against any potential retaliatory assaults from terrorist groups. Defense Minister Toshimi Kitazawa said he had told the Self Defense Forces to strengthen security at all of its military facilities in Japan. 

The Philippines, which faces its own militant Islamic insurgency, ordered that diplomatic facilities and other key installations be secured and said it will monitor the situation in the southern region of Mindanao, where some terrorist groups are known to hide out. 

"The death of Osama bin Laden should not lull us into complacency," said President Benigno Aquino III in a statement. "The world must continue to consistently and courageously raise its collective voice against religious hatred, political intolerance, and terrorism of all kinds." 

In Australia, Prime Minister Julia Gillard said she has advised all embassies and consulates of the need for "security awareness." "We are advising Australians in areas likely to be affected by gatherings outside hotels, gatherings and demonstrations, to exercise enhanced vigilance," she said. Australia has nearly 2,400 troops in Afghanistan with an additional 87 in the Middle East and North Africa. Ms. Gillard said the death of Mr. bin Laden only enhances the country's need to be present in the region.

The U.S. urged U.S. citizens to limit travel in areas where the al Qaeda leader's death would spawn anti-American violence. The State Department said U.S. embassy operations will continue to the "extent possible," though some facilities may temporarily close. 

—Marc Champion, Tom Wright, Joe Lauria and Geoffrey Rogow contributed to this article.