DENVER—If the Mets trade Jose Reyes in July, the star shortstop will likely be gone for good. 

Theoretically, the Mets could trade Reyes to another team before the non-waiver deadline to help bolster their farm system and then re-sign him when he becomes a free agent next winter. But general manager Sandy Alderson said if the Mets intend to re-sign Reyes, they probably won't trade him. "I think that's unlikely," Alderson said. "I think if you go back and look historically at similar cases, you'll probably find very few examples of that."

It wouldn't be wholly unprecedented for a team to trade a star player and re-sign him the following winter. The Cleveland Indians traded outfielder Kenny Lofton to the Atlanta Braves in March of 1997 and re-signed him eight months later. The Philadelphia Phillies traded Cliff Lee to the Seattle Mariners after the 2009 season and re-signed him one year later.

But such cases are rare, and trading Reyes could hurt the Mets' chances of re-signing him. A major factor working in their favor, should they attempt to keep Reyes, is his stated desire to remain with the only team he has ever known.

By trading him to a contender, the Mets could open Reyes's eyes to the pennant races he has been missing the past couple of years. Wearing another uniform wouldn't be so hard for him to fathom.

Keeping Reyes for the rest of the season would carry risks of its own. The two sides are unlikely to discuss a contract extension during the season, so the Mets would have no assurance that Reyes would stay.

 If they pass on the chance to acquire a high-level prospect for Reyes in July, it may be for naught.

But if the Mets decide to make a run at re-signing Reyes, that is a risk they appear willing to take. They could still offer him salary arbitration after the season, meaning if he signs elsewhere, they would receive a compensation draft pick.

For now, the larger question remains: Will the Mets attempt to sign Reyes to the lucrative, multi-year deal he figures to command?

That question hovers over them now, especially in light of how quickly they have faded in the standings. At 15-20 entering Tuesday, the Mets were in last place in the National League East, 8 1/2 games behind the first-place Philadelphia Phillies. Only two N.L. teams had a worse record. 

Still, until the trade market begins to take shape next month, the decision on Reyes can wait. "I don't think you really approach [potential trades] in a serious fashion until sometime in early June," Alderson said. "There are exceptions to that, but as a general rule, you're talking about an evaluation process the first couple months of the season....I think it's still less likely that something of any significance would happen early in June. The probabilities will continue to increase through the end of July."

Regardless of what the Mets do with Reyes, it is apparent they need to find a way to add more high-level talent to their farm system. That is especially true now that top pitching prospect Jenrry Mejia will undergo reconstructive elbow surgery.

"We don't have a lot of top-end prospects at the upper echelon," Alderson said, "but that was true before the injury to Mejia."