BANGALORE – Indian generic drug maker Dr. Reddy's Laboratories Ltd. Friday far exceeded expectations by doubling its fiscal fourth-quarter net profit, helped primarily by strong margins from U.S. sales of a generic drug to treat allergies. 

Consolidated net profit for the quarter through March rose to 3.35 billion rupees ($74.5 million) from 1.67 billion rupees a year earlier, beating the average forecast of 2.59 billion rupees in a poll of 11 analysts. 

Consolidated sales rose 23% to 20.17 billion rupees from 16.42 billion rupees, ahead of the poll forecast of 19.14 billion rupees.

The results sent Dr. Reddy's shares up 3.3% to 1,655.45 rupees at close of trade Friday, outperforming the broader Mumbai market, which gained 1.1%. 

The numbers conform to International Financial Reporting Standards. 

The Mumbai- and New York-listed company, which gets almost three-quarters of its revenue from selling generic drugs globally, benefited from limited competition to its sales of generic versions of several drugs in the U.S. 

Generic drugs sales in North America, the biggest market for such products, grew 68% from a year earlier to 5.9 billion rupees in the fourth quarter. Dr. Reddy's said sales for the region were boosted by the launch a generic version of  Sanofi-Aventis SA's anti-allergy drug, Allegra D-24. 

The presence of other limited-competition products like  Takeda Pharmaceutical Co.
TKPYY


0.20
%




's ulcer drug Prevacid and  AstraZeneca's anti-asthma drug Accolate in its U.S. drug portfolio has also meant that the company has continued to enjoy good profits on their sales as there aren't too many competitors to push prices down. 

Generic drug makers that are first to successfully challenge any patented drugs in the U.S. get sales exclusivity for six months. Indian companies have been using this route to fatten their margins as they can sell products at a higher price when they have sales exclusivity. 

Ranbaxy Laboratories Ltd. earlier this week posted a better-than-expected quarterly profit, helped by strong margins from exclusive U.S. sales of a generic drug to treat Alzheimer's disease. 

Dr. Reddy's' U.S. business performance was supported by sales in Russia and other Commonwealth of Independent States, where quarterly sales rose 26% to 2.7 billion rupees. 

Generic drugs sales in Europe continued to be a drag, declining 5% to 2.0 billion rupees. Sales in the region have been strained by the company's operations in Germany, where drug prices have fallen after health-care insurance providers switched to a tender-based model for the supply of generic drugs. 

Generic-drug sales rose 5% to 2.8 billion rupees in India in January-March. 

Sales in the pharmaceutical services and active ingredients segment grew 13% to 5.6 billion rupees.

Dr. Reddy's said the latest fourth-quarter results included a gain of 171 million rupees against a loss of 45 million rupees last year due to foreign exchange movements. 

In January, Dr. Reddy's won a legal battle in the U.S. against Sanofi-Aventis and  Albany Molecular Research Inc.
AMRI


2.20
%




 that had blocked the Indian company from launching the copy of Allegra D-24. 

Allegra D-24 tablets are a once-daily treatment for allergy symptoms such as nasal congestion. 

 Write to  Rumman Ahmed at rumman.ahmed@dowjones.com 