 Volkswagen said it would launch a mandatory takeover offer for MAN that values the German truck maker at about €13.8 billion ($19.8 billion), as part of its plan to forge an alliance to take on the world's two largest truck makers, Daimler and Volvo.  



 Vincent Bolloré, the French mogul who has invested in palm oil, a French newspaper and global advertising, this year is making what might be his boldest gamble: a shared-electric-car project for the City of Light. 



Hertz offered to buy smaller auto-rental rival Dollar Thrifty for $2.08 billion in cash and stock, a substantially bigger offer than the one the target's shareholders had spurned last year. 



BMW said will ramp up investments in China to €1 billion ($1.44 billion) from €560 million together with its joint-venture partner Brilliance Automotive Holdings to further expand its operations in the market. 



Tata Motors started exporting the Nano minicar last month, a move that will likely help India's largest auto maker by sales further lift sales of the world's cheapest car and reduce its sole dependence on the home market. 

The company, which controls the Jaguar and Land Rover luxury car brands, exported 498 units of the Nano in the past month, according to data issued by the Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers. 



Qantas Airways said it expects minor flight disruptions across Australian airports later this week as a result of a strike action planned by an engineers' union. The Australian Licensed Aircraft Engineers Association said it would hold a nationwide stop work action between 0800 and 0900 Sydney time on Friday. 



 U.K. banks abandoned their legal fight over the mis-selling of payment protection insurance, following the lead set by Lloyds Banking Group last week, in a move that could cost them billions of pounds in compensation. 



 HSBC said lower taxes and a drop in bad-loan charges helped lift first-quarter net profit by 58% to $4.15 billion, but underlying profit was down, revenue was a touch lower and costs were up sharply in the period. 

The bank also said it would make a $440 million provision toward compensating customers for mis-sold payment-protection insurance.



 Indonesian state energy firm PT Pertamina is in talks with Exxon Mobil to buy its 25% stake in an oil-exploration project in Angola after bidding around $3.5 billion, said a person familiar with the matter.  



 French fashion house Chloé won't renew the contract of lead designer Hannah MacGibbon and named Clare Waight Keller, previously the creative director for knitwear label Pringle of Scotland, to succeed her. 



Munich Re, the world's largest reinsurer by premium revenues, said it swung to a net loss in the first quarter of €947 million ($1.36 billion), as the high burden from the recent string of earthquakes, floods and other disasters around the globe took its toll.



Danisco said its largest shareholder, U.S. financial investor Elliott International, has raised its stake to more than 10%, a move that could jeopardize U.S. chemicals company DuPont's takeover bid for the Danish food-ingredients manufacturer.



IntercontinentalExchange and Nasdaq OMX Group told NYSE Euronext shareholders to demand more time to review the proposed merger with Deutsche Börse, warning that the Big Board had "rushed to judgment" on the deal.

Nasdaq OMX and ICE also renewed calls for investors to put pressure on NYSE Euronext's board to meet with its uninvited suitors, after the company twice rejected overtures from ICE and Nasdaq OMX. 



RTL Group, the Luxembourg-based free-to-air broadcaster, said first-quarter operating profit fell nearly 12% to €181 million ($259.8 million), after the German television advertising market was down in the period. 



Elan sealed a transformational deal to sell its drug technology unit EDT to U.S.-based Alkermes in a deal valued at $960 million that allows the Irish drug maker to pay down debt and fund pipeline development. 



Private-equity firm BC Partners said it will buy 79% of Italian general retailer Gruppo Coin for €733 million ($1.05 billion) and intends to make an offer for the rest of the shares. 



McDonald's global same-store sales rose 6% in April, the biggest monthly increase since October, reflecting continued demand for its McCafe beverages in the U.S. as well as premium beef and chicken options in Europe. 



 South Africa's government said Wal-Mart Stores' $2.4 billion acquisition of African retailer Massmart Holdings could cause thousands of job losses and worsen labor conditions, in a blunt warning that throws cold water on one of the country's biggest potential overseas investments. 

LinkedIn plans to sell 7.84 million shares at an estimated price range of $32 to $35 a share in an IPO that could value the company at more than $3 billion.



Publisher Condé Nast said it struck a deal with Apple to sell subscriptions to the iPad editions of a number of its titles through Apple's App Store, beginning with the New Yorker and expanding to Vanity Fair, Glamour and other magazines.



Toshiba said its net profit for the three months through March doubled to ¥97.66 billion ($1.21 billion) from ¥48.60 billion from a year earlier, thanks to smaller restructuring costs, helping it to its first full-year profit in three years. 

For the full fiscal year that ended in March, Toshiba made a net profit of ¥137.85 billion compared with a loss of ¥19.74 billion a year earlier. 

Softbank, Japan's third-largest mobile carrier by number of subscribers, said net profit for the three months through March surged to ¥47.41 billion ($588.5 million) from ¥1.85 billion a year earlier. 



Engine maker Tognum said it targets revenues of around €2.9 billion ($4.2 billion) in 2011 as it swung to a net profit of €56.3 million in the first quarter from a net loss of €1.1 million in the same quarter a year earlier.



Thomas Cook Group, Europe's second-largest travel operator by market capital, said net loss fell to £200.8 million ($329.3 million) from £211.8 million a year earlier, while revenue for the six months to March 31 climbed 3.7% to £3.43 billion, driven by higher prices and an increase in the number of people buying costlier trips.



U.K. utility Centrica said earnings in 2011 would grow at a more modest rate than anticipated due to the U.K. government's recent increase in taxes for North Sea gas and oil production, so it won't invest as much in the U.K. in 2011. 