 A Renault executive the French auto maker suspects of spying on its electric-cars program said he hadn't engaged in espionage, and that he was the victim of a scandal that he didn't understand.  

Germany's Daimler said it is investing €271 million ($351 million) in Mitsubishi Fuso Truck and Bus and raising its stake to 89.29% from 85% in a move aimed at supporting business expansion as the global commercial vehicle market continues its recovery. 

India's car sales surged 31% to 1.87 million cars in 2010 as rising disposable incomes, new models and a robust economy drove more customers to showrooms, a trade group said. Total vehicle sales in 2010 also rose 31% to 14.82 million.

 Airbus said it has a preliminary deal with Indian budget carrier IndiGo for 180 of its A320 airliners, with a catalog value of $15.6 billion, which Airbus says is the largest-ever order for jetliners in terms of both number and value. 

Deutsche Lufthansa said it expects operating results in 2011 will further improve despite headwinds that include uncertain demand as well as rising jet fuel costs. 

Airport operator Fraport said passenger volume at its Frankfurt hub for December declined 1.6% because of the severe winter, according to preliminary figures. 

American Airlines and Japan Airlines unveiled a new joint business that will operate on 10 trans-Pacific routes between the U.S. and Japan. 

Qantas Airways said it will resume A380 jetliner flights from Australia to Los Angeles on Jan. 16 after a Rolls-Royce Group engine blowout on one of its Airbus superjumbos late last year forced it to ground the service. 

 Barclays Chief Executive Bob Diamond said the giant bank will keep London as its headquarters, but the vow did little to blunt attacks from British lawmakers that reflected ongoing angst over bankers' compensation.  

 The U.K. Financial Services Authority said it fined Royal Bank of Scotland Group and its National Westminster Bank unit a total of £2.8 million ($4.4 million) over "multiple failings" in the way they handled customers' complaints.  

 Société Générale has agreed to purchase North American power and natural-gas assets from RBS Sempra Commodities, the latest effort by the French bank to expand its commodities business. 

Newell Rubbermaid Chief Executive Mark D. Ketchum is stepping down after a five-year effort to transform the maker of storage tubs and Sharpie pens into a business focused on more distinctive products. 

U.K. defense giant BAE Systems abandoned plans to sell its North American commercial aerospace business four months after putting it on the block. According to media reports, bidders for the operations were due to submit final offers last week. 

BP said it raised output from Iraq's Rumaila oil field by more than 10% above the 1.066 million barrel a day target agreed to in December 2009, a milestone that means the company will start to get paid for its work on the field. 

ExxonMobil Exploration & Production Malaysia, with Petronas Carigali, plans to invest more than 10 billion ringgit ($3.25 billion) in new oil and gas assets in the South Asian nation.

Also, Shell Malaysia will invest 5.1 billion ringgit in various projects to upgrade, expand or build facilities in upstream and downstream activities in the country while Malaysia's oil and gas services provider, Dialog Group, will lead a consortium including the Johor state government and Vopak to develop a 5 billion ringgit deepwater petrol terminal. 

 Goldman Sachs unveiled its much anticipated business-standards committee report and disclosed changes to its financial disclosures that reduce the percentage contribution of trading to the firm's net revenues. 

Tryg, Denmark's largest insurer by market capitalization, said Chief Executive Stine Bosse resigned to focus on supervisory board work and spend more time with her family. Bosse joined Tryg in 1987 and has served as CEO since 2003. 

Bond insurer MBIA won an important ruling from a panel of New York judges who determined that the company's restructuring plan was legal. The Appellate Division of the New York State Supreme Court overturned a lower court's ruling on the restructuring plan, which would segregate some of the company's policies covering structured securities from its municipal-bond obligations.

De La Rue has yet to outline a clear strategy to its shareholders in the wake of Oberthur's £900 million ($1.4 billion) approach to the U.K. banknote producer, people familiar with the situation said. 

Samsung and LG, South Korea's top two consumer electronics makers, said their home appliance divisions are expected to report brisk sales over the next few years, driven by demand for premium and environmentally friendly products. 

Hong Kong's stock exchange is working on a way to help investors buy stocks listed in yuan, even if they don't own any of the Chinese money, and will toughen measures to reduce market-wide risks. 

Norwegian conglomerate Orkla said it has signed a deal to sell its Elkem unit to China National Bluestar for $2 billion.

Tata Steel, saddled by the debt it took on to fund its India expansion plans and to buy Anglo-Dutch steelmaker Corus in 2007, plans to raise about $1 billion through a follow-on share sale, and may file an offer document this week, two people familiar with the matter said. 

The company later said in a filing to the Bombay Stock Exchange that it plans to sell 57 million shares through a public offering once it gets regulatory approvals. It didn't give any details about the size and timing of the issue.

Eli Lilly and Germany's Boehringer Ingelheim unveiled an alliance to develop and commercialize a pipeline of diabetes treatments in mid- and late-stage development. The companies will share continuing development costs and any commercializations costs. 

 Simon Property Group of the U.S. said it won't make an offer to buy Capital Shopping Centres Group because the U.K. regional shopping-center owner has refused to open its books for due diligence. 

Germany's Metro reported disappointing fourth-quarter sales as bad weather in December hit sales hard, despite a boost from a stronger euro. The world's third-largest retailer by sales said sales rose 1.6% to €19.7 billion ($25.52 billion) in the fourth quarter which includes the crucial Christmas trading period. 

Tiffany & Co. raised its forecast for the fiscal year following a stronger than expected holiday season. The company reported net sales for the two months ended Dec. 31 climbed 11% from a year earlier, as same-store sales were up 10%. The sharpest growth was in the Asia Pacific region, which saw sales jump 23%, followed up Europe, up 13%. 

Fast-food eatery Sbarro—a fixture at malls and food courts around the world—has hired bankruptcy and restructuring lawyers after defaulting on debt, said people familiar with the matter. 

Comverse Technology is likely to pursue a sale of its subsidiary Verint Systems, and a deal could fetch $2 billion, people familiar with the matter said.

Verizon Wireless will start selling Apple's iPhone 4 early next month, ending AT&T's exclusive hold over the smartphone in the U.S. and shaking up the industry. 

 Myspace, the social networking site owned by News Corp., is cutting almost half its workforce—about 500 employees—as part of a major restructuring aimed at reviving its business after being eclipsed by Facebook.  

Groupon said it has expanded to India, Israel and South Africa by acquiring fellow online-coupon discount sites in those countries, entering the new markets by acquiring deal sites SoSasta, Grouper and Twangoo. It didn't give terms of the deals. 

Research In Motion said it hasn't received any request from the Indian government or its agencies to filter Internet-accessed content on its BlackBerry smartphones. 

E.ON U.K., the U.K. subsidiary of the German utility, is increasing prices for the majority of its residential customers effective Feb. 4, becoming the fifth of the six big energy suppliers in the U.K. to increase prices this winter. 