PPR SA Monday announced a $608 million takeover of California sportswear brand  Volcom Inc., as the French luxury and retail group strives to bulk up its sports division around its Puma label.

Volcom sells skateboarding, snowboarding and surfing apparel and goes by the motto "youth against establishment."

The potential for synergies between PPR's Puma athletic wear brand and Volcom is high. The majority of Puma's business is shoes, and Volcom only has a small footwear business. PPR plans on amping up Volcom's distribution, in part by opening stores. In addition, PPR expects Volcom to tap into Puma's Asian manufacturing."

The acquisition lands in the midst of a major shift for PPR from a low-margin group of retail chains to a constellation of high-profile international brands, including Gucci and Puma. PPR has sold off retail networks such as the Conforama furniture stores to invest in profitable brands. 

"Our aim is to be a world-wide actor in sports and lifestyle," PPR Chief Executive François-Henri Pinault said. "We will ensure Volcom reaches the next stages in its development."

With the boost from Volcom, PPR expects its sports lifestyle division— which will also comprise Puma and the Cobra golf brand—to generate €5 billion ($7.4 billion) in sales by 2015, PPR's chief financial officer said Monday. Last year, the division turned in €2.7 billion in sales. Last year, Volcom had sales of $323 million. 

Volcom, like Puma, was hit hard by the consumer spending slump during the economic crisis, and its operating margin has not yet recovered.

Given the runaway ascent in production costs, anytime a brand portfolio such as PPR could combine two business units to gain scale, it's good," Wall Street Strategies analyst  Brian Sozzi wrote in a research note.

PPR's disposals have outweighed acquisitions in recent years. In addition to Conforama, PPR has sold businesses such as the Printemps department store chain and spun off CFAO, a profitable African distribution company, netting the company billions of euros. That has increased anticipation for acquisitions to bolster Puma and complement the brands in its luxury division, which include Gucci, Yves Saint Laurent and Balenciaga.

However, Mr. Pinault has repeated that no target would be bigger than Puma, limiting the potential for a major purchase. In 2007, PPR bought a majority stake in Puma, the third-biggest sportswear brand after Nike and Adidas, valuing the company at €5.3 billion.

PPR is offering $24.50 per Volcom share, a 37% premium to its three-month average. Volcom's directors have agreed to sell their 14.4% stake to PPR, and they will remain with the company. PPR expects the deal to close by September. 

 Write to  Christina Passariello at christina.passariello@wsj.com 