BEIRUT—Hezbollah-led politicians who forced the collapse of Prime Minister Saad Hariri's government here said they would block him from leading the next administration, limiting the prospects of Washington's primary ally in Lebanon.

The opposition resigned Wednesday over Mr. Hariri's refusal to denounce a United Nations-backed international tribunal investigating the 2005 assassination of his father, former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri.

The White House said afterward that Washington would continue to support Saad Hariri. Mr. Hariri tried to amass further support by flying to France to meet President Nicolas Sarkozy and then to Turkey, where he was set to meet Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan on Friday. It was unclear when he would return to Lebanon.

Members of the Shiite political and militant party Hezbollah, which is backed by Syria and Iran, said on Thursday that Mr. Hariri's candidacy to lead a new government is unacceptable. 

Mr. Hariri is the political leader of Lebanon's Sunnis. By Lebanese law, the prime minister must be appointed from the Sunni sect, the president is a Christian and the speaker of the house is Shiite.

Mr. Hariri, from a secular, pro-Western party, is also viewed by opponents as an agent of American interests. The opposition timed the collapse of the government to coincide with a meeting between Mr. Hariri and President Barack Obama at the White House Wednesday. 

The next prime minister, said Hezbollah parliamentarian Mohammad Raad, "must be someone with a history of national resistance and ability to confront Western imperialism."

Lebanon, a small Mediterranean country, has long been the stage for regional and international political rivalries. If Mr. Hariri fails to restore his leadership, it will be a victory for those who have tried to steer Lebanon away from its traditional Western allies.

"The opposition feels they have achieved a political victory with this collapse and will likely not agree to a new government for many months," said  Hilal Khashan, professor of political science at American University of Beirut.

Until a new government is established, Mr. Hariri will remain the caretaker prime minister, but major state decisions and functions will be impaired. 

The government has been hobbled for months alrady by a dispute over the Hariri tribunal. The court is expected in the coming weeks to indict members of Hezbollah for having a role in the assassination of Mr. Hariri's father.

Hezbollah has sought to discredit the court as a tool of U.S. and Israeli interests. Saad Hariri refused to do that, saying only that he wouldn't support the prosecution of Hezbollah members in the case, in the interest of national unity. 

The opposition is expected to name other Sunni politicians as possible successors to Mr. Hariri, over the objections of Mr. Hariri's supporters.

"There is no substitute for Saad Hariri to head the Lebanese government in the next phase," said parliamentarian Antoine Zahra. 

 Some key events in Lebanese politics: 

 Feb. 14, 2005: Former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri killed in Beirut. Syria is blamed, denies role. In April, Syria pulls troops from Lebanon after 30 years.

 June 10, 2007: U.N.-backed tribunal formed to investigate Hariri assassination.

 June 7, 2009: Pro-Western parliamentary majority wins legislative elections.

 Nov. 9: Saad Hariri, son of slain leader, forms government in which Hezbollah-led opposition has 10 of 30 cabinet posts.

 July 22, 2010: Hezbollah leader says tribunal expected to indict members of his party.

 Jan. 12, 2011: Hezbollah-led opposition ministers resign, forcing the collapse of Saad Hariri's unity government.

Neither the opposition nor Mr. Hariri have the parliamentary majority to appoint the next prime minister, meaning politicians must gain the support of independents such as Druze political leader Walid Jumblatt. 

Mr. Jumblatt, whose alliances have shifted from Mr. Hariri to the opposition at times over the past few years, told Lebanese media he hasn't made up his mind on the matter.

Mr. Jumblatt met with Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah on Thursday and said he would travel to Syria on Saturday.

The parliament is scheduled to meet with President Michel Suleiman on Monday for two days of discussions.

If the Sunnis choose Mr. Hariri to lead the next government, the opposition says it would call for demonstrations and civil strikes, then attempt to dissolve the parliament by pulling out members. 

Lebanon would then have to hold general elections and could face many more months of turmoil and the heightened prospect of armed conflict. But since an outbreak in 2008, Hezbollah has pursued power in Lebanon through the democratic system, rather than through violence.

—Nada Raad contributed to this article.

 Write to  Farnaz Fassihi at farnaz.fassihi@wsj.com 