HONG KONG— PCCW Ltd.
PCCWY


0.70
%




, Hong Kong's dominant fixed-line operator, said Monday it is exploring a separate listing of its telecommunications operations in the form of a business trust, a move that could see Chairman  Richard Li cash out on a debt-laden investment. . 

Mr. Li, the younger son of  Li Ka-shing, Hong Kong's richest man, has been grappling with what to do with PCCW for much of the last few years. The former blue chip, which also sells wireless and Internet services in the city and operates a broadband-delivered television business, generates significant cash but operates in a low-growth market, and has been fighting cutthroat competition in a saturated marketplace. 

PCCW said in a statement it is in preliminary stages of "exploring the feasibility of a spin-off and separate listing" of its telecom business as a business trust. However, the company declined to provide further details of its proposed plans. 

It wasn't immediately clear whether PCCW is considering a listing in Hong Kong or elsewhere, though the company said Monday it has been discussing related regulatory issues with the city's regulators. 

Though Monday's announcement lacked specifics, analysts widely say that the proposed listing of some of PCCW's core assets would need approval from its shareholders, possibly creating a major hurdle for the younger Mr. Li. Many minority shareholders have earlier voiced strong opposition against its management for decisions they thought contributed to its weak share performance, such as the unsuccessful attempt to take PCCW private in 2009. 

Under Hong Kong's listing rules, listed companies must seek majority approval from shareholders for any major transaction that involves assets accounting for more than 25% of the company's assets, profits or revenue, among other metrics. Mr. Li controls around 27% of PCCW. In 2009, PCCW posted revenue of 16.29 billion Hong Kong dollars (US$2.09 billion) for its telecommunications operations, representing 65% of its consolidated revenue. 

Mr. Li hasn't kept secret his intention to sell his telecom assets, which have been subject to robust competition over the past few years amid a flood of new operators that saturate Hong Kong's broadband and fixed-line market. Its Internet protocol television service called NOW Broadband TV, also faces competition from the likes of players including i-Cable. 

The announcement by PCCW followed Friday's US$6 billion listing in Singapore of the ports unit of Li Ka-shing's  Hutchison Whampoa Ltd., also in the form of a business trust. 

Hong Kong currently allows listings of real-estate trusts, but not other types of business trusts. But Hong Kong regulators said earlier they would consider allowing business trusts to be listed in the city following the initial public offering of Hutchison Port Holdings Trust in Singapore, which prompted calls by local politicians to ease restrictions on such listings in the former British colony. 

The Hong Kong Stock Exchange said Monday it is studying the introduction of a framework that allows for the listing of business trusts in Hong Kong, but also one that can fully preserve the current investor protection mechanisms for listed companies. 

The exchange said the study involves legal and technical issues, adding that it has no timetable for its completion. Meanwhile, a spokesman for the Securities and Futures Commission confirmed that PCCW had been in discussions with both regulators on the possible listing. 

"A business trust would allow Richard Li to retain control of the assets without the need to have a majority shareholding. Since the listing structure does not favor minority shareholders, Hong Kong regulators will have to carefully consider the framework if there is to be one," said  Billy Mak, associate professor of finance at Baptist University of Hong Kong. 

PCCW's latest plans follow a series of failed attempts by the younger Mr. Li to offload the telecom assets. 

In 2009, he scrapped a US$2.1 billion deal to take the company private after the SFC alleged irregularities in a shareholders' vote to approve the buyout deal. Hong Kong's Court of Appeal ruled in favor of the SFC, effectively blocking the buyout. Mr. Li has denied the SFC's allegations. 

Analysts had widely believed at the time that Mr. Li's plan to take PCCW private was a precursor for the company's core telecom assets to be repackaged for an eventual separate listing. 

Even before the botched privatization attempt, Mr. Li had tried and failed three times since 2006 to sell all or part of the PCCW assets due to various political and market reasons. 

Mr. Li acquired Hong Kong's dominant phone company in 2000, in a deal valued at US$28 billion, which was Asia's biggest acquisition at the time. The phone company held a decades-long monopoly in Hong Kong's long-distance telephone market until the late 1990s. 

Richard Li's purchase came within months of the start of the tech-laden Nasdaq's year-long decline that marked the end of the technology and telecom boom. 

By early 2001, PCCW's share price had fallen more than 90% from its peak of HK$99.46 in March 2000. Over the past few years, the stock has consistently been trading at about 95% below its peak. Shares in PCCW rose 4.6% to close at HK$3.43 on Monday. 

