Norbert Bajurin, owner of Alouis Auto Radiator Inc., a San Francisco auto-parts shop, might seem like an unlikely partner for Oracle Corp.'s billionaire chief executive,  Larry Ellison.

As commodore of the Golden Gate Yacht Club from 2001 to 2002, Mr. Bajurin persuaded Mr. Ellison to join forces with the club—then deeply in debt—to compete for sailing's highest trophy, the America's Cup.

After two unsuccessful attempts, Mr. Ellison's team clinched the prize in 2010, winning the right to decide where the next competition would be held and thrusting the small club further into the spotlight. 

This year, Mr. Bajurin once again was named commodore of the Golden Gate Yacht Club, as San Francisco begins preparing to host the America's Cup regatta in 2013. He recently discussed how he sees the competition affecting San Francisco, and what challenges race organizers are facing as they prepare for the event:

 WSJ: How did your partnership with Larry Ellison come about?

 Mr. Bajurin: One day, I read a newspaper article about Larry's [stalled negotiations with] the St. Francis Yacht Club. So I got in touch with the CEO of the [Oracle] racing team, and I said, 'I hear you are looking for a yacht club.' 

There were benefits for both of us. Larry had a club that was now listening to his needs. And he made 100 members of his team members of our club. The dues over the next year basically wiped our $450,000 debt out clean. 



 WSJ: How often is Mr. Ellison at the club?

 Mr. Bajurin: Not too often. I'll see Larry flying in his private jet over the club more than I'll see him come to the club, actually. When we need to talk, I go down to his neck of the woods more than he comes up to our neck of the woods.



 WSJ: How did you get into sailing in the first place?

 Mr. Bajurin: I've sailed on and off since I was a kid. But more than that, I was a power-boater; I was a fisherman. My mother passed away in 1996, and my father and she were both members of the Golden Gate Yacht Club. That same year I bought my first boat to be closer with my dad. That's why I came aboard at the yacht club. I started to get involved in the political side a few months after that. I became the commodore in 2001, and that's when I made the deal with Larry. 



 WSJ: What makes the San Francisco Bay a good place to hold the race?

 Mr. Bajurin: This is going to be the first America's Cup that's going to be inside a bay. It's a natural amphitheater. You can watch from the Golden Gate Bridge, Angel Island, Alcatraz, Sausalito and all along the San Francisco waterfront. At all the other races you had to go on spectator boats. Here, you'll get to watch it right from our shoreline. 



 WSJ: How will the race affect the San Francisco waterfront and economy?

 Mr. Bajurin: It's going to bring jobs, and it's going to beautify the location. Even though we may lose in 2013, the buildings will remain and the beauty will remain. It's something that I've seen in other communities [that have hosted the America's Cup]. I've seen it happen in Valencia, Spain. I saw it in Auckland, New Zealand. 



 WSJ: What would you say to critics of the deal between the city and race organizers, who say San Francisco gave up too much in the way of waterfront development rights?

 Mr. Bajurin: Those piers right now are unsafe. They're not going to be repaired any time in the near future. They are just going to get worse. What we're bringing in is a total revitalization of that area.



 WSJ: What are going to be the biggest challenges for race organizers?

 Mr. Bajurin: Raising money. We need to get sponsors. That's the next big step. With this economy, money is hard to find, and people who do have money out there are not spending right now. It's an uncertain time. We can do it. It's just going to take some time.

 Write to  Cari Tuna at cari.tuna@wsj.com 