PARIS—When it comes to mowing the lawn, cleaning the kitchen and performing other household chores, Southern European and some Asian men are the least likely to take part, according to a study by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.

The Paris-based think tank surveyed 29 countries to determine how much time people spent doing unpaid work. 

The results showed women spent considerably longer than men doing daily chores, a factor that could hinder their ability to take part in paid employment, the study says. 

Italian and Portuguese men spent less than two hours a day helping out at home—the lowest figure among European nations. 

Men in India, Japan and South Korea spent less than an hour a day performing task such as shopping and looking after children. In the U.S., men spent around three hours a day on household chores outside working hours, about the same as Poles.

The yearlong study highlighted a large difference between the time men and women spent doing unpaid tasks. On average, women spent 2.5 hours a day more than men on chores.

"We want to show that if you want to create gender equality in the workplace, you need to create work equality at home," said the study's author and OECD economist  Veerle Miranda.

Overall, people spent 3.5 hours a day taking part in unpaid work, according to the OECD study.

There is a trade-off between the amount of time people spend doing paid and unpaid work, Ms. Miranda said. The OECD estimates that if unpaid work were remunerated it would be equal to one-third of the average GDP in OECD countries. Thus, household chores amount to an unglamorous way of contributing to the economy. 

Washing up after a meal, reading to children or coaching sports are important ways of giving back to society and "can be enjoyable," the study says.

The OECD noted that low male participation in domestic tasks doesn't necessarily equate to a national lack of overall productivity. The study states that the time women spend doing chores is to some degree balanced by paid work undertaken by men.

In terms of the breakdown of work, the study concludes that women spend a lot of time cleaning, shopping and caring for children. Men tend to contribute by doing "construction and repair." On average, men spend 13 minutes a day on do-it-yourself tasks.

In the kitchen, women spend nearly four times as long as men cooking meals and washing up afterward. The time spent doing these tasks varies widely among countries. 

Americans spend about 30 minutes a day cooking and washing up, compared with nearly 1.5 hours a day in India. The OECD also notes that Americans spend very little time eating and have some of the highest obesity rates in the world.

Shopping also makes up a large part of unpaid work. On average people in OECD countries spend 23 minutes a day shopping. The French are the biggest shoppers spending 32 minutes in stores a day. Koreans spend the least, with only 13 minutes in shops daily.

 Write to  Max Colchester at max.colchester@wsj.com 