India's central bank surprised no one by its decision to increase rates on Thursday. But the question is how much of an impact the move will really have on rampant inflation plaguing the economy.

The Reserve Bank of India's quarter-point increase in its lending and borrowing rates was the eighth hike in the past year. In total, it has raised rates by two percentage points.

Through this tightening, inflation has persistently beaten the RBI's own forecasts. The central bank raised its forecast for the wholesale-price index rate to 8% by the end of this fiscal year in March, revising it for the third time this fiscal year.

Tightening hasn't worked that well, partly due to the RBI's tendency to break it into small quantums. Its rationale is that it doesn't want to disrupt the growth momentum.

But this argument doesn't hold up now as well as it did a year ago. Despite the continued uncertainty in other economies, India has largely shown resilience and will likely record 8.6% economic growth in this fiscal year. Still, the RBI continues what it calls a "calibrated approach".

Given interest rate hikes have a lagging effect "acting aggressively early, in October-December, would have brought inflation down to more tolerable levels," says  Jay Shankar, economist with Religare Capital Markets. Acting aggressively now, poses a "greater risk of derailing investment and growth, even as inflation stays out of control," he says.

A large part of this inflation problem is, of course, out of the RBI's control. It stems from food prices that rise because of supply shortage. Even though some food article prices are now cooling, the food articles index is still rising at close to a 10% rate from last year.

Worse, this has spurred a more broad-based inflation in manufactured goods: non-food manufactured products inflation rate jumped to 6.1% in February, from 4.8% in January. Add to this the rising trend in global commodity prices and India could have a real problem at hand.

RBI could at best try to keep in check speculation on further price gains that could further fuel inflation. But a quarter-point increase won't dampen any price rise expectations ahead. 

 Write to  Harsh Joshi at harsh.joshi@dowjones.com 