As communications networks in Japan went down after the earthquake struck on Friday afternoon, many people looking to contact loved ones and get updates turned to microblogging services. Five years after its founding and nearly three years after it became a surprise source of on-the-scene information following the earthquake in Sichuan, Twitter is a go-to place in times of disaster.

A rush of tweets, most short and to the point, followed the quake, which struck at 2:46 local time. "It's a big one!" wrote @nekko1119 in Ibaraki Prefecture, just north of Tokyo.

As the news spread around the world and tsunami alerts were issued for Pacific nations from Russia to Chile, the quake quickly became Twitter's dominant trending topic.

Tatsuya Hattori (@Henry3811) in Fukushima, one of the worst-hit areas, reported huge damage to buildings, downed power lines and a strong smell of gas. "People are queuing outside convenience stores," he wrote.

The flow of tweets coming out of Tokyo since the quake has been running at 1,200 messages a minute, according to the website Tweet-o-Meter—whose dials go no higher.

From the capital, @howl4you wrote that he was concerned about his grandfather in Miyagi Prefecture, also hit hard. (He later provided an update for his concerned followers: His grandfather was fine).

Also in Tokyo, @meiling2266 reported that the roof of nearby old house had collapsed. "I hope my place is OK" she wrote. With trains stopped in the capital and elsewhere, @hikosaemon wrote he was "walking home with the rest of Tokyo," and said it was "amazingly calm and orderly."

And as aftershocks continued, some people were taking precautions. "It must be serious, mother-in-law is wearing outside shoes in the house," wrote @ourmaninabiko from Tokyo's northern suburbs.

Twitter wasn't alone in getting a workout. Millions of homes across the country were without electricity, sending a surge of traffic to live-video streaming website Ustream to see national broadcaster NHK's rolling coverage of the quake.