DUBLIN—As Irish Prime Minister Brian Cowen fought for his political life Friday, his Fianna Fail colleagues were mulling whether he should stay or go ahead of the general election due in March after the passing of the Finance Bill. 

Mr. Cowen has said he will spend Friday consulting colleagues on his leadership, resisting pressure to resign following revelations last weekend about his previously undisclosed contact with the now-nationalized Anglo Irish Bank's former chairman  Sean FitzPatrick. Ireland's opposition Labour Party Friday said it has put forth a motion for a vote of no confidence in the government, adding further pressure on Mr. Cowen. 

The embattled leader has said he will consult with party colleagues on his leadership. "I will sit down with them in an atmosphere of mutual respect and solidarity and decide what I believe to be the collective view of the party. If concerns are raised, I will address them. I will do that swiftly over the next 24 hours."

Some ministers have given Mr. Cowen their backing. Minister for Social Protection Eamon O'Cuiv threw his support behind the Taoiseach. "As far as I'm concerned Brian Cowen is the leader of the party. As far as I'm concerned he has my full support as leader. If I didn't have confidence in Brian Cowen, obviously it would be invidious for me to stay as a cabinet minister in this government." 

Deputy Prime Minister Mary Coughlan told state broadcaster RTE Radio that the party needed to move on from the leadership question. "Do I have confidence in and do I support the Taoiseach? And the answer is, I do," she said. "I do support the Taoiseach's ability and his acumen." She added, "He himself will make the decision." 

Minister of State Martin Mansergh—a junior minister—also voiced support for Mr. Cowen. In a statement Friday, he said a change in the country's leadership before the passing of the Finance Bill and forthcoming general election due in March could create "acute political instability." 

Mr. Mansergh said: "There is a real danger that acute political instability, triggered by a late leadership change, could have negative consequences for the country in terms of financial confidence." 

"I have made it clear to the Taoiseach that he will have my continued support to complete the government's term," he said in a statement Friday. 

However, pressure is mounting on Mr. Cowen. Minister of State Conor Lenihan—a junior minister—said there was a desire among his constituents for a change of leadership ahead of the general election and said the credibility of the leader and party has been "dented." 

Mr. Lenihan told reporters: "We need political stability in this country. We need to resolve this issue once and for all. As I said, I haven't made my mind up on that matter." Mr. Lenihan is the brother of Finance Minister Brian Lenihan, one of the front runners to replace Mr. Cowen if he steps down. 

Minister for Foreign Affairs Micheal Martin—the other most likely leadership contender—welcomed Mr. Cowen taking time to consult other Fianna Fail lawmakers on the matter. "It is important that members use this opportunity to have their say on the future of the party," he said. 

Another potential challenger for the leadership, Tourism Minister Mary Hanafin, told reporters Friday that she wanted Mr. Cowen's consultation with Fianna Fail lawmakers to come to a conclusion by the end of Friday, but refused to comment on what she would say when she met with the prime minister later Friday. 

In recent days, Ms. Hanafin has repeatedly refused to state her confidence in Mr. Cowen, but she told reporters, "There is no vacancy. I will be speaking with him again this afternoon. What I want to say to him, I'll say it to him before I say it to the media." 

John Gormley, leader of the Green Party, Mr. Cowen's junior coalition partner, said the question of leadership was one for the ruling Fianna Fail party, and said the government needed to focus on passing the Finance Bill. "It leads to instability and that's the last thing we need right now." 

The leader of the opposition Labour Party, Eaamon Gilmore, on Friday urged the Greens, the independents and Finnal Fail backbenchers that have been critical of the government to support its motion for a vote of no confidence.

The vote is unlikely to succeed unless Labour can garner the support of the Greens and independent lawmakers, which have supported Fianna Fail in recent votes on the budget.

"Are you prepared to give the people the election they want, or are you going to prolong the life of this dysfunctional, demoralized and discredited government?" he wrote in a statement. 

Mr. Gilmore said in accordance with normal parliamentary practice he expects the government will now allow time for a debate on this motion next week, or alternatively will table a motion of confidence. 

—Ainsley Thomson contributed to this article.







