In 1795, Baron Jean-Baptiste Otard, having escaped death-by-guillotine in the French Revolution, found the perfect premises for his new business—the Château de Cognac, overlooking the River Charente, 400 kilometers south-west of Paris. 

What sold him wasn't the property's 11th-century origins as a fortress, nor the luminous Renaissance halls designed by Leonardo da Vinci, nor even the fact that King Francis I of France was born there. 

As a cognac trader, the baron bought the site for its location.

"Cognac houses set up alongside the Charente because of the river's direct access to the sea. Like wine traders in Bordeaux and port houses in Porto—all established riverside—the priority was reaching export markets," explains economist Véronique Lemoine, consultant to Bordeaux's Wine Culture and Tourism Centre 2014 and also founder of a cognac tasting school.

"Producing cognac is so long, so difficult, so expensive, that nowadays it could not be invented," she says. "Nobody would invest in such a stupid business! Profitable, of course, but after so many years. It takes great patience to make cognac. The aging process can take 50 years."

Today, the cognac house Baron Otard is still in the château and VIP guests relish dining in the room where a king first tested his lungs. But it's the cellars that have won the company its name for making elegant cognacs with a long finish and floral flavor. The thick stone walls offer ideal conditions for aging eaux-de-vie, or elixir of life.

"The château isn't a historic monument. It's a real tool of our trade which has its part to play in the quality of our products," says Philippe Jouhaud, sales and marketing director. 

From the imposing main courtyard, Karine Aiguillon, visitors' service manager, leads me down worn stone stairs and through dimly lit but deliciously scented vaults harboring tall alleyways of casks.

"For the cellar master, the château is like a game of cards," she says. "Each chamber has a different temperature and humidity. The cellar master plays his cards, moving the eaux-de-vie around so that they age as he wants them to.

"He is a little like 'the nose' for a perfume house. It's he who keeps the memory of the product and ensures a constancy of taste and quality."

Set within gardens overlooking the Charente Valley, the dainty 19th-century Château de l'Yeuse, with 21 rooms and three suites, lies three kilometers from the center of Cognac. Its gourmet restaurant and sumptuous cognathèque, with 250 or so cognacs, have won a following from film and media folk. Double rooms from €106.

Cognac merchants, grower-distillers and oenologists are among those who sit down to expertly prepared local produce in the art deco inspired interior of the Restaurant du Château The seven-course menu for cognac lovers, including cognacs, is €82. Other options include a five-course menu for €51 and a set weekday lunch for €24. 

All the buzz of the cognac trade is exchanged in Le Bistro de Claude. Long-established restaurateur Claude Vézin's specialities include fish landed at La Cotinière and prized Gillardeau or Papin oysters. There is a set three-course lunch for €20 and a set dinner for €30.

 Baron Otard (www.baronotard.com) is one of several cognac houses offering guided tours and tastings as individual as their cognacs. For details, contact the Tourist Office (www.tourism-cognac.com). 

She unlocks an iron portcullis and we step into a humid but spine-chilling cavern. The stone walls appear to be hung with sea anemones, the glass demi-johns on the floor swaddled in grey cotton wool. In fact, they're fungi. This is the "paradise cellar," the resting place of liquid treasures dating back to 1820.

Described by Victor Hugo as "the liquor of the gods," cognac must by law come from an area defined in 1909. Centered around the town of Cognac, the area combines ideal climatic conditions with centuries of experience of double-run distilling in copper stills particular to the Charente. The region encompasses the town of Saintes, with its ancient Roman and Gothic splendors, and La Rochelle, a picturesque and historic Atlantic port.

In Cognac itself, whether walking the cobbled streets of the old town or gliding past the waterfront warehouses on a pleasure boat, the local elixir of life is inescapable.

Emblazoned on a high-flying flag is Hennessy, the biggest player. Between them, Martell, Rémy Martin and Courvoisier account for around the same market share. But there are scores of smaller houses and, close by the statue of Francis I, La Cognathèque (cognatheque.com) sells more than 400 cognacs.

Within a 17th-century half-timbered house, at Le Bistro de Claude, some of the most powerful people in the cognac business are partaking of seriously good cuisine. But their clients are unlikely to be French; 97% of production is sent abroad.

Jérôme Durand, marketing and communication director for BNIC, the trade's professional organization, explains, "It's yet another French paradox, which in this case can be explained by the history of cognac.

"From the beginning it has been commercialized by foreigners, notably from the English-speaking nations and Scandinavia, and they have always sold to their own markets."

Exports today are valued at €1.4 billion, with the U.S. the biggest customer, but China the fastest-growing market. The main European customers are the U.K. and Germany.

Although 70% of production is used in long drinks, connoisseurs appreciate they're drinking what Mr. Durand calls "the extract of time."

Seventy percent of production is used in long drinks; a practice not as modern as it might seem, explains François Julien-Labruyère, author of "Cognac Story," published by L'Harmattan in 2008 in French. 

"For the first two-thirds of the 19th century, almost all cognac was served as a long drink—with water or soda," he says. "A change came about around 1860 or so with the advent of gentlemen's clubs in England. After dinner the members would play cards and they began drinking cognac pure as a digestif."

Toward the end of the 19th century, it became chic to drink cognac from large glasses with various contraptions to warm the glass. In France, with the turn of the century, drinkers moved to smaller tulip glasses, warmed in the hand. Around 20 years ago the notion of warming cognac at all began to be frowned upon by connoisseurs.

"A truly excellent cognac is best drunk at room temperature, like a good wine," says Mr. Julien-Labruyère.

Unlike wine, however, cognac shouldn't be swirled in the glass. "Some of the aromas are very light and others are heavy. It would be a shame to mix them," says Ms. Lemoine. At her tasting school in Cognac (ecole-des-cognacs.com), she also advises against dipping the nose too deeply into the glass. "If you go too close, the heaviest aromas will hit you first. It's better to let the cognac come to you. It's also important to take your time. It might take half an hour or more for a good cognac to fully unfold its bouquet. Of course, this doesn't prevent you sipping at the same time."

Unless labeled single cask, cognacs are blended from eaux-de-vie of differing ages (but matured at least two years) to create a complex mix of tastes and aromas with lasting pleasure for nose and palate. 

In an XO (Extra Old) cognac the youngest element must be at least six years old, but there are usually much older partners in what blenders call "the marriage." And premium cognacs might be decades older than the drinker who delights in them. 

The barrels themselves are made of French oak, taken from trees over a century old, the timber aged for three years.

On leaving Cognac, I drive through swathes of Ugni Blanc vines, dotted with red-roofed farmhouses and villages of pale local stone, bathed in the intense light for which the Charente is famed. By a stretch of the river swimming with green islands, I arrive at the small town of Jarnac. 

On quiet streets locals greet each other with four kisses, and behind closed white wooden shutters, in what look like unlived-in homes, some of the finest cognacs on the planet slumber, purposefully. 

A discreet brass plate marks the tiny cognac house of Delamain, founded in 1824 and still majority-owned and run by descendants of James Delamain, cognac-maker since 1762 (delamain-cognac.com). 

I'm welcomed by Charles Braastad, managing director, and one of the family. "We've an attachment to our product here that is truly visceral. We're selling cognacs now that my father selected 30 years ago."

With only 20 staff, he explains, "In one year we produce as much cognac as Hennessy or Martell in two or three days."

The house specializes in very old premium cognacs blended solely from grapes grown and distilled in the immediately surrounding vineyards of Grande Champagne—one of the six growing areas for cognac and the appellation credited with producing the subtlest of slow-aging cognacs. 

Until the 1950s, most country families grew vines and distilled eaux-de-vie, laying down small quantities at home. Aware that Delamain selects eaux-de-vie individually, rather than signing regular contracts, these small grower-distillers bring in their samples in the hope of selling them. 

On a time-swept wooden desk stands an open shoe box with a newly arrived batch—little screw-top bottles with homemade labels indicating the year the pressed grapes were distilled, the family's name and telephone number.

"They're what I call liquid savings accounts," says Mr. Braastad.

When buying younger eaux-de-vie, the skill is in being able to project which ones will produce a great cognac of the future.

Holding up a sample from 2009, Mr. Braastad says, "This accords well with the style of our cognacs. It'll be put into the bottle in 30 years time, when I'm 71 years old." 

As cognac matures, the clear liquid acquires tones of gold and amber. Rambling through 18th-century warehouses stocked with Delamain's "sleeping beauties," the air is scented with developing aromas of apricot, fig and prune. The walls are blackened with torula, the fungus that feeds on the escaping vapors; known as "the angels' share." 

On emerging into the daylight, a different quality of stillness has fallen on Jarnac. It's lunchtime. On the main square, across from the manorial façade of Courvoisier, at the Restaurant du Château, chef and owner Ludovic Merle is serving fine cuisine from regional products. 

Cognac-born, with a résumé including two years at the Pierre in New York, Mr. Merle opened his restaurant here seven years ago, a few steps from the covered market where he buys fish and seafood landed on the nearby island of Oléron. In winter there is a truffle market. Rabbit, pigeon and snails are all raised locally.

A year ago, Mr. Merle created a menu for cognac-lovers. "I tasted cognacs at an ambient temperature, cold and frosted to see which flavors emerged and which dishes would go best with each," he says. 

"Here, people tend to drink cognac as an apéritif or sometimes as a digestif. We wanted to show it could be enjoyed with a meal." The cognac—as everywhere in this region— is served in tulip glasses, far better for retaining aromas than "balloons."

I return that evening for a superb dinner that includes carpaccio of fresh coquilles St Jacques with ginger, coriander and herring caviar, with frozen Courvoisier XO; followed by John Dory in a bouillon of champignons noirs and Shitake, accompanied by Vesper Delamain.

It's a memorable final note to a sensory journey through Cognac country.