As bombs started falling on Libya Saturday, blogger Glenn Reynolds noticed something striking: "Hey, it's exactly 8 years to the day since Bush started bombing Iraq!" Eight years--which is to say, Barack Obama ordered the bombing of an Arab dictatorship at precisely the same point in his presidency that George W. Bush did.

Of course, there were some differences. The Libya war is new; the Iraq one was an escalation of a conflict that had been under way for 12 years. The U.N. Security Council had authorized action in Libya for the first time two days earlier, vs. 17 times in Iraq. Bush had persuaded a large majority of the public that escalating the war was a good idea; Obama had to act more quickly, without making a sustained case to either the public or Congress.

Also, Bush made his announcement from the Oval Office. His successor spoke at the White House on Friday, but by the time the bombs started falling, he was in--of all places--Brazil, as the Associated Press reports:

 NY1.com quotes Seif Gadhafi, son of Libya's dictator: "The whole country is united against the militia and the terrorists." Maybe he meant to say the "tourists."

There are, however, striking similarities between 2003 and 2011, especially on close examination. An earlier AP dispatch notes that in his Friday remarks, the president "never used the word 'war.' " Bush did use the word twice in his 2003 remarks, but contrary to the contemporaneous CNN.com headline, he did not "declare" war (something that, as a legal matter, only Congress can do anyway). He said the allied aim was to "undermine Saddam Hussein's ability to wage war" and observed that "America faces an enemy who has no regard for conventions of war."

Much has been made of the unclarity of the administration's war aims. Is the idea to oust Muammar Gadhafi--"regime change," in the Bush-era term--or not? Try to parse this statement from a White House spokesman to Politico's Ben Smith:

But then here's how Bush started his remarks in 2003: "My fellow citizens, at this hour American and coalition forces are in the early stages of military operations to disarm Iraq, to free its people and to defend the world from grave danger." He starts with "to disarm Iraq"--formally, the chief goal of those U.N. resolutions--and only then mentions "to free its people," which implies regime change. But doesn't "to stop the killing" in Libya also imply the ouster of the country's murderous dictator?

Defense Department leaders would like you to think not necessarily, as Politico reports:

Call it the lesson of Tora Bora: It's better to deliver what you can't promise than to promise what you can't deliver.

It is undoubtedly true that Obama is a much more reluctant warrior than Bush was. He was reportedly led to this juncture by Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and other women in the administration. In the prewar diplomatic maneuvering, the U.S. ended up shlepping behind Britain, France, even Germany and the Arab League--though the Germans decided that the final resolution was too strong for them and abstained, and the Arabs are now backpedaling, according to the AP:

It's a bit like the joke about the definition of chutzpah: when a guy kills his parents, then pleads for mercy because they were civilian casualties. 

Obama's eventual decision to strike Libya is more consistent with the Bush doctrine--that promoting democracy in the Muslim world, sometimes by military means, is in America's national interests--than with Obama's own inclinations. It has drawn harsh if predictable criticism from both the isolationist right and the anti-American left. Providing some comic relief, Politico reports that Rep. Dennis Kucinich is even making noises about impeachment.

So Obama is acting like a neoconservative. We're tempted to nickname him "Neo-Bam." Then again, Bush wasn't always able to act in accord with his seeming inclinations. In his 2002 State of the Union Address, he identified three countries that constituted an "axis of evil": Iran, Iraq and North Korea. Fifteen months later, it was one down, two to go. Nine years later, it still is.

The president may be the most powerful man on earth, but his power is still severely limited. As Bush was constrained by forces beyond his control from acting in Iran and North Korea, Obama was constrained to act in Libya. Obama would be well served, however, if he learned to project a sense of leadership even when doing things he'd rather not be doing.

One plus for Obama in all this: The Press Trust of India reports that Moammar Gadhafi wrote a letter to Obama in which he addressed the president as "our son." Gadhafi's claim of paternity is one more bit of evidence--not that any is needed--that the claim Obama was born in Kenya is a flat-out lie.

  The Hobgoblin of Little Times   Here's a thoughtless lead paragraph from a New York Times story:

Whatever the merits of Mrs. Clinton's exhortations to the Emiratis, how is it inconsistent to ask for help in a military operation against a repressive regime while repudiating a military operation in defense of a repressive regime?

 Hillary Out, Gisele In? 

  What 'Quality Journalism' Means   "About 100 Associated Press journalists held a rally outside AP's Manhattan headquarters this week to stand up for quality journalism at the world's largest news agency," according to a press release from an undisclosed source published at EditorandPublisher.com, the newspaper trade magazine turned website.

Wow, even AP reporters have gotten fed up with the sloppy, biased coverage that goes under the name "accountability journalism"! Haha, of course not. Here's what they mean by "quality journalism":

So "virtually all AP journalists" equate the generosity of their fringe benefits with the quality of their journalism. Does that enhance your confidence in the objectivity and fairness of the AP's coverage of controversies involving other unionized employees?

  Biden's Idea of a 'Victim'   Vice President Biden opened his mouth again the other day, this time likening Republicans to what a report in the Hill calls "rape apologists":

The invidious and tasteless comparison speaks for itself, but Biden shouldn't be able to get away with characterizing unions and government workers as "victims." To the contrary, they--along with mostly Democratic politicians--have been beneficiaries of a corrupt system that victimizes taxpayers. We wouldn't liken it to a violent or sexual crime, but it does have something in common with embezzlement.

In other Biden news, the Daily Caller reports that the Wilmington, Del., Amtrak station was rechristened the Joseph R. Biden Jr. Railroad Station on Saturday. Amtrak CEO Joe Boardman was there, but no thanks to Amtrak. He was on a train from Washington that got stuck in Baltimore, so he got off and went by car. Sounds like something right out of "Atlas Shrugged," doesn't it?

 Out on a Limb 

  'So It's Not Surprising Then That They Get Bitter . . .'   "Many Banks Are Clinging to Billions in Bailout Money"--headline, New York Times website, March 18

  These Birthers Just Won't Give Up   "Life Derailed by an Alien Who Likes to Party"--headline, Patch.com, March 18

  In the Last Century, Himmler Had Something Similar   "Century's Fate Rests With Ball Control"--headline, Post-Bulletin (Rochester, Minn.), March 17

  Somebody Call a Locksmith   "Interview on Cuba Attacks Key in Ex-CIA Agent Case"--headline, Associated press, March 21

  Left, Right, Left--Oh, Look! A Squirrel!   "News: Camp Lejeune Fighting Back Squirrel Nuisance"--headline, Camp Lejeune (N.C.) press release, March 17

  And Bees Don't Really Know How to Spell   " 'Talking' Pooch Likely Has No Idea What He's 'Saying' "--headline, Bangor (Maine) Daily News, March 17

  He's Luckey He Didn't Sea It   "Mark Hurd Sex Letter Will 'Burn Your Eyeballs' "--headline, BusinessInsider.com, March 18

  Transgender Discrimination Is Alive and Well   "Newark School Search Drags"--headline, The Wall Street Journal, March 18

  Providence, or Mere Coincidence?   "Update: 2 Shot Near Nonviolence Center in Providence"--headline, Providence Journal, March 18

  There Has to Be an Easier Way to Get a Competency Exam   "Man Accused of Breaking Baseball Bat Over Friend's Head During NASCAR Argument to Get Competency Exam"--headline, AnnArbor.com, March 20

  Must Be One of Those Sangui-Vegetarians   "Vegetarian's Blood Boils Over In-Flight"--headline, Newscore, March 19

  Packed Like Lemmings Into Shiny Metal Boxes   "Sting Takes 14 Tour Buses in N.Y. off Road"--headline, Associated Press, March 20

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

 Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  Horrible Person Confesses to Being David Sedaris--Now That Would Be News   "Author David Sedaris Confesses to Being a 'Horrible Person' "--headline, Deutsche Welle website, March 19

  God Named After Dog Barks at Man--Now That Would Be News   "Police here said they arrested an 18-year-old man Thursday night for barking at the police dog Zeus."--Saginaw (Mich.) News, March 19

  Helen Thomas Controls Self--Now That Would Be News   "Helen Thomas: Jews Control White House, US Congress"--headline, Jerusalem Post, March 19

  Playboy Playmate to Be Clinton Woman--Naw, That Wouldn't Be News   "Clinton Woman to Be Playboy Playmate"--headline, Associated Press, March 17

  It's Always in the Last Place You Look   "Woman Professors Find Gains at MIT"--headline, Boston Globe, March 21

  All Your Base Are Belong to Us   "Arrests at WikiLeaks Suspect Base Protest"--headline, Sky.com, March 21

  News of the Tautological   "You only go into orbit for the first time around Mercury once in human history, and that's what we've done tonight."--NASA's Edward Weiler, quoted by the Christian Science Monitor, March 18

  Breaking News From 1942   "Germany Defends Cautious Approach to Libya, Denies Isolation"--headline, Deutsche Welle website, March 21

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  In the Name of Justice   A gruesome story in New York's Daily News underscores the dangers of naming government buildings after people who are still alive:

Whatever happened, it doesn't sound like the work of a wise Latina woman.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to T. Young, Clifford Crouch, Michele Schiesser, Tom Dziubek, Bill King, Dan Goldstein, Alan Jones, Taylor Dinerman, Tom Albergotti, Ed Lasky, Rod Pennington, Hillel Markowitz, Doug McLaren, Ethel Fenig, Rex Pilger, Daniel Mullen, Marion Dreyfus, Michael Segal, John Bobek, David Gerstman, Dave Ceely, John Williamson, Joe Perez, Scott Bach, Frank Free, Joel Engel, John Robb, Richard Belzer, Zack Russ, Bruce Goldman, Doug Black, Rafael Green, Mark Brown, John Sanders, Hugh Phelps, Stan Obenhaus, William McMillan, Charlie Gaylord, Skip King, Kenneth Johnson, Arlene Ross, Michael Capel, Jim Palazzolo, Monty Krieger, Peter Huntsman and Aaron Spetner. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)