Pierre Matisse and Tana Spreti Matisse spent their lives immersed in New York's art world. Now their foundation has donated $20,000 to help emerging artists get the legal resources they need to succeed. 

Mr. Matisse, the youngest child of the French artist Henri Matisse, was born during the turn of the century in France. Mr. Matisse made his name in New York where he spent 65 years as an art dealer focusing on 20th-century art.

Ms. Matisse, born in Austria in 1943 and raised in a family of diplomats, began working in Mr. Matisse's art gallery during the early 1970s. They married in 1974.

Before her death, Ms. Matisse set up the Pierre and Tana Matisse Foundation to support arts education for disadvantaged children in public and parochial schools, and after-school programs.

 The foundation decided to focus on arts education because of its belief that it helps children succeed in other areas of their studies, said Robert H. Horowitz, president of the foundation. "By funding arts education we are keeping alive Tana's and Pierre's love of the arts," Mr. Horowitz said.

The foundation gave its first major gift in 2002 when it donated about 30% of the Matisses' art collection to the Metropolitan Museum of Art. The donated collection was appraised at the time to be worth about $75 million. 

More recently the foundation has given donations to the Third Street Music School Settlement, Bronx Charter School for the Arts, the International Foundation of Art Research and the Young Audiences New York. Since 2005, the foundation has donated almost $5 million to arts education and other related programs. 

The Matisse Foundation awarded its latest donation to the Volunteer Lawyers for the Arts, a nonprofit organization that provides legal services to artists. The $20,000 donation will help fund the group's new website called Ask a Lawyer. The site provides basic legal advice in areas like intellectual property, contracts and business incorporation.

"It's tailored for artists," said Elena M. Paul, executive director of the Volunteer Lawyers for the Arts. Many artists are intimidated by the legal aspects of art, she said. The program will help artists get started and "keep people from being exploited," she added. 

Volunteer Lawyers for the Arts, founded in 1969, helps about 8,000 artists a year in its education and legal programs. The group also helps place about 900 cases with other law firms for pro bono work worth about $7 million a year. 

Lawyers that specialize in the arts can be hard to find, and their services are expensive, especially for up-and-coming artists, Mr. Horowitz said. "They are serving a community that is very anxious to get these services," he said. 

 Write to  Joseph De Avila at joseph.deavila@wsj.com 