A delegation of regional African leaders is set to travel to Ivory Coast on Monday to try again to persuade entrenched Ivorian leader Laurent Gbagbo to step down from the post of president that international observers say is no longer his.

The threat of military intervention in Ivory Coast by West African countries has faded, according to diplomats and analysts, so the delegation this time of four leaders will be offering Mr. Gbagbo expanded concessions such as amnesty against prosecution for possible war crimes committed during the current standoff and exile in a foreign country.

Mr. Gbagbo says that he is the rightful winner of a Nov. 28 run-off presidential vote, and that rival Alassane Ouattara should accept defeat. Nearly every African and international body, including the African Union and the United Nations, however, have backed Mr. Ouattara.

Mr. Gbagbo has so far been unmoved by economic sanctions enacted by the Central Bank of West Africa and the European Union as well as travel sanctions imposed by the U.S.

Diplomats and heads of state are now working to come up with an offer that Mr. Gbagbo will accept. Mr. Gbagbo has turned down offers of exile in Nigeria, Ghana and France, according to a senior Nigerian official, but an offer to relocate to the U.S. is still on the table.

A U.S. State Department spokesman didn't immediately respond to a request for comment.

The first meeting between the presidents of Benin, Cape Verde and Sierra Leone and Mr. Gbagbo in Ivory Coast didn't produce any results.

For Monday's meeting, the three presidents will be joined by Kenyan Prime Minister Raila Odinga, who has publicly stated that Mr. Gbagbo should be removed by force.

"It will be a very difficult meeting," a Western diplomat said in Abidjan Sunday. "It's important that Raila Odinga will be there–not that he can add much, but it's been important that the African Union has been so engaged in recognising Ouattara as the winner and calling for the democratic process to be respected."

The delegation's first meeting with Mr. Gbagbo didn't go well, according to a Western diplomat in Nigeria who was briefed on the talks. The president of Cape Verde wouldn't agree to military intervention, and the president of Benin went off script, "ad-libbing" during the meeting, according to the diplomat.

For now, the country has avoided widespread violence. A threat by Mr. Gbagbo's youth leader to attack on Saturday the hotel where Mr. Ouattara is ensconced failed to materialize.

In the Ivorian commercial capital, Abidjan, normally vibrant New Year's festivities were subdued, with Messrs. Gbagbo and Outtara each addressing the nation without any sign of compromise.

Mr. Gbagbo's camp has endorsed Monday's return trip by the heads of state and insists there won't be any military intervention.

"There can't be a military intervention here—was there a military intervention in Kenya after the election crisis, or in Zimbabwe?" said  Gnamian Yao, diplomatic adviser to Mr. Gbagbo. "Which Africans will come and kill other Africans over an election dispute?"

West African defense chiefs are due to meet in Mali later this month to finalize plans for a possible intervention force after an initial meeting was held in Abuja, Nigeria, at the end of December. The defense chiefs agreed on a total troop deployment of about 2,700 troops, according to a Western diplomat.

But military intervention remains unlikely. The 15-nation Economic Community of West African States wouldn't send troops unless "there are massive attacks on innocent civilians, and even then we would need serious support from the U.N.," said the senior Nigerian official. And with presidential elections coming up in Nigeria, the regional power has an interest in concentrating on domestic priorities.