MELBOURNE, Australia—Serbia doesn't have a long history in tennis. On Sunday night, Novak Djokovic proved he is ready to write one.

Playing the fast and punishing style of tennis that propelled him into the finals of the Australian Open, No. 3 Mr. Djokovic defeated No. 5 Andy Murray in straight sets, 6-4, 6-2, 6-3, to win his second Australian Open title. 

After winning the match on one of his opponent's many unforced errors of the evening, Mr. Djokovic embraced Mr. Murray, his good friend and practice partner, before tossing his racquet, wristbands, shirt and even his shoes into the screaming crowd.

Throughout the match Serbian supporters sang songs, waved Serbian flags and called out "Nole!", a nickname for Mr. Djokovic.

Mr. Djokovic, 23 years old, came into the Australian Open fresh from winning the Davis Cup for Serbia, and he continued to play in his national colors of red, white and blue. During the tournament he said the recent victory for his nation had inspired the power and confidence that was evident in his game when he defeated opponents here, most notably No. 2 Roger Federer in the semifinals.



"The Davis Cup title and another Grand Slam title, I'm living the dream as a tennis player," Mr. Djokovic said after winning the Open. 

Mr. Murray was chasing not only his own first Grand Slam victory but the first Grand Slam title for a British man since 1936. He said after the match Mr. Djokovic played "unbelievably well."

Mr. Djokovic, who made it through the Australian Open dropping only one set in a tie-break, put the pressure on Mr. Murray from the start. Even in Mr. Murray's first service game, Mr. Djokovic pushed him to deuce five times, but failed to break his serve. 

With Mr. Murray on serve at 4-5 in the first set, the Serbian gained a crucial break point by forcing Mr. Murray to hit a forehand into the net at the end of a mammoth, 38-shot rally. On the next point, Mr. Murray hit a forehand that a line judge called long. Mr. Murray challenged the call and for one long, silent moment the crowd waited until the Hawkeye camera traced the shot to eventually show that the ball was indeed out, at which point the Serbian fans jumped to their feet to celebrate Mr. Djokovic having won the first set.

The second set moved a little more quickly. Mr. Djokovic broke Mr. Murray twice to establish a 5-0 lead before Mr. Murray pulled out an ace to hold his serve. With that confidence, Mr. Murray was able to break Mr. Djokovic back on a series of errors by the Serbian, both forced and unforced. On Mr. Murray's serve, at 2-5, Mr. Djokovic turned the pressure up, sinking into a split to return a deep shot to keep a 19-stroke rally alive. He then forced an error on Mr. Murray's forehand to win the second set.

While Mr. Murray could at times keep up with Mr. Djokovic's game, he just couldn't find the moves needed to conquer it. 

Again in the third set, Mr. Murray found his service game challenged, his serve broken three times. Serving for the match at 5-3, Mr. Djokovic gained a 30-0 lead on his opponent's unforced errors. But with the match in his hands, he hit two backhands long and faulted on two of his first serves. Still, it only took a few moments for him to recover and hit his last forehand to win the match. 

Fans were expecting a tighter final. Mr. Djokovic and Mr. Murray are one week apart in age and they grew up on the tennis circuit together, having first played each other when they were 13. They are ranked No. 3 and No. 5 in the world, but had yet to meet in a Grand Slam before Sunday.

