SAN FRANCISCO—When lawyer Stephen Joseph sued Kraft Foods Inc. several years ago to eliminate trans fat in Oreo cookies, activist friends here celebrated his spirit. Now the party's over.

Mr. Joseph recently ran into one of them, Betsy Rosenberg. "He was my hero," she says. "I talked about him in speeches." But when they saw each other, she asked, "Have you gone over to the dark side?"

Ms. Rosenberg was referring to Mr. Joseph's metamorphosis into one of the nation's most vocal defenders of plastic bags. Out of a townhouse near Fisherman's Wharf, the onetime renewable-energy lobbyist now runs the website SaveThePlasticBag.com. He sends pro-plastic messages to municipal officials around the state and is disputing the existence of plastic-bag related "garbage patches" in the ocean.

Mr. Joseph has also made it a mission to sue California cities for their plastic-bag bans, alleging the cities violated state environmental law because the bans may boost the use of paper bags, which can also hurt the environment.

"I have a plastic watch, and I just got new plastic glasses," says the 56-year-old attorney. "I love plastic."

Mr. Joseph's transformation has made him very controversial in the Bay Area, which has led the country in banning plastic bags. San Francisco approved its ban—the nation's first—in 2007, followed by San Jose, Palo Alto and other cities. 

Mr. Joseph's change is particularly galling to many activists because he seems such an unlikely plastic defender. Years ago, the British native and registered Democrat formed a Green Patrol to clear litter in his San Francisco neighborhood. In 2003, Kraft announced an Oreo makeover in the wake of his lawsuit, and in 2005, he sued McDonald's Corp. for not telling customers that it hadn't yet reduced trans fats in recipes as it had planned. A Kraft spokeswoman says its trans fat change was unrelated to the lawsuit. A McDonald's spokeswoman declined to comment.

"It's crazy," says Michael Jacobson, a health advocate in Washington and an old friend who praised Mr. Joseph after the Oreo campaign. "Why is anyone defending plastic bags?" 

Certainly, plastic bags hurt the environment. But so do any number of other products—including paper bags, Mr. Joseph says. The question is which is worse. Studies funded by the plastics industry finger paper. Paper-industry research points to plastic. 

A peer-reviewed 2004 report conducted by Ecobilan, a consulting firm, and paid for by French supermarket chain Carrefour SA found that, while both types require energy and resources to produce, it takes more water to produce paper bags than plastic bags and that paper bags emit more greenhouse gases, among other harms. 

On the other hand, paper-bag litter was less detrimental than plastic, the study found. Furthermore, marine researchers point out that, unlike paper, plastic doesn't biodegrade, and sometimes floats in the ocean and breaks into tiny bits that sea animals swallow. It is unclear, however, whether ingested plastic hurts animals, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency won't answer the paper-or-plastic question, with a spokesman saying the agency "does not have information" on the impact of bans and "encourages the use of reusable bags."

Mr. Joseph traces his change of heart to 2007. That year, his second cousin, Albert Halimi, a plastic-bag executive at Grand Packaging Inc. in Vernon, Calif., called him for help to stop local bans and debunk plastic myths. Mr. Joseph said no. Then he searched the Web for information on the environmental impact of plastic bags. He says that environmental groups were spreading what he believed were inaccurate claims about so-called garbage patches and the impact of plastic bags on sea animals, without acknowledging the detriments of paper bags. He came to believe plastic bags had been unfairly vilified by environmentalists looking for an easy target. 

Mark Gold, president of the environmental group Heal the Bay, says some early claims about plastic out at sea were "probably not the strongest science" but says that "doesn't lessen the impact of what's going on in the global marine-debris crisis."

In mid-2008, Mr. Halimi's company, which does business as Command Packaging, joined with other plastic-bag makers and distributors as the Save the Plastic Bag Coalition, with Mr. Joseph as the group's spokesman. While the firms now pay him "well into six figures" each year, Mr. Joseph says, "This is not about the money."

That year, Mr. Joseph lobbed his first shot against the Southern California town of Manhattan Beach, which was planning a plastic-bag ban partly based on a 2002 report that claimed the bags kill 100,000 sea animals yearly. In fact, that oft-quoted number came from a study on deaths from plastic debris such as fishing nets, not plastic bags, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The federal agency also says on its website that the often-used term "garbage patch" is a "misnomer" because the tiny bits of plastic don't amount to visible masses, but adds that "manmade litter and debris do not belong in our oceans and waterways."

In a letter to the town, Mr. Joseph extolled the plastic bag as "an excellent product that has been unfairly attacked." He mentioned the animal-killing error and threatened to sue the city.

Manhattan Beach passed its ban in July 2008. So Mr. Joseph turned to the California Environmental Quality Act, which requires intensive environmental-impact reports on any project that might harm the environment. In August 2008, he filed suit on behalf of the coalition against Manhattan Beach in Los Angeles County Superior Court under the act, alleging the city hadn't properly evaluated the environmental impact of paper bags. 

Robert Wadden, city attorney for Manhattan Beach, says that the city's main concern in approving the ban was to reduce seaside litter and that any potential negative impacts of higher paper-bag use would be insubstantial because the town is quite small. 

Mr. Joseph has also threatened lawsuits against Santa Clara County, San Diego, Santa Monica, Mountain View, Morgan Hill, Palo Alto and San Jose—all of which were considering bans without environmental reviews. In February 2009, Mr. Joseph won the Manhattan Beach case in state Superior Court. In January 2010, an appellate court also ruled in his favor. The law requires environmental-impact reports when one can "fairly argue" that the environment might be harmed, even if an opposing argument exists. The case is now on appeal at the California Supreme Court.

Meanwhile, Los Angeles County and San Jose agreed to conduct extensive environmental reviews before enacting plastic-bag bans. In the process, Los Angeles County last November concluded that a plastic-bag ban could boost paper-bag use and boost greenhouse-gas emissions. San Jose also acknowledged the chance of environmental harm in its recent report.

Yet rather than dropping plastic-bag bans entirely, most cities have concluded that they should charge a fee for paper and ban plastic bags. Stores in Santa Monica will charge 10 cents per paper bag by September. Starting in January next year, Los Angeles County and San Jose will, too.

Mr. Joseph acknowledges he's fighting a losing battle in behalf of the plastic bag. Still, he says, "I never, ever give up."

 Write to  Vauhini Vara at vauhini.vara@wsj.com 