DALLAS—Texans are loading their cannons, six-shooters and flintlock rifles to celebrate their declaration of independence from Mexico 175 years ago Wednesday.

Events are under way to commemorate the revolution that led to the Republic of Texas. The sovereign nation lasted just a decade before it joined the United States, but it continues to loom large in the mythology of the Lone Star State.

"If Texans hadn't gotten free from Mexico, then probably the whole western half of the country wouldn't have been the U.S.," said Chuck Dawson, whose Cowtown Opry historical-music group in Fort Worth plans a two-stepping celebration ball.

As the only U.S. state to wage its own war of independence and constitute its own nation, "Texas has its own creation narrative," said Gregg Cantrell, professor of Texas history at Texas Christian University in Fort Worth.

Complicating the narrative these days, though, is Texas's expanding Hispanic population, much of it hailing from Mexico. Latinos make up 38% of the state's population, according to the latest census figures, up from 32% in 2000. They're expected to surpass the number of Anglos in coming years.

Some fear these new Texans are eroding the state's cultural heritage—though newcomers from California, New York and Ohio are also diluting the Texas identity, the Dallas Morning News noted in a recent editorial. "We're losing some of our uniqueness," the newspaper warned.

On March 2, 1836, in a town called Washington-on-the-Brazos, 59 Texans-to-be signed a declaration of independence, according to the Texas State Historical Association. For the commemoration, an early copy of the document has been put on display in Austin.

In Huntsville, Texas, former home of war hero and early Texas president Sam Houston, local residents will dedicate a log cabin Mr. Houston used as a bear-hunting base and will lay a wreath at his grave.

Perhaps the biggest event will be the re-enactment of the battle of the Alamo, scheduled for Saturday. 

Although the group including frontier hero Davy Crockett died defending the famed San Antonio outpost, "Remember the Alamo" became the rallying cry of a later battle in April 1836 in which the Texans defeated the Mexicans. 

Bill Barnett, president of the San Antonio Living History Association, said it will be hard to re-create the overwhelming advantage the Mexican Army had over the Texans—the roughly 200 defenders were out-numbered 10-1—in part because uniforms for the Mexican soldiers are expensive.

Otherwise, the group strives for historical accuracy. The 200 participants, who were required to submit for approval photos of their costumes and weapons, will be reminded to remove modern-day wrist watches and eye glasses.

And absolutely no raccoon headgear will be allowed, other than on the man portraying Crockett. 

It would "diminish his role," Mr. Barnett said, "having 12 people with coonskin caps."

 Write to  Ana Campoy at ana.campoy@dowjones.com 