Bernanke gave the Fed's first news conference ever, signaling that the central bank would end its $600 billion bond-buying program in June and maintain ultra-low interest rates for now. He tried to reassure a skeptical public that the Fed is doing all it can to control inflation and expand a recovery that has yet to reach many Americans. At some point the Fed will have to start draining excess credit from the economy with higher rates; that transition could mean an end to the roaring rally by stocks, commodities and riskier bonds and currencies, and a new period of volatility. And investors are concerned about how all that easy money to boost growth has weighed on the dollar, which fell Thursday to its lowest point since the summer of 2008. But the historic presser's 20 or so questions and answers didn't shake the earth. "He's skilled," said Fed historian Allan Meltzer. "He's been dodging questions in Congress for a long time now."

See the probability of tornadoes within 25 miles of any given point, based on past occurrences, throughout the center of the U.S.

A nearly five-year slide in home values across the country, now accelerating, is creating a standoff, with many sellers unable or unwilling to lower their prices further—and buyers reluctant to make a purchase without a deep discount. One index of the pain: It's getting tougher to post bail using your house as collateral. "It's the Wild West out here," said one southern California house hunter, "a daily, tireless search." On the brighter side for a state slammed by the housing bust, California's farm economy is on the mend after years of decline, thanks to the wettest winter since 2006.

The economy expanded at a 1.8% annual rate in the first quarter, down from 3.1% growth in the fourth, and the slowest pace of growth in three quarters. Most economists wrote it off as a passing combination of bad weather and surging prices.

A five-minute questionnaire in a pediatrician's office can detect autism-like symptoms in children as young as 12 months old, a study found, offering an important head start on treatment but risking the anguish of false positives.

CIA Director Panetta will succeed Gates as defense secretary, and Afghan war commander Petraeus will take the helm at the spy agency, reflecting Obama's belief that conflicts can better be fought with smaller, covert forces. Marine Lt. Gen. John Allen will lead allied forces in Afghanistan. On another front in the antiterror campaign, the WikiLeaks disclosure of Guantanamo detainee reports showed a system without consistent standards for holding, prosecuting or releasing detainees, illuminating the difficulties the administration faces in fulfilling its promise to deal fairly and quickly with accused terrorists.

Some prominent hedge fund managers are actively supporting Republicans after making a big bet on Obama and other Democrats in 2008, reacting to what some criticize as the president's populist attacks on Wall Street and to Democrat-led efforts to raise the industry's tax bill.

Obama released his long-form birth certificate to prove his U.S. citizenship, denouncing skeptics as "carnival barkers," after real estate mogul Donald Trump seized on the issue while testing the waters for a presidential run.A quarter of respondents in a recent CBS/New York Times poll said they believed Mr. Obama wasn't born in the U.S. 

The U.S.-led coalition in Afghanistan faced new peril, as hundreds of Taliban militants escaped from prison and investigators arrested the warden on suspicion of complicity. An Afghan air-force officer opened fire on coalition forces at Kabul Airport, killing nine, the latest in a series of deadly attacks by Afghan troops on their foreign allies. The coalition said it had killed the second-most-wanted insurgent in the country, a senior al Qaeda leader. from Saudi Arabia

Libyan leader Gadhafi is reorganizing government, rallying international support and hiring foreign consultants to help stave off sanctions, while using a mix of financial incentives, patriotic appeals and repression to retain the loyalty of officials and tribal leaders. His forces overran a rebel outpost on the Tunisian border, cutting off a vital rebel supply line, after attacking Misrata's port, threatening the city's sole lifeline to the world just two days after rebels drove the last government forces out of the city.

International pressure on Syria increased as the Assad regime continued using deadly force against protesters. Turkey sent a delegation to advise on rapid reforms after the U.N. Security Council failed to condemn the government's efforts to silence dissent. Hundreds of ruling-party members quit, and activists reported fighting between soldiers and elite troops.

Opposing Palestinian political factions Hamas and Fatah reached a preliminary power-sharing agreement, in a reflection of the political changes sweeping the Arab Middle East. Egypt's encouragement of Palestinian unification points up an independent streak in its foreign policy that could present new challenges to the U.S. and Israel in the region.

The Japanese government will shoulder much of a nine-month plan to tame the stricken Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant, as criticism of plant operator Tepco mounted. Japan's industrial production and consumer spending for March dropped at their sharpest rates on record, due to the impact of the earthquake, tsunami and nuclear crisis on the nation's fragile economy.

China's population is growing slower and aging faster, its once-a-decade census showed, raising questions about the government's refusal to scrap its one-child policy. Separately, the World Bank said China's trade surplus is no longer a major factor in its growth, a sharp shift in the development model that helped turn the country from an economic backwater into the world's second-largest economy.

Germany's Merkel is set to endorse Mario Draghi of Italy as the next president of the European Central Bank, making his appointment a virtual certainty.

Hackers stole the names, birth dates and possibly credit card numbers of 77 million people who play online videogames through  Sony's PlayStation console, among the biggest data breaches in history. It's a big black eye for Sony, locked in an increasingly heated battle with Microsoft, Nintendo and others in the gaming market, and highlights the trove of personal information stored in online-gaming services. Meanwhile, Apple is scaling back how much information its iPhones can store about where they have been and said it will stop collecting such data when consumers request it, as the company tries to quell concerns it was tracking iPhone owners. Elsewhere in the tech sphere, Research In Motion warned of slack sales for its BlackBerry smartphones, fresh evidence that RIM is struggling to compete with Apple and other smartphone makers, especially in the U.S. market.

Percentage of Americans killed in tornadoes last year who were inside mobile homes. Deaths in the past week's twisters have shined a light on safety.

Average price of a gallon of gas just 10 years ago, in April 2001shortly before its climb to the new national average of $3.88.

Kids and adults participating annually in Take Our Daughters and Sons to Work Day, at more than three million workplaces. This year's theme: Invent the Future.

Jobless Americans not receiving unemployment benefits.

The U.S. unemployment rolls are shrinking after expanding to more than 11 million last year as the government extended benefits to ease the pain of a deep economic slump. People are finding jobs; the number of those employed in March was up by nearly one million from a year earlier, according to the Labor Department's household survey. But many Americans are running out of time. As of March, about 5.5 million were unemployed without benefits, up 1.4 million from a year earlier. In the same period, another 600,000 or so either gave up on finding a job or left the labor force for some other reason. Many more are set to join those with no job and no benefits. The number of people using up their regular 26 weeks of jobless payments peaked in August 2009 at nearly 800,000 a month. Those who got an added 73 weeks of extended benefits should be running out right about now. 

—Mark Whitehouse

 Sources: National Weather Service; Energy Information Administration (price adjusted for inflation); Take Our Daughters and Sons to Work Foundation  



Federal investigators looking into the recent midair fuselage rupture of a  Southwest Airlines
LUV


0.25
%




 Boeing
BA


-0.68
%




 737 gave the strongest sign yet that manufacturing problems, including a pattern of misaligned rivet holes, likely played a major part.

  Exelon,
EXC


0.06
%




 the largest operator of nuclear plants in the U.S., agreed to buy  Constellation Energy Groupin a stock-for-stock deal valued at about $8 billion.

A federal judge in Minnesota ruled in favor of the National Football League's players, ordering an end to the league's seven-week-old lockout. But the matter remained in flux late Friday, as an appeals court considered granting the league's request to stay the decision while it considers the matter.

  ﻿
JNJ


0.75
%




Wal-Mart Stores is quietly bringing back rifles, shotguns and ammunition to hundreds of U.S. stores as the retail giant seeks to reinvigorate its one-stop-shopping appeal and attract more male customers, after a misbegotten attempt to go upscale.

A government attempt to oust longtime drug-company CEO  Howard Solomon of  Forest Laboratories over his company's marketing violations is raising alarms in the industry, and beyond, about an expansion of federal involvement in business.

  Barrick Gold agreed to acquire copper producer Equinox Minerals for $7.65 billion, topping a bid by a Chinese miner and firing the latest salvo in a three-continent battle for assets.

Amazon's quarterly profits plunged 33% as the online retailer spent ferociously to build more fulfillment centers and expand its technology offerings. It's the latest Web company to report rising costs as the Internet proves to be an expensive arena in which to do business.

Investors took the Fed's standing pat on rates as a green light to continue a binge on high-yielding, risky investments. The Russell 2000 index of small-company stocks became the first big benchmark since the financial crisis to carve out a record, breaking through its 2007 high on Wednesday and ending the week at 865.29. The Nasdaq Composite hit its highest in a decade during the week, and ended at 2873.54. The Dow Jones Industrial Average finished at 12810.54, while the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index hit 1363.61.

The CFTC is moving to effectively preclude mutual funds from using offshore subsidiaries in the Cayman Islands and elsewhere to make speculative bets on gold, oil and other commodities and currencies, mainly through futures contracts and derivatives tied to their prices. Many of the subsidiaries invest as much as 25% of a mutual fund's assets in commodities.

A committee of Berkshire Hathaway directors pinned the blame for its stock-trading controversy squarely on former executive David Sokol, saying he misled top executives, including Chairman and CEO  Buffett. The audit panel said Sokol's trading in the shares of a chemical company Berkshire recently agreed to buy violated Berkshire's standards.

Two of Europe's biggest investment banks stumbled in the first quarter. Barclays reported a first-quarter profit down 5.2% from a year earlier, to $1.66 billion. Barclays Capital, the investment-banking unit that consistently accounts for more than half of the company's revenue and profit, said revenue fell 15% while profit sank 33%. Credit Suisse Group said its net profit sank 45%, to $1.3 billion, dragged down by a strong Swiss franc and a charge on its own debt, even as both its investment bank and private bank fared well.