European Union governments are considering proposals to significantly boost the bloc's bailout fund for indebted euro-zone countries, an acknowledgment that the fund might prove too small if the region's debt crisis spreads to Spain, European officials said. 

Top civil servants from EU finance ministries discussed an overhaul of Europe's main bailout mechanism, the €440 billion ($568 billion) European Financial Stability Facility, at talks in Brussels on Monday and Tuesday, the European officials familiar with the matter said. The changes being discussed include raising the fund's size and letting it intervene in bond markets. 

Also on Tuesday, Japan said it plans to buy more than 20% of a bond offering by the European Financial Stability Facility, expected this month, Finance Minister Yoshihiko Noda said.

The euro-zone economy is expected to expand mildly through 2011, aided by a recovery in global demand. But forecasts are overshadowed by the government debt crisis. See how member nations stack up. 

"The euro zone is planning to issue a large amount of bonds in a cooperative manner late this month to raise funds to assist Ireland, and it is appropriate for Japan, as a major economy, to buy some of the EFSF bonds to bolster confidence" in Europe's efforts, Mr. Noda said.

Investors responded to the news that the fund could grow, first reported online Tuesday by The Wall Street Journal, by pushing both the euro and German bonds lower in Europe. The euro was at $1.2975 in late trading in New York, slightly up from $1.2952 late Monday. 

One senior European official cautioned that no decision has been reached on increasing the fund, as officials prepare for next week's meeting of EU finance ministers. 

The fund under discussion is the major component of a broader, roughly trillion dollar bailout package that includes commitments from the International Monetary Fund and other sources.

Political divisions over the issue means it may take several weeks to resolve, the officials said. One sticking point is that hardly any of the fund's existing capacity has been tapped, making it politically difficult to justify making it bigger. 

The talks on the size of the bailout fund are taking place against the background of deteriorating financial-market confidence in Portugal's finances, leading many observers to believe that Portugal will need international aid in coming weeks. Portugal faces a crucial test of investor confidence on Wednesday, when it is expected to try to raise as much as €1.25 billion with a bond auction. 

After Portugal, Spain is seen as the next euro-zone country potentially at risk of being shut out of capital markets because of its fast-rising debts and poor economic outlook. Economists say Spain is less likely than Portugal to need a bailout, because Spain's public debt is far lower. But a collapse of confidence in Spanish debt can't be ruled out, most analysts say, partly because of uncertainty about the health of Spanish banks. 

The Spanish economy's far-greater size when compared with that of Portugal or previously bailed-out Greece and Ireland means Spain is widely seen as the make-or-break test of Europe's ability to resolve the crisis. 

This year is already shaping up to be a test of whether Europe can defend its single currency, the centerpiece of 60 years of efforts aimed at fostering political and economic unity on the Continent. The contradictions exposed in the past year between having one currency and monetary policy, but disparate national policies on taxes and spending, have triggered a debate about whether Europe needs a deeper fiscal union if it wants to save the euro. 

In Germany, Europe's biggest economy and the EU's paymaster, criticism is widespread of euro-zone leaders' failure so far to agree on tougher punishments for fiscal indiscipline, which many Germans see as the root cause of the crisis. 

Otmar Issing, an influential German economist and former board member of the European Central Bank, warned this week that the "seemingly unstoppable" movement toward financial transfers from the euro zone's strongest to its weakest members threatens the euro. 

"The longer this process is characterized by unsound conduct of individual member countries, the more these tensions will endanger the existence" of the euro, Mr. Issing warned in an essay for the Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum, a London-based think tank. 

Calls from some euro members to boost the bailout fund stem partly from fact that the fund's advertised €440 billion size refers only to its maximum amount of credit guarantees from other euro-zone governments. The fund's true capacity for lending to stricken countries is far smaller, partly because of its need for excess collateral, and partly because the bailout fund shrinks if more countries become supplicants rather than supporters. 

Should both Portugal and Spain need a bailout, the fund's lending capacity would be only around €240 billion. Although most euro-zone governments say publicly that the fund is big enough, some officials admit the available money would meet Spain's borrowing needs for only about a year. 

Many European governments are thus pushing to increase the bailout facility's effective lending capacity to €440 billion or more. That would require a big increase in credit guarantees from financially strong countries such as Germany and France. 

Other ideas being debated include allowing the fund to buy euro-zone government bonds in the secondary market, replacing some or all of the European Central Bank's current bond-buying activities. 

Some governments also want to reduce the interest rates on the fund's rescue loans, a step that would make it easier for aid recipients such as Ireland to reduce their debt-service burdens and repair their budgets.

European governments are far from reaching consensus, with Germany particularly wary of proposals that would require it to commit more money while reducing pressure on indebted nations to reform. 

Advisers to German Chancellor Angela Merkel are concerned about a domestic political backlash against more-generous aid to other euro members. A majority of German voters, as well as many lawmakers in Ms. Merkel's center-right coalition, are hostile to helping profligate Southern European countries. The ruling coalition is struggling in opinion polls ahead of a string of key regional elections in Germany this year. 

However, the German finance ministry is seen as more open to boosting the bailout mechanism. Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble has for weeks argued that the EU needs to take bolder action to defend the single currency. 

Portugal, meanwhile, continued to insist on Tuesday that it doesn't need aid, despite bond-market pressure that has pushed up its borrowing costs to painful levels. 

"Portugal won't ask for any financial help because it's not necessary," Prime Minister José Sócrates said Tuesday. His government announced that its budget deficit for 2010 came in below its target of 7.3% of gross domestic product, a fact Mr. Socrates cited as evidence that the country's deficit-reduction efforts are succeeding. 

Many other EU governments believe Portugal hasn't taken sufficiently stringent action to curb its rising debts, however. The country's budget cuts so far "have not reassured the markets sufficiently," Dutch Finance Minister Jan Kees De Jager said Tuesday. 

Wednesday's auction of Portuguese bonds will be a test of whether the country can continue to finance itself on capital markets. Other euro-zone governments have for weeks advised Portugal to tap the bloc's bailout fund, partly in the hope that resolving the uncertainty over Portugal's fate will help to reduce financial-market pressure on Spain. 

Portugal may be able to muddle through for several weeks, but it may need help by April at the latest thanks to steep debt repayments and already unsustainable borrowing costs, say economists.

—Brian Blackstone in Frankfurt, Alex MacDonald in Lisbon and Takashi Nakamichi in Tokyo contributed to this article.

 Write to  Marcus Walker at marcus.walker@wsj.com and Stephen Fidler at stephen.fidler@wsj.com 