Bill and Anne Krupman made reading to their children a nightly ritual. Their daughter Pam especially loved stories about horses.

"She would read every book, plus some and then over and over and over the same books," says Mrs. Krupman. "Her interest has always been in reading and writing and we never knew what direction she was going to go."

The direction that daughter Pam Allyn ultimately followed was to found LitWorld, an international literacy organization that has the goal of teaching one million children to read by 2014.

Ms. Allyn is the executive director of the four-year-old organization, and, separately, she leads LitLife, a consulting company that works on literacy education in schools.

Mr. Krupman says that his daughter's trajectory to be involved with helping people to read "was clear from the beginning."

Mrs. Krupman agrees. "The minute she started reading she was just off to another world and I think that's what she wants to impart to children all over the world."

In support of LitWorld's work and in honor of a gala to be held Wednesday, Bill, 74 years old, and Anne Krupman, 72, will announce a $25,000 matching gift to the organization.

It is one of about 100 organizations that the Krupmans, who live in Purchase, N.Y., support annually. 

"What could be more unarguable than teaching children?" asks Mr. Krupman. "You have to read. It is so fundamental. It's beyond an inalienable right, it's an absolute necessary right."

The inspiration to develop a literacy program, and eventually LitWorld, started simply. Mr. Krupman, a former managing partner with Jackson Lewis LLP, helped to engage his daughter on literacy issues through his involvement with the Children's Village, an organization that serves at-risk boys and based in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y. Mr. Krupman has served on the board of Children's Village since 1974.

During a visit to the Children's Village, Pam noticed that there weren't any books in the library because students had a habit of stealing the books.

In retelling the story, Mrs. Krupman says that her daughter's initial reaction to the thefts was joy: the boys needed more books to further foster their interest in reading. Out of that came a reading and mentoring program at Children's Village called "Books for Boys," which was followed by Lit World. 

To date, LitWorld has worked in 35 countries and reached 40,000 people, the organization says. One of its primary focuses is its reading clubs for girls, from Iraq to Liberia and Kenya. 