The global financial crisis was—as its name suggests—global. Yet only one country is engaged in a fevered debate over the possible break-up of its banks: the U.K. Almost since the moment the crisis fully hit the shores of Britain with the collapse of Northern Rock—ironically a small mortgage bank rather than a global banking behemoth—the talk has been about the need for some form of Glass-Steagall style splitting of U.K. bank retail and investment arms. This agenda is being driven by the Governor of the Bank of England, no less, and is given vocal support by leading members of the government, and much of the press. 

Quite why the U.K. alone should be so vexed by this issue I don't understand. Most likely it reflects societal factors, notably resentment at the huge income inequalities and resulting pressures on housing and other services that come with hosting one of the world's leading financial centers in the capital of medium-sized European country. But when other countries affected by the financial crisis have considered solutions to the problems in the banking sector, they have steered clear of breaking up their banks. 

The U.S. has introduced the Volcker Rule—a poorly-drafted attempt to force banks to divest their proprietary investments, if only one could define what they are—but have otherwise left the bulk of the industry in tact. 

The Swiss government is introducing a "Swiss Finish" which would require its largest banks to hold extra capital. And Germany has recently introduced a tough new Special Resolution Regime for banks. But only the U.K. has established an Independent Commission to spend a year considering whether to break up the banks—and if recent reports are to be believed is leaning to that conclusion.

In fact, I understand this speculation is wide of the mark. The Commission is certainly looking seriously at options for breaking up the banks but it is also looking equally hard at alternative solutions to the too big to fail problem involving the use of loss-absorbing capital, according to people familiar with its deliberations. It is by no means clear at this stage which way they will go. That makes sense since the case for breaking up banks such as Barclays and Royal Bank of Scotland is far from clear. 

The key to the debate hinges on whether universal banks such as Barclays enjoy lower funding costs relative to pure investment banks such as Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley reflects the benefits of diversification or a cross-subsidy from their retail divisions. Barclays boss Bob Diamond argued forcefully to the Treasury Select Committee last week that the bank's lower funding costs reflected its superior business model and my understanding is that the Banking Commission is increasingly sympathetic to this view. It is very hard to dispute that diversification—the ability of investment banking activities to generate profits as retail losses emerged—has helped universal banks to recover from the crisis. 

But if one concedes that diversification does bring universal banks legitimate funding advantages, where does that leave the case for breaking them up? At this point, most protagonists are left arguing over the social desirability of investment banking activities and whether they are an appropriate use of government-insured deposits. But despite the chairman of the Financial Services Authority's claim that many investment banking activities are "socially useless", it is hard to argue that there is not an important economic benefit in allowing farmers to hedge their exposure to volatile commodity prices or manufacturers to hedge their foreign exchange exposure. 

A more subtle argument is advanced by the Bank of England's Financial Stability director Andrew Haldane. In an article for Nature Magazine—surely a first for a central banker—he and co-author zoologist Robert May draw on research from ecology and epidemiology to argue that, while diversification may indeed reduce risks for an individual bank, if all banks diversify in similar ways it can increase systemic risks. The same studies also suggest that the bigger and more complex the bank, the higher the probability of default. 

Mr. Haldane concludes that the solution is not only higher capital ratios for bigger banks—which seems unarguable and has been agreed by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision—but also more modularity in banking systems, separating different activities to prevent infections spreading across asset classes. 

But even this is not entirely persuasive. After all, it's not clear that diversification was a cause of bank failures in the crisis. With the exception of RBS and Citigroup, the universal banks tended to hold up relatively well. The most spectacular collapses tended to be pure mortgage banks and investment banks. 

Also, banking systems do not operate in laboratory conditions: if regulators were to arbitrarily restrict the types of assets that could be funded by retail deposits, there's a risk that deposits would leak into the shadow banking system, beyond the reach of regulators and increasing systemic risk.

There's also another point to consider. Breaking up banks would require far greater levels of capital to be carried in the system against the same activities. Some members of the BOE including the governor have argued that this will have no impact on the overall cost of funding since debt costs should come down. 

But I am told that the Commission disagrees with the BOE on this crucial issue—not least because nobody in the markets actually believes it to be true. This conclusion has major implications for the potential impact of structural reforms of banking on the U.K. economy since it would raise the cost of capital for the economy—and by extension reduce the lower rate of growth. 

Regulators like to talk of the social contract at the heart of banking: societies agree to allow banks to engage in risky maturity transformation—turning short-term deposits into long-term loans—and banks in return accept a high degree of regulation. But there is another aspect to this social contract: 150 years of banking history has revealed that society has a clear preference that governments accept a degree of tail-risk in return for a lower cost of capital and faster growth. Perhaps the intensity of the U.K. debate means that this preference has changed—but somehow I doubt it very much.

 Write to  Simon Nixon at simon.nixon@wsj.com 