BANGKOK—Thailand's young, British-born leader is betting that new elections will break the cycle of political violence plaguing one of Southeast Asia's linchpin economies and propel it back into the ranks of the world's most promising emerging markets. His first hurdle is achieving a peaceful vote.

Over the past few years, Thailand's carefully crafted image as a paradise of tropical beaches and investor-friendly industrial zones has taken a beating. Its vibrant economy has been overshadowed by a military coup, raucous street protests and blockades at its international airports. 

Strict laws stifle antigovernment criticism while the army's leaders sometimes play a royal trump card by accusing dissenters of being disloyal to 83-year-old King Bhumibol Adulyadej, whom some Thais consider to be almost divine.

Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva, however, said new elections can wipe the slate clean and enable Thailand to go about the business of putting itself at the forefront of a new wave of emerging economies.

He said Friday he had submitted a decree to Thailand's king seeking royal endorsement for dissolving parliament, six months before his term ends, paving the way for a general election to be held by early July. The vote will push Thailand "beyond the conflict, move it beyond the protests and really help us reach our potential," he said in an interview at Bangkok's elaborate, Italian-designed Government House.

It is a risky strategy. Mr. Abhisit acknowledges it will be a close-fought election between his Democrat Party and a well-funded opposition backed by former premier Thaksin Shinawatra, the man the army kicked out of power nearly five years ago. 

Conservative royalists argue that Thailand isn't ready to hold peaceful elections. Some of their members are camped outside the main government complex demanding Thailand wait four or five years before holding a vote. 

They point to last year's violent street protests, which killed 91 people, as evidence the country still hasn't recovered from the aftermath the 2006 military coup that ousted Mr. Thaksin, the most recent of the many coups Thailand has seen in nearly 80 years since the end of absolute monarchy.

On the other side, the left-leaning Red Shirt protesters have been agitating for a fresh election since taking to Bangkok's streets last year in an effort to bring Mr. Thaksin back from his self-imposed exile. They accuse military leaders of plotting to block the election.

Meanwhile, a border conflict with Cambodia that has so far claimed 17 soldiers' lives is fueling widespread rumors the vote will be called off.

Some observers say an election might not draw as decisive a line under Thailand's recent past as Mr. Abhisit hopes. Michael Montesano, an expert on Thai politics at Singapore's Institute for Southeast Asian Studies, said that even among Thailand's anti-Thaksin establishment, there are doubts that elections are the best way to stabilize the country. 

"There are a lot of people who don't think it is the silver bullet he seems to think it is," Mr. Montesano said.

Mr. Abhisit, however, is adamant that the election will go ahead, and that it will represent a political landmark. "I think there are groups of people who may not feel that the elections will solve anything, who are fed up with politicians, but you get that all over the world," he said. "I think an overwhelming majority of Thais want the elections to be a clear process through which we achieve stability and move the country forward." 

The prime minister plays down rumors of a coup by the military. "I find it odd that people talk about more military presence or influence in the policies we've adopted," he said. 

"On the contrary, I think we see the military is now playing its role according to the constitution, and supports an elected government and the policies we adopt," he added.

The election campaign will test the leadership credentials of this 46-year-old, Oxford-educated economist. Thailand is passing through one of the most volatile periods in its complex history, beginning in 2001 with the landslide election of Mr. Thaksin, a telecommunications billionaire with a street-savvy populist streak and a blueprint for remodeling this conservative Buddhist kingdom in his own image.The business mogul's shoot-from-the-hip, CEO-style of leadership, however, rubbed many conservative Thais the wrong way.

Mr. Thaksin crafted a series of popular policies that appealed to millions of Thais left behind during the country's economic boom. Affordable health care and better access to credit created a huge constituency that enabled Mr. Thaksin to become the only elected Thai leader ever to complete a full term, let alone be re-elected.

Powerful civil servants and army chiefs, in particular, worried his sway over large, rural voting blocks granted Mr. Thaksin almost unchecked power. Some top generals accused him of corruption and of using his populist appeal to undermine the authority of the world's longest-serving monarch, King Bhumibol—something Mr. Thaksin always has denied.

Once the momentum shifted, the coup came quickly. The army ushered Mr. Thaksin from power while he was attending the United Nations' annual meetings, and a new army-appointed government set about dismantling his political machine before restoring democracy in late 2007.

Since then, Mr. Thaksin's support base has expanded into a broad coalition of Red Shirt activists. In 2008 alone, Thai courts removed two of Mr. Thaksin's supporters from the post of prime minister. One was dismissed for accepting token payments to appear on a television cooking show. The other, Mr. Thaksin's brother-in-law, was removed in December 2008 for alleged vote-buying, while royalist protesters blockaded Bangkok's international airports.

Enter Mr. Abhisit, a trim, handsome member of Thailand's old ruling classes. His first move was to set about reviving an economy threatened by events elsewhere in the world.

"When we came in it was right at the height of the global financial crisis," Mr. Abhisit said. "The biggest fear was that we would see a prolonged recession or depression and mass unemployment. That didn't happen. We swiftly put in place stimulus packages and we were able to achieve close to 8% growth last year, and we continue to have a very strong expansion of exports and tourist income."

Mr. Abhisit says he feels his government's economic record should put it in good standing with the electorate at election time. He is positive about Thailand's position in the region and says the country stands to benefit from China's growth in years to come. 

"People, when there is a rapidly rising economic power, they always feel threatened," he says of his constituents, "but I see opportunities." 

Mr. Abhisit welcomes greater engagement from the U.S. in the region. He said he wished that the U.S. weren't as distracted with the Middle East and its own economic troubles, but added that he has picked up signals from the U.S. and President Barack Obama that it wants to engage.

Mr. Thaksin also is focusing the opposition's election campaign on the economy—directing the effort from his home in Dubai. 

 In a recent interview with The Wall Street Journal, Mr. Thaksin said he is pledging large salary increases and cuts in corporate taxes to help invigorate consumer spending. Mr. Thaksin is promising to return home to personally manage Thailand's economy and turn back the clock to the country's boom years—if his allies in Parliament can pass an amnesty law freeing him of an earlier corruption conviction, in addition to terrorism charges for his role in instigating last year's rioting.

The big concern is whether street protesters will accept the results of the polls. Neither Mr. Abhisit's Democrat Party nor the For Thais Party, which is pro-Thaksin, will likely win a majority of the seats in the new Parliament, leaving them to rely on Thailand's unpredictable smaller parties to form a coalition government. That could feed current accusations by some Red Shirt supporters that Thailand's generals already have brokered a series of defections in Parliament to bring Mr. Abhisit to power.

Mr. Abhisit acknowledged the risks. "What's important is to make sure there are no conditions that would spark off a series of protests," he said.

 Write to  James Hookway at james.hookway@wsj.com and Almar Latour at almar.latour@wsj.com 