SVIT, Slovakia—Slovakia's ruling coalition government must fully back the €700 billion (about $1 trillion) European Stability Mechanism, the euro zone's permanent rescue mechanism, before counting on the Central European country's largest opposition party, Smer-Social Democracy, to vote for it in Parliament, said Robert Fico, the leader of the left-of-center party.

"This isn't a matter for playing [political] games," said Mr. Fico, a former Slovak prime minister, before meeting Smer supporters in this northern Slovak town in the foothills of the High Tatras range.

If it fails to approve the euro area's permanent salvage plan, Slovakia may further bolster its status as the currency union's biggest renegade, having already refused to chip in for the Greek loan package and dragged its feet on the approval of the European Stability Mechanism's predecessor, known as European Financial Stability Facility, last year.

Mr. Fico, whose own previous government shepherded Slovakia into the euro zone in 2009, said he had called on current Prime Minister  Iveta Radicova, the first woman heading this post-Communist country, to put her coalition government "in order" on the ESM.

Mr. Fico aimed his words mainly at the junior coalition member, the liberal Freedom and Solidarity, or SaS, party, led by Parliament speaker  Richard Sulik. SaS opposes Slovakia's participation in the ESM.

"The ESM is a swindle on European taxpayers and that is the reason why SaS will not support it," Mr. Sulik said in a statement.

Smer holds 62 of 150 votes in Slovakia's single-chamber legislature and without the 22 votes held by SaS votes, the ESM supporters in Ms. Radicova's cabinet will garner only 55 votes, forcing the prime minister to seek support for the euro safety mechanism from the opposition Smer.

The fight over Slovakia's position on the ESM plan is becoming a key domestic political issue. Smer is currently leading opinion polls, indicating that Mr. Fico could be able to form a single-party government if early elections were held before the current Parliament's term is up in 2014.

"I'm for this ESM plan but I also want the ruling government to bear its share of responsibility," Mr. Fico said. "We'll take over the government's responsibility [on the ESM] only on the basis of results of any new elections."

The ESM is to supplant the euro area's current rescue facility in mid-2013, but the permanent safety net requires approval from all 17 euro-zone member states, which include Slovakia.

 "Of course we have our political attitudes but I can clearly say that [Smer] is pro-European-oriented and that we will support these mechanisms," Mr. Fico said, adding that he will try to put pressure on the coalition government to approve the ESM. "We won't allow one political party to seek political capital gains from their opposition" against the ESM," he said.

Before narrowly losing parliamentary elections in June 2010, Mr. Fico's outgoing left-of-center government gave preliminary approval for the European Union's Greek loan package of €110 billion, but Mr. Fico left the full endorsement of the Greek aid up to the incoming government. Ms. Radicova's right-of-center government withdrew the approval, arguing that poorer euro-zone nations such as Slovakia shouldn't pay for sins of richer profligate currency union members.

"I've never viewed the loan to Greece as just an aid package for Greece, I've always viewed as a support for the euro," Mr. Fico said, adding that he regards the Greek loan as a demonstration of Europe's solidarity.

While Mr. Fico said his party was fully in favor of the new euro safety mechanism, he added it would also like the EU to strengthen its control and sanction mechanisms against any euro-area members that fail to play by rules on responsible budget policy.

 Write to  Leos Rousek at leos.rousek@dowjones.com 