China watchers have long believed that not every statistic the Middle Kingdom throws is accurate. A Wikileaks story, uncovered last month, about how Li Keqiang, China's own vice-premier, analyzes the economy lends some credence to the non-believers: Because he doesn't trust GDP figures, Mr. Li focuses on three data points—electricity consumption, rail cargo volume and bank lending. 

For such a large economy and with such unreliable data, it's imperative for researchers and investors to collect as many pieces of information as possible. The more pieces that fit into the same picture, the likelier that the picture is the right one. After the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) released December's inflation data last Thursday, investors should be asking what the right picture for inflation is.

Beijing shows the world its inflation by releasing a consumer price index. By this measure, inflation in China fell from a high of 5.1% in year-on-year terms in November to 4.6% in December. Some investors are celebrating this slowdown, but this was the result of base effects (in December 2009 the rise in prices was quite high) and price controls that Beijing deployed in 2010 to cool inflation. But that's not even the half of it. If investors focus on the CPI as the sole gauge of inflationary pressures, they could underestimate the extent of China's overheating. If they were to look at other gauges, they would see different pictures. 

The best gauge of domestic inflationary pressures in an economy is the consumer spending deflator. Calculated as the ratio between current-price and real consumer expenditure, the deflator shows actual spending patterns. The CPI, on the other hand, is based on a basket of goods and services whose weight is fixed each year. But consumers' preferences are hardly fixed for a period as long as a year: They tend to switch their preferences to the goods and services whose prices are rising at a slower rate. When prices are rising quickly, inflation measured by the CPI tends to be higher than that measured by the consumer spending deflator. The CPI will only reflect the switch in preferences when the NBS resets its weights. 

China does not publish a consumer spending deflator. But there's another measure, the GDP deflator, that similarly relies on calculating the difference between two sets of data. The NBS publishes real and nominal GDP growth which allows us to calculate that measure of year-on-year inflation. And here we see that changes in the price level as measured by the GDP deflator has consistently outpaced CPI inflation. 

In the last three months of 2010, the deflator made inflation out to be 7.3%, compared with 4.7% using the CPI. Yes, GDP statistics aren't accurate in China either: Real GDP growth has shown unnatural stability over the past few years. But if the 7.3% inflation the GDP deflator calculates is an overestimation, this has to mean that real GDP growth is higher than the 9.8% Beijing officially clocked for the last quarter—which is dangerously high, strengthening the fear of overheating China bears have been raising of late.

Why the stark difference? First, while the market may set most prices in China, the authorities administer some—the key price of energy, for instance. And every time inflation becomes a problem, Beijing introduces price controls aimed at the items whose prices are rising the fastest. This happened in 2004, in 2008 and yet again last year when, say, cooking oil came under controls. The CPI will take into account these administered prices—that's why it hasn't increased as much—whereas the GDP deflator is more likely to reflect actual price developments. 

Second, the NBS changes the CPI weights only every five years, well behind structural changes in spending patterns. What's worse, the CPI weights are not disclosed, nor are the changes; some of the changes also seem to be ad hoc. The NBS announced last year that the weights and the composition of the CPI basket will change from January 2011, but they have not as yet disclosed what the exact changes will be. The weight of food, hitherto believed to be around 34% of the index, is supposed to be lowered and the weight of housing, believed to be around 14%, will be increased. These changes could well be driven by genuine improvements, but given the secrecy that accompany them—and considering annual food inflation is running at nearly twice the rate of housing inflation—such an exercise naturally creates suspicion that the CPI is a "politically correct" measure. 

It's not just the prices of consumer goods and services. Asset price inflation, most famously in real estate, has been accelerating; as has wage inflation. All of this should make the thousands of investors looking to jump onto the China bandwagon skeptical of what they're being told. Regardless of Beijing's claims of prudent economic management, excess money is sloshing around and overheating China's economy, thanks to the huge monetary overhang from China's post-2008 stimulus. 

Beijing clearly panicked when the global financial crisis hit and stepped on the monetary accelerator. It halted the ascent of the yuan by re-pegging to the dollar in mid-2008 (so that exports could become cheaper), it stopped sterilizing the still-massive foreign exchange inflows (so these inflows directly entered the money supply) and ordered banks to lend historic amounts of credit. The increase in broad money was a massive 39% of GDP in 2009 and 30% in 2010, compared with a previous peak of 27% in 2003. The Chinese express alarm over Western quantitative easing efforts these days, but China's own monetary loosening beats all that. 

Investors in 2008 marveled at the way Beijing mobilized to combat the crisis. Now they should be concerned about the inflation this mobilization has wrought. 

 Ms. Choyleva is a director at  Lombard Street Research. 