 Berkeley, Calif. 

Before he died in July 2009 at the age of 90, the choreographer Merce Cunningham organized his own legacy while creating its final piece—a dance he called "Nearly Ninety." (The title refers to both Cunningham's age and the piece's approximate length—88 minutes.) Nearing the end, he decided to see how "Nearly Ninety" would work without its mammoth sets and onstage rock music. This last (and posthumous) Cunningham dance is called "Nearly 902."

Cunningham's Legacy Plan arranged, among other things, for a two-year round-the-world "Legacy Tour" of about 130 performances of 17 dances, traveling to 23 cities in the U.S. and 20 overseas. This tour will end on Dec. 31, 2011, with a site-specific work in New York. When the tour is over, the Merce Cunningham Dance Company will no longer exist.

It is hard to imagine the troupe without Cunningham, who began in 1953 as the star of the company and danced major parts into his 60s. In 1999, at 80, he performed a duet with Mikhail Baryshnikov to music by John Cage (his late partner of 50 years) inspired by Marcel Duchamp. In 2009, he was still joining his dancers for final bows from his wheelchair—from which he also led rehearsals.

Not all fans of modern dance appreciate the copyrighted "Cunningham Technique." Many are bewildered by the number of things Cunningham chose to do without. His dancers rehearse in silence, and were led—until recently—by his own moves, advice and stopwatch. Meanwhile, a composer was off somewhere else putting together a package of sounds that would end up the same length as the dancers' sequence of moves. Any connection between the two was likely to be accidental. Cunningham dancers often seem to ignore one another for long periods of time. There are no narrative plots or expressions of emotion in a Cunningham dance. Many aspects of some dances are determined by the toss of a coin or die (an obsession of Cage's), so one performance of a work may differ from every other. 

We are left with handsome human bodies moving (or not moving) in space, creating with their limbs, torsos and heads a multiplicity of beautiful and ever-changing shapes. The 14 dancers in the final team are young, lithe and preternaturally flexible. They have committed to body-memory thousands of simple and complex moves. The company brought "Nearly 902" to Berkeley in March 2010 as the second stop on its Legacy Tour. It returned here last month with four more dances.

"Nearly 902," Cunningham's final creation, was not a last will and testament, although earlier moves and patterns are discernible. On his deathbed, he dispensed with the futuristic, rotating, nine-ton metal set of "Nearly Ninety," and the overpowering noise of the rock band Sonic Youth, which played inside it. Most notable was the degree to which this choreographer—who so often seemed to be working with individual dancers whose paths accidentally cross—designed this work for couples, moving them in slow, never-seen-before pas de deux made out of unbelievable postures, overlapping solos and intimate, female-led disequilibrium. In even more compelling trios, two men lift, raise up, nearly drop, twirl horizontally and lay down slowly their female burdens.

Of the four older, shorter dances, "Antic Meet" (a revival premiere) aged the least well. What may have been jarring and amusing in 1958 seems a Dada period piece today. In "Sounddance" (1975), the six men and four women emerge one by one from a slit in a gold velvet screen. Once on stage, they seem to enter a force field of frantic, electric, nonstop energy. The impulsive force of the men, in particular—bounding off and leaping over one another; falling flat and bouncing back; bending, twisting and twirling in unison, then flying off—defines the nature of this hyperintense piece. At the end, the dancers disappear, one by one, behind the curtain. "Pond Way" (1998—another revival premiere) is danced in front of a Roy Lichtenstein landscape. The performers wear billowing, gossamer pajamas slit on the inside of the arms and legs. The moves here are typical of Cunningham, in that each dancer is usually twisting and turning, hopping and bending, gliding and sliding (or standing still) independently of the others. Until nearly the end, no dancer looks at or touches another. All three dances were performed against the noise of unmatching modernist scores, by Cage, David Tudor and Brian Eno, respectively.

The most exciting event of this recent visit was "Roaratorio" (1983)—a 60-minute dance that defies most of one's expectations. It is performed against a wonderful tape made up of Cage's own gentle reading of his own word games on James Joyce's "Finnegans Wake"; an Irish fiddle, pipe, flute and drums, playing traditional folk tunes; ballad singers, poetry readers, bits of talk, birds, babies, roosters, church bells and gurgling water that Cage recorded in Ireland. In defiance of his usual practice, Cunningham meets the sound-score halfway, by including numerous allusions to Irish jugs and reels, step dances, promenades, strolls and circles that occasionally intersect with the music. Couples dance together holding hands and looking at each other—some even smile. There is an unusually large number of unison dances, where performers move at the same pace. Between these come the usual backbends and freezes and stork-leg lifts and torso twists and near-falls. But on the whole it seems like one big Irish party at which everyone on stage is having a marvelous time.

Although the Legacy Plan lays out terms for other companies to take on Cunningham's dances (a few already have), I can't imagine them being performed by others with anything like the style Cunningham instilled into several generations of his own performers. The sense of the infinitely possible moves of human limbs, head and torso, the admiration of movement for its own sake, came from within his own bones, muscles and nerves, and was passed on to a relatively small number of students. He was, I fear, irreplaceably unique.

 Mr. Littlejohn writes for the Journal on West Coast events. 