FLORHAM PARK, N.J.—As soon as Jacob Tamme, the Indianapolis Colts' tight end, made an inside move at the snap to block linebacker Bart Scott, safety Brodney Pool knew the Colts were running the ball.

 It was one of the "keys" that he had been studying for weeks, even months, as he worked to learn the Jets' defensive system. So he bolted toward the line of scrimmage and tackled running back Joseph Addai for a 2-yard loss.

The play punctuated the Colts' first possession, a three-and-out series that set the tone for the Jets in Saturday's 17-16 victory. It also showcased Mr. Pool, who has emerged as an improved playmaker for the Jets as they prepare for Sunday's divisional round game against the New England Patriots.

The Jets signed Mr. Pool as a free agent over the offseason after he spent the first five years of his career with the Cleveland Browns, where the system was different. The coaches typically told him where to line up, whom to cover, when to blitz. 

The Jets, meantime, rely on their safeties to have a full understanding of the scheme and make their own decisions based on what they see. Mr. Pool was unaccustomed to that sort of autonomy.

"All of our plans are complicated," defensive backs coach Dennis Thurman said. "We are not a conventional system."

Mr. Pool felt a greater sense of urgency when Jim Leonhard, the team's top safety, broke his right tibia three days before the Jets visited the Patriots on Dec. 6. In leading the Patriots to their 45-3 victory, quarterback Tom Brady torched the Jets' secondary by throwing for 326 yards and four touchdowns. It was a discombobulated mess.

"I'm not sure if it was the food, the water, a combination of food, water, cold, atmosphere—I can't explain it," Mr. Thurman said. 

Not long after that, Mike Pettine, the Jets' defensive coordinator, assessed Mr. Pool as "inconsistent." Mr. Pool said he heard about Mr. Pettine's comments from his mother, who called him after reading them in a newspaper article. Mr. Pool knew not to expect compassion from her.

"She was like, 'You need to step your game up,'" Mr. Pool said. "But I'm the same way. I criticize myself more than anybody."

He began to watch more film. He developed a rapport with fellow safety Eric Smith. And he became more vocal, both at practice and during games. He has learned to communicate, Mr. Thurman said, and knows when to make the "proper adjustment at the proper time."

"It takes a while in this system to be 100% confident in what you're doing," Mr. Pool said. "If you get there and second-guess yourself, you're not going to play as fast or as physical as you should be playing."

On Sunday, Mr. Pool is expected to help defend the Patriots' rookie tight ends, Rob Gronkowski and Aaron Hernandez, who have combined to account for 1,109 yards on 87 receptions this season. But Mr. Pool, at 6-foot-2 and 214 pounds, has the tools to compete with them.

"He attacks the ball, he plays physical and he likes to hit," safety James Ihedigbo said. "He's great in man-to-man coverage against tight ends."

At the same time, Mr. Thurman said, Mr. Pool has a long way to go before he understands the intricacies of the defense. This is cause for optimism, in one sense: His ceiling is unlimited. Then again, he will need to play at a high level this weekend to help negate the Patriots' high-powered offense.

Win or lose, Mr. Pool will hear from his mother after the game. "I hope it's a good report," he said.

 Write to  Scott Cacciola at scott.cacciola@wsj.com 