 Mainland China's benchmark stock index fell 2.9%, leading a selloff in most Asian markets, due to worries that the nation's faster-than-expected fourth-quarter economic growth could lead to more tightening efforts by Beijing. Coal miners and property developers were among the hardest hit.  

 Exxon said Australian offshore gas projects it is helping develop and operate are over budget and face delays amid rising costs.  

 BHP Billiton said coking-coal production from Queensland fell 30% quarter-on-quarter, hurt by floods in the Australian state.  

 The world's biggest iron ore miners are running at record production rates and boosting prices while steel makers are warning that raw-material prices will sap their profits.  

 Spain is set to pour billions more euros into its troubled savings banks and force greater transparency as it seeks to ward off an international bailout.  

 Rising prices for food, energy and other commodities could drive up consumer prices in the euro zone, the ECB warned.  

 BlackBerry maker RIM said it started Internet filtering on its smartphones in Indonesia just ahead of a Friday deadline.  

 Sony Ericsson posted a small quarterly profit, as the mobile-phone maker cut prices to woo customers who had a broad range of rival smartphones to choose from. 

 Mitsubishi Motors aims to sell 37% more vehicles in three years by focusing on growth markets like China.  

 GM selected a new product-development chief as CEO Akerson looks to speed up development of new vehicles after cost cuts left it a year behind schedule.  

 Nomura hired Piero Novelli from UBS as co-global head of mergers and acquisitions, the latest senior hire in the bank's push to globalize.  

 Cnooc is preparing to bring a U.S. dollar bond offering Friday, in a deal worth at least $1 billion.  

 U.S. lawmakers pressed China's President Hu, on a state visit to Washington, on issues including the yuan's valuation, intellectual-property enforcement and human rights. The mood contrasted with the previous night's state dinner, where Hu and Obama exchanged toasts to "mutual respect" and "common responsibility."  

 Japan's Prime Minister Kan criticized China for its opaque expansion of defense and maritime activities, and stressed the need to strengthen communications.  

A pair of bombs blasted through security checkpoints ringing the Iraqi holy city of Karbala, killing at least 51 people.

Ireland's prime minister called a national election for March 11, after resignations by ministers not standing for re-election. 

 The EU ordered its members to boost security for emissions trading after a heist by computer hackers temporarily shut down trading in carbon permits.  

 A report on the murder of Wall Street Journal reporter Daniel Pearl found faults in the prosecution and probe.  

Gunmen attacked employees of a Hungarian oil and gas company in northwest Pakistan, killing two and abducting two others.