The White House has ramped up its public relations campaign on the budget by arguing that it would be "Armageddon-like" if Congress fails to pass a clean debt extension bill. But House Republicans are unpersuaded. If the 2011 continuing resolution came down to the eleventh hour before a government shutdown was averted, don't be surprised if the debt ceiling bill impasse goes well past the stroke of midnight.

Republicans are almost entirely unified that a debt bill must include budget reforms to bring a halt to the current pace of borrowing. House Speaker John Boehner said last week that any debt bill that passes the House must include "really big" budget reforms. That rhetoric infuriated the White House and prompted spokesman Jay Carney to accuse Republicans of playing a game of "chicken with the economy."

"I can tell you we are not voting for a debt ceiling that doesn't repair the budget," Rep. Connie Mack of Florida tells me. "It's not happening." Republicans like Mr. Mack feel that the White House scare tactics are just that—political tactics. The fact that President Obama voted against a debt extension when he was a senator—as did current Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid—makes current claims of economic carnage look like hypocritical posturing.

At some point the feds are prohibited from additional borrowing without extending the debt limit past its current $14.3 trillion ceiling. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner says that failure to pass a debt hike will imperil the economic recovery and raise interest rates. But others, including former Bush administration officials, say that Mr. Geithner has much more time than the July deadline to strike a deal with House Republicans. Among other things, he can rearrange accounts within the Treasury and borrow from trust funds to delay the day of reckoning.

The most likely budget reform to get attached to the debt ceiling is the "Cap Act" sponsored by Republican Sen. Bob Corker of Tennessee. This bill would require federal spending to shrink to 20.6 percent of GDP over the next decade from about 24.5 percent today. If those targets aren't reached, the legislation would require automatic across-the-board spending cuts. "This bill has iron clad sequestration enforcements to get spending and debt down in an orderly and sustainable way," Mr. Corker told me in an interview. "These are big cuts. It is also one of the few bills that has Democrats on board."

One thing is sure. The White House didn't buy budget peace last week by agreeing to a 2011 budget that cuts spending. The armistice is temporary.

To read more stories like this one, please subscribe to Political Diary.