NEWARK, N.J.—In all, it took less than six seconds for the series of events that might define Martin Brodeur's season to play out, still more than enough time to fashion another humbling moment in the hardest year of his hockey life.

In the first period of a game here at the Prudential Center last week, the New York Rangers' Brian Boyle received a pass from teammate Ruslan Fedotenko and, in the same motion, shoveled a shot toward the New Jersey Devils' net. Mr. Brodeur, the Devils' goaltender, had squared himself in front of Mr. Boyle to make the save, and at another time, in another year, he would have made it.

Instead, the puck glanced off the underside of Mr. Brodeur's glove and pond-skipped along the ice behind him for a game-tying goal. The sight would have been less poignant had he not touched the puck at all; that he nearly prevented the goal made him appear only more helpless. As Mr. Boyle and the Rangers huddled to celebrate, Mr. Brodeur did not react other than to remove a water bottle from atop the net and squeeze a burst into his mouth. The Devils lost the game, 3-1.

"Par for the course," he said afterward.

Over the 16 previous years that he had been the Devils' primary goaltender, Mr. Brodeur had developed into the National Hockey League's answer to Derek Jeter: a respected superstar in the New York market who, for reasons tangible and intangible, had become the emblem for a franchise's generation of excellence. But as Mr. Jeter did last year with the Yankees, Mr. Brodeur is undergoing a statistical decline and could soon confront a tricky financial negotiation with the organization with whom he is most identified.

From 1993-94, which was Mr. Brodeur's first season, through 2009-10, the Devils won three Stanley Cups and nine division championships and missed the playoffs just once. Four times in that span, Mr. Brodeur was awarded the Vezina Trophy as the league's best goaltender. He is a two-time Olympic gold medalist with Team Canada, and no NHL goalie has won more games (607), recorded more shutouts (113) or played more minutes (64,931).

But with his contract set to expire after next season, Mr. Brodeur is in the midst of a nightmare campaign. Through his first 27 games, his save percentage is a career-low .882 and his record an embarrassing 5-18-0. After Mr. Brodeur allowed three goals on seven shots in the first eight minutes of a 6-3 loss to Carolina last week, Devils coach Jacques Lemaire pulled him—an indignity usually reserved for a rookie whose psyche is delicate, not a 38-year-old whose eventual induction into the Hockey Hall of Fame is a fait accompli.

The Devils themselves are suffering through their worst season in more than two decades. At 10-26-2, they are last in the NHL with 22 points, and rebuilding the veteran-laden roster won't be an easy task for general manager Lou Lamoriello. (As one member of the organization put it, "It's not like the cavalry's coming.")

So what will they do with Mr. Brodeur? It depends largely on his free will. Mr. Brodeur, who acts as his own agent, signed a six-year contract extension in 2006, a deal that includes a no-trade clause. He will earn a $5.2 million salary this season and next season, and that figure is also his annual salary-cap number. (An NHL player's cap number is the average yearly value of his contract, regardless of the actual dollar amount he is scheduled to make in a given season.)

Mr. Brodeur said in two recent interviews that he plans to continue playing through the duration of his contract. "From there," he said, "we'll see how it goes." Between now and then, though, would he want to play for a winning team again, even if it meant leaving New Jersey?

"I wouldn't try to go somewhere else if that's the question you're asking, like to get traded or ask to be traded because we weren't doing well," he said. "I mean, I've got another year, and I love playing here. It's definitely not fun going through this, but you know what? In life, nothing is always fun."

That Mr. Brodeur won't demand a trade doesn't mean another club can't attempt to acquire him. A team that has aspirations of winning a Stanley Cup but lacks a playoff-proven goaltender—the Washington Capitals, for instance—might see Mr. Brodeur as the ideal addition to improve its championship chances. Neither Mr. Lamoriello nor Capitals general manager George McPhee responded to an interview request for this story, but when asked about the possibility of another team's pursuing him in a trade, Mr. Brodeur said, "If it happens, well, I'll have to really consider what I want to do because I don't have 10 years left in my career."

Whether Mr. Brodeur remains in New Jersey or ends up somewhere else, his age and the wear-and-tear he has accumulated demand that a team try to determine how much his play has regressed over time, if at all, and how vital he was to the Devils' success in the first place. At their best, the Devils perfected the "neutral-zone trap," a come-into-my-parlor style of play that neutralized opposing offenses and often limited the number of shots Mr. Brodeur faced each game. It also may have obscured just how good a goaltender he was.

"Is he a product of the system? Every goalie is to a large degree," author and hockey historian Joe Pelletier said in an e-mail interview. "But I think he deserves more credit for the Devils' success and reputation than he sometimes gets."

Using a formula called Goals Versus Threshold, or GVT, to normalize and calculate a player's value, writer and statistician Tom Awad last year ranked Mr. Brodeur among the six best goaltenders and the 25 best players in the sport's history. But to those who contributed or bore witness to the Devils' past dominance, it is difficult to separate Mr. Brodeur's efforts from the team's collective brilliance.

"Obviously, he's a big part of it," said team captain Jamie Langenbrunner, who has been with the Devils since they acquired him in a trade with Dallas in March 2002. "The thing about playing on this team was, everybody was a big part of it, though. He obviously did a lot, but every guy had a job and a role and fulfilled that role."

Four players comprised the fulcrum of that era for the Devils, according to Glenn "Chico" Resch, who has been the team's lead television analyst since 1996 and was himself an NHL goaltender for 14 years: Mr. Brodeur and defensemen Scott Stevens, Ken Daneyko and Scott Niedermayer. That trio of defensemen, all of whom have since retired, provided Mr. Brodeur with a blanket of security that no goaltender in the league enjoyed then and that Mr. Brodeur doesn't enjoy now. Mr. Brodeur's physical skills haven't declined much, Mr. Resch said, but he is in "new territory mentally" because the Devils' poor defensive play has sapped some of his aggressiveness and confidence.

"Those guys weren't just good," Mr. Resch, 62, said. "They were the umbrella, and everybody was under them. How do you recapture that?"

He isn't the only aging goaltender around here seeking an answer to that question.

 Write to  Mike Sielski at mike.sielski@wsj.com 