Jeffrey J. Feil is hoping to make it easier for cancer patients in South Nassau County to get the care they need closer to home.

With a $3 million gift from the Louis Feil Charitable Lead Annuity Trust, Mr. Feil is helping to support a cancer center at South Nassau Communities Hospital. The center will be renamed in honor of Mr. Feil's late parents, Gertrude and Louis Feil.

Mr. Feil, 64 years old, is the chief executive of the New York-based Feil Organization, a real-estate company. He lives in Rockville Centre, N.Y., the village where his parents settled around 1950 and where his children were raised. 

Mr. Feil says that a lot of people in the region seek cancer treatment in Manhattan, but the trouble for patients who require constant treatment is that the commute from Long Island can become an emotional and financial burden to families. 

"If you don't have to send people back and forth you've accomplished a lot of good," he says. "If you can do your own care in your own neighborhood, that's a great thing."

The Feil family has supported numerous hospitals and causes in the region. A $30 million gift to Weill Cornell Medical College helped to establish a research building and the family has also given significantly to fund scholarships, professorships and multiple sclerosis research at the hospital, too.

Additionally, the family funded the building of a residence hall at Brooklyn Law School and a pediatric intensive care center at North Shore-Long Island Jewish Health System.

Almost all of the gifts are named in honor of Gertrude and Louis Feil, who gave to Jewish organizations and hospitals. Mr. Feil, one of four siblings, says his family members consider their parents when they give and purposely focus their charity on education, universities, scholarships and health care.

Mr. Feil has visited South Nassau Communities Hospital and met with doctors about a half-dozen times. He says the family likes to make sure that gifts are used "wisely."

During face-to-face meetings with doctors and hospital staff, "you get to hear and listen, some of it is good for education purposes and another part of it is you expand your thinking in what you're doing," says Mr. Feil. "I find it much better that way. This way you're more focused."

Adds Mr. Feil, "When you're fortunate to make some money you're fortunate to give it away, too."