SYDNEY, Australia—Widespread flooding in the Australian state of Queensland will likely weigh heavily on the thinking of the country's central bank when it decides next month whether to resume interest-rate increases that have helped push the country's currency to record highs, economists said Wednesday. 

  Paul Bloxham, chief economist with HSBC Holdings PLC in Sydney, said a rate increase by the Reserve Bank of Australia in February was now out of the question after the heavy rains in Queensland hit vital export industries like mining and agriculture. 

"If it was ever a consideration that February was on the table, it is certainly not now," said Mr. Bloxham, who most recently headed up the overseas economies and financial conditions sections within the RBA. 

A spokesperson for the RBA declined to comment on the impact of the flooding. 

Successive rate increases by the central bank have pushed the Australian dollar up about 20% since late 2009. Australia's economy has blossomed partly due to a commodities-driven boom, but rains have caused coal mines to shut down in a state that is one of the world's biggest suppliers of the fuel to China. Miners including  BHP Billiton Ltd.,  Rio Tinto
RIO


-0.39
%




 PLC and  Anglo American
AAUKY


-1.02
%




 PLC have declared force majeure on their Queensland coalfields since the floods began, with the state supplying about 40% of the global trade of the fuel used for steelmaking. 

U.S. investment bank  J.P. Morgan Chase
JPM


1.40
%




 & Co. changed its view Wednesday and now expects the central bank to hold rates in February because of the economic impact of the floods. Mining accounts for 3% of Australia's economy. 

"If you look at the impact on economic growth from the flooding, they will look through [inflation numbers] and be on hold," said J.P. Morgan economist  Helen Kevans. 

Australia is due to report its fourth quarter 2010 inflation figures on Jan. 25, a week before the February meeting of the country's central bank. 

In the past week, 30-day interbank bond futures have moved to pricing in a near 3% chance of a February rate increase from a near 10% probability. The market swung further on Wednesday, with bond traders briefly forecasting a remote possibility of a cut next month. Australia's three-year bond futures contract was up five ticks at 94.77 in trade Wednesday. 

Economists caution that the flooding in the long term may add more heat to Australia's economy as billions of dollars are spent on rebuilding in Queensland. The country's central bank currently forecasts gross domestic product growth of more than 3.5% for 2011, with 4% growth forecasted for both 2012 and the first half of 2013. 

In addition,  Westpac
WBK


1.01
%




 economists argue the crop destruction—particularly wheat—and the delay to commodity exports will push inflation higher and prompt more rate increases. The central bank has a mandated target of keeping inflation within a 2% to 3% band and already forecasts inflation at the top end of that band for the next two years. 

"If these pressures materialize, then the RBA could increase rates at a faster pace then what the market is currently pricing," said Westpac in a morning note. With the New Year's holiday taking place this month, the central bank won't be meeting again until Feb. 1, with no RBA speeches scheduled in the interim. 

 Write to  Geoffrey Rogow at geoffrey.rogow@dowjones.com 