PARIS—Christian Dior started dismissal procedures against designer  John Galliano for making "deeply offensive" anti-Semitic remarks, acting fast to distance itself from a potentially damaging association with a couturier whose star was already starting to fade.

On Friday, Dior had suspended the 50-year-old Mr. Galliano, one of the fashion industry's most celebrated rags- to-riches tales, after the designer was questioned by police for allegedly making anti-Semitic slurs to a couple during a late-night row in a trendy Paris bar. 

Making anti-Semitic remarks is illegal and punishable with up to six months in prison under French law. 

The suspension was due to last until the end of a police probe into the incident, but on Monday a video circulated on the Internet apparently showing Mr. Galliano insulting people sitting next to him and saying "I love Hitler" and "People like you should be dead." The contents of the video could not be independently verified.

Dior said it had launched the procedure to fire Mr. Galliano because of the "deeply offensive statements and conduct by John Galliano in a video." 

A spokesman for the company said Dior was working under the assumption that the video was authentic. Dior is part of the luxury-goods empire of  Bernard Arnault, chief of LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton.

A lawyer for Mr. Galliano didn't respond to several calls and messages seeking comment. On Friday, before the posting of the video,  Stéphane Zerbib, the lawyer, denied that his client had made any anti-Semitic or racist statements, or that he had acted violently at the La Perle bar. He said his client had been enjoying a drink there when he was insulted. 

The fallout from the video has hit the fashion world quickly. "I am deeply shocked and disgusted by the video of John Galliano's comments that surfaced today," said Oscar-winning actress  Natalie Portman, who has been the face of Miss Dior Cherie perfume since December. "I will not be associated with Mr. Galliano in any way." 

The video was first posted on the website of British daily The Sun. (The Sun is owned by News Corp., as is The Wall Street Journal.)

The dismissal comes three days before Dior is set to unveil Mr. Galliano's fall-winter 2011/2012 collection before the world's fashion critics and retail buyers at Paris Fashion Week. But the severity of the designer's remarks meant Dior had to act, says a person close to the company. 

Dior will go ahead with the catwalk show even though Mr. Galliano had not completed it before his suspension, the person said. 

Mr. Galliano's design team is working to finish the collection in time, according to people close to the company.

Mr. Galliano was handpicked by Mr. Arnault in 1996 to become the creative chief of Christian Dior. Putting a young foreigner—who had grown up in working-class London and hadn't yet earned his stripes— to run one of France's most storied couture names riled the Parisian establishment. 

It was exactly the kind of publicity Mr. Arnault sought: Mr. Galliano made a splash with risqué collections inspired by homeless people. He introduced frayed denim and black motorcycle jackets to a dusty brand that gradually returned to favor with tastemakers and the younger consumers Mr. Arnault was trying to attract.

Mr. Arnault took a similar risk in 1998, when he hired another enfant terrible of the fashion world–-young American designer  Marc Jacobs—to run Dior's sister brand Louis Vuitton. Mr. Jacobs too brought a whiff of fresh air to what had become a staid accessories label, making it sexy with the Hollywood A-list and helping it become one of the most profitable fashion brands in the world. 

Mr. Arnault also bankrolled Mr. Jacobs' eponymous brand, which has become one of the hottest American fashion brands.

Four years ago, the New York designer was struggling with a drug problem that was affecting his work and, supported by Mr. Arnault, checked into a rehab center. 

 20 Odd Questions for John Galliano 

 Stars Toast Dior's New Look 

 Being Bernard Arnault 

 Daily Updates from WSJ's Fashion Blog, Heard on the Runway 

Mr. Galliano's runway buzz didn't lead to financial success at Dior. The label didn't begin to turn a profit until 2002, and since then it has struggled to improve its bottom line. 

Its sales of €826 million ($1.14 billion) and operating margin of 4.2% still lags far behind that of Louis Vuitton, with its estimated €5.5 billion in sales and 45% operating margin. 

Despite the lackluster performance, Mr. Arnault has continued to pour money into Dior, which insiders say has always been the businessman's pet project. It was the first fashion house he bought when he started out in the luxury industry in the mid-1980s.

Messrs. Galliano and Arnault have also had their ups and downs. In 2006, Mr. Arnault pressed the designer to create a collection that was less flashy and more commercially oriented. The designer came up with a dull ensemble of muted dresses and coats. It was a critical flop. 

 It doesn't really matter what specific laws the French have or do not have. No matter how you try to look at it, Galliano's behavior was unbefitting of a premium brand like Dior. 

—Carl Castrogiovanni

Since then, Mr. Mr. Galliano has faced other difficulties. His close friend and assistant  Steven Robinson died unexpectedly in 2007, depriving the couturier of his confidant. Mr. Robinson had been the liaison between Mr. Galliano and  Sidney Toledano, Dior's chief executive, according to a person close to the situation, and without him the direct contact between the designer and the executive was strained. 

Mr. Galliano's smaller line that carries his own name has remained a small business that depends largely on licenses for such products as perfumes and sunglasses for its sales. 

Under French law, firing procedures can take several weeks or months and includes a number of steps including the mailing of a registered letter and an in-person meeting with the employee in question.

 Write to  Christina Passariello at christina.passariello@wsj.com and Alessandra Galloni at alessandra.galloni@wsj.com 