Egyptian Prime Minister Ahmed Shafiq resigned Thursday and was succeeded by a U.S.-educated engineer, underscoring how protesters in Egypt and across the region aren't letting up their press for systemic changes that reach beyond the ouster of unpopular rulers.

The resignation of Mr. Shafiq, appointed by ex-President Hosni Mubarak in the dying days of his regime, marks a bid by Egypt's interim military rulers to placate protesters who have sustained demands for sweeping governmental changes in the wake of Mr. Mubarak's exit. The move came days after protests in Tunisia forced the resignation of interim Prime Minister Mohammed Ghannouchi, a longtime member of the government of Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali, the president toppled by protesters in January. 

In both Tunisia and Egypt, protesters have demanded that their new caretaker governments, charged with leading the countries until new elections, be swept clean of remnants of the previous regimes. But in these countries, they are pressing for farther-reaching demands. 

Protesters in Tunisia have continued to agitate for better pay, new social benefits and a government free of Mr. Ben Ali's cronies. The country's interim president, Foued Mebazaâ, announced Thursday that the country would rewrite its constitution to turn the page on Mr. Ben Ali's regime. General elections will be organized on July 24 to elect an assembly to write the country's new bylaws, Mr. Mebazaâ said in a televised address. "Today marks our entry into a new era," he said.

Protesters in Egypt continue to press for the release of political prisoners and the end of Egypt's emergency law, which allows the government to detain citizens without a judicial warrant. Protest leaders are using the same tools to pressure the military government that they used to topple Mr. Mubarak—mobilizing followers via Facebook and Twitter to join weekly protests, usually on Fridays. 

This week's rally on Cairo's Tahrir Square will mark a pause to celebrate Mr. Shafiq's exit, said Abdul Rahman Samir, a member of Egypt's revolutionary youth coalition. But he said protests will resume after a month if the new prime minister, Essam Sharaf, fails to respond to further demands, including the dissolution of Egypt's vast internal security services and the return of regular police protection to the streets before elections in the next several months.

"Every ministry, every syndicate will have a protest in front of its door," Mr. Samir said. "It's going to start after a month if our requests aren't met."

Many Egyptians are coming to understand that changes so far have been modest, said Augustus Richard Norton, an international relations professor at Boston University. "Notwithstanding the inspiring 'revolution' in Egypt, a revolution has not occurred," Mr. Norton said. "The military remains in power, as it has been for decades, and it has until now only made concessions at the margins of its power and privilege." 

The ongoing call for change has spread easily across the region, thanks to the Internet and satellite television. The revolts have created a new pride and solidarity among Arabs, too. 

"What started in Tunis and swept Cairo is unstoppable here, too," said Sheikh Ali Salman, leader of Al-Wefaq, the largest opposition bloc in Bahrain, which has been gripped by more than two weeks of massive protests. 

Track events day by day.

But in Bahrain and other turmoil-gripped countries, antiregime movements appear to be split: While established opposition leaders negotiate with governments, protesters inspired by events elsewhere are digging in for deeper changes.

Bahrain's opposition groups, including Mr. Salman's Al-Wefaq, on Thursday officially submitted demands to the island kingdom's ruling al-Khalifa family that included the introduction of a constitutional monarchy and the dissolution of the government. "We want a constitutional monarchy, where the king reigns but the people to rule," said Mr. Salman.

He and others in Bahrain's established opposition, however, have struggled to persuade hardline protesters to accept anything less than full regime change. "The opposition groups are playing politics and they don't represent opinion" of protesters on the street, said Ahmed al-Aradi, a 20-year-old student from Manama. "Our only demand is that [the al-Khalifas] leave."

In Yemen, similarly, a coalition of opposition groups in Yemen have agreed to enter talks with the government. Opposition leaders said late Thursday that President Ali Abdullah Saleh has agreed to a plan to determine, by the end of the year, how he may eventually cede power. 

But many protesters say they will be satisfied by nothing short of Mr. Saleh's immediate departure after 32 years in power.

"There is no [middle-ground] solution that will be acceptable for the people in the street," said Khaled al-Anesi, a human-rights lawyer and protest leader.

In the center of Yemen's capital, San'a, dozens of tents are added daily to the camp of thousands of protesters. More women and children have joined the demonstrations and local celebrities come to talk to the crowds. "President Ali must leave the throne, now even his chair is rusty," protesters yelled Thursday evening.

In Egypt, the Middle East's most populous nation, Prime Minister Shafiq was the immediate target of protesters' criticism. Protest leaders worried that the former Air Force official was too close to Mr. Mubarak and would help the long-ruling National Democratic Party cling to power and prevent real democracy from taking hold—in effect, carry out a "counterrevolution." 

The move will help defuse growing tensions between the military and the protesters. On the night of Feb. 25, night, protesters clashed with troops who tried to clear them out of Tahrir Square, the nerve center for the protest movement. Troops used electric prods and batons to clear out some protesters and arrested others. 

On Wednesday, a military court sentenced one protester, Amr Abdullah El-Behairy, to five years in prison for allegedly attacking an army officer during the clashes. The case has caused an outcry because Mr. El-Behairy was sentenced within three days by a military court, according to human-rights activists. 

Mr. Shafiq was succeeded by Essam Sharaf, an engineer who was transport minister from 2004 to 2006 under Mr. Mubarak's government, but who is widely seen as free of the taint of the former leader. Dr. Sharaf also supported young protesters soon after they began a drive to kick Mr. Mubarak from power in late January—burnishing his pro-democracy credentials among the protest movement. 

In fact, it was protest leaders who suggested Dr. Sharaf as a suitable successor for Mr. Shafiq in indirect meetings with the army leadership this week, according to Abdul Rahman Samir, a member of Egypt's revolutionary youth coalition. 

Pressure to remove Mr. Shafiq grew this week. On Tuesday, opposition figures Mohamed ElBaradei, the former head of the International Atomic Energy Agency, and Amr Moussa, head of the Arab League, met with military brass and reiterated the protesters' demand to remove Mr. Shafiq. 

On Wednesday, Mr. Shafiq angered protesters after he went on Egyptian television and held a confrontational interview with leading Egyptian intellectuals. 

"The high council of the military forces has decided to accept the resignation of Mr. Ahmed Shafiq and assign Dr. Essam Sharaf to form a new cabinet," the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces said in a statement on its Facebook page. 

Protest leaders and opposition politicians welcomed the choice. 

"Goodbye Shafiq, friend of Mubarak, and welcome Sharaf and congratulations to the new Egypt," Ayman Nour, the head of the opposition Ghad Party who ran unsuccessfully against Mr. Mubarak in 2005 presidential elections, wrote on his Twitter account. 

Mr. Sharaf got a master's and doctorate in civil engineering at Purdue University. According to Kumares Sinha, an Edgar B. and Hedwig E. Olson Distinguished Professor of Civil Engineering at Purdue University in Indiana and Essam Sharaf's doctoral thesis adviser, Dr. Sharaf was forced from his position as minister of transportation in 2006 after he pressed government officials to withdraw a license for Mamdouh Ismail, whose company, El Salam Maritime Transport, operated ferries on the Red Sea. 

Dr. Sharaf said the ferries were in violation of safety standards and were unfit to transport passengers. Mr. Ismail, who was widely seen as well-connected within the NDP, managed to avoid the suspension. A subsequent cabinet shake-up saw Dr. Sharaf relieved of his position.

Dr. Sharaf was tragically vindicated the following year, when one of El Salam's ferries, the MV al-Salam Boccaccio 98, sank in the Red Sea, killing more than 1,000 people. A parliamentary inquiry blamed the company for the disaster. Mr. Ismail and four others were acquitted in the summer of 2008.

The case inspired massive popular outrage because Mr. Ismail appeared to have benefited from his high-level NDP connections. At a retrial in 2009, Mr. Ismail was sentenced to seven years in jail. 

—Oliver Holmes in San'a, Yemen, contributed to this article.

 Write to  David Luhnow at david.luhnow@wsj.com and Joe Parkinson at joe.parkinson@dowjones.com 