There's no teaching any writer how to be funny. You can read the great comic writers—Jane Austen, Dickens, Twain, Thurber, Leo Rosten, Kingsley Amis—and notice what a refined art comedy is, how it takes the most subtle and sophisticated writing to make you laugh. But in the end, when it comes to doing it yourself, it's the same as tap-dancing: You either have the rhythm in your bones or you don't.

Thereafter, especially if the object of your comedy is yourself, there's a great deal that can go right or wrong. I'm not sure why it took me until I was in my 50s to realize there was a comic novel, "The Mighty Walzer," to be written about my experiences as a boy table-tennis player growing up in Manchester, England, and dreaming of world domination. I think it was embarrassment.

For some of us, part of the ambition to be a novelist is the desire to blot out the ignominies of youth. That's a mistake. The ignominy of being young is a wonderful subject. I would even go so far as to say that consciousness of early embarrassment is indispensable to a novelist. It militates against the biggest sin in novel writing—especially in the writing of novels that excavate the self—which is grandiosity.

Take yourself too seriously and you're sunk. Me, me, me, me. There's only so much of that a reader can tolerate. A periodic "I" count is always a good idea, though it's not the number of them that matters; it's the spirit of their employment. Catch yourself writing an "I" too many times (and this, too, is a decision about rhythm, again like tap-dancing), and you should either start crossing out or make the self-obsession ludicrous in itself. A first-person comic novel that doesn't know there's something preposterous about a first-person comic novel is already not a good first-person comic novel.

But the other extreme is also perilous. Just as tiresome as the regulation egoist is the regulation schlemiel. I almost fell into that one with "The Mighty Walzer." I knew the literary model I needed for the story that I wanted to tell: the mock heroic. Oliver Walzer would be a hero in the classical mold, but his chosen arena for greatness—ping-pong—would render his heroic longings absurd.

The novel has been doing this since its inception. It is what the novel is for, whether the hero is Cervantes's chivalric Don Quixote or James Joyce's Homeric cuckold, Leopold Bloom. But ping-pong was a further descent into the commonplace. The danger, I quickly saw, lay in making poor Oliver too ludicrous or too pathetic.

For the novel to work, for us to care about Oliver's early ambitions and the subsequent dashing of them, not only did his love for the game have to be of a sort a reader (especially a non-ping-pong player) could enter into, but ping-pong itself had to be rendered with grandeur. Mock heroic only works if the heroic is equal to the mockery of it.

An essential rule of comedy applies here: Don't make fun of that which is easy to make fun of. Don't belittle even a game of ping-pong. What's funny might lie in the opposite direction entirely: in depicting the pursuit of real skills, in describing where an unexpected joy might lie (as, for example, in the execution of a perfect forehand smash). Then, in the moment of failure and frustration, comedy becomes indistinguishable from tragedy. And that's comedy at its best.

—Mr. Jacobson's most recent novel is "The Finkler Question," winner of the 2010 Man Booker Prize. "The Mighty Walzer" (1999) will be published for the first time in the U.S. next week. 