SINGAPORE—The greatest challenge facing Asian economies this year will be to tame building inflationary pressures, making further interest-rate rises likely, and raising the possibility of additional capital-control measures, Standard & Poor's said Wednesday.

In its 2011 outlook report, the credit rating company said it believed that inflation still wasn't under control in most of Asia's economies, and that a few of them may already be running at full capacity. But it said it didn't expect inflation to spiral out of control or for there to be an economic hard-landing in the region. 

However, it warned that capital flows into the area had the potential to fuel excessive asset-price gains, and said it saw increased risk of bubbles in China, Hong Kong, India and Singapore's real-estate markets. 

"Asian economies have been facing emerging inflation, potential for asset bubbles and a number of geopolitical and domestic political situations, but we believe overall that these risks are largely manageable,"  Ian Thompson, S&P chief credit officer for Asia Pacific, said on a conference call following the release of the report. 

He also said interest rates were likely to remain low overall in the region in real terms. 

The report tipped slightly slower growth overall in Asia this year compared with 2010, as a series of policy-tightening measures cools expansion in the world's second-largest economy. 

S&P forecasts Chinese gross domestic product to grow 9.1% to 9.6% in 2011, compared to 10.3% last year, with consumer price inflation seen around 4.3% to 4.8%. 

The forecasts in the S&P report didn't factor in any impact from Japan's massive earthquake Friday, which triggered massive tidal waves that engulfed coastal regions and seriously damaged nuclear power stations. 

But on Wednesday's conference call, S&P Credit Analyst  Takahira Ogawa said he didn't expect serious implications for Japan's economy as a result of the disaster, unless there was a catastrophe at one of the quake-hit nuclear plants. 

While over the next few months, the disaster could hurt activity, in the longer term, reconstruction should have "positive implications" for output, he said. 

Radiation levels around the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant spiked again earlier Wednesday. Officials are still battling to stabilize several reactors at the site, after their cooling systems ceased to function. 

"If there's no major [nuclear] disaster, for the macro economy for this year and next, it [the quake] won't be a significant negative," Mr. Ogawa said. But if acute electricity shortages were to persist, that could be problematic, he said, noting that if nuclear capacity had been destroyed, it would take time to be replaced. 

He added that it was too early to talk about any implications for S&P's credit rating on the sovereign, saying that would depend on the eventual size of economic damage and the cost for the government. 

However, government spending to tackle the disaster is likely to be "much higher" than after the Great Hanshin Earthquake that devastated the city of Kobe in 1995, he said. Then, the government spent a total of Y3.38 trillion. 

Japan's total government debt load, at nearly 200% of total annual economic output, is already the highest among major industrialized nations. 