My hip younger sister recently asked for a lightweight scarf for her birthday. At 29, her style—she matches the jewel in her belly ring to her bikini—is as far as possible from the powdered Parisian grandmothers who wear their Hermès silk tightly knotted at the throat. But for a new generation of fashionistas, the scarf is no longer a noose.

Fashion's most matronly accessory is experiencing a rejuvenation. Silk prints have evolved from hunting scenes to tattoo-like images. Scarves have loosened up, worn slouchy around the neck or as a bow-tie. They have moved off the neck to substitute for belts, bandanas, bracelets and even a sling for a broken arm. From the runways of John Galliano, Emilio Pucci and Yohji Yamamoto to celebrities such as Sienna Miller and Jessica Alba, the lightweight scarf is once again a wardrobe staple.

But it's all deceptively tough to pull off. Nothing looks as effortless as a wisp of silk thrown over a cashmere sweater. Yet after a decade in Paris, I still feel like an Air France flight attendant every time I wear a silk scarf. Designers are aware it takes practice to look so nonchalant: several publish guides on the different ways to tie a scarf. But I usually end up pulling mine off halfway through the day, feeling too prim.

"The silk scarf is the code of the bourgeoisie," says Pierre-François Le Louët, president of Paris-based style consultancy Nelly Rodi. "There's a return of the neo-bourgeois look with traditional values, and the scarf is a manifestation of that."

Its comeback marks the convergence of several fashion trends. The economic downturn led women to scrounge in their closets, dressing up old basics with accessories such as scarves. Scarves are a good way to play the seasonal trend—leopard prints, polka dots—without going overboard. Leopard print silks from Louis Vuitton, in gray (€525), and Danish brand Epice, in lime green and orange (€85), are colorful variations on the traditional tones.

The downturn also sent the fashion industry veering toward a more mature style, with waist-flattering dresses, silk blouses and tailored suits. It's no coincidence that French fashion house Céline, an icon of chic French dressing in the '60s and '70s, is having its biggest moment in decades. Its most recent catwalk featured a long, cream-colored scarf worn under a tunic, hanging out like a train. On the Yves Saint Laurent runway, a cinched petite scarf around the neck found a match with a white pantsuit. 

Another Céline-initiated trend is muted colors like camel and beige, which sometimes are in desperate need of a burst of color. Colette, the cutting-edge Paris boutique, has adorned a couple of mannequins dressed plainly in black and white with a red-patterned Givenchy scarf dashing from the neckline. 

But the new incarnations of silk squares break with the earlier, more uptight styles. The scarf has morphed from a bourgeois ornament to something much more bohemian and punk. "Designers are giving it a twist to renew it with current trends," says Mr. Le Louët. Forget matching your scarf to your shoes and bag—the new credo is to look slightly disheveled. 

Though the scarf originated in the Roman empire, since World War II it has become indelibly French. In fact, the French have an entire vocabulary for differentiating kinds of scarves: foulard for a classic, lightweight silk scarf; écharpe for a thicker wool scarf; and variations on the foulard, like the smaller gavroche and the square carré. 

If scarves evoke the French Riviera in the '50s and '60s, it's thanks to Grace Kelly, who wore Hermès silk around her head, her neck and as a broken-arm sling. 

Hermès's scarves are iconic. And yet, the most traditional of fashion houses is at the forefront of the rejuvenation of scarves. Last year, Hermès launched an edgy website, ilovemyscarf.com, that profiles trendy twentysomethings in London, New York, Paris and Tokyo with their silks. The silks are worn as a headband, as a bustier and threaded through an epaulette. Only two of the seven girls wear it around their necks. 

"The style with the point in front is a bit more modern," says a saleswoman in Hermès's Paris flagship. She gives a quick demonstration of different permutations, her fingers flying like a magician's. Her basic tip: fold the tips of the scarf into the center, then fold it in on itself toward the middle three times to make a long strip. The website also includes a how-to guide on knot-tying.

If Hermès has innovated with how to tie a scarf, it still hews conservative in design. But that's slowly changing. A new silk-jersey blend (€440) hangs more casually than traditional silk. Its dip-dye collection (€292) gives the silk a vintage aspect—that's a plus when avoiding the total bourgeois look. The best is yet to come: next month, Hermès's first scarf in T-shirt material, a gray cotton jersey, arrives in stores—perfect for a slouchy attitude.

But young designers are the ones really loosening up the style. The one rule they stick to is silk—but in the prints, anything goes. Some of the most aggressive looks come from French brand Delicious Freaks. The Tim Burton-esque dark designs include a pin-up surrounded by poker chips posed below the Hollywood sign, and the Queen of Hearts and the White Rabbit hanging onto a clock-tower decorated with skulls (both €155). If the prints are too racy for the office, hide the images by twisting the scarf; the flashes of color will just peek through.

Charlotte Sparre, a Danish scarf designer, uses more color but remains quirky. Look for the Pop Art scarf of the Miami skyline in fluorescent pink with turquoise palm trees (€110). More subversive is a series she did with tattoo artist Henning: lilac and green skulls and dragons could be hidden by a knot, leaving only purple flames licking up from the edges showing.

Digital printing has changed the game for scarf designing, and Britain's fashion schools have produced a flock of experts. Jonathan Saunders is the doyen of them. His black and white silks with splashes of bold color dress up jeans and a T-shirt or a black dress. An up-and-comer is Dominique Mosley, whose girly colors of pinks and blues incorporate flowers and dots.

The founder of knitwear brand Mia Zia, Valerie Barkowski, recently started a new silk scarf line, Bandit Queen. She applied digital prints to achieve patterns such as a mosaic of tiny black and white baby faces, and long rectangular scarves of dog portraits in bubbles (€165). "Usually silk scarves are very classic," says Ms. Barkowski. "I like the idea of finding new ways to make a silk scarf more playful."

 Write to  Christina Passariello at christina.passariello@wsj.com 