NEW DELHI—India may miss its 9% fiscal-year economic-growth target as global commodity-price spikes and sustained local inflation crimp activity, the finance minister said Wednesday. 

Pranab Mukherjee's comments underscore concerns from analysts who are increasingly doubting India's ability to stick to its budgeted growth target for the fiscal year that started on April 1. 

Last week, the chairman of the prime minister's Economic Advisory Council slashed his growth estimate by half a percentage point to 8.5%, while India's central bank said it expects the economy to expand about 8% this fiscal year. 

India's economy escaped relatively unhurt from the global financial crisis and likely grew 8.6% last fiscal year. 

"A major challenge is to achieve sustained GDP growth at the rate of 9% to 10% with fiscal prudence and moderate inflation," Mr. Mukherjee said. 

He expects inflation to range between 7% and 7.5% this fiscal year. 

The central bank last week said it expects inflation to remain high through the middle of the year as it raised policy rates by half a percentage point to tame prices. 

Inflation, mostly driven by costlier foods, has been uncomfortably high for more than a year, despite the Reserve Bank of India raising key interest rates nine times since March 2010. According to the latest data available, inflation based on the wholesale price index accelerated at 8.98% in March, faster than February's pace of 8.31%. 

Mr. Mukherjee's comments also raise worries that India may slip from its fiscal consolidation path, under which it is tasked to shrink the budget deficit to 3.5% by March 2014. 

The finance minister has set an aim to limit this year's fiscal deficit at 4.6% of GDP—a target analysts say looks increasingly difficult as high crude oil prices raise chances of subsidies spilling over budget estimates. 

Nymex crude oil futures for June delivery are trading around $103.38 a barrel in Asia Wednesday. The price has fallen in recent days, but is still way higher than the Dec. 31 level of $91.38. 

India subsidizes diesel, cooking gas, fertilizers and food among other products to shield consumers from global price shocks. 

But the mammoth subsidy bill—budgeted at 1.44 trillion rupees ($32.2 billion) this fiscal year—is straining the government's coffers and makes it difficult to adhere to medium-term fiscal rigor. 

 Write to  Abhrajit Gangopadhyay at Abhrajit.gangopadhyay@dowjones.com 