NEW DELHI—India's new telecommunications minister laid out a detailed defense of the government Friday amid allegations of corruption in its sale of mobile-phone frequencies in 2008, calling "utterly erroneous" a government auditor's report that said the process deprived taxpayers of up to $40 billion in lost revenue.

The press conference by Kapil Sibal appeared to be part of an effort by the Congress party-led government to regain the political initiative. It has been reeling for two months from controversy over the spectrum sale, which critics allege favored some companies over others and gave away frequencies at huge discounts to their true value.

The scandal forced the resignation in November of the previous telecom minister, who handled the 2008 spectrum allocation. Opposition protests also prevented any significant business during the winter session of Parliament and have overshadowed the government's agenda, which is focused on spreading the benefits of economic growth to India's masses.

The Central Bureau of Investigation, India's top investigative agency, has launched a wide-ranging criminal probe into the matter, but the opposition Bharatiya Janata Party has pushed for the creation of a joint parliamentary panel to investigate further. The Congress party has fiercely resisted such a move.

Mr. Sibal's remarks Friday were meant to put pressure on the BJP to back down from its demand before the start of next month's parliamentary session, when a budget for the coming fiscal year must be passed. He called the opposition's prolonged disruption of Parliament "unconstitutional." The opposition's critique has been sharpened by a report by a government auditing agency, the Comptroller and Auditor General, that found the spectrum allotment to have been flawed and estimated that the government lost up to $40 billion in potential revenue because of how the sale was handled.

Mr. Sibal said the Comptroller and Auditor General's report, which was released in November, was based on badly flawed methodology and "has resulted in the kind of sensationalism that has allowed the opposition to spread falsehood to the people of this country."

A spokeswoman for the CAG had no immediate comment. Spokesmen for the BJP could not be reached for comment.

  Seema Desai, India analyst for the risk advisory firm Eurasia Group, said the Mr. Sibal's rebuttal of the cost of the alleged spectrum scam is unlikely to convince the BJP to retreat from its demands for a parliamentary probe. The underlying allegation that spectrum licenses were given out in a corrupt manner is still very serious, she said, especially when Congress is already playing defense on other scandals from recent months such as widespread allegations of graft in the run-up to the Commonwealth Games in Delhi in October.

"I don't think the opposition will back down," Ms. Desai said. "It's difficult to see who will blink first or what will be the compromise." She said it's likely the two parties will cut some deal to allow passage of a budget in February.

Mr. Sibal said the auditor's report from last November made a few crucial mistakes, including assuming that firms received a greater amount of spectrum from the government than they actually did. The auditor also derived the value of spectrum partly based on the government's auction last year of so-called 3G airwaves. Mr. Sibal said this was a false comparison since 3G spectrum is more efficient and valuable than the 2G spectrum sold in 2008. Those changes and others would bring the estimated losses to taxpayers down to about $4 billion, Mr. Sibal said, down 90% from the auditor's estimate.

But Mr. Sibal said that under his reading of the government's policies, firms are actually entitled to a certain amount of spectrum for free—precisely the amount they received in 2008. Therefore, he said, there was technically no loss at all to taxpayers.

Mr. Sibal conceded, however, that "prima facie there was something wrong" in the allocation process. Among the allegations is that Telecom Ministry officials tinkered with the application process and deadlines to give some firms a leg up over others.

"If anyone has done anything wrong or committed a criminal offense, the law will take its course," Mr. Sibal said. 

 Write to  Amol Sharma at amol.sharma@wsj.com 