Internet-phone company Skype Ltd. won't hold its initial public offering until the second half of the year, according to people familiar with the matter, later than some investors had expected.

The company's recent hiring of a new chief executive and uncertainties in the IPO market and economy have slowed the offering process, those people said. The earliest Skype would go public is July, one of the people familiar with the matter said.

Skype filed documents in August stating its intent to go public. But in an unexpected move in October, the company named as CEO  Tony Bates, a top executive from  Cisco Systems Inc.
CSCO


0.12
%




 That has effectively put an IPO "on hold" for now, one person familiar with the matter said.

"Tony needs to get his feet underneath him and understand the business and the voice of the company," another person familiar with the matter said. "The intention is to go when Tony is ready and when the macroeconomic climate allows the company to go."

The additional time may help Mr. Bates to get Skype in better shape and increase its value ahead of an offering. But there is also the risk the IPO market weakens, hurting Skype's chance to go public or depressing the value of the company.

In normal market conditions, it takes a company between four and six months to hold an offering after its initial filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission. IPOs sometimes are delayed during market downturns, as companies don't want to sell when equity prices are low and falling.

The slowdown at Skype comes as the stock market has staged a long recovery and the market for tech IPOs appears to heating up. This week, TV ratings measurement firm  Nielsen Holdings
NLSN


-0.18
%




 N.V. and  Demand Media Inc.,
DMD


-0.67
%




 which aggregates freelance media content online, made strong debuts.

Some of the premier private technology companies are readying public sales as well. Professional social-networking company LinkedIn Corp. will likely file its S-1 registration statement during the first quarter, a person familiar with the matter said previously. 

Meanwhile, online deal site Groupon Inc. is expected to file for an IPO in the third quarter of this year, other people familiar with the matter have said.

Analysts have estimated that Skype's deal could be one of the biggest initial offerings in the technology sector since  Google Inc. went public in 2004 and raised $1.67 billion. Skype expects to raise close to $1 billion through its IPO, two of the people familiar with the matter said. 

Although Skype is still focused on going public, the two people added that Skype's owners, led by private equity firm Silver Lake Partners, would seek between $5 billion and $6 billion were the company to be sold now. A spokeswoman for Silver Lake declined to comment.

That asking price may be too aggressive. Last November,  eBay Inc.
EBAY


0.09
%




 sold the majority of Skype to Silver Lake and other investors in a transaction valuing the company at $2.7 billion.

Although Skype is used by hundreds of millions of people, investors have raised concerns about its ability to generate revenue and profit from its vast user base. Skype's reputation took a hit last December when its service crashed, taking millions of users offline for a full day.

In its most recent SEC filing last November, Skype said it had 560 million registered users as of June 30, 2010, up 41% from the number of users a year earlier. But only 8.1 million Skype users are paying customers on average each month, though the number was up 23% from a year earlier.

Skype reported $13.1 million in income on $406 million in revenue during the first half of 2010, up 25% from the year-earlier period.

 Write to  Anupreeta Das at anupreeta.das@wsj.com 