  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.07
%




 posted a 78% surge in profit and record sales of its gadgets in the holiday quarter, but the company's executives ignored the elephant in the room—the sudden medical leave of Chief Executive  Steve Jobs.

Even as the Cupertino, Calif., company reported a 71% revenue increase for its fiscal first quarter on strong demand for its iPhones, iPads and Macintosh computers, Apple didn't address Mr. Jobs' health in its earnings conference call with analysts. 

The 55-year-old CEO on Monday said he was taking a medical leave for an unspecified health issue, less than two years after he received a liver transplant. Mr. Jobs has in the past been diagnosed with a rare type of pancreatic cancer called islet cell neuroendocrine tumor.

On Tuesday, Apple executives stressed the strength of the company's business. "In my view, Apple is doing its best work ever," said  Tim Cook, Apple's chief operating officer, who Mr. Jobs said would be responsible for the company's day-to-day operations while he was on leave. "The team here has an unparalleled breadth and depth of talent and a culture of innovation that Steve has driven in the company," added Mr. Cook. 

Still, concerns lingered Tuesday over Apple's limited disclosure on Mr. Jobs's health. The CEO, who co-founded the company in 1976, is closely identified with driving Apple's success. The company has never disclosed the specifics behind why Mr. Jobs needed a liver transplant two years ago. 

 Wishing Steve all the luck with his health. He has done an excellent job as a visionary leader . It's unthinkable that Apple may have not recruited the needed talents to carry on in his absence or departure. Bill Gates left Microsoft for a while and the company is still standing. 

—Paul Liu

In a reflection of the concern, Apple's shares slumped in early trading Tuesday before regaining some ground to end the 4 p.m. Nasdaq trading down 2.3% at $340.65. The stock rose in after-hours trading after the earnings report was released, gaining 1.5% to $345.60.

"The company has placed a priority on privacy, arguably at the expense of shareholders," said  Toni Sacconaghi, an analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein. "Companies have an obligation to disclose material information, and we, and most shareholders, view the health of Apple's CEO as material." 

People familiar with the matter said the Securities and Exchange Commission, which had previously launched an informal inquiry into Apple's disclosure practices in 2009, is unlikely to open a fresh inquiry into the matter given that it appears the company disclosed Mr. Jobs's health concerns immediately. 

In Apple's earnings statement Tuesday, Mr. Jobs said, "We are firing on all cylinders and we've got some exciting things in the pipeline for this year." 

Apple gave a strong forecast, saying it expected earnings per share of $4.90 in the current quarter, up 47.1% from a year ago, on revenues of about $22 billion, up about 63% from a year ago. That was above analysts' estimates of $4.43 and $20.6 billion, respectively, according to Thomson Reuters. 

For the quarter ended Dec. 25, Apple reported a profit of $6 billion, or $6.43 per share. Revenue was $26.7 billion, up from $15.68 billion a year ago.

Apple said it sold 16.2 million iPhones in the period, nearly twice as many as it sold a year ago. It also sold 7.3 million iPads, compared with expectations of about 6 million iPads.

Mr. Cook said the company, which is struggling to meet demand for the iPhone, is continuing to work to boost supplies of the smartphone, which will soon be carried by Verizon Wireless.

The company said it has increased supply and distribution of iPads during the quarter. Mr. Cook said the iPad could be cannibalizing the PC market, but it was also enticing customers to buy other Apple products. "If this is cannibalization, it feels pretty good," he said. 

The company sold 4.1 million Macintosh computers in the latest quarter, up 23% from a year earlier. It also sold 19.5 million iPod media players, falling 7%. 

Gross margin fell to 38.5% from 40.9% a year earlier, but it improved from 36.9% in the previous quarter as manufacturing costs fell. 

 Write to  Yukari Iwatani Kane at yukari.iwatani@wsj.com 