HONG KONG—Executives, bankers and government officials raised questions over the emerging offshore market for China's currency during a conference Monday, underscoring the debate over the future of the yuan in the global economy.

The rising use of yuan, also known as the renminbi, outside mainland China dominated much of the discussions at the government-backed financial conference in Hong Kong.

China has taken steps toward greater use of the yuan, long one of the world's most tightly controlled major currencies, for international trade and some types of finance. This has increased expectations that the yuan eventually will become an international reserve currency alongside the dollar.

But Beijing doesn't want the offshore-yuan market to expand too rapidly, said Cheng Siwei, former vice chairman of the National People's Congress, China's legislature.

"We want a more smooth development. We don't want it too fast," he said. "We're keeping an eye on speculation and risk. What we want to see is robust growth."

Mr. Cheng's comments come after Chinese President Hu Jintao, on the eve of a meeting with U.S. President Barack Obama in Washington this week, said making the yuan truly international "will be a fairly long process." U.S. officials have been pushing for China to let its currency appreciate more rapidly against the dollar to reduce China's trade surplus, even as Beijing manages a more gradual rise.

To prevent abuses of China's new currency initiatives, a senior financial policy maker on Monday proposed unusually tight restrictions on the use of funds raised with yuan-denominated bonds in Hong Kong.



"The bulk of the money raised in Hong Kong [through yuan bonds] should not be repatriated to the mainland," said Fang Xinghai, director general of Shanghai's Financial Services Office, at the Asian Financial Forum conference in Hong Kong. He said the money instead should be kept offshore to help promote internationalization of the currency.

Last week, China announced a new policy allowing Chinese companies to use yuan to invest abroad. A big state-owned Chinese oil company, for example, might use yuan to pay for access to an oil field in Central Asia. The seller could then trade the yuan with the local central bank, which would hold the currency in its reserves, or the yuan could be used to buy Chinese goods. But restricting yuan bonds to funding overseas investment could damp demand for them, especially from companies seeking to raise capital for investments in China.

Several foreign companies, including  McDonald's Corp.
MCD


-0.55
%




 and  Caterpillar Inc.,
CAT


0.25
%




 already have raised yuan through debt issues in Hong Kong aimed at funding their China expansion. Bankers said, however, that obtaining the go-ahead to transfer funds raised through these offerings is a bureaucratic process handled the same way as tightly regulated foreign-currency investments.

Mr. Fang also warned that developments in Hong Kong's yuan-bond market need to be coordinated closely with the development of onshore debt funding in Shanghai. Otherwise, a "rush to Hong Kong," where raising money is cheaper and easier, might ensue that could lead China's central bank, the People's Bank of China, to "lose control over interest rates," he said.

Beijing also may fear that certaincompanies might seek access to low-cost yuan funding in Hong Kong to get around measures to tighten bank lending in mainland China to curb inflation.

Business leaders in Hong Kong also are expressing doubts about the speed of the yuan's internationalization. "I'm less optimistic on trade" using Chinese yuan, said  Victor Fung, chairman of Li & Fung Group, a trading company that specializes in finding lost-cost manufacturers in countries like China. Last year, it signed a sourcing deal with retailer  Wal-Mart Stores Inc.
WMT


-0.16
%






China is eager for foreign businesses to conduct trade in yuan, rather than dollars. However, "big retailers have no incentive to switch," Mr. Fung said. "Why should a buyer switch unless there are incentives?"

Since Beijing lifted some controls last summer, daily trading in yuan offshore has increased from zero to about $400 million.

Without further changes to capital controls that keep the yuan from being a fully convertible currency, the Hong Kong experiment won't expand, said  Levin Zhu, one of China's top investment bankers. Mr. Zhu, president of China International Capital Corp., a Chinese investment bank, and son of former Chinese Premier Zhu Rongji, said the yuan "should be convertible before it can be internationalized."

Despite its efforts to promote trade in yuan abroad, China still restricts how much of its currency is taken in and out of the country.

 Write to  Peter Stein at peter.stein@wsj.com and Shai Oster at shai.oster@wsj.com 