Sabermetrics—loosely defined as the search for objective knowledge about baseball, usually through the analysis of baseball statistics—has a lineage nearly as long as that of the sport. The man known as "the father of baseball" wasn't a player, or even a manager, but a writer named Henry Chadwick. He invented the box score in the 1850s. The charm of sabermetrics, a child of the 1970s, is that it is the province of cranks and eccentrics, the sort of men who— if they weren't devising intricate equations to measure ballplayers who died a century ago against the Japanese teenagers of today— might be publishing histories of obscure religious sects, or even founding them. 

The archetypal practitioner might be Earnshaw Cook, an engineer who worked on the Manhattan Project and later went on to propose that his slide rule could net a team two dozen or so wins a year (he had the principles right, but the math wrong). But even the baseball men who saw the value in this kind of work tended to be outsiders in their ways. Branch Rickey, the Brooklyn Dodgers general manager who signed Jackie Robinson, was considered eccentric for being fascinated with percentages. So was Bill Veeck, the owner who once sent a midget up to the plate and bought a rocking chair for the ancient Negro Leagues legend Satchel Paige to use while sitting in the bullpen. 

Bill James, the first and greatest of saber metricians, often seems a character out of late Melville, his obsessive analyses carrying the air of phrenology and nerve tonics about it. Mr. James began writing his annual "Baseball Abstract" (originally published via mimeograph machine) while working as a security guard in a pork-and-beans cannery. Over the next two decades, he burned through the great bulk of numbers amassed over the previous century, wringing out of them revelations about the history and nature of the game.

Much of what he discovered is by now so deeply embedded into baseball culture that it seems self-evident. It took Mr. James a surprising amount of effort to make people understand, for instance, that on-base average is much more important than batting average—though sharp baseball thinkers such as Earl Weaver had known it all along. Mr. James's most interesting revelations, though, were truly new, and came in the area of statistical relationships. He demonstrated that properly refined minor-league statistics are just as predictive of future performance as major-league ones (which is by no means obvious) and even showed that a team's ratio of runs scored to runs allowed tells more about how good they are than actual win totals. Mr. James revealed that most of the men running baseball had no idea what they were watching.

Equally important, he inspired thousands of passionate fans to dig into baseball's books with obsessive zeal, convinced that everything they thought they knew was wrong. In the late 1990s, for example, a paralegal named Voros McCracken offered a proof that pitchers have almost no influence over where batted balls are hit on the field. This insight has kept clubs from overpaying based on fluke statistics and thus has been worth tens of millions of dollars—of which Mr. McCracken saw barely a dime.

All along, some major-league teams had employed their own sabermetricians and hired thinkers like Mr. James as consultants, but it was inevitable that some would see the value in binding their strategies more closely to what the data told. The inflection point was probably reached with Michael Lewis's 2003 best seller "Moneyball," which told the (not entirely accurate) tale of how the sabermetricians were attempting a palace coup against the old-time scouts.

The book itself helped move the process along. Amateurs who had previously written for online listservs and wonky outlets like Baseball Prospectus were brought into management by open-minded clubs; bright students joined the public debate, hoping to get hired. Mr. McCracken went to work for the Boston Red Sox, as did Mr. James himself, by then acclaimed as the most important non-player in the sport since Branch Rickey.

But it is worth noting that the sabermetricians weren't in it for the money. Theirs is the work of people who believe in prophecy. Theirs were insights that could only have been had—and I say this with reverence—by crackpots. For all his rhetoric about objectivity and rationalism, the Jamesian is not a scientist, but a mystic. Constantly devising systems to bring all knowledge into one orbit, in service of an idea of universal order, the man and his disciples operate on the faith that reality will, under careful-enough scrutiny, turn out to operate on fixed percentages, and that these will, if discovered, allow you to see into the future.

The men who run the Tampa Bay Rays, the subjects of Jonah Keri's curious and at times inadvertently telling "The Extra 2%," are not crackpots. Nor are they Jamesians. They practice a wholly different line of quack theorizing, one holding that the key to success is found in a set of principles that would apply equally well to the sale of financial derivatives, the manufacture of bicycle chains or the valuation of center fielders. They think in terms of arbitrage strategies, deploying synergies, "thinking outside the box" and exploiting market inefficiencies. They are characters not out of Melville, but out of Richard Yates.

The tale of the Rays, winners of the American League East two of the last three years, is among the best baseball offers. In the first decade of their existence, the team lost an average of 97 games per season. This was no surprise. They play in the toughest division in major American sports, a division that boasts not only the New York Yankees and Boston Red Sox but teams representing the quite large and quite wealthy metropolitan areas of Baltimore and Toronto. The Rays also play in by far the worst yard in the major leagues, St. Petersburg's Tropicana Field, last of the charmless domes in which major-league baseball was for long years, inexplicably, played.

Much of the book is taken up with a wonderful account of just how the team got so bad, rooted in its horrific early years under original owner Vince Naimoli, a man so cheap he refused to pay to set up team email accounts and once tried to force a high-school marching band scheduled to play the national anthem to buy their own tickets. Equally priceless is Mr. Keri's account of how the crack staff of onetime general manager Chuck LaMar lost out on a pudgy prospect named Albert Pujols.

Once we get to the team's ascent, though, Mr. Keri's interests rise slightly above the field, to focus on the front office assembled by owner Stuart Sternberg, who took over the team in 2005 and populated it with young Ivy Leaguers who had backgrounds in sabermetric research and young veterans of Wall Street. So close is Mr. Keri's attention to the front office that he gives less than a page to the team's thrilling run through the 2008 postseason, when they knocked off both the Red Sox and the Chicago White Sox (teams spending about three times as much as the Rays did on player salaries), before falling short against the Philadelphia Phillies in the World Series. More space is dedicated to team president Matt Silverman's background in mergers and acquisitions. ("He noted all the spending mistakes that struggling companies made and all the revenue-boosting methods that pumped up surging companies' balance sheets.")

If this sort of thing wrings the odd yawn—and it does—the fault really isn't with the author. The problem is that Messrs. Sternberg and Silverman and general manager Andrew Friedman, who ascended to his present position at an age where most of his peers were still studying for their MBA, simply aren't all that interesting. Part of Mr. Keri's problem is that the three seem to have taken a lesson about the value of revealing trade secrets (and their own personalities) from the success of "Moneyball," which exposed Oakland general manager Billy Beane to considerable ridicule from some old-line baseball men even as it taught other teams his tricks. Mostly, though, the troika simply come off as commonplace, tightly wired overachievers. At one point, Mr. Friedman says: "I am purely market-driven. I love players I think that I can get for less than they are worth. It's positive arbitrage, the valuation asymmetry in the game." Leave aside the feeling that this misses much of the point of sport—including winning ballgames. Does anyone anywhere in baseball, Hank Steinbrenner of the Yankees aside, love getting players for more than he thinks they're worth? Of course not.

To value nothing but the market is, in the end, to value nothing but one's own ability to read the market. That is, as any number of busted money managers could tell you, a sketchy thing to rely on. The most important insights that traditional sabermetrics can provide are rapidly reaching commodity status—available to anyone with access to a laptop, an MIT grad and enough money—and this will rapidly reduce the opportunity for arbitrage. Already everyone knows the value of, say, Albert Pujols to a team; there would be no "positive arbitrage" in the Rays signing him to a free-agent contract after this season. Still, they should do it, if they could afford to. 

 By Jonah Keri  ESPN Books, 254 pages, $26

Anyone who learned about the game by reading Bill James and later consuming books like the annual Baseball Prospectus preview (to which Mr. Keri was a longtime contributor) has surely rued one odd effect of the triumph of their work within the sport: It seems that every time a sabermetrician does something really original, he is hired on by a team, with his work soon receiving a big stamp reading "proprietary" on it. Mr. Keri delivers a winning account of how the Rays came to hire Josh Kalk, a physics professor and former writer for Hardballtimes.com with a knack for wringing insight out of the Pitch f/x camera systems that MLB has installed in stadiums during recent years. These record the location and speed of pitches from the time they leave the pitcher's hand to the time they cross the plate, and are used on MLB's website to provide virtual broadcasts of games. When you glimpse how Mr. Kalk uses it to study arcane aspects of throwing a ball 60 feet at high velocity, you will mourn the amount of talent sequestered in front offices, doing interesting work out of public view.

Happily, not everyone with a line in arcane analysis has yet been taken up by someone in search of synergizing an exploitation of market arbitrage. For those who like their sabermetrics to carry the whiff of nerve tonic, Frederick Taylor's "The Runmakers" is a deeply old-fashioned treatise in which a statistic of Mr. Taylor's devising (potential runs per game) is used to rate the top hitters in history by era, position and role. There is a lot of wheel-reinvention going on here, which leads to some rather puzzling conclusions— such as the claim that the obscure Glenn Wright was one of the 10 best-hitting shortstops ever. But the work is charming, and, while it will be old hat to the sort of reader who spends hours at a time fidgeting in front of Baseball-Reference.com, the sport is better for such redundancies and for every new generation of cranky autodidacts. 

By Michael Humphreys  Oxford, 410 pages, $19.95

The book of the season, though, comes from Michael Humphreys, a tax advisor at Ernst & Young, who has spent years meticulously extracting reads on historical defensive performance from the flawed and fragmentary numbers we have to go by, and he now offers the definitive work on the subject. Much of it is highly technical and has to do with how to correct for the many biases in fielding numbers: Infielders on a team with a lot of flyball pitchers, for example, don't have as many chances to make plays as infielders on a team with a lot of groundball pitchers. Mr. Humphreys establishes a way to value both equally.

"Wizardry" has pages of the sort of equations that will probably scare off the casual reader. But anyone who is willing to bear with them will win the reward of understanding a take on defense that not only lays out just who the best fielders of all time were, but charts a history that accounts for integration, expansion and natural changes in talent level, telling us how and why the game has evolved. It is not really of any practical use, and that is what is so delightful about it.

Mr. Humphreys presents a careful, thoughtful system that will make you appreciate all the more the genius of the late Yankees second baseman Joe Gordon or the peripatetic and vastly underrated outfielder Kenny Lofton. He also gives insight into how the game is likely to change in the years to come, as the major leagues begin to accommodate more talent from more parts of the world. The system that allows him to compare Derek Jeter to dead-ball era shortstop Honus Wagner, for instance, is premised on the idea that the pool of potential major-league talent is around six times larger today than it was a century ago—a notion with staggering implications for the quality of play going forward.

"Wizardry" is, in its way, a representation of the future of statistical sabermetrics, which in years to come is quite likely to become more focused less on telling the future than on wresting meaning out of the past. Sabermetricians, so recently the avatars of best practices in baseball management, are about to be overtaken. There will be work for those who can make sense out of a torrent of data, as Mr. Kalk has with the Pitch f/x system, but technology is near to making traditional baseball statistics—and the mining of them for practical insights—obsolete.

 By Frederick Taylor  Johns Hopkins, 272 pages, $24.95

The most exciting development in baseball analysis right now is probably the development of Field f/x, a camera system that will record the position of the ball and all fielders at all times in every major-league park, thus once and for all solving the mysteries of which players are good at defense and which are bad. To tell how good Jackie Robinson was in the field, Mr. Humphreys has to deduce it from official records that can be unreliable or worse. To tell how good Mr. Jeter is, an analyst must deduce it from batted-ball data collected by human observers, which presents its own serious problems. A few years from now, however, telling how good a player is will be a matter of running his movements through an algorithm.

Similar developments in the field of biomechanics are also likely. It won't be long before telling whether or not a teenager has good odds of ever being able to throw a major-league curveball will simply be a matter of recording him with a camera and running his delivery through a computer program. Duller executives will still be bested by smarter ones, but many of the specific techniques that teams like the Rays and Oakland A's have used to win for little money will look a bit quaint.

The paradox is that, as such information becomes fully accurate and widely available, positive arbitrage (as it were) may only be found in deploying the oldest of old-timey tactics. Imagine that every team can tell that a young pitcher—like Stephen Strasburg of the Nationals or Chris Sale of the White Sox—is adding 40% to his chances of tearing up his elbow because he finishes his delivery poorly. The real advantage will then be with the team that can assess his character and judge whether he's the sort of kid who can change his motion and stick to it. In other words, subjective reads on motivation, intelligence and aptitude—the province of scouts and grizzled managers—will again become paramount.

And then, perhaps, sabermetrics, which has temporarily been seized by the grinds, may again become the province of the mystics, who are absolutely sure that there is something no one else has ever noticed and that the answer is to be found in a lot of papers and charts. For the same reason that every park will, on Opening Day, feature a lot of drunks yelling at the manager to pull the infield back, there will always be someone out not only to show a general manager a new way to rationalize operations, but also to teach fans things they didn't even know they wanted to learn about an endlessly surprising game. 

—Contact Mr. Marchman at tlmarchman@gmail.com.