Two weeks ago I shelled out $76.80 to fill the gas tank of my Toyota Sienna, while sipping a revolting cup of java that set me back two bucks and munching on a plain, unbuttered $1.25 bagel. Wow, I thought, things sure are getting expensive in this country! Looks like inflation is heating up!

You can imagine my surprise when the latest economic data came out and we were told that inflation wasn't much of a problem at all. The price index for core personal consumption expenditures increased a piddling 0.9% from the previous year, keeping the national inflation rate far, far below what economists see as the danger level. 

Hang on a second, I thought: What about my exorbitant fuel costs and the two bucks for my disgusting coffee and the $1.25 for my stale, tasteless bagel, with no schmear, no butter, no nothing? If inflation had jumped just a puny 0.9% in the past 12 months, why did it feel like everything that I bought last week had gone up 25%?

The answer lies in the way economists calculate what they call "core" price indexes. The core personal consumption expenditures index (PCE), for example, computes the cost of a representative basket of goods that consumers might buy—like used copies of "Madden 2009" and lace camisoles and jumbo-size containers of Percocet and personally autographed Kenny Chesney guitar picks and Blu-ray discs of "AVP: Alien vs. Predator" —but it cuts out variables like food and energy prices. This makes the month-to-month reporting on inflation less volatile, far less subject to the vicissitudes of the market. 

At first glance, this seems baffling. Removing fuel and food costs from the index purely for the sake of statistical balance seems a bit like saying, "All told, four million people died in World War II. Well, unless you include the people who died in concentration camps. And, oh yeah, the 20 million Russians." It's a bit like saying, "On average, a major league baseball team will win 3.2 World Series each century. Obviously, not the Cubs. And we've thrown out the New York Yankees and their 27 world championships because it doesn't provide a true snapshot of the game at any given moment." It's a bit like saying, "Billy Joel never wrote a single song that just totally sucks and makes people's skin crawl. Unless you include 'Captain Jack.' Which we deliberately left out of our sample because it skews the results. Maybe we should have left out 'Piano Man,' too."

Question: Who gets to decide what gets left out of this or that index? Has anyone ever examined the backgrounds and body shapes and psychological profiles of the men and women who compile the personal consumption expenditures index? No! Or at least not until I did.

Last week, I traveled the length and breadth of this country visiting with these persnickety bureaucrats, and I have something very interesting to report. With one notable exception—a really fat guy in Kansas City—the folks who devise the PCE are skinny nerds who eat a lot of salad and never dine out. 

A spike in food prices means nothing to them, because they mostly eat sprouts and yogurt that they grow at home, and they generally bake their own bread. They eat an insane number of carrots and raw lasagna noodles that they bought in bulk at Sam's Club 12 years ago, and they filch bananas from co-workers' lunch bags when they're not watching. 

These index-makers don't drink coffee, tea, milk, Dos Equis or schnapps and they either walk to work or bike or ride scooters. They also hitchhike a lot. Some of them sleep for weeks at a time on cots in their offices.

All this may explain why economists are so willing to throw food and energy prices out of the PCE index as if they didn't matter. People who use pogo sticks to get to work, where they eat tuna-fish sandwiches their mommies made for them…. Well, maybe these aren't the kinds of people who should be calibrating the economic health of the nation.