The longtime publicist for beleaguered Libyan strongman Moammar Gadhafi has stepped down after the colonel's profanity-laced interview with Piers Morgan on CNN.

"The Libyan people can lick my feet if they expect me to back down," Mr. Gadhafi told CNN. "If they're pissed off at my totally bitchin' rock-star life—which makes Keith Richards and Ozzy and Sinatra and Zeppelin look like droopy-eyed, armless children—that's their problem."

The tirade, full of anti-Semitic remarks about "the cabal of Chaims that run the media," was too much for Mr. Gadhafi's publicist, Ben Gazi, who has been with the colonel for more than 40 years.

"I love the guy to death, but he's out of control," said Mr. Gazi. "Inviting the 'Today' show in to interview the porn star that takes care of his children? Bad move. Agreeing to take a live urine test on television to prove that he's drug-free? Tacky. And actually asking the Libyan people for a $1 million-a-week raise while the country is in flames? Now that's beyond the pale."

Mr. Gadhafi, for his part, told his publicist to "get over it. Come on, not all of this is serious. Frankly, I'm insulted, I'm confused by all this negativity I'm seeing around me. This is the rocket fuel that lives in the tip of my saber."

He added: "Everyone is jealous of my money and grandiose lifestyle. I'm passionate, and I speak the truth, so now I'm crazy. Well, I say, blame the Libyan people for giving me this much dough, knowing who they were giving it to. They're the ones who are crazy. I say, enjoy it, you can't take it with you."

During the tempestuous 30-minute interview, Mr. Morgan repeatedly tried to get Mr. Gadhafi to explain why he had turned his security forces loose on insurgents in eastern Libya. The colonel, a cigarette dangling from his lips, waved the questions away.

"That's passion. That's all it is, passion. My passion is sometimes misinterpreted as anger. But it's not. It's passion. It's violent love."

But how can he possibly remain in power after the mass murders, the threat to turn Libya into a living hell, Mr. Morgan pressed forward.

"Everybody thinks I should be begging for my job back. I'm just gonna forewarn them that it's everybody else that's going to be begging for their job back."

Mr. Gadhafi then likened the thousands of deaths in eastern Libya to the untimely demise of movie star Heath Ledger.

"Good people get taken out all the time, and you have to file that under the heading, 'That sucks.' But it's not the end of the world."

In a subsequent interview on NBC's "Today" show, Mr. Gadhafi was asked what his kids might feel about his behavior over the past few weeks.

"I hope my kids read about all of this," the North African dictator fired back. "I hope they say, 'Dad, fill in the blanks. This stuff is epic.' Look, I am on a drug. It's called Moammar Gadhafi. I've got one speed. I've got one gear. And I dare you to keep up with me. The run I'm on makes Sinatra and Keith Richards and Ozzy seem like one-armed children. Maybe I already said that."

As the interview drew to a close, the colonel was asked how he felt about Vanity Fair theorizing that he gets his fashion ideas from Liberace and Snoopy.

"Yeah, well did you see that wedding cake Cate Blanchett had stapled to the front of her gown on the Oscars Sunday night?" he sneered. "And where did Melissa Leo get that dress? J.C. Penney's?"

Finally, the Libyan strongman was asked about the controversy swirling around TV-sitcom star Charlie Sheen. 

"I don't think the rest of the world is mentally evolved enough to appreciate Charlie," he replied. "The world sucks, and it's built by losers, and everybody's jealous because his life is so much more bitchin' than theirs. He's basically a total frickin' rock star from Mars." He paused. "But I'd lose the Borsalinos." 