A Wisconsin circuit court judge put on hold Friday a new law that would curtail collective-bargaining rights for public unions, delaying for now the implementation of bitterly contested legislation that drew thousands of protesters and shut down the legislature.

The ruling thrilled Democratic lawmakers, who spent three weeks out of state to prevent the bill's passage, and stunned Republicans, who vowed to appeal.

"Dane County always seems to play by its own rules, but this morning we saw a Dane County judge try to rewrite the constitutional separation of powers," Republican leaders of the state Senate and Assembly said in a statement. "We fully expect an appeals court will find that the legislature followed the law perfectly and likely find that today's ruling was a significant overreach."

Judge Maryann Sumi said a lawsuit filed by the Dane County district attorney had enough merit for her to issue a temporary restraining order to prevent Secretary of State Doug La Follette from publishing the bill while she reviews the case. The law takes effect only after it is published.

In his complaint, District Attorney Ismael Ozanne argued that the state's open-meeting laws were violated when Republican leaders whisked the bill through committee last week without giving a 24-hour public notice. In emergencies, meetings may be called with just two hours' notice. Mr. Ozanne argued that even that minimal standard hadn't been upheld.

"We obviously feel that this was a big victory for democracy in Wisconsin and the people of Wisconsin," said Democratic Assembly Leader Peter Barca, who initiated the complaint. "Wisconsin has a reputation of open and honest government, and this ruling reaffirms that."

Wisconsin Attorney General J.B. Van Hollen, a Republican, said the Wisconsin Department of Justice planned to appeal the judge's restraining order. "The Legislature and the Governor, not a single Dane County Circuit Court Judge, are responsible for the enactment of laws," he said.

The bill containing the collective-bargaining restrictions was moved through a joint committee March 9 while 14 Democratic Senators were in Illinois, where they had gone to deny Republicans the quorum they needed to pass the bill. After weeks of failed negotiations, Republican legislative leaders stripped the bill of its fiscal components, removing the need for a 20-person quorum in the state Senate. The bill passed 18-1, with no Democrats present.

Republican Gov. Scott Walker signed the bill into law on March 11, prompting tens of thousands of protesters to demonstrate at the state capitol. The conflict generated campaigns to recall senators on both sides of the aisle and a slew of lawsuits aimed at stopping the law from going into effect. Several of those cases are also moving forward.

"They're really on the horns of a dilemma now," said Democratic state senator Bob Jauch. He said if Republicans tried to reschedule a vote on the bill, protesters would return to the capitol. He said he could speak only for himself but doubts he and the other 13 Senate Democrats would leave the state again in any case. "Our purpose was not to permanently block the vote but to give a voice to the citizens of Wisconsin," he said. 

Wisconsin Republican Party Executive Director Mark Jefferson said Republican legislators would likely let the legal process play out rather than try to pass the bill again. Protesters have congregated at the homes of Republican legislators, surrounded their cars and jeered at them as they walk to work, Mr. Jefferson said. "It was such a fiasco before, they're probably not eager to get spit on again," he said.

Unions acknowledged that the judge's ruling might delay enactment of the law only temporarily, but they cheered it anyway. "Every day this goes on, the public is turning against Walker, and recalls are getting more and more energy against the Republicans," said Eddie Vale, a spokesman for the AFL-CIO. 

 Write to  Douglas Belkin at doug.belkin@wsj.com and Kris Maher at kris.maher@wsj.com 