CAIRO—It was early Friday afternoon, as growing thousands of protesters sought a route past riot police, across the Nile and into the center of Cairo, that seasoned democracy activist Ziad al-Alimi allowed himself a moment of optimism that the Mubarak regime would be toppled.

"I think we will do it," he said.



At 1:30 p.m., shortly after the muezzin's call rang out through the streets signaling the Friday prayer, Mr. Almi and his group of a dozen young activists linked up with a marching column of protesters coming from the city's Mustafa Mahmoud mosque.

Friday protests in Cairo

Among the throngs of protesters, there were fathers marching hand-in-hand with their young sons. Other demonstrators waved Egyptian flags.

At the Nile, police had deployed in force to prevent their advance across either of the two bridges that could lead them to their destination, Tahrir Square. 

The large square, in the center of Cairo, is home to, among others, the Arab League, the Egyptian Museum, hotels, businesses, and several important government offices, including the seat of the Egyptian bureaucracy. The ruling party headquarters and all major government buildings are nearby.

Occupying Tahrir would be a major accomplishment by activists, some of whom, like Mr. Almi, have worked for years to chip away at the authority of President Hosni Mubarak.

That morning, in Mr. Alimi's family's modest apartment, a dozen young activists nervously prepared for a historic day of protests they had waited a lifetime to see.

A soft-spoken, wafer-thin 22-year-old activist, Selma Akl, sorted the contents of her purse: tourniquets, gauze bandages, vinegar to treat tear-gas inhalation, and painkillers.

"Maybe I'll get killed today," the young activist said with a nervous laugh. "But we have to make change. We have to."

Mr. Alimi, a 30-year-old human-rights lawyer who has been leading democracy protests in Egypt for over a decade, gave marching orders to his cadre in his mother's living room. 

He told the activists to make their way through the streets in groups of two or three to avoid attracting police attention before they linked up with the larger protest.

"When they come to beat you, hold on to each other," he said. "If one person gets arrested, everyone else keeps marching."

A succession of rallies and demonstrations, in Egypt, Jordan, Yemen and Algeria have been inspired directly by the popular outpouring of anger that toppled Tunisian President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali. See how these uprising progressed.

Mr. Alimi's mother, Ikram Yussuf, 54 years old, served six months in prison in 1977, during the historic bread riots, the last time Egyptians took to the streets en masse to protest rising prices. Now she was serving the cause by serving breakfast: eggs, pitas, cheese and hot tea.

"Eat, boys, you'll need the protein for later," she said. She scolded one young activist for heading into the streets without a jacket.

Mr. Alimi has been jailed four times in the past decade. In protests against the Iraq war in 2003, he was beaten by police, who broke his arm and tossed him in prison for 23 days, he says.

When Mr. Alimi and others reached the Nile that afternoon and sought a way to cross the river, tear gas began to rain down on marchers. 

Puffy-eyed protesters fled, hacking for air, into side alleys to rinse out their eyes with water and Coca-Cola, which word had was an effective balm for tear gas. 

They then distributed surgical masks, regrouped, and charged the soldiers en masse.

The marchers were again beaten back by hailing canisters of tear gas. Some protesters picked up the smoking canisters and threw them back at the soldiers or into the Nile, where a lone police boat watched from afar. 

Protesters surged through the streets, trying first one ramp, then another ramp. Pushed back, the crowd shifted toward another bridge together. A photographer gripped her bleeding ear after she was struck by a rubber bullet.

As dusk neared, after several hours of forays, thousands of protesters massed on the 26th of July Bridge and surged through the police ranks—toward Tahrir.

Jubilation broke out as protesters reached the other side of the river. One group of several hundred fell to their knees in prayer. 

When they reached Tahrir Square, hope, optimism and jubilation gave way to chaos. 

Cars and police trucks went up in flames as formations of riot police broke apart and scattered. A dozen or so riot police ran down one street, bashing in windows of parked cars with their truncheons, for no apparent reason. Activists set fire to the headquarters of the ruling National Democratic Party and other buildings.

As authorities retreated from central Cairo, looters heaved rocks through storefront windows. Two foreign female journalists said they were robbed at knifepoint outside their downtown hotel as the hotel's security guards looked on from behind bolted glass doors.

Inside, from the hotel's 18th floor business lounge, windows offered a view of the mayhem unfolding below. Fires spread around the square, encompassing a construction site and ripping through the garden of a mosque.

Booms and explosions and the sounds of jubilant demonstrators banging on metal railings filled the night. Tear gas wafted up and through an open window.

In the early hours of Saturday morning, Mr. Mubarak told his country in a televised address that he was sacking his government—and signaled he would remain in power. Outside, protesters, disregarding a nationwide curfew, continued their raucous drive for his demise. 

 Write to  Charles Levinson at charles.levinson@wsj.com 