The Arab world cast deep differences aside on Saturday to rejoice at the ouster of Tunisian President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali and share a rare moment of hope and unity in a region that has known mostly disappointment and indignity in recent years.

In contrast, Arab governments offered mostly tepid reactions to the popular overthrow of Mr. Ben Ali, a Western ally who ruled Tunisia with an iron fist for the past 23 years. 

In Arabic newspapers, on satellite news channels, in Twitter feeds, and blog posts, the region's people, liberal and conservative, secular and Islamist, praised the Tunisian people. Many hoped aloud that similar fates would befall their own governments. 

"The Tunisian torch will light all the Arab world," Lebanon's As Safir Newspaper proclaimed, a common theme in popular commentary throughout the Middle East. 

"Ben Ali's fleeing the country may prove to be the historic turning point that many in the Arab world have been predicting and anticipating for decades: the point at which disgruntled and often humiliated Arab citizens shed their fear and confront their leaders with demands for serious changes in how their countries are governed,"  Rami Khouri, director of the Issam Fares Institute at the American University of Beirut, said in an essay published online on Saturday. 

  Shadi Hamid, a Doha-based Egypt analyst for the Brookings Institution, said events in Tunisia had broken a psychological barrier for the region's opposition movements. 

"The opposition has always been unable to envision what the fall of a dictator would look like," Mr. Hamid said "That has now become a real thing."

Despite the high hopes of many in the region, there were no signs that significant unrest was spreading to other countries on Saturday, though there were scattered but small protests in several Arab capitals. 

In Egypt, where poverty and political repression are widespread and the country's unpopular President Hosni Mubarak has clung to power for nearly three decades, hundreds of riot-police chased off activists who tried to gather outside the Tunisian Embassy in Cairo. 

A few hundred members of local trade unions rallied outside the Tunisian Embassy in Amman, Jordan, where passers-by left dozens of flower bouquets. A notecard on one bouquet said "We congratulate the Tunisian people for the fall of the tyrant Ben Ali." 

"What has happened in Tunisia is the beginning of change in the whole Arab homeland," said  Ahmad al-Armouti, head of the Jordanian Physicians Union. "The Arab people will learn the Tunisian lesson and they will keep silent no more."

In Iran, where a similar popular outpouring of popular anger at the government was brutally suppressed in 2009, bloggers and activists took heart from the Tunisians' example and called on their countrymen to follow suit.

"If Tunisia can do it, so can we," one blogger wrote. "It's now our turn to overthrow our illegitimate government."

Meanwhile, as their citizens celebrated, Arab governments offered more muted reactions to the ouster of a fellow Arab leader. 

The Egyptian Foreign Ministry said in a statement that it "respects the choices made by the Tunisian people," but added that it "trusts they are wise enough to…avoid plunging Tunisia into chaos."

The Arab League issued a statement calling on the Tunisian people and government "to stand together and unite."

In Iraq, Ali al-Mussawi, an aide to Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, said, "The desire of the Tunisian people for change and reform must be respected." 

A spokesman for Iran's foreign ministry, Ramin Mehmanparast, told Fars News Agency that Tunisia's developments were strictly an internal matter and Iran hopes that stability returns to Tunisia as soon as possible. 

Jordan's Queen Rania tweeted that she was "closely watching developments in Tunisia and praying for stability and calm for its people." 

Analysts said they expected opposition movements to tweak their tactics to emphasize economic woes instead of the absence of democracy, because it appears that economic frustrations largely fueled the successful protests in Tunisia. 

There were also indications Saturday that Arab governments may try to soften their grip a touch to preempt similar shows of unrest. In Egypt,  Hisham Kassem, an independent newspaper publisher, pointed to an unusual story on the front page of the state-run Al Ahram newspaper Saturday morning speaking positively about the country's opposition movements as an example of that softening.

"The government is trying to tone things down, but it's all just lip service," Mr. Kassem said. "The conditions here are almost identical as in Tunisia." 

Other analysts predicted Arab governments may instead seek to rein in liberties to keep the opposition in check. 

"The Arab regimes are in a bind now," said  Laith Shubailat, a prominent opposition activist in Jordan. "They're worried that Tunisia can happen in their own backyards, but if they crack down, the people will only get more frustrated and if they start to loosen their grip, the people will smell blood and go for the kill." 

Many commentators in the Middle East seized on the irony that the first Arab regime to go was one closely allied to Washington, claiming that the U.S. had shown only lackluster support for the Tunisian protestors. Many recalled comments last Wednesday by State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley that seemed to justify, at least partially, the government's heavy handed suppression of the protests. 

"We're concerned about government actions, but we're also concerned about actions by the demonstrators, those who do not have peaceful intentions," Mr. Crowley said at a Jan. 12 briefing to journalists.

"It will be remembered that only when the U.S. made sure that Bin `Ali left the country, the White House issued the statement that the Tunisian people have the right to choose their leaders," wrote As'ad AbuKhalil, a professor of political science at U.C. Berkeley on his popular blog "The Angry Arab." 

President Barack Obama, in a statement on Friday, condemned the use of violence against the protestors and called on the government to hold free elections that "reflect the true will and aspirations of the Tunisian people.

But the perceived lack of U.S. encouragement also made the Tunisian people's accomplishment all the sweeter for many in the region. 

"For once, it was the Arab people who did the deed. This is what victory looks like,"  Robin Yassin Kassab, a Syrian-British novelist, wrote on his blog Qunfuz.

—Summer Said in Riyadh, Nada Raad in Beirut, Farnaz Fassihi in Beirut, Shereen al-Gazzar in Dubai, Matt Bradley in Cairo, Sam Dagher in Baghdad, and Hassan Hafidh in Amman

 Write to  Charles Levinson at charles.levinson@wsj.com 