General Motors said it has halted all nonessential spending and travel while it gets a better handle on the potential impact of Japan's crisis on the company. The U.S.-based auto maker also stopped work at two European factories and is mulling production cuts in Korea. A shortage of Japanese-built electronic parts will force GM to close a plant in Zaragoza, Spain on Monday and cancel shifts at a factory in Eisenach, Germany on Monday and Tuesday. Both factories build the Corsa small car.

 Nissan said it will start parts production and vehicle assembly operations this week in Japan, becoming the first car maker to restart its entire auto production process after a devastating quake brought the country's auto industry to a standstill.  

 A Renault security employee has divulged the name of a person he says is the informer that prompted that car maker to believe it had been the victim of industrial espionage, the Paris prosecutors' office said, as investigators dig into the circumstances behind the bizarre affair.  

 Boeing's newest 747 passenger jet took to the skies for the first time, marking the third maiden flight of a new Boeing commercial airplane in the past 15 months.  

U.S. accident investigators issued a report about a windshield fire in the cockpit of a United Airlines jet last year that highlights similar hazards potentially affecting thousands of other Boeing aircraft. 

 Credit Suisse Group boss Brady Dougan, one of the banking sector's highest-paid executives, is likely to reap nothing this year from the long-term bonus program that delivered him a 70 million Swiss franc ($77.5 million) windfall last year, because the bank's stock failed to meet minimum limits.  

Mizuho Bank's system-wide breakdown, which has led to millions of Japanese being unable to receive salary payments or use automatic teller machines, has affected so many people that the nation's regulatory watchdog, will have to consider disciplining the bank a person familiar with the matter said.

 State-owned Saudi Arabian Oil Co. has agreed on an initial deal with PetroChina to supply crude oil to a new refinery in southwest China.  

 Wintershall, the German oil-and-gas company, is set to join Russia's South Stream natural-gas pipeline, a person familiar with the matter said, a move that the partners hope will increase the pipeline's chances of gaining European Union backing.  

BP concluded a $225 million deal to sell 33 refined products terminals and pipelines, as well as its 50% share in the Inland Corporation fuel transportation joint venture, to oil and gas storage company Buckeye Partners. 

 A former Goldman Sachs Group computer programmer was sentenced to eight years and one month in prison for stealing the confidential source code of the investment bank's high-speed trading system.  

Goldman Sachs will buy back the preferred shares it sold to Berkshire Hathaway in the autumn of 2008, paying $1.7 billion for Warren Buffett's help during the financial crisis.

 Italian candy maker Ferrero was eyeing a potential investment in Parmalat as part of a push by Italy's business and political establishment to keep the dairy firm in Italian hands, according to Italian bankers. 

General Mills will buy a major stake in Yoplait that values the French yogurt company at €1.6 billion ($2.27 billion). French investment fund PAI Partners and dairy cooperative Sodiaal said that PAI would sell its 50% stake in the dairy-products maker for a little over €800 million. 

The U.S. food giant will buy a 1% stake from Sodiaal, which will keep the remaining 49%. 

 Nasdaq OMX Group's potential hostile bid for NYSE Euronext would face substantial antitrust questions in the U.S., where it would merge two direct competitors and create a monopoly in the market for corporate listings, according to antitrust lawyers.  

 Australian mining giant Rio Tinto faces a crucial week in its quest to take over Africa-focused coal producer Riversdale Mining, after a slow take-up of acceptances since the offer was first made in December.  

Mining-investment company Talbot Group has sold a stake in iron-ore explorer Sundance Resources and plans to sell off all of its $871 million Australian dollars (US$868.3 million) in investments, Sundance's chairman said. 

 The trustee recovering money for Bernard Madoff's victims alleged in more detail in an amended lawsuit that the two owners of the New York Mets baseball team should have known for years that Madoff was a fraud and later hatched a plan to shield their assets from recovery after the decades-long Ponzi scheme was exposed in 2008.  

 Nokia will launch the C7 smartphone based on its Symbian operating system with T-Mobile USA, say people familiar with the matter.  

 Yahoo rolled out a new system in the U.K. for letting Web users opt out of allowing websites to collect information about their Internet habits in an effort to comply with a new European Union law. 

 The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission accused IBM of bribing South Korean and Chinese government officials for more than decade. IBM has agreed to pay $10 million to settle the civil charges without admitting or denying guilt. 

 Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing's chairman said the world's largest contract chip maker by revenue is confident that demand for mobile chips will remain strong this year and it is building its second chip manufacturing plant in Shanghai. 

 EMC's RSA security division that provides SecurID computer-access keys used by thousands of businesses around the world disclosed a serious break-in, but left many customers scrambling to figure out what was taken and how they might be affected.  

 AT&T has agreed to buy T-Mobile USA from Deutsche Telekom for $39 billion in cash and stock, in a deal that would create an industry giant by combining the No. 2 and No. 4 U.S. wireless carriers. 

 U.A.E.-based Emirates Telecommunications scrapped a near $12 billion plan to buy 46% of Kuwait's Mobile Telecommunications, a deal that would have given it access to new markets in the region such as Iraq, Kuwait and Morocco.  

 John Malone's Liberty Global is closing in on a deal to buy Germany's Kabel Baden-Wuerttemberg for €3.1 billion to €3.2 billion ($4.5 billion), people familiar with the matter said, an acquisition that would vastly increase its presence in Europe's biggest economy.  

Vattenfall, the Swedish state-controlled utility, announced the company's chairman and another senior executive had resigned after the company discovered the two officials had authorized an improper severance payment to a former chief executive. 