China, the largest foreign creditor to the U.S., was a net seller of Treasurys in November. 

In contrast, Japan boosted its overall holdings of Treasurys, narrowing its gap with China which remains the biggest foreign owner of Treasurys. 

The drop in China's overall holdings was due to a shrinkage of $21.1 billion in holdings of T-bills, those Treasury debt that are maturing in one year or less, according to the latest capital flows data from the Treasury Department released Tuesday. China boosted Treasury note and bond holdings by almost $10 billion over the same period. 

The data on cross-border capital flows came just hours ahead of Chinese President Hu Jintao's official visit to Washington, where he and his delegation are expected to discuss economic and geopolitical issues with President Barack Obama and members of his cabinet. 

China's appetite for Treasurys is closely tracked by market participants. There has been fear that should China sell Treasurys significantly, borrowing cost for U.S. consumers and business would jump, hurting the U.S. economy. 

The reallocation into longer-dated Treasurys came in a month when the bond market started its two-month selloff. Many investors cashed out of the Treasury market after the Federal Reserve announced in early November the $600 billion bond-buying program, known as the second round of stimulus to support the economy, or QE2 on Wall Street. 

The benchmark 10-year Treasury note's yield, which moves inversely to its price, rose by about 0.20 percentage point in November and hit a seven-month peak of 3.568% on Dec. 16. The yield traded at 3.384% Tuesday afternoon. 

"I expect that the low rates prior to QE2 kept central banks in T-bills," said  Joseph Leary, U.S. interest rate strategist at Citigroup Global Markets Inc. in New York. "They did not want to lock in low rates and expected higher rates in the near future. November is where we saw the first big selloff. With this, central banks most likely decided to move out the curve to take advantage of the higher yields." 

Overall, foreigners were net buyers of long-term U.S. financial assets in November, according to the monthly Treasury International Capital report, known as TIC. 

China's holdings fell $11.2 billion to $895.6 billion, following net buying of more than $23 billion in October, its largest increase in nearly a year. The data follow a rise in the value of China's foreign-exchange reserves by $199.3 billion in the fourth quarter, bringing total reserves at the end of 2010 to $2.85 trillion. 

Meanwhile, Japan's holdings of Treasurys rose to a record $877.2 billion, from $875 billion in October. The U.K., the third-largest owner of U.S. Treasurys, also set a record by pushing its holdings to $511.8 billion in November,up $33.3 billion from October.

Among all foreign investors, net purchases of U.S. Treasury notes and bonds totaled $61.7 billion, compared with net buying of $24.7 billion in October. Private foreign investors bought a net $51.5 billion of Treasury notes and bonds, after buying a net $25.9 billion the previous month. 

The closely watched figure of net long-term securities transactions showed total buying of $85.1 billion in November, after purchases of $28.9 billion the month before. 

More broadly, net purchases of long-term U.S. securities, including transactions that don't occur on the open market, totaled $64.6 billion following net buying of $8.5 billion the month before. 

The monthly Treasury report highlights cross-border acquisitions of securities with maturities of more than one year, including nonmarket transactions such as stock swaps and principal repayment on asset-backed securities. 

The report's most comprehensive category, "monthly net TIC flows," includes nonmarket flows, short-term securities and changes in banks' dollar holdings. This measure of net foreign capital inflow was $39 billion, compared with an inflow of $15.1 billion in October. 

Financial-market analysts consider the monthly data from the Treasury Department to be a significant but imprecise gauge of how easily the U.S. can finance its trade deficit. 

Excluding net private capital flows, official net TIC outflows hit a record of $40.8 billion in November, beating the May 2010 outflow of $38.7 billion.

U.S. data released last week showed the U.S. trade gap slimmed narrowly in November, falling 0.3% to $38.3 billion on stronger exports. The trade deficit with China, however, expanded marginally to $25.6 billion, from $25.5 billion in October.

Foreign official institutions, such as central banks, bought a net $11.1 billion of Treasury bonds and notes in November, compared with net sales of $1.0 billion the month before. 

Net foreign purchases of debt issued by U.S. government-sponsored agencies like Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac totaled $14.2 billion, unchanged from October.

Net foreign purchases of U.S. equities shrunk to $13.3 billion, compared with purchases of $16 billion the previous month. 

Net foreign purchases of corporate bonds swelled to $4.7 billion, versus purchases of $1.1 billion in October. 

 Write to  Ian Talley at ian.talley@dowjones.com and Tom Barkley at tom.barkley@dowjones.com 