WASHINGTON—Chinese President Hu Jintao's visit to Washington has "proved to be a great success," said Cui Tiankai, China's vice foreign minister.

Mr. Cui made the remarks at a news briefing late Wednesday after the state dinner hosted by U.S. President Barack Obama and first lady Michelle Obama in honor of President Hu.

"The two presidents had extensive and friendly exchanges," Mr. Cui said. His comments also come as Congressional lawmakers on Wednesday issued some harsh criticisms of China's human-rights record and exchange-rate policy, among other things.

Presidents Hu and Obama played up the two nations' common interests but soft-pedaled or ignored longstanding issues that divide them. In a one-hour news conference Wednesday in the White House's East Room, the two leaders sought to demonstrate they can live with areas of tension, even if they can't cure them, including China's currency policy, its human-rights record and the nuclear ambitions of North Korea. 

China Commerce Minster Chen Deming said in an interview earlier Wednesday that he has been "satisfied" with the visit so far, pointing to what he called "candid" exchanges between the two leaders and their consensus to strengthen "strategic mutual trust" between Beijing and Washington. 

He also noted the large number of contracts to be signed between the two countries during the visit, including up to 11 contracts between government agencies and many more between Chinese and U.S. companies. In addition, "two-way" investments valued at more than $5 billion are expected to be announced during the trip, Mr. Chen said, which includes about $3.2 billion of Chinese investments in the U.S. 

"The New Year has just begun," he said, adding that the visit "foretells good prospects" for China-U.S. trade. 

Meantime, Mr. Chen dismissed the argument linking China's exchange-rate policies to its large trade surpluses, noting that 99% of China's surpluses is with the U.S.

"This trade imbalance is not a currency issue," he said. "This is an issue both countries need to sit down and talk about." Mr. Chen said Washington and Beijing need to focus on "trade liberalization and facilitation measures," adding that "we very much hope that the U.S. can ease export controls to China."

Mr. Chen also defended China's decision to cut export quotas for rare-earth materials, saying the decision is "purely out of environmental concerns." He said other countries needed to step up their own production of rare earths. 

China holds only 30% of the world's rare-earth reserves but supplies 90% of world-wide production of such materials, Mr. Chen said.

 Write to  Lingling Wei at lingling.wei@wsj.com 