In some parts of Wales,  Dai Rees would be considered a late-starter, having not picked up a rugby ball until age 11. 

Still, a healthy rugby career ensued—playing for Swansea and Newport, as well as Wales's 'B' team, the national side's second string.

More than 35 years later, Mr. Rees is the head coach of Hong Kong's sevens squad—he was appointed in 2008, after coaching the Welsh sevens and under-20s units before that. Since coming to Hong Kong, Mr. Rees, 47, has helped Hong Kong achieve a silver medal at the 2010 Asian Games and a shield medal at last year's Hong Kong Sevens, when the side defied the odds to defeat the coach's home country, Wales. 

As this year's squad prepares for the Hong Kong Sevens tournament this coming weekend—including a rematch with Wales—Mr. Rees talked about his love for the game and the state of rugby in Asia:

It was probably about the age of 14 that I really fell in love with the game. My Boy Scouts troop played in a sevens tournament. It was my first big tournament, with 10 different teams. I was two or three years younger than the rest of the team but I had been dropped in to play and was influential. Being named player of the tournament, I was approached by different clubs and teams to play at a higher level. 

I felt I loved this game and the recognition it gave. From that point, I built my career around the game. I could see I would get lots of reward and at that time there was no money involved. It was purely recognition and being good at it and being seen for being good at it. 

When I was playing, I always made sure to polish my boots with newspaper every Saturday morning before a game. I'd do that and eat poached eggs on toast. I only had one pair of boots and was brought up to take care of them every week. You couldn't play a game in dirty boots. Over the 15 years that I played that was the one thing I'd do every time and it taught me values in life. The ritual continues: I don't let my players play in dirty boots. It shows a bit of respect for the game and the individual. 

It's the friends and the opportunities presented to travel the world and meet people that I like about rugby. The game has changed over the years but you still get to travel and make new friends.

The biggest and most significant change in rugby was the transfer from an amateur game to a professional one. There used to be no money involved. In 1995, the international rugby game turned professional and transformed the game overnight. It created money and a career in rugby. It's improved the actual game, in terms of athleticism, skill and speed.

The downside of this for me is the disappointment on young players' faces when they don't get to play in the big venues. But that's like any profession and that's what I have to deal with as a coach—managing disappointment.

The Asian rugby scene is very much geared toward the seven-a-side game. In Asia, with the success of the Rugby Sevens, rugby grows around that, with the 15-a-side game coming behind. In Europe it's dominated by the 15-a-side game. 

The level of play within Europe is tier-one. Other than Japan, Asian rugby is tier-three. But it's grown to recognizable heights from a number of years ago and there's no less enthusiasm. There are now 26 teams playing [in the Asian Rugby Football Union]. But it can't support a full-time professional league yet. 

The major growth is in the seven-a-side game because of China and Korea investment. The next Asian Games, in 2014, will be in Korea and they have invested in a team there. We know the dedication China put into their sports for the Beijing Olympics and it won't be any different. We've already seen massive investment from them in both their women's and men's game and I see them being hugely competitive over the next two to three years. 

Initially when I came to Hong Kong I was disappointed. My first impression was the guys didn't work hard enough but that they were talented and should be winning trophies. We needed a change in focus and emphasis on determinism and belief. As a result we've won a silver medal at the Asian Games and a shield medal [at last year's Hong Kong Sevens], the first medal in [almost] 10 years. I think we earned a bit of respect within world rugby.

I coached the Wales team before Hong Kong. People say you have a shelf life and unfortunately I was asked to step down just before the World Cup in 2007. I was not part of the World Cup Wales team. 

The opportunity to take these part-time rugby players from Hong Kong and beat Wales in front of a full house at the Hong Kong Sevens tournament [last year]—it was almost a fairy tale to me. It was probably one of the highlights of my coaching career, if not the highlight. There were newspaper headlines back in Wales about me beating the team that had asked me to leave. The guy who asked me to step down sat in a box at Hong Kong Stadium and it was quite pleasing to experience that.

Wales will be wounded from last year and we expect a different approach from them. I think we've raised expectations to be a little unreasonable now but are looking forward to playing them Friday night.

Going forward we have to set performance goals. I'd like to think we are able to qualify for the 2016 Olympics. The short-term goal is to qualify for the 2015 World Cup. We will look to become better athletes. We will look at strategy and establish where we want to be as a nation in rugby. We need to be finishing in the top four. I'd like to think over the next couple of years we will pick up more tournaments around the world to compete at a higher level.

 Write to  Marisa Wong at marisa.wong@wsj.com 