Showing no hint of concession while facing potentially costly antitrust litigation, lawyers for the National Football League argued Monday the federal courts shouldn't intervene in the league's lockout of some 1,700 players.

In a 57-page reply to the antitrust lawsuit now known as Tom Brady vs. the NFL, the league accused the NFL Players Association of making a mockery of the collective-bargaining process and hatching a two-year plan to achieve a new work agreement through the courts rather than at the negotiating table. 

Hours before the expiration of the collective-bargaining agreement on March 11, the players association decertified as a union and sued the league for violating antitrust laws in federal district court in Minnesota. The suit, in part, asks the court to order an end to the lockout, now in its 11th day. 

By decertifying, the players association was able to seek relief in the courts, something it couldn't have done in the midst of negotiating a new agreement with the league. The two sides are fighting over how to divide roughly $9.4 billion in annual revenue. According to league officials, the sides' proposals for total annual compensation for the players are $340 million apart, though players' leaders say the figure is $448 million. 

The sides will appear in front of U.S. District Court Judge Susan Richard Nelson in Minneapolis April 6.

In the interim, the labor battle between world's most successful sports organization and its players has evolved into a propaganda war fought through the media and in legal filings. 

The league's lawyers, led by antitrust expert  David Boies, cited federal labor laws in arguing the courts can't get in the way of a private employer locking out workers. In addition, the lawyers argued the courts should await the outcome of a National Labor Relations Board investigation into the validity of the players association's decision to decertify. 

"The law is not so easily manipulated," NFL lawyers assert in their argument. "One party to a collective bargaining relationship cannot, through its own tactical and unilateral conduct, instantaneously oust federal labor law or extinguish another party's labor law rights."

  Jeffrey Kessler, chief outside counsel to the players association, said the NFL's arguments "are 100% what we expected." He added, "there is nothing new here." He has said the expired agreement prohibited the owners from challenging decertification.

The legal standoff has produced a stalemate, with both sides waiting to see who wins in court before resuming talks. 

NFL lawyers cited statements from several NFL players and their representatives suggesting they would eventually resume negotiations as proof that the decision to decertify was tactical and not made in good faith. According to the league's filing, Players Association Executive Director  DeMaurice Smith told the press "we'll be back" immediately after the union decertified. 

Mr. Kessler said the players would respond to the NFL's allegations next week in its reply.

"The NFL's actions don't match their words," said NFLPA spokesman  George Atallah. "They say they want a fair deal. Instead, they locked out players. They are now trying to push through their lockout through a sham litigation strategy."

 Write to  Matthew Futterman at matthew.futterman@wsj.com 