Turkey's economy minister said the country's central bank should wait before making any further changes to monetary policy, in the government's first public sign of concern over the bank's unorthodox strategy of cutting interest rates amid booming demand.

"We don't want an uncertain environment in Turkey. After this for a while I think watching the results is necessary," deputy prime minister for the economy Ali Babacan told reporters in Ankara Wednesday, before flying to Switzerland for the annual meeting of the World Economic Forum in Davos.

Mr. Babacan said the central bank's policy of cutting interest rates to deter potentially destabilizing inflows of short term investment, while at the same time raising reserve requirements for commercial banks to rein in a domestic credit boom, was adopted in coordination with other institutions. But his warning over uncertainty followed recent grumbling in the markets that the central bank was failing to explain its complex policy clearly.

Turkey's central bank surprised financial markets last Thursday when it again cut its key interest rate to a record low, triggering a sell-off of Turkish assets. The bank then on Monday raised commercial banks' reserve ratios aggressively to combat surging domestic loan growth. 

It was the second time the bank has delivered such a one-two punch, but came just days after Mr. Yilmaz had stressed to reporters that the strategy represented a net tightening of monetary policy, in an economy that grew by around 8% last year. Markets had taken those remarks as an indication the bank wasn't about to cut rates again, only to be proved wrong.

Already in Davos on Wednesday, Turkey's Central Bank Governor  Durmus Yilmaz continued to defend his policy. He acknowledged that foreign investors had sold off the Turkish lira following the bank's latest move, but stressed that the measures would have an impact in restraining domestic demand next month. 

Mr. Yilmaz took a less combative stance toward media criticism that he had failed to communicate his strategy, creating an atmosphere of unpredictability.

The bank "cannot be driven by the market," Mr. Yilmaz said in Davos, during an interview with Turkish television channel CNBC-e. "We are doing something completely new so it's natural that people will ask questions... But we know what we are doing and we think we will get a result."

While Wednesday brought the government's first expression of concern over the central bank's strategy, Mr. Yilmaz has repeatedly warned the government to keep its fiscal policies tight. In Davos, he warned again that maintaining fiscal discipline was "critical" to safeguarding financial stability, as a loosening could further aggravate the country's mushrooming current account deficit.

The widening imbalance between Turkey's imports and exports is widely seen by economists as the Turkish economy's Achilles heel, one that could create a financing crunch should the current waves of short-term investment inflows that are helping to fill the gap suddenly dry up. It's largely because of that risk that Mr. Yilmaz has taken the controversial step of cutting interest rates at a time of strong economic growth, in order to restrain these volatile inflows.

One factor that could suddenly spook foreign investors is any sign that the government is pumping money into the economy ahead of elections in June, undermining Mr. Yilmaz's careful balancing act. Economists recently pointed to a marked rise in government spending in the December budget numbers.

"The crucial point is that success requires fiscal policy to work in tandem with monetary policy—and with elections approaching, there are reasons to be cautious," said  Neil Shearing, emerging-markets economist at Capital Economics. 