ZURICH— Google Inc. on Wednesday threatened to pull its popular Street View application from Switzerland if the country's highest court doesn't overturn a ruling that would force the company to blur out every face that appears on the service. 

The Internet search giant said it would appeal the decision of a lower court, which in March backed Switzerland's privacy watchdog in finding that Street View infringes on privacy because the application isn't able to render 100% of individuals' faces and vehicle-license plates unidentifiable. 

"We simply cannot comply with the current terms of the court. If the ruling is not amended, we will not have any choice but to pull Google Street View services from Switzerland," Google legal counsel  Peter Fleischer said during a call with reporters. 

Google has said the Swiss Federal Data Protection and Information Commission's demands for faces to be manually blurred out are financially and logistically unfeasible. Google software that renders 99% of individuals' faces and license plates in Switzerland unidentifiable will continue to improve, but the company will never reach 100%, Mr. Fleischer said.

  Hanspeter Thuer, the privacy-protection commissioner who pursued and won the widely watched case against Google, welcomed the company's decision to have Switzerland's highest court hear the appeal, saying it would set a precedent for similar online privacy issues. "We are confident the federal-court judges will follow the convincing argumentation of the lower court and confirm their ruling," Mr. Thuer said in a written statement. 

A debate over data privacy continues in many countries, as regulators struggle to strike the right balance between privacy rights and Street View, which provides panoramic views of city streets and is used by millions. 

Google disclosed in May last year that the camera-equipped cars it uses to take pictures for Street View had for several years inadvertently collected personal data from unsecured wireless networks across the world. The revelation prompted scrutiny from authorities in a number of countries, including Switzerland, the Netherlands, the U.K. and France. 

In March, France fined Google €100,000 ($144,000) for fetching data from unsecured Wi-Fi networks for Street View and its localization program, Latitude. Google also faces fines of as much as €1 million from Dutch authorities if it fails to comply with a new set of data-protection demands linked to Street View.

In Germany, home to some of the world's strictest data-protection laws, Google allowed residents to opt out of its Street View mapping service before the product was introduced. Google in turn has made Street View available for Germany's 20 largest cities, but has now instead turned its focus in the country to Google Maps. 

Mr. Fleischer said the aim of the appeal in Switzerland wasn't only about financial gain. "This is not a question of financial interests alone here. We think the court is wrong in not taking into account Swiss users and businesses which also take advantage of Street View services for their own purposes." 

The tourism, hospitality and real-estate industries are major beneficiaries of Street View, as consumers increasingly turn to Internet services for research, he said. 

The Swiss Federal Court can take as long as a year to hand down a ruling. 

 Write to  Katharina Bart at katharina.bart@dowjones.com 