SYDNEY—Mining-investment company Talbot Group has sold a stake in iron-ore explorer  Sundance Resources Ltd. and plans to sell off all of its $871 million Australian dollars (US$865 million) in investments, Sundance Chairman  George Jones said Friday. 

Privately owned Talbot Group's investment total is from the company's 2009 annual report. The company owns stakes in numerous exploration and development companies including natural-gas developments in South America and a coking-coal mine in Mozambique. 

Mr. Jones said that the large parcel of shares in the central Africa-focused iron-ore explorer, valued at A$109.9 million, that changed hands shortly before the close of the Australian Securities Exchange had belonged to Talbot Group. 

"It wasn't a surprise," he told Dow Jones Newswires. "The trustees of the Talbot Group are looking to monetize all the assets. People from the estate have been consulting with me and they reached the stage where it was time to move." 

Asked whether Talbot Group had sold out of Sundance or was planning other share sales, Talbot Chief Executive  Shane Edwards said, "We make no comment on our businesses." 

Investors had long speculated about the future of Talbot Group's investments without the leadership of Ken Talbot, the founder of  Macarthur Coal Ltd. and a nonexecutive director on Sundance's board as well as a long-standing mining investor. He was killed last June in a plane crash while visiting Sundance's Mbalam iron-ore project on the border of the central African countries of Cameroon and Republic of Congo. 

Talbot's stake in Sundance, equivalent to around 16% of the company, was bought for 44 cents a share by Hanlong Mining, a subsidiary of privately owned Chinese infrastructure and mining group Hanlong Group.

  Peter Mansell, chairman of Hanlong Mining, said: "We have been interested in Sundance. Our ambition is to be a major iron-ore producer and this stake came up at very short notice." 

Among Talbot's other investments, it is the largest shareholder of  Karoon Gas Australia Ltd. Its 13.1% stake in the A$1.43 billion company has a current market value of A$193.9 million. Karoon is involved in an Australian natural-gas exploration joint venture with  ConocoPhillips and has prospects in Brazil and Peru. 

Talbot is also 58.9% majority owner of the Revuboe River Mine, a coal project in Mozambique which intends to produce 17 million tons a year of coking and thermal coal from 2013, with development costs estimated at US$500 million to US$600 million. Steelmakers Nippon Steel Corp. and Posco are minority partners, holding 33.3% and 7.8%, respectively. 

Revuboe's land holding sits directly between the three main tenements held by  Riversdale Mining Ltd., which is currently the subject of a A$4.0 billion takeover offer from  Rio Tinto Ltd. 

Talbot Group also holds 19.84% of Papua New Guinea-focused metals explorer  Goldminex Resources Ltd., 11.7% of Indonesia-focused Robust Resources Ltd., and 10.42% of unlisted offshore oil and gas explorer Advent Energy Ltd, according to company websites and regulatory filings. 

The company has smaller stakes in west African iron-ore explorer  Bellzone Mining PLC, uranium explorer  Berkeley Resources Ltd., and  Tiger Resources Ltd. , a copper explorer based in the southern Democratic Republic of Congo. 

Talbot Group last month sold its entire stake in uranium explorer  Marathon Resources Ltd. for about A$13 million. 

Sundance Thursday announced it had more than doubled the most-reliable "indicated" measure of hematite iron ore in its Mbalam project to 417.7 million metric tons from a previous figure of 169 million tons, largely as a result of resources on the Congolese side of the border being moved from the less-reliable "inferred" category. 

Sundance said it would produce a definitive feasibility study on the project by the end of the month. 

The company plans to build a 476-kilometer railway and port on the coast of Cameroon to export the ore from its inland site, needing US$3.36 billion in capital spending to reach first production in 2014.

It is currently putting the proposal to investors in China, advised by  Citic Securities Co. Ltd., but Mr. Mansell said there were no immediate plans for Hanlong to fund the development. 

"We would see ourselves as being a very supportive shareholder when it comes to funding infrastructure but that is several steps ahead of where we are right now," he said.

 Write to  David Fickling at david.fickling@dowjones.com and Ross Kelly at ross.kelly@dowjones.com 