BEIJING—U.S. solar panel maker  First Solar Inc.
FLSR


14.22
%




 said it is working with China Guangdong Nuclear Solar Energy Development Co. to revive a project to build what it expects to be the world's largest solar-energy plant in China's Inner Mongolia region.

The two companies will cooperate on the first phase of a two-gigawatt solar field, First Solar President  Bruce Sohn said on Wednesday. Work on the 30-megawatt demonstration project in Ordos will likely begin by the end of this year, and the whole project is expected to be completed by 2020.

First Solar, based in Tempe, Ariz., won Chinese government approval for the project more than a year ago. Construction on the first phase, initially expected to be solely conducted by First Solar, was scheduled to begin on June 1, 2010. It was delayed due to disagreements with the Chinese government on subsidies for the project and for so-called feed-in tariffs, which are special electricity rates that give renewable energy companies higher returns than what they would otherwise get from the free market.

China aims to generate 20% of its power from renewable sources by 2020.

"We were looking for a partner that had capability, engineering experience, and influence in the Chinese market," said Mr. Sohn, adding that the terms of the projects' financing, laying out each company's investment, is likely to be announced within the next 90 days.

The solar field will be the largest of its kind. First Solar declined to provide details of the cost of the project.

State-owned China Guangdong Nuclear Solar Energy Development, a subsidiary of China Guangdong Nuclear Power Co., will be the majority owner and operator of the giant plant. Construction is set to begin before this winter during warm-weather months, said  T.K. Kallenbach, executive vice president for marketing and project management at First Solar.

The domestic firm will bring bargaining power to set the feed-in tariff, which First Solar hopes will range from 14 cents to 17 cents a kilowatt hour, said Mr. Kallenbach. The higher the tariff rates, the more profit the solar companies will be able to make. China's solar tariff rate is set in a public auction in which state-owned utility companies are able to bid for the lowest rates, ensuring they achieve the government's mandatory renewable energy targets.

First Solar will provide thin-film solar modules for the facility that no company in China currently can supply.

  Edwin Mok, an analyst with Needham & Co., said that intellectual property theft may be a risk for the company's long-term operations in China, where up to 60% of the world's solar production is based. "Still, there's a significant amount of know-how that is involved with this particular technology, which means it would still take years for competitors to catch up," said Mr. Mok.

Mr. Sohn said First Solar's low cost structure means that it would be hard for any company in the world to undercut its products using the same technology. The company, which does not have a technology transfer agreement with China Guangdong Nuclear Solar Energy Development, also plans for future projects in China to collect from purchasers solar modules that have reached the end of their lifecycle.