Galleon Group founder  Raj Rajaratnam used a "corrupt network" of consultants, company insiders and associates to obtain inside information, generating tens of millions of dollars in illicit profits, a U.S. prosecutor said.

In an opening statement at a packed courtroom in New York federal court, Assistant U.S. Attorney Jonathan Streeter said the defendant used corrupt insiders to get "tomorrow's business news today." Gesturing toward Mr. Rajaratnam, who wore a gray suit and a blue tie, Mr. Streeter said the case centers on "greed and corruption." 

  John Dowd, a lawyer for Mr. Rajaratnam, said his client did nothing wrong and traded only on publicly available information and research by his hedge-fund firm. The government has it wrong and "failed to do its homework," Mr. Dowd told jurors.

The dueling arguments opened what is expected to be a tension-packed, ten-week trial touching on, among other things, allegations of sex, lies and audiotapes. Opening statements are extremely important in criminal trials, lawyers say. Often, jurors are won over by an argument immediately or not at all, they say.

The overflow audience was silent during the arguments. In the crowd, a team of regulators and prosecutors in the audience sat spellbound. Among the spectators waiting to get into the courtroom was a defendant in a related insider-trading case and his wife.

The opening statements followed a day of jury selection that culminated in the swearing in of a 12-member jury of New Yorkers, most of whom told the judge overseeing the case that they weren't familiar with Galleon or any of the executives who will take the stand or be referred to in the high-profile case. The sitting jurors were each more than 45 years old and came from parts of Manhattan, the Bronx and Westchester County, N.Y.

Mr. Rajaratnam showed little emotion throughout. He looked forward or took notes, occasionally glancing at Mr. Streeter.

Much is at stake for both sides. Manhattan U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara has made insider trading a focus, and this case could affect other insider-trading investigations by his office. 

For his part, Mr. Rajaratnam, 53 years old, could face 20 years in prison if he is convicted on all 14 counts of securities fraud and conspiracy.

Insider-trading cases can be difficult to argue, and key to prosecutors' success will be their ability to keep the jurors focused on the evidence. 

The Galleon trial is the first insider-trading case to have as its centerpiece roughly 90 hours of telephone conversations. They involve Mr. Rajaratnam and were intercepted through a government wiretap. A lineup of cooperating witnesses will be called to the stand to corroborate the recordings, defense lawyers say. 

The challenge for prosecutors is to avoid overwhelming the jurors with evidence and to make their case simple and clear. 

Mr. Streeter's opening statement was akin to a primer on insider trading and underlined the challenge faced by the government.

Mr. Streeter kept his allegations basic. "People at Galleon did their homework, but they cheated, too. And that cheating is called inside information." 

Each time Mr. Streeter mentioned stocks Mr. Rajaratnam is accused of illegally trading in, he used the same refrain: "He didn't just buy a little. He bought a lot."

Mr. Streeter also repeatedly alleged that Mr. Rajaratnam frenetically bought and sold stocks on inside information and sought to "cover his tracks." He alleged Mr. Rajaratnam would conjure up emails to make it appear as if his trading was based on research.

Mr. Dowd said his client ran a legitimate business that used a "mosaic" of research to make trading decisions about companies and "built his success on shoe-leather research."

He said: "In the real world, there's nothing wrong with talking about stocks or researching stocks."

Mr. Dowd said his client's company spent about $300 million a year on research and traded millions of stock shares every year. The alleged improper trades accounted for a fraction of the trades Galleon made annually, Mr. Dowd said. 

"It did not make sense to pay so much money for stock research to cover up so few trades," Mr. Dowd said.

Prosecutors will hone their case and focus on a select group of cooperating witnesses, who they say were part of the scheme and recorded telephone calls of Mr. Rajaratnam in which he discussed improper trades.

Prosecutors plan to play two phone calls from 2008 during which Mr. Rajaratnam allegedly told Galleon employees that he had received tips regarding  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.,
GS


0.09
%




 Mr. Streeter said, in one case telling employees he received a tip from a Goldman director.

The alleged inside information included a $5 billion investment by  Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway Inc. in Goldman at the height of the financial crisis, Mr. Streeter said.

Within minutes of hearing the Berkshire tip, Mr. Rajaratnam placed an order for $43 million worth of Goldman shares, Mr. Streeter said. Wall Street firms were able to fill an order of only $27 million in the minutes before the New York Stock Exchange closed, Mr. Streeter said. After the close, the Berkshire investment was announced, and Mr. Rajaratnam made more than $1 million on the trade, Mr. Streeter said.

At times, Mr. Dowd lapsed into financial-industry jargon. In discussing Mr. Rajaratnam's trading in Goldman shares, he reference the financial crisis and the government's Troubled Asset Relief Program.

"You all remember TARP?" Mr. Dowd asked the jury. 

 Write to  Chad Bray at chad.bray@dowjones.com and Susan Pulliam at susan.pulliam@wsj.com 