WASHINGTON—The House passed a bill Tuesday to fund the government for two more weeks, and Senate leaders say they will follow suit as early as Wednesday, setting up difficult negotiations as lawmakers try to agree by March 18 on a spending plan for the rest of the fiscal year.

Government operations currently are funded by legislation that expires at midnight Friday. The House voted 335-91, with 104 Democrats joining almost all Republicans, to extend funding for two more weeks, while also cutting $4 billion in federal spending from last year's levels.

Senate Democrats said they would go along with the bill, in part because Republicans included only cuts that Democrats were already on record as supporting. Democrats wanted a longer stopgap measure, to give lawmakers more time to reach a deal on a funding plan for the rest of the year. But they said they recognized that Republicans would not go along with that.

The White House suggested a four-week extension Tuesday afternoon, shortly before Senate Democrats took that idea off the table. "We do believe that if $4 billion in cuts over two weeks is acceptable, that $8 billion over four or five weeks is something that we could agree on," said White House spokesman Jay Carney.

A short time later, Democratic leaders said they would pass a two-week bill Wednesday or Thursday, because Republicans wouldn't agree to a four-week deal.

With the House and Senate apparently in accord on the two-week measure, congressional leaders are focusing more intently on a plan to fund the government for the rest of the fiscal year, which ends Sept. 30. President Barack Obama and House Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio) talked by phone Tuesday, and Reps. Steny Hoyer (D., Md.) and Eric Cantor (R., Va.), both party leaders, spoke over the weekend.

Some Democrats are grumbling privately that Mr. Obama should have been involved earlier in the budget talks. They said they expected him to raise his profile now and speak out more forcefully against a House GOP plan for more spending cuts.

"I think they should be involved more, and I think they will be," said Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D., Nev.). "He has the bully pulpit and the White House."

Mr. Boehner suggested that if the White House had been involved earlier, Republicans might have been open to the four-week extension. "If there had been a conversation about this 10 days ago or two days ago, you know, we might have had something to talk about," Mr. Boehner said. "But the fact is…we were forced to move on our own."

Administration officials said they have been involved. "The White House is obviously engaged at various levels, including at the presidential level," Mr. Carney said.

The gap between the two sides on a longer-term funding bill remains wide, and both parties are preparing for a fight that will be as much for public opinion as for legislative advantage. House Republicans have passed a bill cutting $61 billion this fiscal year. It contains numerous provisions anathema to Democrats, such as a 30% cut in funding for the Environmental Protection Agency. House Republicans see the $4 billion in cuts contained in the two-week spending measure as a down payment toward larger cuts to come in the full-year funding bill.

Rep. Peter Roskam (R., Ill.) said that now that Democrats are concurring in a $4 billion cut over two weeks, they should go along with the GOP plan, which would return the government to 2008 spending levels.

"If you accept the premise that you can cut $4 billion in two weeks, you keep walking down that line of thinking and you can get to the '08 levels in seven months," Mr. Roskam said. "You can do it. You've just got to do it a billion at a time."

Separately, Senate Republicans looked ahead to another coming battle, over the federal debt ceiling. Senate Republicans failed in a bid to require the federal government to prioritize interest and Social Security payments in the event that the country reaches its borrowing limit and can't meet all its obligations.

Republicans said their measure would minimize the disruption should Congress fail to raise the debt ceiling, by ensuring that the U.S. makes good on its interest payments on its debt. The Treasury argues that a failure by the U.S. to make any payments would cause market chaos. The nation's debt outstanding puts the U.S. close to the statutory limit of $14.3 trillion, a mark that the Treasury now says will be reached as soon as April 15.

—Damian Paletta contributed to this article.

 Write to  Naftali Bendavid at naftali.bendavid@wsj.com 