One of the drawbacks of young-adult fiction these days is that compelling stories, well told, so often include both expletives and depictions of dark unpleasantness that many parents would rather their teenagers not encounter. It may seem unfair even to raise such a criticism in the context of the suspenseful "Blink & Caution" (Candlewick, 342 pages, $16.99), by Canadian Tim Wynne-Jones, because, in the scheme of things, the novel contains nothing more scandalous than the general run of young-adult literature. Yet perhaps because the book is so skillfully wrought, one wishes that it could have been written without not just foul language but also foully specific images, such as that of a 16-year-old girl sleeping with a sadistic drug dealer. The girl, Caution, is a runaway whose guilt over a family tragedy has driven her to seek oblivion in the worst possible company (see: drug dealer, sadistic). When she double-crosses him, though, she has to flee again—and that's when she crosses paths with Blink, a Toronto street kid with a facial tic, a tender heart and a violent stepfather whose side of the narrative is, interestingly, written in the urgent second person. Blink has accidentally witnessed the faked kidnapping of a mining- company executive and, on impulse, pocketed the man's BlackBerry. This fateful act propels him into Caution's company and both of them into a dangerous journey to an isolated cabin where they will have to use all their street smarts to survive. Over the course of the novel these two damaged children move from darkness toward light and healing, and by the end we are awfully glad of it.

Middle-grade readers are generally safe from the harsher narratives visited on their older brothers and sisters. Rachel Wildavsky's "The Secret of Rover" (Amulet, 368 pages, $16.95) offers a considerably gentler degree of tension for children ages 10-14. Here, too, a boy and girl are on the run and trying to reach a remote cabin where their questions will be answered, but that's where the similarities end. Katie and David are quarrelsome Washington, D.C., siblings whose parents, having gone abroad to adopt a baby, have left them with a new nanny. The nanny turns out to be a deeply sinister foreigner in league with wicked kidnappers who take the children's parents and new sister hostage. It is up to the children to escape the nanny and find their way to the Vermont hermitage of their reclusive Uncle Alex, who, with their parents, developed the top-secret "Rover" project for the American government. Will they make it? Will their parents and sister be OK? Will Uncle Alex and Rover help save the day? Somehow, even as the action heads toward its big conclusion, it all happens without expletives.

Ratcheting down the suspense and sharply raising the wit quotient, we arrive at Doreen Cronin's "The Trouble With Chickens" (HarperCollins, 128 pages, $14.99). The hard-bitten, wisecracking, Chandler-esque star of this large-print detective caper is a retired search-and-rescue dog named J.J. Tully. After seven years of pulling people from cars, crevices and caves, he is supposed to be living a life of ease. But in accordance with noir imperatives, a pushy dame shows up and demands his help. "She was a short, tired-looking bird with a funny red comb on her head. It looked about as useful to her as a spoon is to a snake." Two of the hen's chicks are missing, and the reluctant J.J. agrees to look for them. When the hen discovers an unusually literate ransom note, J.J. finds himself drawn into a barnyard mystery that includes a nonexistent cheeseburger, empty plastic bottles and an arch-villain canine called Vince the Funnel, on account of the cone he has to wear around his head. With comic drawings by Kevin Cornell, this is ideal light entertainment for more reluctant readers ages 7-12. Ms. Cronin's playful imitation of Raymond Chandler's style is likely to amuse even readers to whom "the big sleep" means just a long night's rest.