A dozen years ago Jill Paton Walsh was deputized by the estate of Dorothy Sayers to complete an unfinished manuscript by the mystery master involving the detective Lord Peter Wimsey and Harriet Vane, his wife and fellow sleuth. Ms. Walsh followed up "Thrones, Dominations" a few years later with "A Presumption of Death," which she spun from a series of Wimsey letters that Sayers published during World War II.

Several critics suggested that Ms. Walsh showed such a deft touch with Wimsey-inspired storytelling that she should try writing one of his tales from scratch. Now, again with the estate's blessing, Ms. Walsh has done just that. The result, "The Attenbury Emeralds" (Minotaur, 338 pages, $25.99), is an absorbing period tale of manners and mystery likely to please demanding Sayers-lovers and even add a bit of polish to the sometimes scruffy subgenre of posthumous sequels.

The book is set in England in 1951, when members of every class are enduring postwar rationing, and the imperial glory days are long gone. Lord Peter observes: "I think I can feel the social weather changing as we speak." But the complex puzzle at hand has its origins in the early 1920s, before a shell-shocked World War I veteran named Peter Wimsey had even found his calling as a detective. His task here is to comprehend the deaths that attend the recurring disappearance of a fabulous emerald, "green as a dream and deep as death."

Through deft use of dialogue, Ms. Walsh relates the early parts of her story without needing to employ flashback chapters. Like Sayers, she lays out a classic crossword-like challenge that also provides some of the satisfactions of mainstream fiction.

Just as the British in Sayers's heyday dominated the mystery-writing business, it sometimes seems that we're now living in the age of Scandinavian detective fiction. The latest addition to the category is "Three Seconds" (Silver Oak, 489 pages, $24.95) by the Swedish collaborators Anders Roslund and Borge Hellstrom.

In this sprawling and often gripping thriller—an international best-seller translated by Kari Dickson—two factions of Swedish law enforcement come into unwitting conflict. One operation, led by a young, dynamic police detective, has worked for nine years to infiltrate the upper ranks of a major drug-smuggling gang. Another cop squad, headed by a more tradition-bound detective, persists in a murder investigation that, if success ful, will jeopardize the long-running undercover project. Yet dropping the murder investigation would mean a dereliction of duty. 

The gritty details of drug dealing, of prison life and of the relations between cops and informants are all rendered with convincing authority in "Three Seconds." (Mr. Hellstrom's bio graphical credit describes him as an "ex-criminal.") And in Ewert Grens, the veteran policeman whose dogged devotion to his work conflicts with the desires of situational ethicists in the department, the authors have created an eccentric, alienated, socially inept hero worthy of comparison with Swedish mystery master Henning Mankell's Inspector Kurt Wallander. 

John Lescroart's "Damage" (Dutton, 399 pages, $26.95) turns on the release from a Northern California jail of a convicted murderer granted a new trial through appeal. Right away, the chief witness against him is killed. Police and prosecutor urge the accused's bail be revoked, but the mayor and the D.A. are wary: The alleged murderer's parents are newspaper owners able and eager to vilify their son's "persecutors" in print. Meanwhile, more deadly mayhem ensues. 

"Damage" is an ensemble piece of sorts, with shifting points of view exploring ethical and political matters that also help ratchet up the suspense. Even after everything mysterious seems to have been resolved, Mr. Lescroart still has some surprises for the reader.