Duncan Fletcher just got handed one of the toughest jobs in sports. On Wednesday, the former Zimbabwe captain and England coach was given a two-year contract as coach of India's national cricket team. He takes charge of a team in rude health—World Cup winners and top-ranked in test matches. But the fervent expectations of a billion people, plus the unique challenges facing modern cricket coaches, mean it could be as much poisoned chalice as dream appointment.

That has nothing to do with Fletcher's credentials, which are for the most part impeccable. When he took over as England coach in 1999, they sat at the very bottom of the test rankings. Within six years they rose to second with a string of epoch-defining results: rare test series wins in Pakistan, Sri Lanka, South Africa and the West Indies, the latter the team's first in 36 years, and its first Ashes victory over Australia for 18 years. He also scored some notable successes as a modestly talented but fiercely determined and intelligent player, most notably when he captained Zimbabwe to victory over Australia at the 1983 World Cup, scoring 69 undefeated runs and taking four wickets for 42. Those being the days before Zimbabwe had a professional team, he also had a job in systems management, part of which involved designing Zimbabwe's car registration system.

That's about right for Fletcher, a man big on process, theory and efficiency. Players who have worked with him almost universally praise his methods, and his ability to establish a rapport with his charges—the India job will involve dealing with some of the biggest names and strongest personalities in cricket. He's also known for his compendious technical knowledge and his tactical sophistication and willingness to question orthodoxies, qualities he's demonstrated as an insightful newspaper columnist.

That role apparently hasn't dimmed his famous distrust of the media, however. On hearing of the appointment, former England captain Michael Vaughan summed it up in a tweet: "Duncan will work well with all the talent. His biggest challenge will come from the media … he has never really understood how it works."

Cricket gets near-saturation coverage in the Indian media, and the fortunes of the national team are subjected to indescribable levels of scrutiny. Fletcher will cop flak for any and every failure—and in cricket, there are often failures. Neither is he taking over at the easiest of times. For one thing, the only way is down, and soon he'll face the challenge of several retirements of all-time batting greats. Australia were cricket's unquestioned champions for more than a decade, but even they were ripped apart by a slew of legends retiring in quick succession. After just a short period at the top, India will soon lose to retirement Sachin Tendulkar, Rahul Dravid, and VVS Laxman, plus potentially also injury-ridden Zaheer Khan.

It's a tough one—and just one of the ways in which the fate of a team is beyond the control of the coach, despite so much of the responsibility for it being placed on his shoulders. It represents quite a change; the role of international cricket coach only goes back a couple of decades, before which there were just selectors to pick the team and, when on tour, a manager to take care of the logistics. Now teams have massive professional support staffs, numerous technological aids—and consequently raised expectations of what a coach can achieve. 

Of course, coaches can only do so much and then it's up to the players, but that's especially true in cricket because of the amount of power wielded by the captain. Having such a powerful figure within the playing ranks sets up an alternative power base within squads in a sport that tends to be factional and filled with independent thinkers at the best of times. One of Fletcher's predecessors in the India role, former Australian captain Greg Chappell, resigned in 2007 following a series of personality clashes with players, many of them still in the side today. This time, senior players including captain Mahendra Singh Dhoni were consulted.

Some players are downright contemptuous of their coaches. Shane Warne once famously said, in a swipe at his coach John Buchanan, that the role of the coach should be to transport the players to the ground. 

With increasing competition for top talent from the Indian Premier League and other domestic outfits—and the expectation heaped on them in top jobs—it's likely that coaches will increasingly swap allegiance with soccer-like frequency. But the coach's influence is limited: he often doesn't even select the team, and has zero ability to control the little tactical nuances that control the ebb and flow of the game once the players get out on the field. Already an unrealistic amount of responsibility for the success or failure of a team is placed on the coach's shoulders—and it's only set to grow. 