PORT-AU-PRINCE—Four former Haitian political prisoners filed suit Wednesday for violation of their human rights against former dictator Jean-Claude "Baby Doc" Duvalier, whose surprise return to Haiti stunned this devastated country and is now stoking old political passions.

The suits could be the beginning of several similar legal actions and indicate that Mr. Duvalier's legal problems are likely to quickly multiply. On Tuesday, Haiti's chief magistrate formally re-opened a 2008 case charging the former dictator, who was overthrown and went into exile in France in 1986, with crimes including embezzlement of funds, money laundering and murder. 

Under Haiti's legal system, the investigating magistrate now has 90 days to either indict Mr. Duvalier, 59, or dismiss the charges.

"It's mind-boggling that a man like Duvalier thinks he can come back after 25 years and nothing will be held against him," said Michel Montas, a prominent former journalist and owner of a radio station here, one of the four Haitians to file a suit against Mr. Duvalier. "Each of us filed a separate claim for arbitrary arrest, detention, torture and forced exile." 

Ms. Montas said her case was based on the shutdown of her radio station on November 1980 amid a general crackdown on the Haitian opposition. 

"The country stayed silent as we were expelled for six years," she said. "I hope that what we did this morning will be the beginning of a succession of people who will file judicial complaints." 

Mr. Duvalier's lawyer, Gervais Charles, dismissed the government's legal action. "They have no case," he said. "They were incapable of producing any evidence." Mr. Charles said Mr. Duvalier, who arrived in Haiti Sunday using an expired Haitian diplomatic passport, had no intention of leaving the country. "He is staying in Haiti," he said. 

Mr. Charles dismissed the claims made by the former political prisoners, saying they were invalid because of Haiti's statute of limitations for civil or criminal claims. 

Mr. Duvalier made a brief appearance Wednesday, waving to a small crowd of supporters from a third-floor balcony of his hotel room. Among Mr. Duvalier's supporters at the hotel are a number of figures from Haiti's past, some of whom were allegedly involved with death squads. 

Analysts and Haitians alike continue to be baffled by Mr. Duvalier's motives for returning. 

"I'm mystified about this," said Michael Shifter, president of the Inter-American Dialogue, a Washington-based think tank. Mr. Shifter feared that the controversy surrounding Mr. Duvalier's arrival would distract the country from its most important priorities. 

Haiti has been struggling to rebuild from a devastating earthquake that killed 230,000 people a year ago, a raging cholera epidemic and the political uncertainty that resulted from botched presidential elections in November. "It's important to bring Duvalier to trial, but the justice system is not in great shape, and it's just not the highest priority at the moment," Mr. Shifter said.

Mr. Duvalier took power in Haiti in 1971 at the age of 19, succeeding to the presidency on the death of his father, Francois "Papa Doc" Duvalier, who had been in power as "President for Life" since 1957. Mr. Duvalier had been living quietly in France since 1986 when he was deposed by mass demonstrations and U.S. pressure.