TUNIS—Tunisia's interim government is struggling to establish control over an agitated nation amid sustained public protests and strikes, adding to uncertainty about what so far has been a peaceful transition since the surprise ouster of President Zine al-Abedine Ben Ali. 

In a stark rebuke to the government's legitimacy, an estimated 90% of Tunisia's schoolteachers obeyed orders by their powerful union to strike on Monday, according to the state news agency, defying a government order to reopen schools as part of an attempt to normalize daily life following the turmoil that ended Mr. Ben Ali's 23-year rule. 

The teachers are expected to be joined in the strike by university lecturers on Tuesday, when colleges and universities had been due to reopen. Mr. Ben Ali ordered the closure of all state schools two weeks ago.

Groups of protesters from small towns in the south and central parts of the country slept in front of the prime minister's residence Monday for the second night in a row, ignoring emergency laws in place for the last two weeks that instituted a nighttime curfew through the capital. The demonstrators are demanding the resignations of Prime Minister Mohammed Ghannouchi and the interior and defense ministers, saying they are compromised by close relationships with the former president.

Also Monday, the top U.S. envoy for the Middle East, Jeffrey Feltman, arrived in Tunis to meet with members of the interim government. Assistant Secretary of State Feltman was discussing plans for "democratic reforms and elections," the State Department said. 

Energetic street demonstrations have continued since Mr. Ben Ali's departure, but most have been peaceful. On Monday morning, however, protesters at the tent city grew agitated and threw stones at police cars and at the gates outside the prime minister's residence.

In an indication of the growing tension between security forces and protesters, anti-riot troops stationed around the building shot tear gas into the crowd, sparking clashes that settled only when army chief Gen. Rachid Ammar arrived to calm them.

Gen. Ammar is considered one of the country's most popular figures because of the army's refusal to open fire against protesters during month-long demonstrations that started in December. The government says 78 people died in police clashes between Dec. 17 and Jan. 14, when Mr. Ben Ali fled the country for Saudi Arabia. 

Since taking power last week, the coalition government—which includes leaders from the last government, opposition figures and independent technocrats—has struggled to establish its legitimacy. Sustained protests have continued by trade unions, opposition parties and unaffiliated pedestrians who say they worry that the bulk of leaders affiliated with the interim government aren't reform-minded enough to institute real democratic change. 

Tunisia has had only two presidents since its independence from France in 1956. Mr. Ben Ali is accused of running an autocratic police state with a fearsome security apparatus, and members of his family are accused of abusing their power and illegally enriching themselves during his long tenure. Mr. Ben Ali quashed dissent and prohibited any meaningful opposition party to compete with his ruling party.

It is unclear who among the 30 ministers in the interim government has the stature or experience to appeal to the public demands for fresh faces in the government. That has led to speculation that Gen. Ammar could step into power, at least temporarily, until fresh elections could be called.

Gen. Ammar steered clear of political rhetoric in front of the crowd gathering at the prime minister's office. Instead, he told the demonstrators that the army was the "guarantor of the revolution." 

The general's speech is believed to be his first public appearance since Mr. Ben Ali fled the country on Jan. 14. The protesters quieted down noticeably after his remarks. 