A Kansas college is facing a legal challenge over its dismissal of a nursing student who posted online a photograph of a human placenta studied in class. 

The student, 22-year-old Doyle Byrnes, was dismissed in November during her final year at Johnson County Community College in Overland Park, Kan., for putting on her Facebook page a photograph of herself with the placenta. 

In a lawsuit filed Dec. 23 in U.S. district court in Kansas City, Kan., Ms. Byrnes is seeking an injunction to reverse her ouster, on grounds that the photographs violated no school policy and were posted with the alleged approval of the class instructor.

In a statement issued Monday, an attorney for the college denied that the instructor approved or knew about any intention to post such photographs online. 

The college also issued a statement defending its decision: "We will not tolerate such insensitivity on the part of our nursing students. We also must protect the reputations of our business partners in health care." 

The photographs, according to the lawsuit, were taken during a Nov. 10 laboratory session devoted to studying the human placenta, the organ that feeds nutrients to unborn babies before being discharged at birth. The placenta studied in class that day came from an anonymous donor, and nothing about the photographs compromised that anonymity, the suit said.

The suit alleges that the class instructor, when asked if students could photograph themselves with the placenta, merely said, "Oh, you girls." When four students proceeded to take such photographs, the teacher issued no protest or warnings, the suit said.

Later that day, about three hours after Ms. Byrnes posted on her Facebook page a photograph of herself with the placenta, the teacher called her and asked her to remove the photograph, which she promptly did, according to the lawsuit.

The following day, Ms. Byrnes and the three other students were dismissed, according to the lawsuit. Ms. Byrnes's attorney, Cliff Cohen, said he has talked with the other three students but represents only Ms. Byrnes.

The lawsuit includes as an exhibit a letter that Ms. Byrnes wrote to the college apologizing for what she called a "lapse in judgment" but asking that she not be dismissed. 

The school said the four students are allowed to reapply to continue their nursing studies in August 2011.

 Write to  Kevin Helliker at kevin.helliker@wsj.com 