European stocks ended the first trading day of March in the red, as concerns regarding the unrest in the Middle East and North Africa escalated.

Oil prices rose as investors continued to worry about how supplies of crude could be affected as violence continued in Libya and protests persisted in the Middle East. 

"The combination of actual turmoil in some countries and newly introduced political uncertainties in others has already seen a surge in crude oil prices," said Rabobank International. "It remains to be seen whether this is purely transitory. The political landscape in many of these countries remains in a state of flux that could prove a long-lived affair, leaving us with the real possibility of having to deal with elevated oil prices over a protracted period of time." 

The bank argued that higher oil prices will not only weigh on economic growth, but also raise the danger of inflation, creating challenges for central banks. 

After two consecutive sessions of gains, the Stoxx Europe 600 index ended down 0.6% at 284.63. The U.K.'s FTSE 100 fell 1.0% to 5935.76, Germany's DAX slid 0.7% to 7223.30 and France's CAC-40 closed 1.1% lower at 4067.15. 

Stocks in Saudi Arabia tumbled, with the Tadawul All Share index closing down 6.8% at 5538.72, bringing its year-to-date losses to more than 16%. By the close of European equity markets the Dow Jones Industrial Average was down 0.5%.

In Europe, travel and oil stocks were lower, due to the continued political instability in Libya and in neighboring countries. The Stoxx Europe 600 travel index finished down 1.4%, while the index of oil stocks was down 1.0%. Banks declined, too. Disappointing earnings from major lenders have reduced interest in the sector; the Stoxx Europe 600 banks index fell 1.9%. 

Even strong manufacturing data from the U.S. failed to boost stocks significantly. The Institute for Supply Management's manufacturing index jumped to 61.4 in February from 60.8 in January, exceeding expectations. 

Comments from U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke, who was reporting on monetary policy to the Senate, failed to make a mark on the markets. He said inflation expectations remain low, but that the central bank was ready to respond to the surge in global commodity prices if necessary. 

Meanwhile, the euro climbed, trading as high as $1.3855, from $1.3799 late in New York on Monday, after euro-zone inflation rose to a 28-month high, raising expectations that the European Central Bank would no longer be able to keep interest rates at record lows. "The further rise in euro-zone CPI inflation in February will strengthen the hands of the hawks on the ECB's governing council in arguing the case for a less accommodative monetary policy," said Martin van Vliet, economist at ING Bank. On Thursday, the European Central Bank will make its monthly interest rate-announcement.

Unemployment data from Germany, the euro-zone's largest economy, also helped the common currency. The jobless rate in Germany fell to 7.3%, more than expected and to its lowest rate since records began in 1999. 

By late afternoon, the euro had slipped back to $1.3815.

As European markets closed, light, sweet, crude for April delivery was up $1.33 or 1.4%, at $98.30 on the New York Mercantile Exchange. Gold for April delivery on the Comex division of Nymex rose $13.40 per ounce, or 1.0%, to $1423.30. Gold is often seen as a hedge against global political and economic instability. 

 Write to  Andrea Tryphonides at andrea.tryphonides@dowjones.com 