Historians in recent decades have been notably attentive to the lives of ordinary Germans during the Third Reich, in an attempt to establish the extent of public knowledge of—and complicity in—the Nazi regime's barbarity. For any such attempt, a contemporaneous personal record, compiled with no thought to posterity by an individual with no public responsibilities, will be an invaluable resource. One such record was set down by a man named Franz Göll; his diaries are now the basis of Peter Fritzsche's instructive and fitfully absorbing "The Turbulent World of Franz Göll." 

Born in 1899 in Berlin, Göll grew up on the edge of a small working-class quarter, and there he was to remain, living in a small apartment, until his death in 1984. He experienced a few tentative relationships with women in his younger days, but he soon settled for a solitary life. As for work, he occupied a succession of low-grade positions (clerk, night watchman), rising to lower managerial roles in a coal-distribution operation and in the Springer publishing house. In his spare time he went to the movies, collected postcards, and clipped newspaper and magazine articles. He loved to read—and to write.

For much of his life, in fact, Göll was an obsessive writer, a "graphomaniac," to use Mr. Fritzsche's term. From youth into old age Göll kept a diary, recording his thoughts in a series of handwritten notebooks that eventually ran to 23 volumes. Göll drafted memoirs, compiled housekeeping books, composed poems. He kept notes on his reading, jotting down quotations from novels and books of verse and well as from books on science and philosophy. Upon his death he bequeathed his papers to the Berlin State Archives, where they were found first by a young French researcher, who used them as the basis of an unpublished dissertation, and then read by Mr. Fritzsche, a University of Illinois history professor.

To judge by the samplings in "The Turbulent World of Franz Göll," the diaries document a haphazard and perhaps typical individual engagement with German history, not least under the Third Reich. In 1932 and 1933, Göll welcomed the Nazis' talk of order and national renewal. As early as 1935, however, he was disillusioned with the bleak realities of life under Hitler and withdrew into a state of private disapproval. He recorded anti-Nazi jokes in his diary, and, though far from free of anti-Semitism himself, recoiled from the regime's brutality toward Jews. Wading through broken glass after an air raid in 1943 prompted him to recall Kristallnacht, "that notorious 8 November 1938, when the hate of 100 per cent Nazis ran wild in the demolition of Jewish businesses."

 By Peter Fritzsche  Harvard, 260 pages, $26.95

During the war Göll served as an air-raid warden and worked at the Springer publishing house; with younger co-workers in the military, he prospered. (As a teen, Göll had been found unfit for World War I service, and he was presumably no more fit at age 40, when World War II began.) He paid close attention to what was going on in Germany and to the course of the war. In 1941, in a diary entry that refutes so many Germans' later claims to wartime ignorance, he wrote: "It is an open secret that they are proceeding against the Jews in the most rigorous way with sterilization, removal to the eastern territories." 

After the war, in capitalist West Berlin, Göll came to wonder whether communist East Germany might not have done a better job of preserving a distinctive German culture than the socially liberal, consumerist Federal Republic whose freedoms he enjoyed.

"In many ways," Mr. Fritzsche observes, "Franz Göll was an ordinary man." But in another way he was more than that. For Mr. Fritzsche, Göll is notable chiefly as an autodidact. A less sympathetic reader might wonder if Göll's windy worldview quite merits the serious academic discussion it receives. 

Göll is undoubtedly capable of acute observation. One day in the winter of 1922, amid the privations of Weimar, he sets down in his diary a street scene: "Man and wife push a heavily loaded handcart to market. The wheels sink deep into the freshly fallen snow, and the couple has to work hard. For a moment, the wife relaxed her hold; the load came to a standstill and became stuck. The man let himself fall into a fit of rage; quiet and acquiescent, the woman endured everything."

It is an affecting vignette. Göll, alas, is unable to leave it there: "Does not this case reflect in miniature the fate of humankind, which, stumbling from one mistake to another, groping in the darkness, searches for a way into the clearing, searches for clarity, comprehension, deliverance?" 

Even readers unable to share Mr. Fritzsche's enthusiasm for portentous banalities will be fascinated by the strange private world of an eccentric obsessive. As early as 1916, Göll had amassed a collection of 5,730 pictures cut from newspapers and magazines. He knew because he counted. By 1945 he had 8,283 postcards in 231 albums. His accumulating and cataloging, his intellectual aspirations, his quest, as reader and writer, for knowledge of himself and the world—all stand in poignant contrast both to his workaday existence and the terrible events through which he lived. 

As welcome as "The Turbulent World of Franz Göll" is, it would be instructive, at some point, to be able to read a comprehensive selection from the diaries themselves, to hear more of Göll's own voice. In 1954 he paused to take stock. He didn't much like what he saw: "I used to take myself very seriously: my diaries, my collections, my readings, my poems, and, not last, my self. Today I have to admit it: it would have been important to have acquired a trade, to have become a man, and to have founded a family. . . . Nothing I did ever bore any fruit; it was all an idle wasting of time." He was wrong about that.

 Mr. Brunskill is a senior editor at the London Times. 