 Chinese bank lending breached official targets in 2010, as widely expected, highlighting the challenge for the government in fighting inflation. Meanwhile, China continued to acquire foreign-exchange reserves at a rapid rate in the fourth quarter, bringing their total value to $2.85 trillion.  

 Goldman Sachs, seeking to beat back criticism that it abused its trading savvy to put its own interests ahead of clients, released details on how and where the Wall Street giant makes its money.  

 Japan threw its support behind Europe's bailout efforts, saying it will take a major stake in a bond offering for Ireland.  

 The Fed's Charles Plosser suggested he wasn't prepared to mount strong opposition to the U.S. central bank's bond-buying program, even though he wasn't supportive of the policy. 

 Hong Kong's stock exchange is working on a way to help investors buy stocks listed in yuan even if they don't own any of the Chinese currency.  

 A Renault executive suspected of spying on the French auto maker said that he hadn't engaged in espionage and that he was the victim of a scandal.  

 Verizon Wireless will start selling Apple's iPhone 4 early next month, ending AT&T's exclusive hold over the blockbuster smartphone in the U.S.  

 JAL unveiled a joint business with American Airlines, the first alliance under the "open skies" pact to liberalize flight services between the U.S. and Japan.  

 Samsung and LG Electronics said their home appliance divisions are expected to report brisk sales over the next few years. 

 Norway's Orkla agreed to sell its Elkem unit to China National Bluestar, a chemicals and new-materials company, for $2 billion.  

 Tata Steel plans to raise about $1 billion through a share sale and will use the money to help lower its net debt.  

 South Korea announced new measures aimed at reducing stock-market volatility triggered by trading in stock derivatives.  

 U.S. stocks rose as the ECB's bond-buying helped ease worries over euro-zone debt. Chinese property plays rose as investors decided valuations looked low.  

 Advanced Micro Devices forced out its CEO, just as the chip maker appeared to be gaining momentum in its turnaround.  

 The euro rose against the dollar, as support from Japanese and European financial authorities momentarily overrode angst about the euro-zone debt crisis.  

 Worries over flooding in Australia worsened as the death toll mounted and waters threatened Brisbane. The Australian dollar fell over concerns about the rising costs to the nation's economy.  

 South Korean farmers and officials are struggling to contain an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease that has forced them to kill about 12% of the nation's swine.  

 Japan's defense minister ended a visit to South Korea with a trip to the fortified inter-Korean border, following a promise to work more closely with Seoul.  

U.S. Defense Secretary Gates said North Korea must announce a moratorium on nuclear and missile tests before the U.S. will consider resuming talks. 

The continued use of torture, illegal detention and censorship means China has failed to deliver on its first rights action plan, Human Rights Watch said.