MINAMISANRIKU, Japan—In this tsunami-ravaged fishing village, the "headquarters" of the Shizugawa Elementary School evacuation center is a table placed at the foot of the gymnasium's stage. It can be identified by a sign made of cardboard with a thick red marker.

Next to lists detailing the comings-and-goings of its 500 residents is a box containing reading glasses for borrowing ("please return after using") and nail clippers for communal use ("please wipe with alcohol when finished"). Taped to the edge of the table is a handwritten sign identifying the council's chairman and three vice chairmen.

In the best of times, Japan is a rule-obsessed nation with a penchant for creating bureaucracy, designating titles and committees for even the most mundane of tasks. 

Now, as hundreds of thousands of Japanese find shelter in evacuation centers, they are relying on this hyper-attention to detail to restore a sense of normalcy destroyed by the March 11 earthquake and tsunami.

With government officials estimating it could take months to move evacuees to temporary housing, the orderly running of the evacuation centers could play a big role in reducing the long-term psychological and physical toll on survivors, experts say.

The Japanese government monitors radiation levels around the country. Track these measurements over time.

At the Shizugawa Elementary School, where evacuees are living in the gymnasium and classrooms, order is the word of the day. The approximate 500 residents are divided into units of about 15 people each. 

Each group has elected a captain to represent them at a daily meeting where the discussion veers from the best way to flush a toilet when there is no running water, to whether to allow pets into the communal space (the ruling: no).

This system was put in place when the distribution of rice balls on the second day following the tsunami created a near-riot as hungry, frustrated evacuees stormed the stage. Soon, the group elected the chairman and three vice chairmen to oversee various parts of the evacuation center's operations.

The group captains arrange themselves in a dozen rows of five people, kneeling on the wooden stage, as the council's leaders go over the day's points. To the right of the stage, there is a broken clock with the hour and minute hands frozen at 2:47, one minute after the magnitude-9 earthquake struck and triggered a 50-foot tsunami that wiped out most of Minamisanriku. About half of the town's 17,000 residents are still missing.

Councils like this one are taking on greater roles and autonomy at many evacuation centers because local governments are too overwhelmed with the devastation to manage the centers closely. 

Minamisanriku, for instance, remains without electricity and its water system needs to be rebuilt from scratch. It still has more than 9,000 evacuees holed up in 43 evacuation centers. Mayor Jin Sato said it would likely take months before most of the people can be moved to more permanent housing.

The group at Shizugawa Elementary has created six divisions to oversee various aspects of day-to-day life: cooking, administration, facilities and environment, distribution, inventory control and medical care.

"The Japanese people are the type to feel more reassured the more rules are in place," said Shintaro Goto, a 32-year-old failed actor who left Tokyo and moved back to his hometown to be an electrician three months ago.

Although the waves didn't destroy his house, and his family is fine, he has chosen not to leave the center as long as he feels he can be useful to his neighbors as the vice chairman of the evacuation center's hygiene and environment issues.

Every day at 8:30 a.m. and 3 p.m., Mr. Goto convenes the cleaning crews in the lobby of the gymnasium. They are organized by an intricate rotation system that subdivides the units into groups A, B, and C. 

Mr. Goto assigns tasks including sorting the garbage, washing the bathrooms, sweeping the surrounding areas and cleaning a water tank for nonpotable water.

To avoid any confusion, the self-governing committee created an instruction sheet on how and what to clean. It lays out in painstaking detail how to replace the garbage bags, crush the plastic bottles, and separate the trash between burnable and nonburnable items while picking out paper, plastic bottles, glass bottles and cans for possible recycling. When or how anything might be recycled amid the destruction remains unclear.

One of the group captains asked for more division. "Shouldn't we have a separate place for used batteries?" he asked. They agreed to set up a separate container for battery disposal.

Responsible for overseeing cleaning and garbage sorting, Mr. Goto is often asked to make a ruling on disagreements. Should fish bones go in the burnable or nonburnable trash? Should residents use a bucket or a plastic bottle to hold the water for flushing, since there is still no running water?

On the latter point, Mr. Goto said, "Big or small, let's try to flush with a plastic bottle."

Wearing an orange towel wrapped around his head, Mr. Goto tries to remain patient. "I tend to lose my temper, but I am reminded to calm down because these people have been through a lot," said Mr. Goto, who some people call the "environmental minister" or simply "minister."

Doctors and relief workers say it is critical for survivors to find some kind of routine and responsibility as quickly as possible after a disaster, even if it involves doing minor tasks.

Giving victims tasks "helps people feel like they're owning part of the process of reconstruction and rehabilitation, that they have a voice in the recovery effort," said Kristy Allen-Shirley, a spokeswoman for World Vision, a humanitarian group that sent aid workers into affected areas.

—Patrick Barta in Bangkok contributed to this article.

 Write to  Daisuke Wakabayashi at Daisuke.Wakabayashi@wsj.com 