Remember in 1957, when President Eisenhower said, "This is our generation's Sputnik moment"? 

Of course you don't, even if you are old enough. Ike never said anything of the sort, nor did he need to. When you're actually in such a "moment," you don't have to announce it.

So of course President Obama was talking nonsense when he said, in his State of the Union Address last night, that "this is our generation's Sputnik moment." He was merely trying to make his calls for pouring tax money down the drain of "renewable energy" and "high-speed rail" sound like inspiring ambitions rather than boondoggles.

(On high-speed rail, by the way, the president promised: "For some trips, it will be faster than flying--without the pat-down." At the risk of overestimating the competence of the federal bureaucracy, could it be that the Transportation Security Administration insists on touching everyone's junk because the president wants us to get excited about trains?)

"Sputnik moment," however, sounded to us not just false but clichéd. And in fact, it turned out the president himself had trotted out the "our generation's Sputnik moment" line before, at a Dec. 6, 2010, speech in North Carolina. But we doubted it originated in the White House speechwriting shop. It sounded like the work of a far, far worse writer. Sure enough, our suspicions were confirmed by a book review in the Sept. 9, 2008, edition of the New York Times: "Thomas L. Friedman's latest book is a plea for a new Sputnik moment."

Friedman, it turns out, has been beating the Sputnik drum since the Clinton years:

Friedman also cited Sputnik in an April 3, 2005, New York Times magazine story that began as follows:

We can only hope that Mrs. Friedman had the good sense to whisper back: "Honey, if the world is flat, how the hell did the Soviets get Sputnik in orbit around it? Go sleep on the couch."

Evidently Obama was embarrassed by his resort to Friedmanite cliché. Later in his speech, he said this:

Except, of course, for Thomas Friedman, who dreams of being China for a day. It would have been wise for the president to stay out of Friedman's orbit to begin with, but plaudits to him for breaking free of it.

Speaking of the State of the Union and Friedman's newspaper, Obama began his speech by acknowledging the empty seat belonging to Rep. Gabrielle Giffords, still recovering from a Jan. 8 assassination attempt. Then he said:

Even more strongly than in his Tucson speech two weeks ago, the president rebuked the New York Times-led attempt to blame the Tucson massacre on conservatives and competitive media voices. 

The Times, which once held unrivaled influence over politics and the media, now can't even persuade the most liberal president in history to believe its lies. Will it rise to the challenge and start telling the truth for a change? Or, as Friedman might put it, how will the paper use Rush Limbaugh, Sarah Palin, Glenn Beck, et al.: as a scapegoat or a Sputnik? Only Tom will tell.

  The Case for Bipartisan Seating   Before last night's speech, we had been inclined to think that "bipartisan seating" was a silly gimmick. Sen. Barbara Boxer of California thinks it was a good idea, as the Daily Caller reports:

We never thought we'd say this, but: Ma'am, you are absolutely right. Watching at home, we noticed there was a lot less of the annoying partisan ovation that normally turns an overlong speech into an interminable one. (The exception was during the portion in which the president defended ObamaCare.) The experiment was a success. Here's hoping it becomes a tradition.

Meanwhile, as Bloomberg reports, six Supreme Court justices attended the speech. The no-shows were Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas, neither of whom has attended in some time, and Samuel Alito, who last year was caught on camera muttering a dissent at President Obama's scurrilous and demagogic denunciation of  Citizens United v. FEC, a landmark First Amendment case.

Justice Anthony Kennedy, author of Citizens United, attended last night, as did Chief Justice John Roberts and the court's four Democratic nominees. We didn't see any close-ups of the justices, but from afar we noticed that Ruth Bader Ginsburg seemed to be having trouble staying awake. Your honor, we felt your fatigue.

Last March, the Los Angeles Times reported that Roberts told a group of law students "that he found it 'very troubling' to be surrounded by loudly cheering critics at President Obama's State of the Union address, saying it was reason enough for the justices not to attend the annual speech to Congress":

He made a wise choice in attending this year anyway. Had Roberts stayed home and the Democratic nominees all gone, it would have put Justice Kennedy in the awkward position of casting a metaphorical vote for or against the president of the United States. The chief justice diffused the political tension the president had created with his outrageous attack last year. And at least Obama did not dare mention the court again last night.

  David Frum's Latest Distortion   We find this a bit distasteful, but we've been receiving queries about the following claim by David Frum, and we feel the need to set the record straight:

Frum distorts for his own purposes our comment last Wednesday, in the course of analyzing the left's deranged hatred of Palin, that "we are inclined to think that she is not" of "presidential timber."

The very tentativeness of this statement should be sufficient to make clear that we would not endorse Frum's categorical statement that Palin is "unfit for the presidency." Further, it is our view that John McCain made an excellent decision when he chose Palin as his running mate in 2008. The thought of Palin a heartbeat away from the presidency certainly bothers us no more than the reality of Joe Biden in that position.

Our skepticism about a prospective Palin presidential run, rather, is based on what she has done since the 2008 campaign ended. If she was seriously interested in running for president, we think she should have kept a lower profile and spent time boning up on policy in preparation to reintroduce herself to the public and persuade them of her seriousness.

Some of Palin's critics, including Peggy Noonan, think that she does not have it in her to do this. Perhaps so. On the other hand, it is far from an established fact that Palin's goal is to run for president, and in any case the path she has chosen has given her considerable political influence. Even if Noonan's description of Palin as "a ponder-free zone" is accurate--especially if it is accurate--Palin has made very effective use of her talents.

By staying in the public eye, she has also done the country the service of helping to expose the unhinged hatred that is all too common on the left--which, of course, was the point of our column last week. Frum's overall argument is less than coherent, but its gist seems to be that because he disapproves of Palin, no one should defend her and all attacks on her should be regarded as reasonable and fair. Frum calls this ugly Manichaeism "responsible conservatism."

  Metaphor Alert   "Paul Ryan owes it to the national audience tonight to explain why he wants to privatize Social Security and Medicare. He can't sweep his roadmap under the rug just because the spotlight will be shining brighter than usual."--Sen. Chuck Schumer (D., N.Y.), quoted by the Associated Press, Jan. 25

 Out on a Limb 

  Keep It Classy, Loretta   "Rep. Loretta Sanchez Sparks Outrage From Fellow Democrats With Proposal to Boot Giffords From Armed Services Committee"--headline, DailyCaller.com, Jan. 25

 With DNC in Mind, City Bans Carrying Urine, Feces 

  The Lonely Lives of Cantors   "Pelosi Spurns Cantor on Seating"--headline, TheHill.com, Jan. 25

  The Lonely Lives of Viewers   "Sexy News Anchors Distract Male Viewers"--headline, Miller-McCune.com, Jan. 24

  So Much for the War on Drugs   "Regulator Delivers Blow to Hochtief"--headline, The Wall Street Journal, Jan. 26

  The Evolutionary Ancestor of 'The Bird'   "Scientists Discover First One-Fingered Dinosaur"--headline, Chosun.com (South Korea), Jan. 25

  Little Green Pupils   "Mars Area Awards Contracts for School Construction"--headline, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, Jan. 26

  Hey, Kids! What Time Is It?   "Obama's Moment to Redefine the Modern Middle East"--headline, Commentary website, Jan. 26

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking   "Alec Baldwin to Replace Keith Olbermann on MSNBC's 'Countdown'? Network Spokesman Denies Rumor"--headline, Daily News (New York), Jan. 26

  Dog Dodges Feral Reporters--Now That Would Be News   "Reporter Dodges Packs of Feral Dogs While Testing Computer Equipment"--headline, Forbes.com, Jan. 25

 Too Much Information 

  News of the Tautological   "Lethal Injection Drug Won't Delay Execution"--headline, Associated Press, Jan. 24

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  Might as Well Kaul It Quits   Donald Kaul used to be the Washington columnist for the Des Moines Register, but now he writes op-eds for the hard-left Institute for Policy Studies, which sends them out for hard-up newspapers to publish free. Which proves that you get what you pay for. It begins high-mindedly, if uninterestingly:

Kaul then goes on to complain that Speaker John Boehner "has set the leadership bar fairly low," to call Sarah Palin "the Republican Party's answer to Eva Peron," to quote Humpty Dumpty, and to conclude "that 'Supreme Court' is becoming an oxymoron, like 'jumbo shrimp.' " Like a filthy mirror, Kaul turns out to be incapable of reflecting.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Evan Slatis, Michael Segal, Michele Schiesser, Jim Fehrle, John Erickson, Scott Holmes, John Sanders, Ethel Fenig, Hillel Markowitz, Ed Grinberg, William Schultz, Bruce Goldman, Bill Schweber, Rod Pennington, Israel Pickholtz, Stuart Creque, John Bobek, Scott Hill, Terry Meahl, Jim Miller and Randy Smith. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)