The release of documents detailing how Pima Community College responded to incidents involving suspected Arizona shooter Jared Lee Loughner largely show the school acting diligently while underscoring the limits of its capabilities and responsibilities, experts said Thursday.

"They did identify this student and get him off campus," said LeRoy Rooker, a former official with the U.S. Department of Education who helped rewrite federal privacy regulations after the 2007 Virginia Tech shootings. "It's not their job to get him mental health care."

The documents released late Wednesday cover a series of disruptive incidents and run-ins with campus police leading up to Mr. Loughner's suspension from the school in September.

The documents released late Wednesday cover a series of disruptive incidents and run-ins with campus police leading up to Mr. Loughner's suspension from the school in September.

Also Thursday, investigators into the shooting at a Tucson supermarket that killed six and injured 14, including U.S. Rep. Gabrielle Giffords, found 9mm ammunition—the same type used in the attack—in a black bag that Randy Loughner, the suspect's father, had earlier told them he saw his son carrying Saturday morning.

The Pima County Sheriff's Department said that Jared Loughner had removed the bag from a family car before the shooting, and fled on foot when his father spotted him and questioned him about it. 

Randy Loughner told police that he chased his son in a car but lost sight of him.

The bag was found near the Loughner residence by a man walking his dog. It was a black diaper bag resembling a backpack, police said, and was given to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for further analysis.

As for the community college, which Mr. Loughner attended from 2005 to last September, some mental health experts say that it would be difficult for Pima to know what further steps to take. Schools and colleges are allowed to share campus police records with outside law-enforcement agencies. 

Pima officials have said they didn't do so in Mr. Loughner's case because he didn't appear to be dangerous; school spokesmen didn't respond to requests for further comment Thursday.

"To ask colleges to go beyond and start calling the police every time someone is scary will overwhelm local law enforcement," said Peter Lake, professor of Law at Stetson University College of Law in Gulfport, Fla. "And it will be like crying wolf. It would be hard to sort out the real problems from the vast sea of false positives."

The school, which serves 68,000 students, doesn't provide housing or direct mental-health services. And even smaller institutions with residential housing have struggled with how respond to students who don't present an immediate danger to themselves and others.It's unclear whether Pima tried to assist Mr. Loughner or his family in getting treatment. Records from Pima's public safety department show that school staff met with Mr. Loughner, alone and with his mother present, before he was suspended Sept. 29. The reports don't detail any referrals or assistance the school might have offered Mr. Loughner or his family.Citing the continuing criminal investigation as well as federal privacy rules, Pima said it couldn't comment on the specifics of Mr. Loughner's history.

But in response to written questions on Tuesday, a school spokesman, Paul Schwalbach, said that the school does have counselors who "respond to students in crisis with intervention, stabilization and referral." 

—Leslie Eaton, Daniel Gilbert and Michael Rothfeld contributed to this article.

 Write to  Elizabeth Bernstein at Bonds@wsj.com and Shirley S. Wang at shirley.wang@wsj.com 