MADISON, Wis.—Gov. Scott Walker on Friday signed a bill eliminating most collective-bargaining rights for the state's public-employee unions, setting a precedent other states could follow in the broadest move in decades to curb union rights. 

The bill's passage Thursday by the state's Republican-controlled Assembly in a 53-42 vote ended a three-week stalemate that saw the state's 14 Senate Democrats flee to Illinois in a bid to stymie the measure and tens of thousands of people protest at the Capitol.

Controversy continued to swirl. Democratic senators were challenging the legality of a committee meeting that cleared the way for Wednesday night's Senate passage, saying it violated the state's open-meetings laws. Unions were planning large rallies and supporting campaigns to recall eight Republican senators across the state. Six Democrats are also targeted for recall.

Conflicts over union rights continued to play out in other states. An estimated 8,000 union supporters rallied in Indianapolis on Thursday to oppose Republican-backed measures that would limit union rights in the state. In Ohio, the GOP-controlled House is expected to pass a bill curbing rights for 400,000 unionized public workers.

Mr. Walker applauded the vote by the Assembly. "Their action will save jobs, protect taxpayers, reform government and help balance the budget," he said. "Moving forward, we will continue to focus on ensuring Wisconsin has a business climate that allows the private sector to create 250,000 new jobs."

Mr. Walker's "budget repair" bill was introduced nearly a month ago to address a $137 million shortfall in the current budget, and help close a $3.6 billion projected gap over the next two years.

Democrats objected to eliminating unions' bargaining rights and the way the bill passed. 

"Republicans have made a mockery of democracy," said Democratic Assembly Minority Leader Peter Barca. He said the bill's passage in the Senate violated the state's open-meetings law, because he was given less than the two hours required by law for any government meeting before a gathering to amend the bill Wednesday night. Mr. Barca filed a complaint with the district attorney of Dane County, where Madison is located, asking him to investigate whether the law was violated. 

"We ran on this. We will get the fiscal house in order," said Republican Assembly Speaker Jeff Fitzgerald during the tense Assembly session before the vote. "I know you feel passionate that this is going to ruin Wisconsin…that's simply not true." 

Cullen Werwie, a spokesman for Mr. Walker, said passage of the bill meant that the state wouldn't have to lay off public employees.

The bill would take away the ability of unions to bargain over pensions and health care. It would limit pay raises, which can still be negotiated by unions, to inflation. It eliminates automatic collection of dues by the state and requires each public union in the state to get recertified every year by vote. 

The bill also requires public-employee union members to contribute 5.8% of their pay to pensions and to pay 12.6% of health-care premiums out of their wages, up from 6% on average. 

Two items taken out of the amended bill involved the sale of power plants and legislative oversight of Medicaid assistance, which many Republicans and Democrats opposed. Police and firefighters' unions are exempted.

Outside the Capitol, hundreds of people banged on drums, rang bells and chanted as car horns blared, while inside dozens gathered in the middle of the rotunda, shouting, "Hey, hey, ho, ho, Scott Walker has got to go." 

Elden Jelle, 57 years old, a custodial worker at the University of Wisconsin, wore a green shirt with the logo of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees. Mr. Jelle, who earns about $15.51 an hour, estimated that his take-home pay would drop by about $300 to $400 a month. "Where are we going to make up the money?" he said. 

Meanwhile, it was unclear how soon the 14 Senate Democrats who left for Illinois on Feb. 17 to boycott the bill would return to Wisconsin. 

 Write to  Kris Maher at kris.maher@wsj.com and Ilan Brat at ilan.brat@wsj.com 