WINDERMERE, Fla.—Domestic doyenne  Martha Stewart and home builder  KB Home
KBH


0.83
%




 are teaming up again, this time to offer environmentally friendly homes, a move both companies hope will spark home sales.

The concept home unveiled Tuesday in Windermere, Fla.— on the eve of the start of the International Builders' Show in nearby Orlando—includes solar panels on the roof, kitchen composting bins and a rainwater-collection system. Buyers also can get electric-car charging stations. 

The venture continues a six-year partnership between Los Angeles-based KB Home and  Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia Inc.
MSO


0.00
%




 that has built more than 1,000 Martha-branded homes, whose designs were inspired by Ms. Stewart's residences in New York, Connecticut and Maine.

Both sides maintain that the Martha Stewart-KB Home partnership has been a success since its debut in 2005. The builder touts features, such as open kitchens and wainscoting, that are associated with Ms. Stewart, who is said to be heavily involved in the design process. 

As the market softened several years ago, the Martha-branded homes initially outperformed KB Home's non-name-brand construction. But as the softening turning into a collapse, sales of Martha Stewart homes fell off, too.

That KB Home would debut a new Martha Stewart community near Orlando, which has been hard-hit by the housing bust but is showing early signs of recovery, shows the company remains confident that Ms. Stewart's name will sell homes—in this case, with prices starting in the $200,000-range.

But whether Ms. Stewart's stamp of approval will encourage more consumers to buy "green" is unclear, and industry watchers are skeptical. Other home builders that have spent the past few years promoting and rolling out one environmental feature after another have been disappointed that buyers haven't shown great interest. Buyers are far more concerned about location and price and are largely unwilling to pay extra for features that may be hard to understand.

"I'll build the greenest house in the world if the market demands it," said  Eric Lipar, chief executive of LGI Homes, a Texas-based builder. "We're not losing customers because other builders offer green options."

Part of the problem is that green features remain difficult to value and to sell to consumers. "The general public doesn't seem to understand the value prospect of, for instance, a super-insulated home with a super-efficient HVAC system as much as they understand the value of, for instance, a granite countertop or an in-suite master bath," said  Kevin Morrow, senior program manager for the National Association of Home Builders' Green Building Programs.

KB, however, thinks this house and community show that it remains bullish on building. "This is a great statement about the company and housing and KB Home's partnership with Martha," said  Jeff Mezger, KB Home's chief executive, in an interview. 

Still, the company is hedging its bets. The environmentally friendly features are largely options that buyers can choose if they wish. If not, they can just get a Martha house that isn't so green.

 Write to  Dawn Wotapka at dawn.wotapka@dowjones.com 