 Intel reported its best quarterly and yearly results ever, despite evidence that demand for Apple's iPad and similar products is undercutting sales growth for PCs that use its chips. Intel said fourth-quarter gains were driven largely by sales of server systems to companies. 

 The SEC is investigating whether banks and private-equity firms violated bribery laws in their dealings with sovereign-wealth funds. 

 The Dow industrials lost 23.54 points, or 0.2%, to close at 11731.90. The Nasdaq Composite and S&P 500 also posted declines. 

 The EPA revoked a key permit for Arch Coal's Spruce Mine No. 1, one of the largest proposed mountaintop-removal projects in Appalachia. 

 Public-sector borrowers are scrambling to refinance tens of billions of dollars of debt this year as the market for muni bonds tumbles.  

 Target disclosed plans to expand into Canada and said it hired an adviser to help sell its $6.7 billion credit-card receivables portfolio. 

 ECB President Trichet moved to counter an unexpected rise in euro-zone inflation, signaling that he won't hesitate to raise rates. 

 German leaders are divided over whether to boost the euro-zone bailout fund amid growing calls elsewhere in Europe for its expansion. 

 Merck said researchers halted a major study of its experimental heart drug vorapaxar and curtailed patient participation in another. 

 Sterling Bancshares has put itself up for sale as it faces a proxy battle, a rare auction of one of Texas's independent financial institutions. 

 The Justice Department is preparing a potential court challenge to Google's proposed acquisition of travel-software company ITA. 

 Wall Street's most powerful executives each had 45 minutes to woo AIG as it began picking the firms that will complete an expected stock sale. 

 Economists surveyed by The Wall Street Journal predict the U.S. economy will grow atbetter than a 3.2% annual rate in each quarter this year. 

 The CFTC moved ahead on proposed rules to curb speculative trading in commodities, but they still face considerable opposition. 

 Toyota is striving to develop a new type of electric motor to escape a simmering trade conflict involving China's grip on a rare mineral. 

 The age-old ritual of the passenger bump is getting a makeover at Delta Air Lines with a high-tech system that employs a silent auction. 