BANGKOK—The U.S. dollar is expected to continue heading south over the long term as countries can't escape their economic fundamentals, Thai Finance Minister Korn Chatikavanij said Friday. 

The U.S. can only repay its massive debt by allowing depreciation of dollar, Mr. Korn told The Wall Street Journal and Dow Jones Newswires. 

"I see no way of repaying it other than through devaluation. Hopefully it will be gradual, but one can never predict that." 

He said the Bank of Thailand has been intervening in the foreign-exchange market, both buying and selling the U.S. dollar, and it will continue to intervene in the market to limit any excessive currency volatility. 

However, he said there is no need for the central bank to fight the trend and that there is no evidence of any "hot money" behind the baht's recent strength. 

"So far they (the Bank of Thailand) have been able to manage excess volatility," Mr. Korn said. 

He said Thai exporters have been extremely resilient to the baht's strength, though they need any appreciation to be gradual. 

"Exporters detest volatility the most," Mr. Korn said. 

The minister called on Thai exporters to diversify their trade settlement currencies, into yuan, yen or other units, to match their trading counterparties in order to reduce dependency on the U.S. dollar, which is on the descent. 

He noted that the adoption of the Chinese yuan in international trade and investment has been happening faster than expected. 

On the other hand, Mr. Korn said the strong baht will likely attract more investments for value-added projects than those seeking the cheapest production base and low labor costs. 

Potential further increases in global oil prices are considered the biggest threat to Thailand's economy, as they will fuel inflationary pressures, he said. 

Higher oil and commodity prices are key factors pushing up production costs and inflation. However, the global food crisis could provide an obvious opportunity for Thailand as a food producing country. 

Mr. Korn said the government's proposed minimum wage hike won't put upward pressure on inflation, which is driven more by external factors. 

The Democrat Party-led government has been floating the idea of raising minimum wage by another 25% in two years in a bid to increase the purchasing power of low income earners. The proposal comes ahead of general elections in the country, which could take place by late June or early July. 

Mr. Korn said the poll result will likely to be a close race between the ruling Democrat Party and the Puea Thai Party, backed by fugitive ex-Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra. 

 Write to  James Hookway at james.hookway@wsj.com, Leigh Murray at leigh.murray@dowjones.com and Almar Latour at almar.latour@wsj.com 