DAVOS, Switzerland—A growing band of central banks are throwing up obstacles to prevent floods of money from overwhelming their economies.

The banks' actions are raising the prospect that a three-decade trend in which capital has become progressively freer to move from country to country could go permanently into reverse.

Capital controls, which were blessed by the International Monetary Fund last year as countries like South Korea, Taiwan, Turkey and Brazil moved to stem inflows, were a hot topic at this week's World Economic Forum. 

"We have a [global] capital market where borders were less and less relevant. Now we are seeing the borders go back up again," said  Stephen King, chief economist of HSBC.

"Five years ago, [capital controls] would have been a non-Davos subject,"  Howard Davies, director of the London School of Economics, said at a lunch Friday at which regulators, hedge-fund traders, academics and bankers debated the subject. Mr. Davies's conclusion at the end of the lunch: "Sometimes they may be a regrettable necessity."

In the immediate years after World War II, controls on capital movements were common. Unlike today's controls aimed at slowing the tide of inflows, however, these postwar controls were largely aimed at slowing outflows.

After Britain lifted its exchange controls under the government of Margaret Thatcher in 1979, an increasing number of governments decided to allow free movement of money in and out of their economies. 

While freer movement of capital around the world can help spur economic growth by enabling more productive investment, the growing volume of inflows into some countries has raised several concerns over the past year.

Foreign inflows are pushing up the value of their currencies, making it harder for local exporters to compete in global markets. The inflows threaten to create asset bubbles in real estate and stock markets.

Central bankers are also haunted by the memory of quick reversals of foreign investment in the past which knocked their currencies sharply lower, sparking financial crises in Latin America and in Asia the 1980s and 1990s. 

"We don't want the reversal of flows having financial stability implications," said Alexandre Tombini, president of the Central Bank of Brazil. "We have to resort to a larger and more encompassing set of tools." 

Central bankers are more concerned about some inflows than others: Most worrisome are short-term investments in bank deposits and local debt that can be quickly pulled out of the country. Foreign direct investment and stock-market investments are less of a concern. "The real problem is the short-term flow—the hot money," said Stanley Fischer, governor of the Bank of Israel.

Many experts here don't see capital controls as a very effective long-term policy.  Simon Johnson, professor of economics at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, said it would be preferable for countries such as India and Brazil to run more austere fiscal policies, for instance by reducing public spending. That should allow central banks to lower interest rates and reduce inflows of capital.

"It is one of the tools that can be used, but it would not be my preferred tool," said Jaime Caruana, general manager of the Bank for International Settlements, a Swiss institution that tries to promote coordination among central bankers. He said it is better for central banks to stick to traditional tools to manage their economies and markets: interest-rate increases when inflation is heating up, currency appreciation when money floods in, and tough bank regulation to keep local institutions healthy. 

Capital flows into some countries have grown in part because of very low interest rates in the U.S. and other developed economies, which encourage investors to seek higher returns elsewhere. One big question is whether capital controls will be reversed once interest rates return to more normal levels.

"These controls take on a life of their own," Mr. Johnson said. "You don't want to have to rely on them." 

Mr. Fischer, a former senior official at the International Monetary Fund, said: "I hope it is temporary. I hope that when the advanced countries start growing and raise interest rates, this phenomenon is going to become less important." 

One challenge with capital controls is that financial regulators don't have much of a playbook to make decisions about how and when to use them. There are different roadblocks that regulators can put up to reduce foreign money flows. So far, the most popular approaches are to tax short-term investments or reduce the interest rates that banks can pay to foreigners. South Korea has imposed a tax on local banks that turn to foreigners for credit. 

Some central bankers are pushing behind the scenes for the IMF, which has come out in favor of controls in some circumstances, to develop rules for financial regulators to follow. The subject could become more prominent on the IMF's agenda in the months ahead. 

 Write to  Stephen Fidler at stephen.fidler@wsj.com and Jon Hilsenrath at jon.hilsenrath@wsj.com 