MUMBAI – The Indian rupee Monday fell to its lowest level in two months against the U.S. dollar as investors bought into the greenback globally and sold risk-sensitive currencies. 

Bids from oil importers and a 1.0% fall in India's benchmark stock index added to the pressure on the rupee. 

The dollar was at 45.16 rupees late Monday, compared with 44.87 rupees late Friday. The dollar touched an intraday high of 45.19 rupee--a level last seen on March 17. 

The rupee fell early in the session mirroring weakness in the euro as market participants reacted to the news of the arrest of International Monetary Fund chief  Dominique Strauss Kahn, which threatens to weaken the IMF's ability to resolve the deepening euro-zone debt crisis. 

The currency market was subdued and trading volume a tad lower as market participants refrained from entering into long positions ahead of the next session Wednesday. Indian foreign-exchange and bond markets are shut Tuesday for a religious holiday. 

Foreign investors have turned cautious over the economy's growth prospects, with capital flowing out after the Reserve Bank of India increased interest rates by a higher-than-anticipated 0.50 percentage point on May 3. 

A trading head at a foreign bank said the rupee is poised to face more headwind in coming weeks as risk appetite remains shaky due to uncertainty on more aid for debt-laden Greece. He expects the dollar to trade in a band of 45 rupees to 45.35 rupees this week. 

Meanwhile, Indian government bonds ended lower as market participants braced for a near-certain rate hike by the RBI as inflation for April increased more than expected. The central bank next reviews monetary policy on June 16. 

The benchmark 7.80% 2021 bond ended at 96.80 rupees Monday, compared with 96.85 rupees at its previous close. The second-most-traded 7.83% 2018 bond was at 96.97 rupees, compared with 97.09 rupees at Friday's close. 

Bonds, however, recovered from intraday lows on bargain-buying. 

India's inflation rate in April rose 8.66% from a year earlier, slower than a provisional 9.04% increase in March. But, the April print remained above the central bank's comfort zone and topped expectations of an 8.5% rise forecast in a Dow Jones Newswires poll. 

The data highlight persistent price pressures in the economy that are fueling expectations of more monetary tightening by the RBI to rein in demand and cool inflationary expectations. 

Policy makers said inflation is "too high" and demand has to be managed to tame price pressures even if growth may have to be sacrificed. 

RBI Deputy Governor  Subir Gokarn said price pressures in India are unlikely to see a steep fall any time soon. He noted that the risk of commodity price inflation becoming generalized is now visible and while India's economic growth rate is reassuring, the slowdown in investment activity isn't desirable. 