The White House and Democratic lawmakers, with less than two weeks left to avoid a government shutdown, are assembling a proposal for roughly $20 billion in additional spending cuts that could soon be offered to Republicans, according to people close to the budget talks.

That would come on top of $10 billion in cuts that Congress has already enacted and would represent a deeper reduction than the Obama administration and Senate Democrats had offered previously in negotiations. But it isn't clear that would be enough to satisfy Republicans, who initially sought $61 billion in spending cuts and face pressure from tea-party activists not to compromise. 

Congress must resolve three separate fiscal issues in coming months.

GOP Congressional aides said they had not received a new proposal from the White House over the weekend. 

With the federal deficit projected to rise to a record $1.65 trillion this year, how Washington is going to control government spending has become the central point of dispute between the parties. 

Congress returns from a weeklong recess Monday facing an array of budget issues, including a deadline of April 8 to reach agreement on a spending plan for the current fiscal year. 

With negotiations on the current-year budget proving difficult, leaders of both parties are trying to broaden the discussion. 

House Republicans are preparing a budget resolution for 2012 that would make major spending reductions in entitlement programs such as Medicare and Medicaid, and give states more flexibility in how they spend federal Medicaid money. 

Separately, Senate GOP leaders are urging all 47 Republicans in the chamber to sign on to a proposed constitutional amendment to balance the budget and demand a vote on it.

Those efforts are aimed at turning attention from spending on defense, education, research and other so-called discretionary programs—the one-third of the budget that is at issue in the current debate—to the broader sources of the nation's deficit problems, which come from entitlement programs and the cost of interest on the growing national debt.

By signaling that they will make efforts to rein in entitlements and balance the budget, Republicans may also diminish the disappointment among some conservative activists and tea-party groups that this year's spending cuts aren't bigger.

Many tea-party activists are already complaining that Republican leaders have fallen short of budget-cutting goals. Critics are calling a rally on Capitol Hill Thursday to air their complaints. 

The pace of the budget debate is quickening amid a convergence of deadlines. The House is scheduled to begin debate on the 2012 budget resolution in early April. 

The Treasury Department this week is likely to issue an updated report on when it expects the ceiling on the federal debt will have to be increased; its most recent estimate was that the borrowing limit would be reached between April 15 and the end of May.

Negotiators are still working on short-term spending policy because, with the parties stalemated over the 2011 budget, the government has been operating under a series of interim appropriations bills, and the latest expires April 8.

The House has passed a bill that would cut $61 billion from 2010 levels. Democrats say those cuts would be too large, but large numbers voted in favor of $10 billion in cuts as part of the last two short-term government funding measures.

Negotiations to bridge the $51 billion difference have been conducted by aides to Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D., Nev.), House Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio) and White House Budget Director Jacob Lew. 

Those talks faltered last week amid a dispute over where to start discussion. Republicans insisted that the two sides negotiate from the legislation passed by the House to cut $61 billion, which would put the burden on Democrats to say which cuts they didn't find acceptable.

The White House and Democrats said they had expected, based on earlier discussions with Republicans, to talk about cuts from current spending levels. Democrats said they were blindsided by the new GOP position, and a Tuesday meeting blew up over the point.

Republicans said the Democrats had laid out a proposal that made insufficient spending cuts. Democrats wouldn't comment on its contents, but GOP aides said the proposal purported to cut $11 billion, but amounted to less because of "gimmicks'' that inflated the impact of the proposed savings. In turn, Democrats say Republican leaders keep shifting their bargaining position under pressure from conservative members, making negotiations confusing. 

The ill will that erupted last week has cast doubt on when negotiations will resume. Some people tracking events said that Democrats are continuing to prepare their proposal that makes additional spending cuts, but when and whether they are offered is in question.

Anticipating tough tea-party opposition to raising the debt limit, Senate Republicans are planning soon to mount a new push for a constitutional amendment to require a balanced federal budget, which may be unveiled soon after Congress reconvenes this week. 

Sen. John Cornyn, chairman of the National Republican Senatorial Committee, has said he wants Republicans to demand a Senate vote on the amendment as a condition of voting on an increase in the debt ceiling.

Democrats are also contending with division in their ranks. Many have hopes that a bipartisan group of senators known as the Gang of Six can reach agreement on a broad deficit-reduction package.

It would not only set targets for cuts but also call for an overhaul of the tax code and changes to entitlement programs, including Social Security. The group, which hopes to get broad support by including elements that each party likes and dislikes, is expected to meet again Monday.

Republicans say any comprehensive deal to rein in the deficit must include changes to Social Security. 

But Mr. Reid, like many fellow Democrats, argues that Social Security shouldn't be part of such a deal because it faces no immediate financial problems and therefore isn't part of the deficit problem.

Mr. Reid is emphasizing his opposition by hosting an event for 200 people in a Senate office building, featuring other senators as well as beneficiaries who will recount how Social Security helps them. Organizers said the event was Mr. Reid's idea.

—Carol E. Lee and Naftali Bendavid contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Damian Paletta at damian.paletta@wsj.com 