  Q: What are the pros and cons of using nitrogen in tires? I have a brochure from my local dealer which I received when I put the nitrogen in my tires. The brochure indicates increased tire service and better gas mileage. I am not challenging the accuracy of the brochure; however, I will appreciate your thinking on the use of nitrogen in automobile tires. 

—John Budde Conway, Sarasota, Fla.

 A: Let's start with the biggest con: about $10 per tire to fill up with nitrogen. I don't even like spending quarters to get air from the air pump at the gas-station, so I'm not about to pay $40 for nitrogen-filled tires. Yes, you have touched on one of my many pet peeves—right up there with paying for bottles of water, subscription radio and other things that used to be free.

The pros of using nitrogen include more stable tire pressure and fewer of the contaminants that turn up in ambient air. Auto-racing teams and the aircraft industry have used nitrogen in tires for years because of its relative stability. But really, there's no reason for most drivers to use it. You are better off simply checking your tire pressure weekly.

  Q: A 2004 Volkswagen Phaeton with 70,000 miles in good condition showed up at a nearby car lot. I'm interested in scoring a luxe second car for a bargain price. Am I a loon? 

—Chris Wolff, Davidson, N.C.

 A: Not at all. The Phaeton was a wonderful car when new even though it was a flop in the market. Essentially an understated Audi A8, the Phaeton had about every luxury feature available. Still, it was no surprise people were unwilling to pay more that $60,000 for a Volkswagen. Today, though, the 2004 model can be had for the price of a compact economy car—about $15,000. 

Just remember that while used luxury cars can be cheap to buy, they are almost always expensive to maintain and repair.

  Q: My wife drives a 2002 Ford Explorer with over 110,000 miles and we are looking to buy her a replacement vehicle in the next six months. We'd like something of similar size, but with more features and a tad more luxury.  

 So far, we have focused our search on a used Acura MDX; however, we've quickly come to realize a used MDX with fewer than 50,000 miles costs over $30,000. Do you have any recommendations of less expensive MDX alternatives? 

—Andrew Edelman, Charlotte, N.C.

 A: If you need three rows of seats you might try the Mazda CX-9, which is especially pleasant to drive, the Ford Flex, GMC Acadia or Toyota Highlander. All three drive more like large cars than trucks and are more comfortable than an Explorer. 

If two rows will do, the Ford Edge, Lexus RX or used BMW X5.

  Q: I am in the market to replace a 2002 Chevy Avalanche but not interested in spending $50,000+. I occasionally carry business-related materials in the back that can weigh upward of 800 pounds and/or tow a utility trailer with 2,000 pounds. The Honda Ridgeline is interesting to me because it is the most car-like and similar to the Avalanche. The 4-wheel drive needs to be capable as well as I live in the mountains and drive in snow. I would appreciate your thoughts the Honda and suggestions on alternatives. 

—Larry Hall, Asheville, N.C.

 A: The Ridgeline is a good alternative to the Avalanche as it does essentially the same job more efficiently and handles a bit more like a car. It lacks the Avalanche's cargo capacity but should have enough for the work you describe. A more conventional full-size pickup truck with a bed cover could also work well. The advantage with pickups is that you can order them with the specific features you want while avoiding extras that come with option packages that Honda and other car makers typically offer. 

—Email mecar@wsj.com 