WASHINGTON—A Securities and Exchange Commission study released Saturday recommends creating a common fiduciary standard of care for brokers and investment advisers, but the commission's two Republicans said the study's conclusions aren't sufficiently backed up. 

Last year's Dodd-Frank financial law says the SEC can hold brokers to a higher "fiduciary duty" standard, compelling them to put the interests of clients before their own. Investment advisers already are held to that standard, while brokers need to ensure only that the products they sell are "suitable" for their clients. 

The study, which was prepared by the SEC staff, found that people are confused about the roles of brokers and investors and are unsure of their protections when they receive advice about securities. 

"Retail customers should not have to parse through legal distinctions to determine whether the advice they receive was provided in accordance with their expectations," the study said. 

The study recommended the SEC impose a uniform fiduciary standard on brokers and advisers and look at whether to harmonize protections for investors when brokers and advisers are fulfilling essentially the same functions. 

Commissioners  Kathleen Casey and  Troy Paredes, in a joint statement, said the study didn't muster enough evidence to justify an overhaul of rules governing the advice brokers and advisers give retail customers. 

They said they weren't necessarily opposed to creating a common fiduciary standard for brokers and advisers, but that the SEC must do more analysis to show that the change wouldn't harm investors. "Regulation based on poorly-supported recommendations runs the risk of restricting retail investors' access to affordable personalized investment advice and the range of products and services they currently enjoy," they wrote. 

For years, financial planners and others classified as investment advisers have pushed to impose a fiduciary standard on brokers, saying that the various types of financial professional should face the same rules. 

Brokers recently embraced the idea of being subject to a fiduciary duty, but don't want a standard that upsets the way they do business. They also say that any fiduciary standard must be translated into clear rules that brokers can follow. 

Investment advisers say brokers are pushing for a weaker standard than what advisers already adhere to. 

The Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, in a statement, said the SEC's study "appropriately articulated" an approach to governing the investment advice given to retail customers. 

"It is especially important that the SEC recognized that any fiduciary standard should not pick business model winners and losers, and that the Commission will need to issue interpretive guidance to allow firms to operationalize this new standard," Sifma wrote. 

Some in the adviser community saw signs the SEC staff supports a standard that wouldn't force brokers or advisers to mitigate or eliminate conflicts of interest. 

"I'm seeing hints here that the way the standard would be interpreted would allow a broker or adviser to proceed with transactions that are not in the client's best interest," said  Knut Rostad, chairman of the Committee for the Fiduciary Standard, a group in investment professionals. 

  David Tittsworth, executive director of the Investment Adviser Association, said, "We will work to oppose efforts to weaken or water down the well-established fiduciary duty" for investment advisers.

 Write to  Jessica Holzer at jessica.holzer@dowjones.com 