RIYADH—State-owned Saudi Arabian Oil Co. has agreed on an initial deal with  PetroChina Co. Ltd. to supply crude oil to a new refinery in southwest China, the companies said Sunday, in a move that will help cement Saudi Arabia's position as China's top crude-oil supplier. 

China National Petroleum Corp., the state-owned parent of PetroChina, said in a statement on its website that the new refinery in Yunnan province will receive crude through a pipeline being built from the coast of Myanmar to China. 

The pipeline is a top priority of China's leaders, as it will enable the country to import crude oil from the Middle East without cargoes having to pass through the potential choke point of the Strait of Malacca, near Singapore. It would also mean big savings on shipping costs. 

The Aramco-PetroChina deal marks the latest effort by China and Saudi Arabia to strengthen energy ties, despite recent unrest in the Middle East. Aramco signed a memorandum of understanding with China Petrochemical Corp., or Sinopec Group, to develop the 400,000-barrel-a-day Yanbu refinery on Saudi Arabia's Red Sea coast. 

Under Sunday's non-binding agreement, Aramco will supply up to 200,000 barrels a day of Arabian crude oil through long-term contracts to PetroChina's 10-million-metric-ton-a-year refinery in Yunnan, Aramco said in a statement on its website. 

Saudi Arabia already exports about 1.1 million barrels a day of oil to China, while the Middle East as a whole provides about 2.9 million barrels a day of oil to the country.

The refinery's output, including ultra low-sulfur gasoline and diesel, will be sold through PetroChina's network of filling stations in southwest China, including Yunnan and Guizhou provinces. 

"This agreement is a significant step forward in our expanding relationship with CNPC and in our global downstream strategy," Aramco Chief Executive  Khalid Al Falih said in the statement. "We don't consider ourselves simply sellers of oil to China, but rather strategic partners." 

China surpassed the U.S. as the biggest importer of oil from Saudi Arabia in 2009, and the Kingdom's crude oil is an increasingly important factor in powering the nation's growth. Energy demand is rising rapidly in China, driven by rapid industrialization and a growing middle class. 

Despite China's best efforts to diversify its oil imports, most of the imported crude it needs to fuel growth comes from Saudi Arabia, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration. 

The commitment of Saudi crude through the pipeline running from Myanmar's western port of Sittwe to Kunming city in Yunnan could create friction with the U.S., which has repeatedly tightened sanctions against the military regime in Myanmar. 

The Myanmar-China pipeline, which is already under construction, has an initial capacity targeted at 20 million metric tons a year, equivalent to around 400,000 barrels a day. 

—David Winning in Sydney contributed to this article. 

