BEIJING—Chinese telecommunications equipment maker  ZTE Corp.
ZTCOY


1.09
%




 said Wednesday it stepped up its legal battle with Chinese rival Huawei Technologies Co., filing motions in multiple countries to invalidate various Huawei patents and a Huawei trademark.

The move comes after Huawei and ZTE said last week they filed lawsuits against each other over alleged patent infringements. Such lawsuits are common between global rivals in high-tech industries, and ZTE and Huawei are competing with each other and with Western rivals like  Telefon AB L.M. Ericsson
ERIC


-1.33
%




 and  Alcatel-Lucent
ALU


-0.99
%




 as they look to expand outside China. 

ZTE press officer Rena Qin said ZTE launched proceedings with China's domestic State Intellectual Property Office to invalidate some Huawei "family patents" that were registered in multiple countries at the same time. 

ZTE has also filed a lawsuit in France to invalidate Huawei patents related to a USB connector device, and asked European regulators to revoke a type of trademark certification held by Huawei, the press officer said. 

Huawei didn't reply to a request for comment. 

Huawei said last week it filed a total of four lawsuits against ZTE in Germany, France and Hungary for patent and trademark infringements. It accused ZTE of infringing on patents related to wireless modems and a high-speed fourth-generation technology called Long Term Evolution. It also alleged ZTE illegally used Huawei's trademark by embedding Huawei technology into a wireless USB modem and printing a Huawei logo on the modem without paying proper licensing fees to Huawei. 

ZTE fired back last week, saying it filed a lawsuit against Huawei for alleged infringement in China of patents also related to LTE technology. 

Huawei's lawsuits against ZTE are the latest in a series of legal actions involving Huawei--including intellectual property lawsuits with Motorola Solutions Inc. that were settled last month. 

ZTE has also become embroiled in a legal battle with Swedish rival Ericsson, which last month said it filed patent-infringement lawsuits against ZTE in the U.K., Germany and Italy. ZTE said it launched patent invalidation procedures against Ericsson in China and also filed a lawsuit in China against an Ericsson unit over alleged patent infringement. 

Huawei ranked second in the global carrier-network-infrastructure market in 2010, taking a 15.7% share of the market's $78.56 billion in revenue, while ZTE ranked sixth with a 7.2% share, according to market-research firm Gartner. Ericsson ranked first, while Alcatel-Lucent,  Cisco Systems Inc.
CSCO


0.14
%




 and Nokia Siemens Networks ranked ahead of ZTE, according to Gartner. 