GLASGOW, Scotland—There are some 240 overseas players in the English Premier League. They're spread all over the map—35 from France, seven from Senegal, one each from Uruguay, Mali and Greece. By some measures, it's the most cosmopolitan league in all of sports. 

But when it comes to the men prowling the sidelines, some of the very best come from this same cold, industrial city of 600,000 in western Scotland.

Both Manchester United's Alex Ferguson and Liverpool's Kenny Dalglish, who will face off in the Premier League on Sunday, were born in Glasgow. Alex McLeish, who masterminded Birmingham City's Carling Cup triumph last Sunday, is a Glaswegian, as is Everton's David Moyes, the third-longest serving manager in the top division. Two of the game's rising stars, Bolton's Owen Coyle and Blackburn's Steve Kean, also grew up here.

Less than 1% of the U.K. population lives in Glasgow, but six of the 20 Premier League managers learnt the game there—more than from any other country, including England. This volume is more than matched by quality: Since 1986, three Glaswegians—Ferguson, Dalglish and former Arsenal coach George Graham—have won the league title a combined 17 times.

Four decades ago, when Manchester United's Matt Busby, Celtic's Jock Stein and Liverpool's Bill Shankly occupied the dugouts at Britain's biggest clubs, Scotland's coaching superiority was a matter of course. But at a time when the Scottish national team is an also-ran in world football—Scotland is currently ranked 53rd in the world and has failed to qualify for the last six major tournaments—the rise of a new generation of Glaswegian coaches belies the notion that Scottish football is in a tailspin.

The engine of Glasgow's success is football's unshakable primacy in this city's culture. Its passion for the game is fuelled by a history of tough, blue-collar labor in manufacturing and shipbuilding. For decades, its gray skies and gritty reputation formed the bedrock of working-class life in Scotland, which some say has strengthened Glasgow's connection to football and its ideals of teamwork.

"It's a pretty rough environment," says Barry Wilson, a 22-year-old construction worker. "But we love our football."

Historians say football first became a Glaswegian obsession when Scotland and England played out a goalless draw here in the first international game in 1872. Today, Istanbul is the only other European city to house three football stadiums with capacities over 50,000, but it has a population of 13 million compared with Glasgow's 600,000.

"It's got this extraordinary football heritage," says David Goldblatt, the author of "The Ball is Round: A Global History of Football." "If Paris was the place where modern art was invented at the turn of the 20th Century, I would argue that Glasgow is the place where modern football was invented."

Although the rules of the modern game were codified in London in the 19th century, in many ways the sport was fashioned north of the border. The rivalry between Rangers and Celtic, the top two teams in Glasgow, dates back to 1888 and the clubs have shared about 80% of the total Scottish football titles ever since.

To nature, add nurture: Scotland has long been known as a pioneer in the education of young coaches. The Scottish Football Association's coaching school down the Ayrshire coast at Largs was established in the late 1970s and has become a cradle for some of the world's best coaches. England's Fabio Capello and Arrigo Sacchi, the former AC Milan and Italy coach, both attended classes here. So did Real Madrid's José Mourinho. By contrast, England only began to recognize the UEFA qualification system in 2003.

Glasgow first became the leading source for football coaches in the late 1960s with the successes of Manchester United's Matt Busby and Jock Stein at Celtic. These two men became the first British managers to lift the European Cup, the latter with a team made up entirely of players born within a 30-mile radius of Glasgow.

Bill Shankly—who grew up all of 35 miles away in Ayrshire—achieved similar success at Liverpool, winning the last of his three championships in 1973 and paving the way for the team's domination of English football for the best part of two decades.

As well as a common adherence to toughness and discipline, these three coaches shared a commitment to attacking, entertaining football. Their ideals have since shaped new generations of Glaswegians, first through their assistant coaches and former players and later their descendants.

Ferguson was heavily influenced by the hard-nosed approach to management favored by Stein, having served as his assistant with the Scotland national team. Now Ferguson is the trailblazer for a new batch of Scottish managerial talent, guys like Birmingham's McLeish, who starred in Ferguson's European Cup Winners' Cup-winning Aberdeen side of the early 1980s.

The structure of Scottish football also makes it an ideal proving ground for young coaches. Unlike many of Europe's top leagues, which typically comprise 20 teams, there are just 12 clubs in the Scottish Premier League. Teams play each other up to four times a season, meaning the players have a good idea of the strengths and weaknesses of their opponents. All of which places a greater onus on the men on the sidelines to win the tactical matchup.

But some say what really separates Glasgow coaches from the rest of the Premier League managers is the tangible fear of returning home a failure. 

"There's a chip on your shoulder when you go down to England," says Jamie Reynolds, a 41-year-old retail manager and a member of a Glasgow Rangers fan group. "It's like following Scotland to Wembley in the old days—you're carrying the reputation of Scotland as a football nation. So you dare not lose."

 Write to  Jonathan Clegg at jonathan.clegg@wsj.com 