European leaders will meet in Brussels on Friday to debate a grand-sounding package to resolve the euro zone's debt crisis. But investors and analysts fear the deal will underwhelm, owing to political differences that have forced Europe to scale down the measures' ambition.

Europe has so far adopted "a series of band-aid solutions" said Brian Yelvington, senior macro strategist at Knight Capital in New York. "I don't think this Friday is likely to be any different."

The package, due to be presented and approved at another summit on March 24-25, is expected to include a new set of rules for the euro zone on budget discipline, a strengthening of Europe's temporary bailout mechanism for indebted euro members, details on a permanent rescue fund and pledges to improve the competitiveness of national economies.

Euro-zone leaders will also debate this week whether to make the terms of rescue loans to Ireland and Greece less punitive. No final decisions are expected before the summit later this month.

However, the measures being considered fall short of the ambition that Europe declared in January. Back then, the 17 euro-zone countries, prompted by Germany, signalled they would sign a grand bargain: Germany would agree to greater and more flexible financial support for severely indebted nations. In return, other countries would agree to change their ways to avoid a repeat of the past year's crisis.

"This was always going to be a tricky bargain," said Peter Vanden Houte, chief European economist at lender ING in Brussels. "The trouble is that the heads of state somewhat oversold it." 

A watered-down package could disappoint investors who believed Europe was finally coming to grips with the debt crisis on its periphery. Government bond markets have been relatively stable this year after several bouts of panic in 2010, although borrowing costs for Greece, Ireland and Portugal remain painfully high. Renewed turmoil in bond markets could endanger the ability of Spain and even some stronger countries to refinance their debts.

The U.S. government is increasingly worried that a failure by Europe to take decisive measures could unsettle global financial markets and possibly even threaten the U.S.'s economic recovery, according to people familiar with the matter.

U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner visited Berlin on Tuesday to lobby Germany to expand Europe's financial safety net for indebted euro members. However, German officials don't want more-generous aid to reduce the pressure on countries such as Greece and Portugal to revamp their economies. Mr. Geithner told reporters in Berlin he was confident Europe would get the balance right.

The difficulty with Europe's grand bargain became apparent at a Feb. 4 summit of European Union leaders. German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President Nicolas Sarkozy presented a "pact for competitiveness," largely written in Berlin, that would have required all euro-zone countries to enact specific and tough economic overhauls, such as adopting balanced-budget amendments and raising their retirement ages.

In effect, Ms. Merkel was saying that all others needed to follow Germany's rigorous economic policies as the price for Germany offering its financial firepower to underpin the euro zone. "This can't be about words — this is about action," Ms. Merkel said before the Feb. 4 summit.

Her proposal hit the shoals within hours, as countries which aren't in need of aid, such as Austria and Belgium, balked at giving up part of their policy-making autonomy.

The deal has since been weakened. On Friday leaders are expected to discuss a new version of the pact that shies away from concrete policy requirements in favor of vaguer recommendations.

Meanwhile Germany has grown less keen on more-flexible financial aid for crisis-hit countries — something for which the European Central Bank, among others, has been pushing hard. German lawmakers in Ms. Merkel's center-right coalition have declared their opposition to ideas such as letting Europe's bailout fund buy government bonds, or letting the fund lend to countries so that they can buy back their own debt. Those proposals now appear to have little chance.

Agreement is uncertain even on boosting the bailout fund's effective lending capacity to its originally intended €440 billion ($612 billion) , from as low as €250 billion now. Some participants in the talks worry that Germany, the Netherlands and Finland—dubbed "the Council of No" by one EU official—will agree only to promise that they will boost the fund later on if needed.

The new, permanent rescue fund set to begin operating in 2013 is expected to be around €500 billion. But it is no longer designed to be more flexible than the current bailout fund, which is restricted to helping countries on the brink of default in exchange for a tough, and politically costly, austerity program.

European leaders' verbal pledges to defend the euro by all means necessary have so far been able to maintain an uneasy calm on bond markets, although yields on Greek and Portuguese bonds have risen further since the deadlocked Feb. 4 summit, showing that investors are even warier than before of lending to those countries. 

Portugal raised €1 billion Wednesday through an auction of 2.5-year bonds, but the country had to pay nearly 6% interest, compared to around 4% six months ago, reflecting markets' growing belief that Portugal will need a bailout. Portugal is running low on cash: its treasury had about €2 billion in cash coming into this year, and the cash balance has likely moved to around €5 billion, counting Wednesday's auction. But Portugal must repay €3.3 billion in maturing Treasury bills next week and a €4.3 billion long-term bond in mid-April. 

—Ian Talley in Washington contributed to this article.