On the way to winning the World Series last fall, the San Francisco Giants beat the Atlanta Braves 3 games to 1 in a National League Division Series. Braves Manager Bobby Cox, 69, had earlier announced that he would retire at the end of the 2010 season. So the last game of that series was also Cox's last in a Hall of Fame career that saw his Braves win 14 consecutive division titles, four National League pennants (in nine attempts) and one World Series (in five tries). It is a measure of Cox's greatness that the Giants interrupted their on-field celebration of the series victory to look across the diamond and salute the losing manager.

As baseball now prepares for a new season, one major storyline for fans concerns just how well the Braves will fare under their new manager, Fredi Gonzalez, a former manager of the Florida Marlins. But Lang Whitaker is still thinking about yesterday—and the influence that Bobby Cox had on him.

No, Mr. Whitaker didn't play for the Braves. He is a sports journalist and a Braves fan—by his own admission, an "obsessive" fan. Mr. Whitaker does discuss certain aspects of Cox's managerial record, but his focus is on the life lessons that he says he "learned from Bobby and the Atlanta Braves."

Mr. Whitaker watched most of the Braves games during Cox's years. And while he routinely critiqued the performance of both manager and players, as fans do, he came to see that he was the one being coached. When Mr. Whitaker refers to the "shrink I've been seeing since 1990," he means Bobby Cox, the man he was sitting with, on his couch, game after game.

Clearly, there is risk in bringing your own meager life-story into a chronicle that focuses on one of the greatest recent teams in professional sports. But Mr. Whitaker succeeds in being interesting enough. He was a teenager when Cox took the helm of the Braves. So there was some maturing for him to do as he lived "in the time of Bobby Cox." He writes engagingly about his life during those years—about school, his relationships with his parents and grandparents, career choices, marriage, and starting a family. And weaving together his own stories and those of the Braves, he identifies the lessons learned.

 By Lang Whitaker  (Scribner, 230 pages, $24)

Consider persistence. Mr. Whitaker tells the story of how, in high school, he helped to coach the junior varsity baseball team. It had no catcher, so he had to develop one. The fellow picked for the position wound up becoming "a real catcher" because of his work ethic. He was persistent, just like Mark Lemke, the Braves second baseman between 1990 and 1997, who "tried and tried and tried." Lemke's excellent defensive skills made him indispensable to Cox, notwithstanding batting numbers that were seldom impressive.

"Persistence isn't always measurable," writes Mr. Whitaker, but "it can be learned." Indeed, it characterized Cox's teams: "The Braves and Bobby Cox might not have figured out how to get over that final hump (another league pennant, another World Series championship) consistently," he writes, "but damn if they didn't persistently try to do it, which in the end is all a fan can ask for."

Or consider faith, of the I-believe-in-you kind. Having played basketball ardently as a young boy, Mr. Whitaker was desperate to succeed at organized league play. In high school, despite his "Pillsbury-build and sloth-like speed," he made the junior varsity team and became a starter. The team wasn't exactly a powerhouse; it finished 0-12. Even so, Mr. Whitaker thanked his coach simply for giving him the chance to play. "That [he] had enough faith in me to put me out there on the court gave me a confidence in my ability to play basketball that I'd never had before."

Cox also understood "the power of faith and what it means to have someone believe in you." Witness his willingness every year to keep on the roster at least one player who was having a below-average season—in 1998, it was Tony Graffanino, a pinch hitter who hit .211 and struck out one in every fives times at bat. And in 2009 it was Greg Norton, another pinch-hitting specialist who flopped. You might think that Mr. Whitaker would be critical of Cox for keeping such players. But he accepts that Cox was a manager of second chances—maybe because Cox, a marginal infielder in his playing days, once had a coach who believed in him.

Other life lessons that Mr. Whitaker learned from Bobby Cox concern adapting, communicating, having patience and holding out hope. Not in every case does the autobiographical material illustrate the lesson, but it doesn't matter: Mr. Whitaker is an entertaining writer who shows what it's like to be an intense baseball fan. Along the way, he offers many shrewd observations of Braves players, including Greg Maddux: "It was through studying him that I grasped pitching as an art form, the importance of matching craft and guile with equal parts determination and intensity." Mr. Whitaker hugely admires Andruw Jones ("a power- hitting center fielder who could run like the wind and had an arm like a howitzer"), but he credits Cox with yanking him in the middle of a game when Jones didn't chase after a fly ball with enough speed. It was a humiliating moment for the likable Braves star, but "he came back the next night and played harder."

"In the Time of Bobby Cox" ends where it should, with a chapter on the Braves future. Mr. Whitaker observes that "the current numbers and headlines" are how fans stay tuned in, but it is the "promise of future production" that gives fans hope. Last year the big rookie outfielder Jason Heyward gave us Braves fans (yes, I'm one) reasons for optimism. Now, it is a new manager we are hoping in.

 Mr. Eastland is the publisher of the Weekly Standard. 