Some prominent credit-card issuers, eager to keep customers happy, are beginning to pull back on fees. 

Over the past year, giants  Bank of America Corp.
BAC


2.60
%




 and  Wells Fargo
WFC


0.92
%




 & Co., along with smaller lenders such as Huntington Bank, have stopped levying "penalty-interest rates" on borrowers who are late with their credit-card payments. For card customers with balances of $100 or less, BofA has entirely eliminated the fees. And in the past two months  American Express Co.
AXP


-0.05
%




 and  Citigroup Inc.
C


0.80
%




's Citibank unit announced that they are killing foreign-transaction fees on some of their cards. American Express plans to launch its cards by March. 

After the passage of the Credit Card Responsibility and Disclosure Act of 2009, which placed tough new restrictions on some of the fees that card companies can charge customers, consumer advocates complained that some issuers were circumventing or ignoring key strictures of the law to make up for lost fee income. 

According to R.K. Hammer Investment Bankers, an adviser to card issuers, the Card Act alone is expected to reduce banks' fee income by $11 billion this year. On top of that, the Senate late last year authorized the Federal Reserve to limit lucrative "swipe fees" on debit cards, costing banks an additional $13 billion a year in revenue, according to CardHub.com, a consumer-information website. 

Now, while banks are charging higher interest rates overall—an average 14.71% this month, down from 11.82% at the start of 2008, according to consumer-information site Creditcards.com—some lenders are stepping back from steep fees and penalty rates. 

"We are seeing a move toward eliminating certain fees across cards," says  Bill Hardekopf, chief executive of LowCards.com, a consumer-information site. 

Why the change? Bank of America waived late fees on accounts with balances of $100 or less after it learned that many arose from simple payment oversights, says  Chip Rossi, who heads the credit-card products division: "We didn't think it made sense to assess fees in these situations."

Wells Fargo spokeswoman  Lisa Westermann says the bank changed its penalty-pricing practices on certain accounts as part of an effort to "provide credit to as many credit-worthy customers as possible and to help our customers succeed financially." 

American Express says it nixed foreign transaction fees on certain cards to build loyalty among their cardholders, many of whom are frequent business travelers. "We want to offer the best card for the affluent traveler," says  Desiree Fish, a company spokeswoman. 

Citi spokesman  Sean Kevelighan says: "Waiving foreign currency fees was particularly meaningful to a select group of existing and prospective customers."

Some analysts, however, say lenders also are calculating that bad publicity from imposing fees is itself a threat to revenues. Amid persistent unemployment and a still-sluggish economy, credit-card companies want to tamp down on controversy. 

"The motivation behind these moves is to improve the persistent perception that card issuers are simply price-gouging," says  Sanjay Sakhrani, an analyst at Keefe, Bruyette & Woods.

That is especially important now, as the new Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection sets its enforcement priorities, say banking industry analysts. "Banks would like to keep a low profile right now," says  Dennis Moroney, research director at advisory firm Tower Group. 

Wells Fargo took a public-relations hit after a federal judge in August ordered it to pay more than $200 million to customers for allegedly manipulating debit-card transactions to maximize fee income from overdraft charges. And Bank of America ran into trouble last July when a coalition of consumer advocates sent a letter to the Federal Reserve saying the bank was skirting provisions of the Card Act by omitting penalty-interest rates from card-holders' statements. 

Ms. Westermann says the bank's "method of processing transactions has been appropriate and consistent with customers' interests" and applicable law, adding that it plans to appeal the judge's ruling.  Betty Riess, a Bank of America spokeswoman, says it is "always listening to feedback on the clarity of our communications and takes that feedback seriously." 

Some industry analysts say banks also are increasingly fixated on retaining customers as other lines of business struggle. This week, Wells Fargo reported a decline in full-year revenue from $88.7 billion in 2009 to $85 billion for 2010.  John Stumpf, the bank's chief executive, emphasized the importance of "growth in loans and deposits." 

The cost of signing up new customers has jumped to roughly $150 per account, up from about $100 before the recession. Tower Group's Mr. Moroney expects the figure to exceed $200 over the next year as lenders seek borrowers with the most pristine credit. 

"The few good customers are scarce and more banks want them, so the marketing costs to reach and woo new customers are growing," he says. "You wouldn't want to alienate customers with billing practices that offer little value anyway." 

To get a better deal, borrowers should exploit banks' desire to curry favor, say consumer advocates. Before opening a new account, ask about late fees and penalty interest rates. "You can negotiate far more than you'd think in this environment, even with lenders that have different fee policies," says  Gerri Detweiler, a personal-finance adviser for consumer-education site Credit.com. 

Likewise, ask about other charges, such as annual fees, balance-transfer fees and foreign-exchange fees, say consumer advocates. In this environment, the customer is always right. "For borrowers with good credit, you can go out there and go shopping," Ms. Detweiler says.

 Write to  Jessica Silver-Greenberg at jessica.silver-greenberg@wsj.com 