A faded white 1930 farmhouse stands forlorn, floating in a field on a base of steel beams in the village of Sagaponack, L.I., a short hop from the ocean. 

All it needs now is a millionaire with some money to spare and a bent toward historic preservation.

For $2.5 million plus a few million dollars more to restore and expand it, a buyer will be able to recapture a moment in Long Island's recent agricultural past—and create a summer cottage, perhaps including a pool.

The white farmhouse was built in what is known as the American four-square style. It is now located on the corner of a 10.7-acre field on Hedges Lane.

Its original location was about 650 feet down the road on what had been a 40-acre farm. That property has now been cut up into building lots and the house was moved in an effort to save it, 

The sale of house is intended to be the final piece of a bigger preservation puzzle, involving three separate farms in a wealthy enclave of summer homes. The deal shows how complicated it can be to preserve farm land, especially in expensive domains like the Hamptons where a potato field can be transformed into $20 million mansions

The Peconic Land Trust, which works to preserve working farms and open space, agreed to move the house after the Sagaponack Village architectural and historic review board raised objections to its proposed demolition. The property owner paid to move the house, and agreed to keep another small cottage on the property.

The house's new site is on property already owned by a preservation group. The rest of the field is now to be preserved as farm land.

Proceeds from the house sale are be used to pay for part of the $6 million cost of the purchase of Pike's Farm Stand, a popular field and farm stand, just off Route 27 in Sagaponack. 

Even so, the saga of the four-square farmhouse has sparked some opposition, including a lawsuit that forced the Peconic Land Trust to move the house a second time to meet the objections of a neighbor.

"In Sagaponack or South Hampton where the real-estate values have been constantly going up, you have a really extraordinary situation," said John v.H. Halsey, the president of the land trust.

The house is going on the market this week even though it is still mounted on steel beams that were used to move it down Hedges Lane. A stairway is being built to enable buyers to get into the dilapidated interior. 

Emma Clurman of Brown Harris Stevens, who holds the listing, said buyers would have to build a foundation, move the house onto it on a one-acre parcel on the northeast corner of the field. The buyer would have to preserve the front of the facade, and make sure it remains visible from the street. 

The house is now about 2,000 square feet, and the Peconic Trust was hoping to get permission for the buyer to build an extension of the rear with about an additional 1,000 square feet, plus additional space below grade.

But the final details haven't yet been approved by village planning officials. Ms. Clurman said rebuilding and expanding the house could cost perhaps $1.5 million more, plus the cost of a pool and a garage as well.

"It is such a remarkable opportunity for someone," she said. "It is on 10 acres of what will be preserved farmland, a mile to the ocean beach on one of the most desirable and valued streets in the Hamptons."

American four-square houses were built between 1890 and the 1930s and were popular across the country. Sears, Roebuck & Co., sold plans for the houses, and complete kits of building supplies that arrived by rail. 

They were called "four square" because each of two floors usually had four rooms, with a pyramid-shaped roof featuring a single dormer window in the center.

The idea of saving the Sagaponack four-square house arose in January 2009, when the owner of the subdivided farm went to the village architectural and historic review board to discuss the possibility of demolishing the building as well as several barns and a 19th-century cottage on the site of a farm.

Eventually the land owner agreed to turn the four-square house over to the Peconic Land Trust, along with a donation to pay for the move. As part of the plan, the remaining cottage would be moved to the edge of the parcel and serve as a guest house. 

Michael Davis, a designer and builder of Hamptons mansions, bought the cottage property. He is putting up a 7,000-square-foot English Country Style House, plus a 3,000-square-foot basement, according to plans on his website. An asking price wasn't listed.

Mr. Halsey said the four-square house was moved to a 10-acre site down the street that Ronald Lauder, the businessman and son of Estée Lauder, had donated to the South Fork Land Foundation. 

The farmland wasn't legally protected, Mr. Halsey said, and as a result the site could have been developed into three separate housing plots. 

But under the deal to preserve the farmhouse, the rest of the field would be preserved as open space as well.

The farmhouse was moved in two stages. A neighbor at the new site, Lilith Jacobs, an assistant to film director Sidney Lumet, obtained a restraining order barring the move closer than 300 feet to her home on the edge of the field.

Mr. Halsey said it had been moved 270 feet from her house, so they decided to settle the suit and move the house again to a another spot on the same parcel. 

Ms. Jacobs declined to comment and her lawyer, Brian Doyle, said under the terms of the settlement he wasn't permitted to discuss it.

 Write to  Josh Barbanel at josh.barbanel@wsj.com 