 More than a year before the Nets are scheduled to move into the neighborhood, a basketball champion grows in Brooklyn. Just a handful of blocks from the rising Barclays Center, which the well-travelled NBA franchise will call home starting in 2012, Long Island University has raised a pennant for the first time in 13 years and is on course to become the first New York City institution to qualify for the NCAA tournament since 2004.

In their ninth season under Jim Ferry, the longest tenured Division I coach in the metropolitan area, the Blackbirds have won 18 of their last 19 games, captured the Northeast Conference regular-season title (and with it an automatic bid to the National Invitation Tournament) and secured home court advantage throughout the NEC tournament which begins tonight. 

With all due respect to St. John's, which has captivated the public while swiftly climbing the Big East ladder, LIU (24-5,16-2) has won more often than any other college team in the region.

 Furthermore, the Blackbirds have succeeded with the kind of balance that would have pleased the late Clair Bee, the man who created a national power at the school in the 1930s and 1940s. Despite ranking among the top 10 offensive teams in Division I (82.7 points per game), only forward Julian Boyd, its most complete player, scores as many as 13 points per game. That's due at least partly to depth. Ferry's eight-man rotation limits playing time to a maximum of 27 minutes.

"We have a saying, 'Next man up,'" the coach related. "We have a fantastic player at every position and a fantastic player off the bench at every position. We've played the same way since day one. We wear people down."

Indeed, the Blackbirds are so deep in the backcourt that freshman point guard Jason Brickman, who has yet to start a game, leads the conference with an average of 5.67 assists.

 He and sophomore starter C.J. Garner run a blistering fast break triggered by the rebounding of Boyd and fellow sophomores Jamal Olasewere and Kenny Onyechi—the Blackbirds rank third nationally in rebounding—and augmented by the long-distance shooting of seniors David Hicks and Kyle Johnson and junior Michael Culpo.

"We have tremendous speed at the point guard position," said Hicks, who has connected on 45 per cent of his 3-point attempts since Dec. 19. "Those guys are going to find you if you get open."

"Everyone on this team wants to win," noted Boyd, the conference's rookie of the year in 2009 who missed all last season with a heart condition. "No one cares how much they play or how much they score.''

Remarkably, not one of the Blackbirds averages 10 field goal attempts per contest. "Unselfishness travels," the coach preaches.

 That would explain why LIU leads the nation in road victories with 13, matching its combined total for the previous three seasons.

 Its only defeat away from the Wellness, Recreation & Athletic Center since mid-December occurred on Jan. 22 at St. Francis (Pa.), the school it will host in NEC quarterfinals.

 With a victory tonight and in Sunday's semifinal and the nationally televised championship game next Wednesday, the Blackbirds will advance to the NCAA tournament for the first time since 1997 and only the fourth time overall.

"We haven't accomplished what we want to yet," Johnson said. The effort continues tonight in Brooklyn.