NEW YORK—U.S. stocks closed out their first day of gains this week on Thursday as rising oil prices boosted energy companies and efforts to tame Japan's damaged nuclear power plant eased some fears over the crisis.

After falling 3.6% in the week's first three sessions, the Dow Jones Industrial Average closed up 161.29 points, or 1.4%, at 11774.59, its biggest point and percent gain in two weeks.

The Nasdaq Composite gained 19.23 points, or 0.7%, to 2636.05. The Standard & Poor's 500-share index added 16.84, or 1.3%, to 1273.72, led by its energy sector.

The market's advances came as Japanese authorities claimed modest gains Thursday in their efforts to tame the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear-power complex with some 100 tons of seawater on Thursday using helicopters and fire trucks, an urgent effort to combat rising temperatures in two storage pools for spent nuclear fuel. Radiation levels at the site fell slightly and a Tepco executive said operations were "a good first step" in bringing the reactors under control.

U.S. investors said the day's gains were unsurprising after the three-day slump.

"The market was due for a bit of a bounce, given how negative the sentiment got and how violent the downdraft was," said  Carlton Neel, senior managing director at Virtus Investment Advisers. "What we're starting to see is the recognition that the rebuilding effort in Japan is going to take an enormous amount of resources: both human resources and natural resources."

Market watchers said stocks were posting sharp swings as investors reacted to a flow of galvanizing headlines. Thursday's session marked the third day of triple-digit point moves.

"You're going to have continued volatility in both directions and today just happens to be on the upside," said  Alan Lancz, president at Alan B. Lancz & Associates.

Energy companies gained as crude-oil prices jumped more than 3.5%, settling above $101 a barrel as unrest continued in the Middle East and North Africa. The United Nations Security Council was set to vote on a resolution that would authorize airstrikes on Libya, several diplomats said, as Col. Moammar Gadhafi's air force bombed the opposition's capital of Benghazi in a push to end the monthlong revolt against his rule.

Oil and gas exploration and production company  Noble Energy jumped 5.3%, while oilfield-services company  Schlumberger rose 4.8% and drilling contractor  Rowan gained 4.8%. 

Boosting natural-gas explorers, the head of the U.S. Energy Information Administration said that Japan is likely to turn to liquefied natural gas to meet its energy needs as it recovers from its earthquake.  Northern Oil & Gas rose 5.5%,  Pioneer Drilling added 6.4% and  Oceaneering International gained 4.4%. 

Industrials also climbed, lifted by a 3.1% jump in international package shipper  FedEx after its fourth-quarter earnings target topped analysts' mean estimate. The company's fiscal third-quarter profit slid, hurt by winter storms. Rival  United Parcel Service rose 1.8%.

The dollar moved higher against the yen Thursday, but still remained down on the day, after a report said leaders of the world's largest economies will support Japan's possible intervention into currency markets. Group of Seven ministers will hold a conference call later Thursday on ways to calm global markets.

The dollar weakened against the euro, which touched its highest level against the dollar since Nov. 8. The euro was trading recently at $1.4019, up from $1.3896 late Wednesday in New York. The U.S. Dollar Index, which tracks the currency against a basket of others, fell 0.9%.

U.S. economic data were mixed on Thursday. Encouraging investors, the Philadelphia Federal Reserve's manufacturing survey for March showed its best reading since January 1984, well outstripping expectations.

The government's weekly report on the number of U.S. workers filing new claims for unemployment showed a bigger-than-expected drop last week. Meanwhile, U.S. consumer prices rose in February at their fastest pace since mid-2009 as energy and food prices continued to move higher.

Among stocks in focus,  Winnebago skidded 12% after the recreational-vehicle company posted a surprising 3.6% decline in fiscal second-quarter revenue. The company said weakening consumer confidence, caused by volatility in gas prices, is crimping sales of its recreational vehicles.

  Guess plunged 14% after the apparel maker's comparable sales at its larger U.S. retail business declined, and it gave a weak outlook for earnings this year and for the current quarter's results. Fiscal fourth-quarter earnings rose 19% on continued strength overseas.

  Apple gained 1.4% after  Credit Suisse started coverage of the stock with an "outperform" investment rating, setting a $500 price target on predictions of strong earnings growth.

The  New York Times rose 0.3% after releasing details of its long-awaited plans to charge readers for access to the paper's website and other digital services. Beginning March 28, online readers will be able to read only up to 20 articles per month free before being prompted to sign up for one of several subscription plans. 

Demand for U.S. Treasurys slipped, pushing yield on the 10-year note up to 3.26%. Gold futures settled slightly higher.

 Write to  Kristina Peterson at kristina.peterson@dowjones.com 