COMBAT OUTPOST KOWALL, Afghanistan—U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert Gates got a first look at a village-based defense force that could be a cornerstone for a U.S. exit from Afghanistan. 

On a Tuesday visit to this U.S. base in the Arghandab River Valley of southern Afghanistan, Mr. Gates met with local leaders who backed the creation of a small local police unit now backed by U.S. trainers and funds.

Mr. Gates said he was encouraged by what he saw in the once-Taliban-controlled village, as well as in other parts of southern Afghanistan. "I do feel the pieces are coming together," he said.

Underscoring that point, Mr. Gates on Tuesday also visited Sangin, a long-contested town in southern Helmand Province that has been a deadly battleground for both U.K. and U.S. troops. Marines of the 3rd Battalion, 5th Marine Regiment say they've made great strides in stabilizing Sangin in recent months, although at a high cost in casualties. Mr. Gates said Sangin had seen a "dramatic turnaround." 

The defense-force initiative, dubbed the Afghan Local Police, is part of a U.S.-backed effort to wrest Afghanistan's rural communities from Taliban control. U.S. special-operations forces, operating out of small, spartan outposts, are helping to organize the lightly equipped units to defend their turfs where Afghan government control has traditionally been limited.

Afghan Local Police, armed with AK-47 assault rifles, live at home and receive a basic, three-week course from their U.S. trainers. For their meeting with Mr. Gates, members of the ten-man force from the village of Tabin, a short walk from the combat outpost, stood in formation by their biggest piece of equipment: a U.S.-furnished pickup truck. They were joined by a handful of new recruits to the program.

Lt. Col. David Flynn, commander of the U.S. Army unit that is supporting the training mission, said the U.S. military picked this village to launch the police program in part because it was on a "strategic piece of road" between Kandahar city to Arghandab District.

"Our hope is that we'll prevent the Taliban from coming back into this village, and all the others that we have up and down the valley," he said.

At issue is not just whether Afghan forces will be able to take over security from U.S. and coalition forces, but whether the cash-strapped Afghan government can afford to maintain them over the longer term without substantial foreign aid. According to the CIA World Factbook, the Afghan government's total annual revenue is about $1 billion, while the Obama administration's budget request for fiscal 2012 includes $12.8 billion to train and equip Afghanistan's growing army and national police force. Mr. Gates has publicly questioned whether Afghanistan can sustain a force that large, and that costly, over the long term. 

Lt. Gen. David Rodriguez, deputy commander of U.S. Forces in Afghanistan, told reporters in Kabul that Afghan Local Police were "very, very cheap, relatively speaking." 

Gen. Rodriguez said around 4,500 Afghan Local Police were now in some stage of training in villages around the country. The U.S. military pays their salaries, which are on par with the country's national police. Military officials said that plans were underway for the Afghan Ministry of Interior, which runs the national police, to eventually also assume responsibility for paying these rural police forces.

Validation by the Afghan government is also important for political reasons. In Wardak Province, west of Kabul, the U.S. military has experimented with a similar program, called the Afghan Public Protection Program. The Afghan government was concerned that local warlords might dominate the local defense groups. 

The Afghan Local Police, which succeeded that program, will rely on local elders to help select and vet volunteers. Oversight by Afghanistan's Ministry of Interior is supposed to prevent abuses.

Gen. Rodriguez acknowledged the Afghan government's concerns. "To get those Afghan Local Police built, there are several preconditions that have to be established prior them being stood up," he said. "Which is why President Karzai very carefully looked at how these were going to get done, to ensure that there are plenty of checks and balances, so it doesn't become a militia, which was part of the fear of the Afghan people." 