Washington

The most artistically accomplished memorial in Washington, D.C.—as well as the most overlooked—is that of Gen. Ulysses S. Grant. It celebrates not just its namesake but the brave men who carried out his orders in the face of danger and death. Shorn of the allegory and sentiment common to so much commemorative art, it vividly and unsparingly depicts what Kathryn Allamong Jacob calls, in "Testament to Union: Civil War Monuments in Washington, D.C.," "the harsh face of war in the awful beauty of richly detailed men and horses rushing to battle."

Standing at the east end of the Mall, facing the Lincoln Memorial to the west, with the Washington Monument in between, its prominent location reflects Grant's once-towering reputation in the eyes of his countrymen. Sadly, most visitors who linger there today do so merely to photograph the Capitol looming behind it. As we approach the sesquicentennial of the onset of the Civil War, the Grant Memorial bears looking at anew.

The genesis of the memorial was a 1901 act of Congress which appropriated $250,000 for the effort and established a commission to select a sculptor. A year later a jury that included Augustus Saint-Gaudens and Daniel Chester French—sculptor of the monumental statue of the 16th president in the Lincoln Memorial—chose Henry Merwin Shrady.

Mr. Shrady (1871-1922) was an unlikely recipient of the largest art commission ever awarded by Congress. He had earlier withdrawn from a business career due to ill health, and during his convalescence had discovered latent artistic abilities. Only 31 years old at the time of his selection, he had but a scant record of artistic achievement. The decision sparked an uproar by the rejected applicants. Detractors complained that family prominence and connections had influenced the choice. But after a review, the committee again selected Mr. Shrady.

The artist's devotion to the task was absolute. Laboring ceaselessly for two decades, he examined Civil War relics, dissected horses to study their anatomical structure and even joined the New York National Guard for four years to gain an understanding of the military.

The memorial Mr. Shrady produced was unlike any other in the U.S. up to that time. It is vast, with a base 252 feet wide by 71 feet deep, and was the largest bronze-casting project ever undertaken. At its center stands an equestrian statue of Grant. Flanking him, albeit some distance away, are clusters of warriors: a Cavalry Group to the north and an Artillery Group to the south. 

The Grant statue, together with its pedestal, stand nearly 40 feet tall and is one of the largest of its kind in the world. The general sits astride his favorite horse, Cincinnati; he is slouched, right arm akimbo, hat pulled low, gazing off in the distance with the cool dispassion for which he was famous. Cincinnati stands tense, head turned slightly to the left, nostrils flared, alert to the sound of battle. Around the statue's Vermont marble pedestal are four smaller plinths topped by bronze lions, each guarding the flags of the U.S. and of the Army.

But the true genius of the memorial lies in the flanking sculptures. They endow the memorial with a powerful immediacy by reminding us that great causes are not won without sacrifice and suffering. The Cavalry Group portrays seven men and their horses in the full chaos of battle. A horse and rider at the front have fallen, and the man behind them has covered his face, bracing for disaster. The fallen soldier appears to accept his fate with grim resignation. (The sculptor used mirrors to model the unfortunate man after himself.) The officer at the front shouts an order, sword aloft, oblivious to his fallen comrade. In his "Washington Sculpture: A Cultural History of Outdoor Sculpture in the Nation's Capital," James M. Goode justly deems the Cavalry Group to possess "more dramatic interest and suspense than any sculpture in the city, and, indeed, in the nation."

The Artillery Group depicts six men and five horses shepherding a caisson and cannon through the battlefield. Beneath them is a roiling sea of mud and debris. An abandoned musket lies nearby, so realistically rendered that the viewer might try to pick it up. One of the men has given the signal to pivot right; his guidon, seemingly flying against the wind, has in fact just been flung backward. The horses are all restrained power, digging their hooves in the mud for purchase as they prepare to turn—save for one, whose continued forward movement seems strange until one notices his broken bridle strap. This horse's hooves are flung out far beyond the pedestal beneath; to stand beneath them is unsettling. The expressions of the men vary from stoic resolve to fearful exhilaration. The danger and fury of battle are rendered without glamour or pretense.

Two low-relief bronze panels on either side of Grant's pedestal represent the infantry. Completed by another sculptor working from Mr. Shrady's sketches, they were installed two years after the memorial's dedication. More conventional and less dramatic than the two sculpture groups, they nonetheless depict relentless forward movement. It is ironic, however, that the infantry, hurled by Grant against the works of Cold Harbor and so many other deadly entrenchments, should be somewhat overshadowed here.

The memorial was dedicated on April 27, 1922, the centenary of Grant's birth. Sadly, Mr. Shrady wasn't there to see it. He had died two weeks previously, at age 50, overwork and exhaustion having destroyed his already precarious health.

Today the memorial is difficult to see to advantage because the Capitol Reflecting Pool, installed in 1970, blocks a direct approach from the front. This pointless water feature should be removed immediately and "Union Square," as the area is officially known, relandscaped to permit a proper viewing and appreciation of Mr. Shrady's masterpiece. And the memorial is tarnished by years of exposure and neglect. Perhaps the new Congress that recently convened behind the memorial will notice and take action. Both the artist and the man who helped Lincoln save the union deserve no less.

—Mr. Bishop has held several government posts and is the former executive director of the Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Commission.