For decades, the tectonic plates of contemporary classical music and progressive rock have been closing in on each other, with New York City straddling the fault line. An ever-growing number of musically ambidextrous artists and genre-bending ensembles make their home here, performing in clubs dedicated to hybrid performances. 

On Thursday, one such group, Alarm Will Sound, will present "1969" at Carnegie Hall, a show dedicated to the time when the ground first began to rumble. In one corner, the Beatles; in the other, the avant-garde of European modernism.

The show, with a script by Andrew Kupfer based on a concept by Alarm Will Sound's artistic director, Alan Pierson, stages a virtual conclave of John Lennon, Paul McCartney and key figures from the world of classical music: electronic-music enfant terrible Karlheinz Stockhausen; Luciano Berio, the Italian godfather of modernism; and Leonard Bernstein, composer, conductor and musical omnivore. Since its first performance in 2009, its mix of live music, spoken text and archival video footage has continued to evolve; this week's New York premiere features new musical material by composer Stefan Freund. 

At the heart of the show are two meetings, one that is documented and one that never took place. The first was between Messrs. McCartney and Berio, who met at a Berio lecture in London in 1965. "Paul left that meeting with the idea of making a piece that used these tape loops," Mr. Pierson said. "[The Beatles'] 'Revolution 9' is the piece where you most clearly hear them, with sounds taken from all sorts of sources, but they're also on 'Tomorrow Never Knows' and 'A Day in the Life'— songs that have that use of sound as a paintbrush."

The second meeting, as the late Mr. Stockhausen would tell it, was to have taken place in New York, in 1969, at the home of the pianist and composer Lukas Foss, where the Beatles and Mr. Stockhausen were to discuss a joint concert or recording. But that get-together fell victim to a severe snowstorm and the collaboration never occurred. Mr. Stockhausen's most visible mark on the Beatles would remain his appearance on the cover of 1967's "Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band." Yet the influence of his seminal "Gesang der Jünglinge," a work for electronically manipulated voices, is audible in a number of songs, including "Strawberry Fields Forever."

Alarm Will Sound's "1969" juxtaposes live performances of these songs—including a chamber-music version of "Revolution 9"—with Mr. Berio's arrangements of Beatles songs. (His first wife, mezzo-soprano Cathy Berberian, liked to include them in her recitals.)

But, said Mr. Pierson, such attempts to bridge the gap between musical worlds were still fraught with difficulties in the '60s, as there was no common language in which to work. "Part of what makes the show resonant for us in Alarm Will Sound is that since then the borders have become more porous," he said. "Now, a meeting between a major composer from the classical world and a rock group wouldn't be news."

After Mr. Lennon's murder in 1980, Mr. Stockhausen praised him as "the most important mediator between popular and serious music of [the] century." On the classical side, Mr. Lennon's counterpart was Mr. Bernstein, who made attempts to reach out to pop culture. "Yet even within this one person, that meeting of worlds is awkward," said Mr. Pierson, adding that Mr. Bernstein's "Mass," with its mash-up of choral passages, Broadway texts and a rock band, "is in many ways a failure."

The political events of the late '60s, including marches, race riots and the assassinations of Martin Luther King Jr. and Robert Kennedy, give the show its narrative arc. According to Mr. Kupfer, foremost "in the minds of the principals was the question: What's the role of music and the arts in times of great political upheaval?"

Their responses, he said, were as much a function of character as of musical style. "Stockhausen was a mystic on a cosmic scale. Berio was very much an éminence grise who was very forward with his opinions. And Lennon started out with the Beatles as sounding fairly naïve on questions of politics, but then met Yoko and became more politicized. Yoko really pushed John Lennon in new directions—even to the extent that John became an exemplar of experimental music." 