NEW YORK—Crude futures settled lower after a major earthquake in Japan created expectations for a drop in demand in the world's third-largest oil consumer. 

Light, sweet crude for April delivery fell as low as $99.01 a barrel early in the session before recovering to settle $1.54, or 1.5%, lower at $101.16 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange. Brent crude on the ICE futures fell $1.59 to $113.84 a barrel. 

Oil prices weakened as markets assessed the damage to Japan's refinery capacity and the impact on overall crude demand in the country, after an 8.9-magnitude earthquake hit. Japan, which consumes 4.4 million barrels of crude oil a day, continues to be rocked by powerful aftershocks after the initial earthquake unleashed a tsunami.

"We're trying to understand how bad this is, and if it's over," said  Phil Flynn, an oil analyst with PFGBest. "Their refineries are shut down, some of them are burning…but it's hard to judge exactly how bad the demand destruction is."

Prices are likely to remain volatile as the market assesses the damage. Fires broke out at two Japanese refineries while another was shut because of a power outage. Though with the shutdown of some of the country's nuclear power plants, analysts said demand could rebound quickly in the next few months as Japan uses oil and fuel products to provide electricity.

"The scrupulous safety checks needed for restart make it likely that these nuclear power sources will be out for a long time," said J.P. Morgan analysts in a client note. "As they have in the past, Japanese power companies will need to turn to fuel oil or [liquid natural gas] where available." 

The quake turned traders attention from the Middle East, where fighting continued in Libya between opposition forces and Col. Moammar Gadhafi. Oil prices surged late Thursday after police in Saudi Arabia fired on demonstrators in the eastern city of Qatif. But a large police presence in the kingdom Friday quashed planned "day of rage" protests, even amid unrest in other parts of the region. 

Saudi Arabia, the world's largest crude exporter, has played a central role in calming the oil market by boosting production to make up for the disruption in Libyan oil exports. Saudi officials said production was raised to nine million barrels a day, while the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries said the group is ready to pump additional oil to accommodate for supply disruptions.

President Barack Obama said Friday the U.S. is prepared to tap federal oil stockpiles in the event of an emergency shortage, while calling for the investigation of possible oil-price gouging. He said the administration is looking at potential new oil development in Alaska.

Should the U.S. decide to tap the Strategic Petroleum Reserve, relief could come within several days, Mr. Obama said. 