Last week, as the Wisconsin stalemate was coming to an end, we worried about the potential threat that unionized policemen, in "solidarity" with other unionized government employees, might tolerate or even participate in lawless behavior in order to undermine the workings of republican governance and preserve union privileges. Milwaukee radio host Charlie Sykes reports that Wisconsin businessmen are now receiving letters importuning them to oppose Gov. Scott Walker's efforts on behalf of Wisconsin's taxpayers:

Palmer's union is the first of the seven "undersigned groups"; the others are two more police unions, two firemen's unions and two teachers unions. Although the new legislation excludes police and fire unions from its limits on so-called collective bargaining, one can understand why they would oppose it: Their own privileges become less secure if they are the only ones to enjoy them.

It should be acknowledged that cops and firemen have dangerous jobs and thus are arguably more deserving of generous retirement benefits than, say, motor-vehicle clerks or teachers. But the substance of their compensation is a separate question from the procedure by which it is arrived at. "Collective bargaining" is outrageous because it is an affront to democracy: a system of collusion between politicians and unions, which cuts out the taxpayers whose money they are spending. 

No doubt there were compelling political reasons for Walker and Republican lawmakers to leave in place the privileges enjoyed by police and fire unions--whether crass partisanship (they are less Democratic than other unions), cops' and firemen's claim to public sympathy, or the desire to avoid (or at least minimize) the threat of a backlash by the workers on whom the government and citizenry depend to maintain order.

But in principle, so-called collective bargaining is no less objectionable in the case of cops and firemen than of anyone else. Once the public accepts that it is over for everyone else, there won't be much political support left for privileging the police and fire unions. Thus it makes perfect sense for them to side with the unions representing teachers and others with easier jobs. Their privileges are safe as long as everyone else's are at least contested.

In the letter to Wisconsin businessmen, however, we see why so-called collective bargaining is particularly corrupting to the police. Although the letter explicitly threatens only an economic boycott, when it is written on behalf of the police--of those on whom all citizens depend to protect their safety--it invariably raises the prospect of another kind of boycott. Can a businessman who declines this heavy-handed "request" be confident that the police will do their job if he is the victim of a crime--particularly if the crime itself is in retaliation for his refusal to support "the dedicated public employees who serve our communities"?

Sykes sums up the letter this way: "That's a nice business you got there. Pity if anything were to happen to it if, say, you didn't toe the line and denounce Governor Walker like we're asking nice-like." He's right. "Organized" law enforcement bears a disturbing resemblance to organized crime.

On a lighter note, here's a Leiter note--a blog post from Brian Leiter, a left-liberal philosopher who teaches at the University of Chicago. Leiter is unhappy with the "attack on workers' rights" by "the Republican criminals in Wisconsin" and also with plans in Pennsylvania to cut funding for public universities. He writes:

Chicago is a private university, but almost the entire higher-education industry is heavily subsidized by taxpayers, so that Leiter's position here is self-interested as well as ideological. Blogress Ann Althouse, a professor at a public university, goes against interest when she writes of Leiter:

Having long viewed academia with a jaundiced eye, we're inclined to view the Leiter post more with amusement than disgust. Just imagine if a Wisconsin businessman got a letter from a philosopher:

Really strikes fear into you, doesn't it? Leiter seems more like a character from Monty Python than "On the Waterfront."

  Accountability Journalism   The Associated Press is still soft on President Obama. "On High-Profile issues, Obama Keeps a Low Profile," reads the headline on a dispatch by Jim Kuhnhenn:

"Call it an above-the-fray strategy"? Why do we think that if George W. Bush were still president, the AP would tell us to call it something less gentle? It is pure puffery for anyone--much less a news reporter--to present the president's lack of leadership in a foreign-policy crisis as a virtue.

On the other hand, there is something to be said for the point that not every subject calls for presidential leadership. On Wisconsin, we'd say Ellison has it exactly backward: It's a state question, and Obama erred by taking sides at all.

Which raises another point: How can the AP do a story about Obama's "above-the-fray strategy" without making any mention of earlier episodes in which he gratuitously inserted himself into controversies--the Ground Zero mosque, the Skip Gates kerfuffle--that were none of the president's concern?

  The Roots of Complacency   "Why Is It So Easy for Lila Rose and James O'Keefe?" asks David French of National Review Online in the wake of last week's O'Keefe-orchestrated meltdown at NPR. (Rose, whom we haven't written about, undertook a similar prank/sting against Planned Parenthood.) French's answer comes down to the Taranto principle, that liberal media bias breeds complacency:

 William Tucker writing for The American Spectator, makes a related point with respect to Ron Schiller, the NPR fund-raiser who was duped into disclosing his bigoted views:

Tucker perhaps gives Obama too much credit. After all, as we learned with the 2008 "bitter clingers" episode, in private he too explains away uncongenial views as the product of economic stress or Marxian false consciousness. In resorting to such catchall dismissals of opposing views, members of the supposed elite reveal themselves to be intellectually lazy, unwilling to make the effort of mounting reasoned defenses of their own positions.

 NewsBusters.org reports on one public-radio person who shows some self-awareness. Sue Schardt heads the Association of Independents in Radio and "represents indies as a non-NPR member on the NPR Board's Distribution/Interconnection Committee." She recently observed that public radio caters to a narrow slice of the population:

Schardt is exactly right about the narrowness of public radio's appeal, though we're highly skeptical of Schardt's assertion that "it was never anyone's intention to exclude anyone." Surely Juan Williams would disagree. 

But Williams's experience--his manifestly unjust and ideologically motivated firing from NPR was followed immediately by a generous offer from Fox News Channel--shows why we're also skeptical of her suggestion that public radio aim to broaden its appeal to include almost everyone. The result, it seems to us, would be either bland or cacophonous--maybe both, if that is possible.

It's not as if the 89% of Americans who are outside the NPR "core" are at a loss for other, mostly commercial media options. But why in the world should the rest of us subsidize the tastes of wealthy white liberals? It makes much more sense to cut public radio free from the government and let it compete in the marketplace on an equal footing with everyone else. 

The leaders of a private NPR might well decide it makes sense to broaden its appeal, but they'd likely be savvy enough not to try to be all things to all people.

 And They Said Bush Was Stubborn 

  No Jury Would Ever Convict Him, Would They? Much Too Circumstantial. His Alibis Were Too Perfect.   "Mike Hammer will do a great job as my successor at State."--former spokesman P.J. Crowley, quoted by the Associated Press, March 13

  Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc   "Earth's Day Length Shortened by Japan Earthquake"--headline, CBSNews.com, March 13

  With Half His Brain Tied Behind His Back   "Rush to Fix Quake-Damaged Undersea Cables"--headline, WSJ.com, March 14

 So Much for the War on Drugs 

  He Was Too Big for Supercuts   "Former Giant Barber to Return to NFL"--headline, The Wall Street Journal, March 9

  Food Allergies Are Not a Joke   "Police Report Rash of Beef Jerky Heists"--headline, Buffalo News, March 12

  Hey, Kids! What Time Is It?   "JUAN WILLIAMS: It's Time to Defund NPR"--headline, FoxNews.com, March 14

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

 Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  Monkeyfishing--Now That Would Be News   "Endangered Monkeys Invent New Fishing Method"--headline, Puffington Host, March 11

  Breaking News From 1862   "North Dakota Lawmakers Vote to Keep 'Fighting Sioux' "--headline, Reuters, March 11

  Breaking News From 1902   "Builder Plans to Develop Triangular Lot"--headline, Waterloo (Iowa) Courier, March 13

  Breaking News From 1941   "Germany Stands by Japan and Is Prepared to Help"--headline, German Mission to the U.S. press release, March 11

  News You Can Use   "Protect His Sperm With an iPad"--headline, CafeMom.com, March 10

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  Bridge to the 20th Century   Even the liberal New York Times admits that Bamtrak, President Obama's rail boondoggle, is ill-conceived. A news story in Saturday's paper notes that the Tampa-to-Orlando line, nixed by Florida's new governor, Rick Scott, "had obvious drawbacks":

The Times also reports that "transportation advocates are continuing their push":

The Naderites set the video in 1965. Why didn't the Randians think of that?

The Times reports that Bamtrak isn't dead, just delayed: "With the collapse of the Florida route, it looks as if the nation's first segment of true high-speed rail will be in an even unlikelier place--linking Fresno and Bakersfield, in California's Central Valley, and scheduled to end construction in 2017."

Just what we need a train from nowhere to nowhere!

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Michele Schiesser, Matthew Berkhan, Ed Grinberg, Hillel Markowitz, J.S. Henkel, Joseph Heschmeyer, Clifford Crouch, Ethel Fenig, David Hallstrom, Joe Perez, Mark King, Jim Dolson, Kevin Burns, Jay Nerby, Peter Huntsman, Gerald Massoudi, Gary Hunt, Michael Williamson, Herbert Sorock, John Sarna, Chuck Hughes, Zack Russ, Bill Briggs, Jim Weidman, Rick Coffey, James Allison, Lance Van Auken, Randy Smith, John Williamson, James Bennett, Janet Eaglstein, John Sanders, Peter Iorio, Jeff Herman, David Bakin, Ed Thompson, Kyle Kyllan, Monty Krieger, Stephen Grant, Seth Lipsky, Tom Dziubek, Justin Bartlett, Pat Allen, Barry Gardner and Steve Fagel. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)