A venture capitalist, screenwriter and an arts manager are trying to put the play back in playwright. 

  Dan Gross, Sandi Goff Farkas and  Lesley Malin Helm, all board members of Manhattan's Lark Theatre, have personally given and raised nearly $1.6 million toward a new $2.3 million International Center for Play Development that recently opened in Manhattan's Theater District. 

"If you look at theater as an ecosystem, we are the beginning developer, the R&D part of the process," says the Lark's founder and artistic director,  John Clinton Eisner. "So much money is spent on theater before the plays are actually ready and then once it's on Broadway it's often too late to make changes." 

He points to a number of multimillion Broadway productions that have recently run into myriad financial and artistic mishaps, leading to on-stage injuries and cancelled performances. 

"We invite the playwright here first to play, experiment, and even fail without the pressures of commercial involvement," Mr. Eisner says, who launched Lark out of his Upper West Side apartment 16 years ago. 

As the Lark grew, it moved to various playhouses and offices. Although executives knew the Lark needed its own space, the nonprofit says it was priced out of the real-estate market. 

"After the recession, our whole model flipped and we could afford it," says Ms. Farkas, who helped the nonprofit secure a 12-year lease last March. "Now for the first time the Lark will have its own home."

The 9,300-square-foot center will serve as a think tank and laboratory for playwrights from the U.S. and abroad and includes a community gathering space and a studio designed to act like an erector set, in which artists can rearrange the room to create a number of formats for performances or rehearsals. 

Covered in blue "chalkboard" paint, the walls allow people to write or draw on them like a chalkboard and encourage artist collaboration. A large rehearsal room allows Lark to work on multiple projects at once and a writing room gives playwrights a quiet space to work. 

"The idea was how do you make the space interactive for the community to use and for playwrights to come and work together?" said the Lark's managing director,  Michael Robertson, "It's like a big toy box." 

Although the Lark has already moved into its new space, construction won't be completed until September. 