BUDAPEST—Central Budapest's cafes and shops were long closed and its narrow streets quiet at 3 a.m. Sunday, when David Recsey let out a horrified gasp.

The 28-year-old Hungarian stared at his television in disbelief as the Atlanta Falcons' kick returner dodged defenders and ran 102 yards for a touchdown against his favorite National Football League team, the Green Bay Packers. He protested when the Packers, well ahead as time ran low, appeared to court injury by sending quarterback Aaron Rodgers in for more playing time.

"Rodgers is good. The offense is strong," said Mr. Recsey, whose apartment is decorated in Green Bay Packers posters and yellow and green Packers' footballs. "If they keep up this level of play, no one will stand a chance against them."

American football, which for years has struggled to promote itself outside the U.S., has developed an ardent and growing following in former communist countries of Central and Eastern Europe. More than 2,000 Hungarians—including many women—play on more than 20 amateur teams, overcoming shortages of equipment and fields and a general ignorance of the game in a country where soccer is considered the real football. 

They include Mr. Recsey, who is also the starting quarterback for the Budapest Wolves. There's also 35-year-old Wolves' wide receive Peter Beran, a former sprinter and New England Patriots follower, and Kata Szaraz, a 29-year-old linebacker on the Wolves' women's affiliate, which plays in the Austrian Ladies' Football League against the likes of the Graz Black Widows.

There is a long if somewhat tenuous connection between American football and Hungary, which from the 1950s through the 1970s provided talented U.S.-born Hungarians who became some of the NFL's top players. 

While the NFL has backed away from its big official push in Europe, disbanding its Europe league in 2007, the sport keeps a toehold, particularly in Germany and Austria. In Hungary, it is slowly picking up steam. 

The game got a boost in Hungary about a decade ago when the Wolves, one of the country's few amateur teams, secured a deal from a television executive who was a fan of the team to place cheap ads, say people familiar with the league. The Wolves inspired Hungarians by meeting the powerhouse Vienna Vikings in championship matches in the mid-2000s. Former Wolves players have gone on to coach new amateur teams around the country.

Quarterback Mr. Recsey cites a more fundamental appeal among men here. "It's a womanizing sport," he said, using a Hungarian word whose closest English equivalent is perhaps "babe magnet."

Mr. Recsey says he was in high school when he caught his first glimpse of an NFL game on satellite TV. "The game was spectacular, extreme and new," he says. 

After years playing water polo and competing in judo matches, Mr. Recsey tried out for the Wolves after seeing an ad posted at a city sports complex in 2003. "There were five practices a week plus training in the gym, and there was a year when we played 20 matches," says Mr. Recsey. 

His Wolves club—which has two men's teams as well as squads for women and boys—trains on an artificial turf soccer pitch in a rundown industrial neighborhood on the capital's outskirts. The Wolves play local teams and also against Serbian, Slovenian, Austrian and Turkish teams that are part of an international Central European League. 

On game days in Budapest, the team members take turns using a homemade measuring tape marked in yards, rather than Hungary's accustomed meters, to line the gridiron. Makeshift goal posts are lashed upright to soccer goals. 

Other teams face additional challenges. The Gladiators, in Debrecen, a city in northeast Hungary about 140 miles from Budapest, play in a clearing in the woods on the edge of town.

The game's basics, however, appear not to be lost in translation. "The secondary stopped working. Cornerbacks who have been brilliant didn't catch the flow," Wolves' wide receiver Mr. Beran said this week, breaking down his beloved Patriots' loss to the Jets on Sunday. "The whole team just fell in the ditch."

And coaches speak an international language. "What I'm trying to teach the guys is to be positive," says Wisconsin-born Lee Hlavka, 66, the Wolves head coach. "We're never going on the field before the match thinking we're going to lose."

Hungarian women, meanwhile, have embraced the game they say demonstrates they aren't afraid to stand on their own. Ms. Szaraz, who plays linebacker, says most of her friends aren't that surprised that she plays football. "People who know me say I am crazy anyway," she says. 

The larger friction point among those in the know, she says, is that her favorite team is the Jacksonville Jaguars, which finished the NFL season at a middle of the pack 8-8. 

Ms. Szaraz says she digs through secondhand clothes shops for aquamarine Jags T-shirts that she can wear to practice. She even ordered the official team-logo toothbrush online. 

"I'm a laughingstock for supporting the Jags," she said.

Corrections & Amplifications

In the photograph, the Budapest Wolves players shown are wearing red uniforms, and the Vienna Vikings white. The caption accompanying an earlier version of this article incorrectly said the Budapest players were wearing white.