Yesterday's reading of the Constitution on the House floor was a lovely bit of symbolism--and all the lovelier for the bizarre and revealing reactions it has prompted among some on the left, especially at the Washington Post. First up, and much commented upon, was wunderkind Ezra Klein, who wrote an essay titled "The Constitution Is Very Important":

Just kidding--that was the Iowahawk parody. Klein's actual essay had an even funnier title: "Yes, the Constitution Is Binding." The young man hitherto best known as the founder of JournoList was trying to clarify comments he had made on MSNBC in response to a question about the planned congressional reading. Here's what he said, in response to the question, "Is this a gimmick?":

The headline of Klein's follow-up essay was more defensive than it needed to be. It was clear from the video that it was the House's reading of the Constitution, not the document itself, that had "no binding power" according to Klein. But he did say the Constitution was "confusing because it was written more than 100 years ago." Maybe he was thinking of "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn."

If Klein isn't intellectual enough to appreciate the Constitution, his colleague E.J. Dionne takes a downright anti-intellectual approach. He complains that many House Republicans "behave as professors in thrall to a few thrilling ideas"--ideas, that is, about limitations on the power of government:

Them dang founders wasn't as smart as they thought they wuz! Shore, they had all that fancy book-larnin', but they didn't have no Facebook-larnin'. What good was they?

Still, one has to admit, transcendent constitutional abstractions like "We the People," "The Blessings of Liberty," and "freedom of speech" are a lot more resonant than contemporary bureaucratic ones like "universal health care" or "cap and trade" or "Affordable Care Act."

Yesterday the Post also carried on its website, though apparently not in the paper, a piece by one David Cole, "legal affairs correspondent" for The Nation, a hard-left magazine, titled "The Conservative Constitution of the United States." It begins:

It goes on in that vein for 900 cringe-making words--a misconceived joke that only reveals Cole to be a small-minded vulgarian.

The Associated Press notes that the reading of the Constitution ended up being bipartisan:

That pretty well sums it up--though "seemingly less ardor" is better than the smirking ignorance that prevails over at the Post.

  Ouster Ousted   The woman who fired Juan Williams has herself "resigned" from National Public Radio,"after an internal review found that the Washington news organization mishandled" Williams's defenestration, the Washington Post reports:

In firing Williams, NPR painted a bull's-eye on itself for House congressional budget cutters, and this move won't necessarily erase the target: "From my perspective, it doesn't change anything," Rep. Doug Lamborn of Colorado, chief sponsor of legislation to slash NPR subsidies, tells the Post.

NPR quickly issued a press release announcing Weiss's departure. Because, you know, it was a private personnel matter.

  Lucky Number?   Britain's Young Women's Christian Association "has changed its name, losing the clearest link to its Christian roots," London's Daily Mail reports. The YWCA "dropped its historic title after 156 years because 'it no longer stands for who we are' ":

The name sounded familiar, and finally we realized why: One of the euphemisms for the Ground Zero mosque is "Park 51." We have no idea what this means, but there are only 90 two-digit numbers, so the likelihood of two organizations coming up with the same one randomly is barely 1%.

  Global Warmists vs. Journalism   Der Spiegel describes an element of the latest global-warmist PR campaign:

Biased reporting isn't a new kind of journalism. It's a very old kind, one that has two distinct forms: opinion journalism, and bad journalism.

  Name the Politician   The New York Times describes him or her as "the rare figure . . . who carries both religious mystique and political authority, heeded by a grass-roots movement with a canny sense of the street and a remarkable ability to fashion itself as the opposition, even when it plays the role of kingmaker, as it is now."

Since we said "him or her," you probably guessed that he or she is a she. Actually, he or he is a he we wanted you think was a she. The correct answer is Moqtada al-Sadr, but you could imagine the Times using almost the same words to describe Sarah Palin.

  Lawyer Shoots Self in Foot With Metaphor   CNN reports on the case of two sisters in Mississippi who received clemency recently from Gov. Haley Barbour:

Keep fighting, don't lay down your guns--that's a hell of a way to be exonerated for armed robbery.

  Homer Nods   The new employer of American journalism's crazy old aunt in the attic is the Falls Church News-Press, not the Free Press as we said in some references yesterday (since corrected).

  How Many Microbes Are Even Human?   "It would take a superhuman microbe to do what they are claiming."--University of Georgia microbiologist Samantha Joye, doubting the theory that undersea bacteria prevented methane from escaping into the atmosphere after last year's Gulf oil spill, quoted in The Wall Street Journal, Jan. 7

 So Much for Devil's Night 

  We Blame George W. Bush   "Fairbanks Teens Accused of Theft Blame Boredom, TV"--headline, News Miner (Fairbanks, Alaska), Jan. 5

  What About 'Read My Lips: No New Taxes'?   "That's Quite a Feet! Bam First Flip Flop President"--headline, New York Post, Jan. 5

  The Change It Had to Come, We Knew It All Along   "Meet the New Boss: Daley Is Obama Chief of Staff"--headline, Associated Press, Jan. 7

  He Has the Hat   "Oh, Kerry's Always Got to Be Different"--headline, Evening Gazette (Middlesbrough, England), Jan. 4

  Short Sales Are Booming   "Dwarf Activity Suggests U.K. Economy Getting Back on Track"--headline, New York magazine website, Jan. 6

  He Must Not Be a Tareyton Smoker   "Coats Make Chief of Staff Switch"--headline, RollCall.com, Jan. 6

  The Thought Is What Counts   "Sex Bomb: Jilted Lover Arrested for 'Making Exploding Sex Toy to Send to Ex-Lover for Christmas' "--headline, Daily Mail (London), Jan. 7

  They Soothsaid This Would Happen   "Some Psychologists Critical of Soothsayer Study"--headline, WTOP-FM website (Washington), Jan. 6

 The Lonely Lives of Scientists 

 This May Be Taking Things a Bit Far 

  Condoms for Chickens?   "Safe-Sex Kits Still Raising Hackles"--headline, New Hampshire Union Leader, Jan. 7

  It Isn't Fair, It Isn't Nice   "3-Point Stance: Luck Never Said He'd Leave"--headline, ESPN website, Jan. 7

  Hey, Kids! What Time Is It?   "Time to License the Dogs, Swampscott Town Clerk Says"--headline, Swampscott (Mass.) Reporter, Jan. 6

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

 Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  Car Bites Man--Now That Would Be News   "Pasco Deputies: Man Bites Patrol Car"--headline, St. Petersburg (Fla.) Times, Jan. 6

  Hitler-Dogging Nazis Mocked Rage--Now That Would Be News   "New Documents: Hitler-Mocking Dog Enraged Nazis"--headline, Washington Examiner, Jan. 7

  The Constitution Explains the NY Times--Now That Would Be News   "The NY Times Explains the Constitution"--headline, PowerLineBlog.com, Jan. 6

  It's Always in the Last Place You Look   "Police Find Drunk Man at Church"--headline, Free Lance-Star (Fredericksburg, Va.), Jan. 6

  Too Much Information   "Rudy Pokes Christie"--headline, Politico.com, Jan. 7

  Help Wanted (Equal Opportunity Employer)   "Transvestite Purse-Snatcher Sought"--headline, Gwinett Daily Post (Lawrenceville, Ga.), Jan. 7

 Everything Seemingly Is Spinning Out of Control 

  Breaking News From 1854   "Out of Nowhere Walden Impresses"--headline, WISC-TV website (Madison, Wis.), Jan. 5

  Breaking News From 1928   "More Iowans Could Soon Work at White House"--headline, KCCI-TV website (Des Moines), Jan. 6

  Breaking News From 1979   "New Tactics Give Pirates an Edge"--headline, USA Today, Jan. 7

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  Dead Cats Tell No Tails   London's Daily Telegraph reports on a nasty court fight over cat litter:

If Clorox wants to dispute Church & Dwight's allegation that "cats do not talk," it might check out this story from London's Metro newspaper: "Is Lucy, 39, the World's Oldest Cat? She may be deaf and a bit stiff in the morning but when you consider Lucy the moggy has just turned 39, it's understandable."

If cats didn't talk, how would Lucy lie about her age?

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Greg Folan, Orin Ryssman, John Sanders, Zack Russ, Michele Schiesser, Hillel Markowitz, Richard Haisley, Ed Lasky, Ethel Fenig, Larry Seltzer, Rod Pennington, Thomas Brown, Michael Segal, Bill King, Joshua Bowman, T.J. Linzy, Alan Hegi, Tracey Tomashpol, John Bobek, Mark King, John Williamson, Bruce Goldman, Kyle Kyllan, Paul Gross, Gary Sandberg, Joel McLemore, Rick Wiesehan, John Nernoff, Dan Tracy, Daryl Duwe, Kelly Meredith, Rex Pilger, Marion Dreyfus, Mark Zoeller, Charlotte Reineck, Dard Hunter, Kevin Smyth and Stuart Creque. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)