Major big-box retailers have been shifting to smaller stores—and scratching around for more profitable ways to fill under-used spaces as they go about reinventing themselves.

Some are becoming landlords, turning excess space over to other businesses. Others are trying to fill the space themselves by stretching into new products and services.

  Sears Holdings Corp.
SHLD


-4.03
%




 is letting prospective tenants browse an online list of Kmart and Sears stores with space to rent. No deal seems too tiny: It let a Rockford, Ill. dental clinic set up shop in two Kmarts last year, though the venture fizzled after the owner ran into unrelated financial trouble.

"If you want 3,000 square feet in Sarasota, we can work with you on that," says Sears spokeswoman Kimberly Freely.

Sears reached a deal to lease 34,000 square feet of store space in Greensboro, N.C., to Whole Foods Market Inc. for a grocery store set to open in 2012.

  Home Depot Inc.
HD


0.42
%




 is selling off portions of its parking lots to fast-food chains and auto repair shops.  Gap Inc.
GPS


-0.20
%




 is reverting to a Russian nesting-doll strategy: after years of expanding by adding standalone stores such as GapKids and Gap Body, it is shrinking them and stacking them back inside its namesake Gap stores.

As consumers trim their spending and shift their shopping to cyberspace, American retailers are acting on a realization that many of their stores are too big. 

"You have a massive rush throughout retail to get small," says  Leon Nicholas of consulting firm Kantar Retail. "Honestly, I am not sure what's going to happen with a lot of these giant boxes. I like to joke that perhaps they can be turned into retirement homes for Baby Boomers."

  Best Buy Co.
BBY


-0.26
%




 last week became the latest retail chain to go smaller, announcing last week that it was slowing growth of new big-box stores this year in favor of adding 150 Best Buy Mobile locations, focused on smartphones.

Best Buy, which already added musical instruments to its regular electronics inventories in an effort to fill floor space, is also getting into health and exercise equipment to better utilize its larger stores.

  Wal-Mart Stores Inc.
WMT


-0.12
%




 also said last week that it was accelerating the rollout of smaller locations—40,000 square feet or less—after it reported a seventh straight quarterly decline in sales at U.S. stores open at least a year. The retail giant, which rose to dominance with 185,000-foot Supercenters, plans to open its first Walmart Express store in the second quarter of this year, though it won't say where.

U.S. retailers of all stripes super-sized their stores over the past two decades after big-box chains demonstrated the benefits of being larger than the competition. But many outsized outlets now look like dinosaurs in an age when  Amazon.com's
AMZN


-0.61
%




 offerings dwarf even the most bountiful in-store selection, and advances in supply-chain management let retailers replenish shelves quickly without keeping heaps of merchandise handy in the back of the stores.

Many chains are concluding that their future lies in more intimate stores—like the ones showcasing  Mattel Inc.
MAT


-0.95
%




's American Girl dolls and  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.91
%




's iPhones and iPads—that present visitors with a unique sensory experience and perhaps stock only best-selling items, directing customers online for the rest.

The changes are clear in the shifting strategy of  Staples Inc.,
SPLS


0.32
%




 which prospered after pioneering the office superstore concept 24 years ago but is having to reconsider the point of over 1,900 North American stores. Staples said its fourth quarter profit rose 17% on Wednesday to $274.7 million. But the company's North American retail sales fell 0.4%, results the company blamed on bad weather.

Now that its customers can stock up on ball-point pens and letter-size paper through Staples.Com, Staples has become the second largest online seller after Amazon.com, according to trade publication Internet Retailer.

Fewer shoppers need to visit stores to make the unsexy purchases. So just outside Boston in Watertown, Mass., minutes from the original Staples superstore, the company is running a tiny 4,000-square-foot shop, a Staples version of a convenience store.

The miniature Staples carries just 1,200 of the retailer's most high-volume sales items, compared to 8,000 items in traditional stores. It primarily serves small business owners, teachers and families who need something right away. 

To jumpstart sales, Staples plans to flood urban and suburban areas with the mini stores in coming years

"This little shop does booming business," says  Kerry Anne Carter, Staples' vice president of copy & print global growth.

  Office Depot Inc.,
ODP


-0.56
%




 meanwhile, quietly began opening new shops the size of convenience stores in December. The new 5,000-square-foot Office Depot stores are barely a fifth the size of the company's traditional locations, yet still manage to contain the office supplies and copy and mail services that account for 93% of the bigger stores' sales, said  Kevin Peters, Office Depot's North American retail president.

"Our box was just too big and didn't work for our customers," Mr. Peters said Wednesday. "We are reinventing Office Depot as a convenience retailer. Think CVS and Walgreens."

 Write to  Miguel Bustillo at miguel.bustillo@wsj.com 