 The euro zone's first batch of economic data in 2011 had more negatives than positives, providing a sharp reminder of the delicate balance between supporting growth and keeping inflation in check. 

The annual rate of inflation in the single currency area rose to 2.2% in December, its highest in two years. For the first time since November 2008, the reading was above the European Central Bank's ceiling of "close to, but below, 2%." 

Business confidence in Ireland Greece and Spain has fallen steeply for 2011 according to a survey that measures business sentiment for the coming year, while optimism in Germany, Belgium and Finland has increased hugely for the New Year.

The German Federal Labor Office announced the first rise in seasonally adjusted unemployment in 18 months. 

 U.K. manufacturing expanded at its fastest rate in 16 years in December, adding weight to indications that the country's economic recovery is picking up pace.  

The Bank of England said growth in the money supply accelerated only slightly in November and net consumer lending was weaker than expected despite a rise in the number of loans approved for house purchases. 

 With Sweden's central bank set to keep pushing interest rates higher, the country's exporters are growing nervous that their already high-flying currency will rise too high for their comfort. 

 A Spanish judge has summoned a top Iraqi military commander, accused of having directed a 2009 assault on an Iraq-based camp holding Iranian opponents of Tehran's regime, to face charges of breaching the Geneva Convention, a spokesperson for Spain's National Court said. 

In Poland, 40 cars collided in dense fog on an ice-covered highway, killing two people and leaving five hospitalized. A spokesman for regional firefighters said the accident occurred near the city of Gliwice on a stretch of the A4 highway that runs from Katowice west to Zgorzelec, on the border with Germany.

Two Russian icebreakers are trying to free a fishing trawler that among five ships with a total of more than 500 people aboard caught in heavy ice in the Sea of Okhotsk. Three of the ships have been stuck since New Year's Eve in the arm of the Pacific west of the Kamchatsky Peninsula. 

Factory-goods orders rose 0.7% in November, giving another indication of solid momentum in manufacturing amid a growing economy.

 The Federal Reserve believes a stronger U.S. economy is among the reasons behind the rise in government bond yields, which may undermine its efforts to keep the recovery going via low interest rates. In minutes of the central bank's Dec. 14 meeting, Fed officials offered several explanations for why U.S. Treasury yields have been increasing despite their $600 billion bond purchase program. 

A U.S. citizen who hijacked a flight from New York's John F. Kennedy International Airport in 1968 and fled to Cuba was sentenced to 15 years in prison. Luis Armando Pena Soltren, 67 years old, admitted last March to hijacking a Pan American plane along with three other men about two hours into the flight in November 1968. 

An Illinois county circuit judge ruled former White House Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel is eligible to run for mayor of Chicago. Cook County Circuit Court Associate Judge Mark Ballard wrote in an opinion that Emanuel's city residency is covered by the election code that "protects the residential status of Illinois citizens who serve the national government."

A top Navy admiral permanently relieved the commander of the USS Enterprise for showing a "profound lack of good judgment" by recording offensive and vulgar videos on a previous tour of duty. Adm. John C. Harvey Jr., commander of Navy Fleet Forces, said an investigation will continue into the how the videos were made and how complaints about them were handled.

The Chilean central bank's announced $12 billion local currency market intervention won't pressure inflation upward as most local prices weren't adjusted to the strength the peso was showing against the dollar, Finance Minister Felipe Larrain said. The central bank had announced it would begin intervening in the local market through sterilized dollar purchases throughout the year for a total of $12 billion.

Iran invited Russia, China, the European Union and others to visit key nuclear plants, but left out Britain, France, Germany and the U.S.—the countries most opposed to its nuclear program. 

 In Pakistan, a leading politician from the ruling Pakistan People's Party who had recently spoken out against the country's controversial blasphemy laws was killed by a member of his security detail in an upscale market in Islamabad. Salmaan Taseer, who was governor of Pakistan's most-populous Punjab province, was attacked at a strip mall in the heart of one of Islamabad's most upmarket neighborhoods as he got into his car after lunch. 

 Indian police registered a case against top Citigroup officials, including Chief Executive Vikram Pandit, in connection with a estimated three-billion-rupee ($67.2 million) alleged fraud at a Citibank branch in a New Delhi suburb. The move follows a complaint by a bank customer, who was allegedly duped in an investment fraud orchestrated by an employee at a branch of the bank. 

 Days after India's government clamped down on the main conduit through which Indian companies pay for Iranian oil, New Delhi and Tehran have opened a temporary channel for transactions, a senior Indian official said—one that involves sending payments through an Iranian bank that is already under U.S. sanctions. 

China's economic-planning agency unveiled regulations to prevent price collusion and monopolistic pricing practices, giving the government more tools to rein in inflation pressures. The rules, which take effect Feb. 1, come after Beijing said ensuring price stability will be a priority, and that it was bringing competition and pricing practices closer to international standards. 

 The first clear pictures of what appears to be a Chinese stealth fighter prototype have been published online, highlighting China's military buildup just days before U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates heads to Bejiing to try to repair defense ties. 

South Korea's National Pension Service plans to establish private equity funds jointly with local conglomerates to invest hundreds of billions of won in overseas resources and energy assets, as the world's fourth largest pension fund seeks to diversify its portfolio to secure stable returns.

Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan said he wants to begin talks with the country's opposition parties on raising the nation's consumption tax, a divisive issue that threatens to erode the government's already low approval rating. 

In the Philippines, rescuers found more victims of landslides and floods from heavy rain, raising the death toll to at least 17, officials said. Nearly 13,000 people have sought shelter in schools and gymnasiums turned into evacuation centers on the archipelago's eastern seaboard. 

 The failure to dislodge Ivory Coast leader Laurent Gbagbo from power has exposed deep differences within the West African bloc of countries, dimming hopes that dialogue between African neighbors will be able to resolve the nation's disputed election. 

 Sudan's President Omar al-Bashir pledged to respect the outcome of the upcoming referendum on whether the south should become an independent nation, raising hopes that Africa's biggest country can avoid more bloodshed even if it breaks apart.  

 Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu asked U.S. President Barack Obama to release Jonathan Pollard, an unusually public request by the Israeli leader on behalf of the former U.S. naval intelligence officer, who was sentenced to life in jail for spying for the Jewish state. 

Rising water levels in northeastern Australia threatened to cut off the 77,000-person population city of Rockhampton in Queensland state, while the U.S. government offered aid to some 200,000 people affected by the record floods.