  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS


0.21
%




 did millions of dollars worth of business every year with the hedge fund Galleon Group. A Money & Investing article on Thursday incorrectly said billions instead of millions. 

The North Atlantic Treaty Organization has held daily discussions, including on the command of the Libya campaign, since airstrikes began March 19. A front-page article in some editions Thursday incorrectly said that Wednesday was the second day of NATO meetings to decide who would take command.

The Federal Communications Commission's report on wireless competition in 2010 didn't take a position on whether the wireless industry was competitive. Articles on  AT&T's
T


-0.97
%




 deal to acquire T-Mobile USA on March 21-23 incorrectly stated the agency had found the wireless market wasn't competitive.

  Alan Lockwood is a neurologist at the University of Buffalo's medical school. In some editions Thursday, a Disaster in Japan article on health risks of radiation incorrectly stated he was with the University of Pittsburgh.

  Safra Catz is  Oracle Corp.'s
ORCL


0.12
%




 co-president. She was misidentified in the Ahead of the Tape column as the company's chief operating officer in some editions Thursday.

Mary Herricks, an Oshkosh, Wis., teacher, earned $68,423 in salary for the 2009-10 school year. A U.S. News article in some editions Wednesday about retiring public employees incorrectly said she earns in the high 50s. In addition, the article failed to note that her husband Len Herricks, who also is filing for retirement, is president of the Oshkosh teachers union.

Sapphire Retail Fund, which was a 50-50 joint venture between Bank of Scotland and Aldersgate Investment Ltd., an investment firm owned by brothers David and Simon Reuben, defaulted on certain loans backed by a portfolio of three shopping centers in 2010. A Property Report article Wednesday incorrectly said that the fund was owned by the Reuben brothers through their Motcomb Estates investment vehicle and incorrectly said that the brothers defaulted on the loan. 

The surname of Berkeley M.B.A. student Brandon Yahn was misspelled as Jahn in a March 24 article in the Bay Area section about student-entrepreneur associations. Also, a photo caption with the article misspelled the first name of Stanford student Anuj Panda as Anil.