The most disheartening aspect of the 2012 election cycle (so far) has been Donald Trump's effort to press the "birther" argument, claiming that President Barack Obama may not have been born in Hawaii in 1961 but somewhere else—Kenya, perhaps. A survey in February recorded that 51% of GOP primary voters believed Mr. Obama to be a non-native son. In a victory for common sense, support for the position plummeted with the recent release of Mr. Obama's long-form birth certificate. 

Liberals should avoid crowing too loudly, though, since they have their own share of nutters. In 2007, pollster John Zogby asked Democratic voters about the terrorist attacks of 9/11; 42% of respondents said that George W. Bush and Dick Cheney either allowed the attacks to happen or deliberately caused the attacks to happen, presumably for political gain or to reap a financial windfall by waging a war for oil in the Middle East. 

To Jonathan Kay, Birthers and Truthers are flipsides of the same coin. "Like an earthquake, 9/11 produced a great fissure through the heart of America's political center," he writes in "Among the Truthers." "It is not just politics that separates these two camps, but the very manner by which they answer fundamental questions about the world."

A Canadian who is an editor and columnist at the National Post, Mr. Kay decided to criss-cross America and meet Truthers of all stripes. He visits the fire-breathing libertarian talk show host Alex Jones, best known today as the man who taught Charlie Sheen to be wary of "Vatican assassins." He chats with "investigative journalist" Michael Ruppert, the man who claimed, in the early 1990s, that the CIA was selling crack in the inner cities to fund wars in Central America. Mr. Kay meets crunchier types too, like Ken Jenkins, a video editor who, with his psychedelic posters and lava lamps, "embodies the sixties soul of the 9/11 Truth Movement's older members." And Mr. Kay patiently listens to Richard Gage, a San Francisco-based architect who claims that explosives brought down the World Trade Center. 

Reporting without mockery, Mr. Kay has a knack for making even the silliest conspiracist sound sympathetic. Still, it is odd to read such fevered imaginings. One Truther, a freelance writer, claims that media organizations are working with the military-industrial complex to suppress what really happened on 9/11. The "Left media," too: The Nation magazine, he says, has "significant ties to the Central Intelligence Agency." Another Truther, a mathematician, believes that no one hijacked the 9/11 planes. According to his theory, as summarized by Mr. Kay, "the passengers of the four planes were killed using sarin gas, and the planes were flown into their targets by government-programmed computers."

 By Jonathan Kay  HarperCollins, 340 pages, $27.99

But Mr. Kay wants to do more than draw a portrait of the Truther movement. He wants to understand where conspiracy theories come from and why scholars and intellectuals haven't debunked them more forthrightly. "Most researchers," Mr. Kay says, "seem hesitant to suggest that any view of the world—no matter how preposterous—is unambiguously wrong." He argues that academic theories such as deconstruction, aimed at unmasking the instability of language, have "replaced the historian's once-unquestioned goal of objective truth." Little wonder that "Scholars for 9/11 Truth"—one of the many Truther organizations aimed at proving the Bush-Cheney plot—picked up so many members so quickly and why the organization contains far more liberal-arts professors than scientists. 

Where Mr. Kay goes too far is in blaming political correctness for the madness of Trutherism. The left-liberal orthodoxy behind so many speech codes, he writes, "has left behind a toxic ideological residue on our intellectual coastline: a vague but powerful baseline belief among educated liberals that mainstream society is divided into victims and oppressors—and that the latter are largely white, male, straight, middle-aged men who look a lot like George W. Bush." Certainly a hatred of Mr. Bush and anyone who shares his outlook is a kind of cliché among media and academic elites, but it doesn't usually translate into conspiracy theory. And Mr. Kay's argument here does nothing to explain Birthers, unless we are to see them as a reaction to a politically correct mainstream culture.

To prevent conspiracy theories from flourishing, Mr. Kay urges that we arm students with "the intellectual tools that not only permit them to identify established conspiracist creeds, but also allow them to identify the common features that bind all conspiratorial ideologies." Sounds like a good idea, but conspiracy theories will probably survive all attempts to thwart them. After Mr. Obama released his birth certificate in April, Forgers came forward to claim that it was a photo-shopped fake. Mr. Trump has yet to join their cause.

—Mr. Bunch is a writer in Washington.