Managers  Rick Raczkowski and  Peter Palfrey were planning to take the long view at the start of 2010 by tilting about 40% of their  Loomis Sayles Core Plus Bond fund, NEFRX, into corporate bonds while they waited out what looked like a stalled e conomy. 

But with improving economic conditions and the availability of credit, it wasn't long before the fund—which invests in bonds, treasuries and asset-backed securities—dropped its defensive stance for a more aggressive approach. The fund enters 2011 with a 20% to 30% respective split between high-yield and corporate bonds. 

"We sold our longer-maturity 30-year corporate bonds and increased our overweight to high-yield, with a focus on short- to intermediate-maturity bonds," Mr. Raczkowski said. "We wanted to capture yield in the front end of the curve and reduce sensitivity to interest-rate-spread volatility." 

The move resulted in giving the Core Plus fund a one-year annualized return of 10.4%, as of Friday's close, and a five-year return of 7.7%, outpacing its benchmark Barclays Capital Aggregate Bond Index by 3.8% for the year and by 1.9% over five years, according to Morningstar. 

"We still think corporate fundamentals are in very good shape and benefiting as the economy slowly recovers and inflation remains low," said Mr. Raczkowski, who helps oversee the $385 million in assets. "There is a lot of refinancing that pushed debt maturities out, and those are all positives, particularly for the high-yield market. There is some slack that is still in the economy such as unemployment, but we think things have bottomed out and we don't see a double-dip," or a return to a recession after a short period of recovery. 

Automotive loan maker Ally Financial Inc., paper-product company Georgia Pacific Corp. and the Student Loan Marketing Association, better known as  Sallie Mae,
SLM


-2.20
%




 are among the companies in which the bond fund invests. 

Mr. Raczkowski said Ally's plans to go public next year make the company a strong holding, while the Atlanta-based Georgia Pacific is benefiting from the economic recovery, especially its consumer-products division that sells tissue brands including Angel Soft, Quilted Northern and Brawny. 

The risk to the fund's current position continues to be unemployment in the U.S. and a possible slowdown in the European economy. The U.S. unemployment rate was 9.8% as of the end of November. 

"There is still some slack in the economy that we are keeping our eye on," Mr. Raczkowski said. 

 Write to  Jeff Bennett at jeff.bennett@dowjones.com 