CULLMAN, Ala. -- For decades, this north Alabama city has resisted the forces of redevelopment and urban sprawl, maintaining a vibrant historic business district as countless cities like it watched strip-mall-bound businesses abandon their downtowns. 

Now, with much of its historic downtown destroyed by a deadly string of tornadoes that struck Wednesday, Cullman's elected leaders and business owners, often one and the same, face the challenge of rebuilding in a way that retains the character of a place where the architecture has changed little in the last century.

"There'll be community pressure to build back in the same spirit," said  Lee Powell, a Cotton State Insurance agent. The brick face of Mr. Powell's office, which he had only recently finished fashioning from a former R.C. Cola bottling plant, was sheared off by the storm and heaped in the street. The second-floor apartment where he lived with his wife and young daughter had collapsed. 

Mr. Powell, who plans to open a temporary office and rebuild downtown, said Cullman's throw-back charm came not from some sweeping gentrification, but rather by having slow, regular and carefully considered renewal to ward off decay.

"We're very proud of our downtown," said Mayor  Max Townson. He was elected in 2008 to lead the city of 15,000 partially on promises to maintain the district's look and vibrancy -- a pledge he said he intends to uphold even as much of the district is hauled away in dump trucks. "We're not quitters." 

The roughly 16-block area that makes up the downtown business district provides Cullman with most of its sales tax revenue and non-agricultural jobs, said  Kirk Mancer, president of the Cullman Area Chamber of Commerce. It hosts banks and a billiards hall, law offices, photography studios, salons, shoe stores, dress shops and diners. Half of those businesses in that district are destroyed or damaged to the point that they won't be able to reopen when electricity returns, Mr. Mancer said. 

"I'm confident everyone will pitch in to bring it back the way it was before the storms," Mr. Mancer said. Most of the businesses are owned by locals, many of whom are the same town leaders who have adopted architectural guidelines for downtown. They've invested heavily there, spending tax dollars and their own money on renewal projects. 

"I don't see why they'd abandon that vision now," he said.

Around the corner from Mr. Powell's insurance office, realtors  Virginia Barnett and  Judy Green, who wore black business wear and jewelry, spent Friday evening picking through the rubble of their office, looking for anything that could be salvaged and taken to the new location their firm, Doyle Real Estate, had leased the day before. Ms. Green, who had just returned from closing a deal in Birmingham, 45 miles to the south, bent down and plucked Ms. Barnett's state license from beneath a desk. Though the storm had sent cinder-block walls crashing down, it hadn't managed to blow away a sheet of paper. 

Down the block a group of older men debated whether they should start over from scratch or work with bits of what was left.

  Steve Spears, whose family has owned the 92-year-old Busy Bee Café since 1967, said he has no doubt that he'll reopen Cullman's preeminent morning meeting spot. There was little worth saving from the wreckage, where his wife  Kitty Spears was found after the storm pinned her with a broken pelvis beneath a large concrete beam. Mr. Spears and his grown children collected unopened spools of plastic wrap and sealed tubs of salad dressing to donate to relief efforts and said they would build back as soon as the debris was cleared.

On a corner where the business district segues into a storm-blasted neighborhood of 100-year-old homes, Fred and  Ramona Merrill raked leaves and limbs from the front yard of the turn-of-the-century home that for years housed their photography business and now was leased to a second-hand book seller. That much of the home's roof was gone didn't seem to upset Mr. Merrill. "If the structural engineers say it's OK, we'll rebuild," he said.

Of course, there are business owners who are doubtful they'll return, said  Sammie Danford, director of the county's economic development agency. But she said some will change their mind once the rubble is cleared away and business owners are able to consider factors like insurance payments and federal aid: "After they get over the initial shock, they'll reevaluate," she said.