  Sprint Nextel Corp.
S


-2.38
%




 is again discussing options for combining its business with rival T-Mobile USA, as the two struggle to keep customers from defecting to larger rivals. 

A transaction would combine the third- and fourth-largest wireless carriers in the U.S., but the two sides disagree over what T-Mobile USA is worth and a quick deal is unlikely, people familiar with the matter said.

Sprint has recently stemmed subscriber losses but the carrier still lacks the size to compete for hot devices like  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.88
%




's iPhone, which both  AT&T
T


-0.68
%




Inc. and Verizon Wireless carry. A deal would let the heavily indebted company book big savings on marketing and overhead.

T-Mobile USA, a subsidiary of  Deutsche Telekom AG, is falling behind in the race to build next-generation networks. It also will soon need more spectrum. A deal could help the German parent solve those problems without heavy investments.

Deutsche Telekom bought its way into the U.S. market at the height of the telecom boom, paying more than $30 billion in cash and stock to acquire VoiceStream Wireless in a deal that closed in 2001. It then renamed the company T-Mobile USA.

With competition getting stiffer and investment needs mounting, Deutsche Telekom CEO  Rene Obermann has been working with  Morgan Stanley
MS


-0.10
%




 on options for T-Mobile USA including a spinoff, a public offering or a sale, people familiar with the matter said. 

The people familiar with the matter described the talks as preliminary and said there are a number of hurdles that make a quick deal unlikely. 

They include disagreement about the value of T-Mobile USA and resulting questions about ownership and leadership of a combined company, the people said.

Deutsche Telekom wouldn't say whether talks are going on, but said all options are open for its U.S. unit, including a sale. 

Sprint has set conditions for a deal, including that it own more than half of a combined company and decide who would run the expanded business, one person familiar with the situation said. Directors likely would favor retaining Sprint Chief Executive  Dan Hesse. 

Deutsche Telekom has yet to agree about accepting a minority stake, the person said. "That's one of the conditions that's a big issue,'' the person said. 

Sprint has yet to formally engage a financial adviser, although  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS


0.00
%




 and other banks are informally advising the company, according to these people. 

Sprint and Deutsche Telekom started talking again as the global economy emerged from the downturn and T-Mobile's need for a strategy around next-generation wireless networks became more pressing, the people said. 

Valuation remains a sticking point. Deutsche Telekom thinks T-Mobile USA would be worth between $20 billion and $30 billion in a public offering, people familiar with the matter said. 

Sprint, which has a market capitalization of about $14 billion and about 50% more subscribers and revenue, thinks T-Mobile wants too rich a price, a person familiar with the matter said.

Investors cheered the news, earlier reported by Bloomberg News, that the two carriers are in talks. Sprint's stock rose 4.9% to $4.70 on the New York Stock Exchange, and Deutsche Telekom's American depositary shares gained 4% to $10.01. 

If the parties clear the question of what T-Mobile is worth, they will have to figure out a way to finance a transaction, particularly given Sprint's heavy debt load. 

A combination of Sprint's 49.9 million subscribers with T-Mobile's 33.7 million customers would create a stronger challenger to AT&T and Verizon Wireless, which have 95.5 million and 94.1 million subscribers, respectively. Verizon Wireless is a joint venture of  Verizon Communications Inc.
VZ


0.00
%




 and  Vodafone Group Plc.

But it would pose operational challenges. The two companies sell service on four different network technologies. Sprint is still dealing with the costly fallout of bringing in Nextel's separate technology in 2005.

"We've seen what happens when you try to put two incompatible network technologies together in Sprint and Nextel," said  Craig Moffett, an analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein & Co. 

Sprint is upgrading its network with equipment that makes it easier to switch technologies, which would make it more feasible for Sprint to take on yet another standard. But the combined company would still have to juggle incompatible technologies in the various phones already sold to customers. 

Any deal also would likely bring significant scrutiny from antitrust regulators. A merger would leave only three national players in the market and would combine the two that are most aggressively competing on price.

Regulators generally are "skeptical of an argument that two weaker competitors can combine to create a strong one, particularly in a concentrated market like this one," said  Robert Bell, a partner with the law firm Kaye Scholer. 

 Write to  Joann S. Lublin at joann.lublin@wsj.com and Anupreeta Das at anupreeta.das@wsj.com 