Have you ever been to a "salt room"? Do you even know what a salt room is?

If so, you know more than I did when I bought a coupon to visit one from deals site Groupon.com. But that's what Groupon is all about: enticing subscribers to visit local businesses with steeply discounted offers -- 50% to 90% in many cases.

The name "Groupon" is a mix of "group" and "coupon." Users purchase a coupon from Groupon.com, but the coupon only becomes valid once a certain number of people have opted in. If the deal doesn't reach the tipping point, which the merchants themselves set, users' credit cards won't be charged. Groupon says that less than 5% of the deals purchased – and 21 million have been purchased in North America alone – don't reach the tipping point.

I signed up for Groupon about five months ago, curious about the site because it was getting a lot of buzz. But much like direct mail, Groupon's punch lost its power for me after the first few weeks, with only the occasional appealing deal trickling into my inbox. I've bought two Groupons to date – one for the salt room and one for a salon service. 

Despite the fact that not all deals will entice everyone, the sign-up and purchasing process was so painless that it's easy to see why 46 million people world-wide have subscribed to the daily email service. Signing up requires little more than an email address and a ZIP code. From there, I began to create my profile, checking off interests like restaurants, groceries, fitness and spa and salon services.

Based on your interests, Groupon will email you one personalized daily deal from a business in your neighborhood, as well as other featured deals on the side of the email.

Groupon also tracks your shopping history on the site, so if a user has made repeat purchases of a certain kind of Groupon, he or she may receive more in that category. Both of my purchases, for example, fell under the spa and salon services category, so I've noticed many of my Groupon offers are now related to those kinds of services.

Users usually have a window of 24 hours to purchase the Groupon, unless the Groupons are all bought up prior to that. When I purchased a Groupon, I simply entered in my credit card number and received an email confirmation. Later on, when enough people had opted in to the deal, I got an email that said the tipping point was reached and my Groupon was ready.

One thing to note: It's important to read the fine print on the Groupons, as there may be additional tax on services that isn't reflected in the price of the Groupon.

Many businesses don't require a print-out of the Groupon and can look up your name in their own computer systems. But it's a good idea to mention when you first arrive at a business that you'll be using a Groupon. 

One thing about Groupon bothered me: the daily email coupons crafted by Groupon's hired writers are often cheeky instead of being simply explanatory. The initial description of the salt room, for example, read as follows: "The benefits of salty air were traditionally outweighed by its proximity to pirates and depressing sea shanties concerning mariners' briny socks." The strange humor is an integral part of Groupon and the explanation of the salt room was given later, but that first sentence didn't make me want to read further. The discount was so steep, though, that I was intrigued.

And a salt room, as it turns out, is a room made of salt that is said to help with respiratory problems and skin ailments. I probably never would have made an appointment to sit in a room made of salt if I hadn't received the Groupon offer, and I paid $18 dollars for what is normally a $65 dollar service. And that's how Groupon has become a local deals darling.

Groupon recently rejected a reported acquisition offer from Google, and the company seems intent on growing its business beyond its current offerings. In addition to its basic service for customers, Groupon has quietly been rolling out Groupon Stores, a self-service platform for businesses to manage their own deal offers, and Deal Feed, which customers can use to access a feed of deals posted by their favorite merchants.

So while I'm desperately trying to de-clutter my inbox these days, I'm curious to see where Groupon goes in its next phase, how it continues to grow and what it will have to offer customers. And it's a no-cost service. For now, I'll continue to subscribe – and hopefully will be able to decipher those deal descriptions.

 Write to  Lauren Goode at Lauren.Goode@dowjones.com 