LAS VEGAS—Hedge-fund manager  Kenneth Griffin said Friday that administration officials aren't listening to concerns from the industry that government spending is out of control. 

The remarks were in response to a question posed at hedge-fund conference here about why hedge-fund managers, including Mr. Griffin, have been shifting political contributions away from Democrats and toward Republicans, a trend cited in a recent Wall Street Journal article. 

Mr. Griffin, head of Chicago-based Citadel LLC, said that in 2008 hedge-fund managers were frustrated with the expansion of government that took place under former President George W. Bush.

"The embracing of the Democrats at the time was a hope, a wish, to return to the policies of President Clinton," Mr. Griffin said.

But something different happened when Barack Obama took office, he said.

"The frustration," Mr. Griffin said, was that the Obama administration extended the spending of the Bush era by "some multiples," leading hedge-fund managers to feel "greatly concerned about the fiscal instability of the U.S."

"That's what's driving the public support…for change in Washington" regarding spending, Mr. Griffin said, adding that managers "would love to see the president initiate this change." He said the nation needs to rewrite its "social contract" to bring its budget into balance.

David Axelrod, a former White House senior adviser who was speaking on a panel with Mr. Griffin, responded that President Obama campaigned that he would fix the nation's finances and that doing so remains a priority. But, he said, the administration inherited a difficult situation.

"We ran on the theory that we need to get our fiscal house in order," Mr. Axelrod said, adding that doing so is still a priority and that Washington has a "responsibility" to future generations.

Mr. Griffin responded: "We acknowledge the challenges that you inherited. We acknowledge you walked into a very difficult situation." But, "the very defensive rhetoric that comes back implies that you are not listening."

Citadel, which now manages about $11 billion, managed as much as $20 billion before high-profile losses shrank its biggest hedge funds. Stronger performance, though, has helped investors in the multistrategy firm recoup the bulk of losses.

 Write to  Steve Eder at steve.eder@wsj.com 