CHICAGO—Haley Barbour carried his critique of President Barack Obama's economic and energy policy to the president's hometown Monday, the start of a Midwest foray that is raising the Mississippi governor's profile as a potential contender for the GOP nomination for the White House.

Mr. Barbour said the White House moratorium on new deep-water oil drilling in the Gulf of Mexico, imposed after the Deepwater Horizon spill in April, had become a "perma-torium," and that the federal government was broadly obstructing exploration for oil, gas and coal.

"More Alaska oil is being placed off limits....Permits to mine coal in Appalachia are harder to get than a heart transplant," Mr. Barbour told members of the Chicagoland Chamber of Commerce Monday. "We need an administration that's committed to more American energy, not strangling our own supplies."

As gasoline prices climb above $3.50 a gallon and stricken nuclear plants in Japan stir new worries about the revival of atomic energy in the U.S., Mr. Obama's energy positions have come under criticism from Republicans.

Mr. Obama said in a news conference last week that he supported expanded domestic energy production and urged oil companies to develop mineral leases they already held more quickly. He ordered a review to determine why more oil wasn't being produced from authorized projects on federal land, but also emphasized efforts by his administration to reduce U.S. consumption of oil, such as through tougher automobile fuel-economy regulations. 

Mr. Barbour's Chicago speech was his first stop in a Midwestern swing designed to test the waters for a 2012 presidential run that appears increasingly likely. After Chicago, he was scheduled to attend several events in the early caucus state of Iowa, his second trip to the state this year.

Mr. Barbour, 63 years old and in the final year of his second term as Mississippi governor, said Monday he hasn't decided if he would run for president, but he was acting very much like a candidate. People familiar with his thinking said he was still weeks away from a final decision. 

A major consideration is that while Mr. Barbour is legendary as a power-broker in Republican circles, he isn't a household name among voters in Iowa—or most other places.

Mr. Barbour's potential viability as a candidate comes mostly from his record as a top strategist, fund-raiser and lobbyist in conservative political circles, in addition to his two terms as governor. He was a key White House political adviser to President Ronald Reagan, chairman of the Republican National Committee when his party took control of the House of Representatives in 1994, and last year was an architect, as chairman of the Republican Governors Association, of a strategy that helped elect 18 new GOP governors in 2010. 

Renowned for his fund-raising ability, he gathered more than $86 million for the governor's group in 2010. 

In Chicago, Mr. Barbour emphasized the spending cuts during his tenure as Mississippi governor, the state's recovery after Hurricane Katrina and changes to the state's tort laws. While acknowledging that Mr. Obama inherited a dire economy, Mr. Barbour said failed policies in the past two years prevented a faster recovery. 

"It's not a failure of business or a failure of free enterprise—it's a failure of government policy," Mr. Barbour said. 

In response, the Democratic National Committee said the president's economic policies have generated 1.5 million private-sector jobs this year. The DNC also criticized Mr. Barbour for accusing Mr. Obama of overspending while accepting $2.6 billion in economic stimulus funds for Mississippi and raising the state's cigarette tax.

The audience of Chicago business executives was generally friendly to Mr. Barbour, but many said they knew little about the governor before his arrival. The criticism of Mr. Obama drew mixed reviews. "I heard a lot of finger pointing," said Melissa A. Morris, a commercial banker.

Sherrey Roberts, an executive at an event planning firm who questioned Mr. Barbour about his position on illegal immigration, liked what she heard. Mr. Barbour said he supported using a fence, guards and surveillance technology to control the border with Mexico. "His answers were really good," Ms. Roberts said.

 Write to  Douglas Blackmon at douglas.blackmon@wsj.com 