The concept at the heart of Kevin Brockmeier's novel "The Illumination" (Pantheon, 257 pages, $24.95) is so good that the author may not have known quite how best to use it. One day, unaccountably and everywhere, pain begins to glow. Suddenly, physical suffering becomes impossible to hide: "You could hardly step out in public without noticing the white blaze of someone's impacted heel showing through her slingbacks; and over there, hailing a taxi, a woman with shimmering pressure marks where her pants cut into her gut; and behind her, beneath the awning of the flower shop, a man lit all over in a glory of leukemia."

By making people continually aware of each other's pain, the Illumination, as it's called, would seem likely to prompt widespread compassion. What's unsettling, however, is how little things actually change. The phenomenon is quickly taken for granted; society deems it discourteous to admit to seeing evidence of a person's illness; people learn, as before, "whose hurt to assuage and whose to disregard."

Mr. Brockmeier weaves into his tale the stories of six men and women who have been affected by some physical or emotional trauma and are linked by a diary—it comes by turns into their possession—of love notes that a young wife had compiled before dying in a car crash. Clearly there is a great deal of loss and sadness in "The Illumination," and Mr. Brockmeier is not always adept in his handling of it all—he can be maudlin, especially in a chapter about an autistic boy. But unlike his ethereally sorrowful 2006 novel, "The Brief History of the Dead," most of the heartache and physical ailments here are presented frankly, with a calm, inquiring concern for the pain they produce. The book's best chapter is about a woman with an ulcerated mouth that shoots out lasers of agony each time she snags her lip. Her affliction is so closely described that I've since gone about with an almost tremulous gratitude for the delicate health of my soft palate.

As a premise for a novel, the Illumination is so promising that readers—especially fantasy fans—may feel that Mr. Brockmeier's cautious handling of it is a lost opportunity, but he is up to something subtle. The final three chapters are about a missionary, the woman with the mouth ulcers and a homeless man; through witness and experience, each has become attuned to the fact that pain is the most universal sensation in existence—and should be as uniting as love. Mr. Brockmeier is too much an artist to state it openly, but the point of his searching and humane book is that we don't need a miraculous occurrence, only care and observation, to see how deeply those around us are defined by their hurt.

As it happens, Joseph O'Connor has also been thinking about incandescent illness. In "Ghost Light" (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 246 pages, $25), he imagines a man's cancer as "a militia of tiny lights moving slowly around his innards." That man is the Irish playwright J.M. Synge, who died of Hodgkin's disease in 1909 while still in his 30s; "Ghost Light" is a fictionalized life of his fiancée, the actress Molly Allgood, better known by the stage name Maire O'Neill. 

Molly lived until 1952, and it's in this year that Mr. O'Connor portrays her: alone in a garret, forced to sell Synge's love letters for grocery money and increasingly reliant on the bottle.

Mr. O'Connor is a gifted writer—I doubt that he could peck out a text message that didn't have a lilting eloquence. His presentation of Molly's penury is sensitive and picturesque, from the "disheveled aplomb" of a broken lamp to the "alleluia of a siren" outside. She walks through London for a rendezvous at the BBC to take part in a radio broadcast, but her memories bedevil her "like dogs" and everything transports her to the past.

The blended flashbacks in "Ghost Light" show Molly's choppy courtship with Synge. It was while they were a couple that Synge wrote his riot- instigating masterwork, "The Playboy of the Western World." But even readers who don't hope for some of that play's manic ardor to rub off on "Ghost Light" are bound to be disappointed by the anemic relationship at the center of the novel. Synge comes across as little more than a priggish Henry Higgins, constantly correctly his lover's pronunciation ("I wish you would not speak in that uncouth manner, Molly"), and Molly seems merely immature.

Ultimately, Mr. O'Connor is best at depicting the shabby splendor of Molly's decline. "Ghost Light" is an attractive cenotaph to a little-known woman whose great love died too soon. But like most memorials, it leaves you wishing you had a better sense of the real person.

In recent years it has become the custom for writers to end their novels by thanking what seems like everybody in Christendom. Karen Russell did not start this lamentable trend, but the acknowledgments in her debut novel, "Swamplandia!" (Knopf, 316 pages, $24.95), must break some kind of record: She thanks 56 people and 10 organizations.

That should be irrelevant, of course, but I can't help wondering if Ms. Russell's legion of helpers and mentors isn't in some way responsible for the warmed-over feeling of this uninspired coming-of-age novel. "Swamplandia!" is about the Bigtree family's desperate efforts to save their alligator-wrestling park; both the premise and title are derived directly from George Saunders's stories about failing theme parks, "CivilWarLand in Bad Decline" and "Pastoralia." (Mr. Saunders is duly thanked by Ms. Russell, but who isn't?)

Things go wrong for the Bigtrees when Hilola, the matriarch and the park's star attraction, dies of cancer. As the place falls into ruin, the three plucky Bigtree children set out on ponderous adventures to restore its past glory while navigating the gator-filled swamps of adolescence. To spice things up, Ms. Russell has thrown in Everglades zoology, some truly awkward comic relief in the form of teenage smack-talking, and a host of unpersuasive similes and metaphors. We're told, for instance, that one of the children feels "his intelligence leap like an anchored flame inside him." Readers may just feel the anchor.