BEIJING—China's inflation shouldn't be blamed on capital inflows, said a senior economist at the World Bank, instead attributing it to expansionary monetary and fiscal policies as well as surging food prices.

"In China, capital controls work quite well, so I don't think you can blame capital inflows for China's inflation,"  Vikram Nehru, the World Bank's chief economist for East Asia and the Pacific region, said at a news briefing Thursday.

Some Chinese economists and government officials have argued that inflows—a result of ample global liquidity, quantitative easing by the U.S. and expectations of a stronger yuan—are a cause of inflation pressures in China.

Inflation is high or on the rise in many developing countries, including China and India, the World Bank said in its latest annual Global Economic Prospects report.

The latest Chinese data show the consumer price index took its biggest leap in more than two years in November, up 5.1% from a year earlier. December and full-year CPI data are due Jan. 20, together with the fourth-quarter and full-year gross domestic product.

Given that inflation is a key concern for China, the World Bank said the inflation-fighting benefit of higher interest rates would probably outweigh the cost of the greater fund inflows the higher rates might attract. Indeed,  Ardo Hansson, the World Bank's lead economist for China, said at Thursday's briefing that higher rates could actually reduce fund inflows, as a significant amount of such inflows are likely directed at the property market, which higher rates could help cool.

China will remain the focal point of economic activity in East Asia and the Pacific region, with East Asian exports of materials and semifinished goods to China for processing and export to high-income destinations likely to intensify, the World Bank said in the report. Global metals and mineral prices, it added, will be under strong upward pressure if demand remains robust from China, the world's largest consumer of most metals and minerals.

The World Bank kept to the forecast it made in November for China's gross domestic product, saying it likely grew 10% in 2010, accelerating from 9.1% in the previous year, and will likely slow to 8.7% in 2011 and 8.4% in 2012 due to the unwinding of Beijing's fiscal stimulus, restrictions on the housing market and other overheating sectors and a tightening of monetary conditions in the face of rising inflation pressures.

Net exports will likely contribute around 0.5 to 1 percentage point to China's GDP growth during 2011 to 2012, down from about 2.2 percentage points in 2010, according to the World Bank report. Domestic demand contributed 7.8 percentage points to GDP growth last year, 1 percentage point of which stemmed from China's stimulus program, the World Bank said.

The World Bank also said China's decision to allow its currency to float more freely is likely to bring important advantages to the economy, including higher incomes and consumption opportunities for the poor and control domestic inflationary pressure by pushing down the cost of imported goods.

The yuan has risen around 3.4% against the dollar since June 19, when China pledged to increase the flexibility of its currency's exchange rate, effectively ending a two-year-long peg to the dollar.

—  Liu Li 