TOKYO—More than 10,000 small and medium-size firms in Japan have been hit by major losses on foreign-exchange derivatives, spurring the country's financial watchdog to urge Japan's leading banks, which sold the derivatives, to support their customers.

The move has been met with some controversy because observers are concerned that political and regulatory pressure is forcing banks to prop up some of their weakest regional customers. The issue is a sensitive one in Japan, where some critics have complained that the government has contributed to the nation's stagnant economy by supporting weakened and troubled companies for years.

Twenty-six companies filed for bankruptcy protection in 2010, more than triple the number in 2009, hurt by big losses on currency derivatives, according to Tokyo Shoko Research Ltd. 

Japan's major banks sold these contracts to more than 10,000 small to midsize companies, according to people familiar with the matter. 

According to Tokyo Shoko Research, Japan's seafood importers and sellers of imported general merchandise are among the companies that have been hit hard by foreign-exchange derivatives losses. These companies purchased long-term foreign-exchange derivatives contracts to avoid exchange-rate fluctuation risks from 2004 to 2007, when the yen was much weaker, at more than 100 yen per dollar. The surge in the yen last year caused many companies to suffer big losses.

After fielding complaints from cash-strapped companies and regional politicians, Japan's Financial Services Agency launched an investigation into the issue in late November. The FSA then urged the country's leading banks to assess the losses incurred by these small and midsize firms and to consider ways to support their businesses. 

But  Keisuke Moriyama, senior director at Fitch Ratings in Tokyo, said that if banks keep propping up weak companies, "from an investors' point of view this could be a risk to the financial system."

An FSA official who is knowledgeable about the ongoing investigation says some companies complained that the banks didn't provide adequate advice and information about foreign-exchange fluctuations. 

The FSA is still investigating how many firms have been affected by foreign-exchange derivatives. "We've been in touch with banks regularly to assess the situation," said an FSA official. 

Japan's leading banks have been discussing this matter with the regulator.  Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group Inc.
MTU


-0.69
%




 said "the bank is exchanging views with the FSA and is dealing with the matter under discussion."  Mizuho Financial Group Inc. said it will listen to its customers and support them, taking a "flexible" stance. Bank of Tokyo Mitsubishi-UFJ, the commercial-banking arm of MUFG, said that as a rule the bank explains the risks associated with any product.

The chairman of the Japanese Bankers Association,  Masayuki Oku, said at a news conference Tuesday: "We need to make efforts not to fail companies whose main businesses are sound, who now face bankruptcy due to foreign-exchange derivatives, by following up [on the matter] and resolving it." Mr. Oku is also the president of Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corp., the core banking unit of  Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group Inc. 

Companies that export or import goods buy the derivatives to hedge currency-rate fluctuations. An importer expecting the yen to remain weak against the dollar may buy a derivatives contract to buy dollars at a better yen rate in order to lower the costs of buying in dollars. Retailers selling imported goods in Japan made long-term forward exchange contracts extensively from 2003 to 2007, when the yen was expected to weaken further. Instead, the yen has strengthened.

Shin Tokyo International Inc., a food-processing company, filed for bankruptcy in April, hurt by foreign-exchange derivatives losses. The company was bought by food-processing company  Kyokuyo Co.
1301


-0.70
%




 later last year. The firm declined to comment on the losses it incurred.

Privately, some of Japan's banks say their clients were made fully aware of the risks involved. "Some companies must have known about the investment risk and they certainly enjoyed profits when yen was much weaker," said one bank official, adding that it is difficult to measure whether they really need to further support these companies.

 Write to  Atsuko Fukase at atsuko.fukase@dowjones.com 