TOBRUQ, Libya—Col. Moammar Gadhafi's forces attacked the last rebel-held major city in western Libya and expanded territory near the eastern rebel capital of Benghazi, as the government gained momentum in its bid to reassert control.

The Libyan leader's son, Saif al-Islam Gadhafi, said military operations against the rebels would be over within 48 hours. 

Airstrikes hit the abandoned airport in Benghazi, while the city quietly braced for an attack. State media said the strike would come at midnight Wednesday, though the state outlets often deliver misinformation and witnesses in Benghazi disputed the claim.

In Ajdabiya, on a strategic crossroads leading to Benghazi to the north and Tobruq in the east, a new series of airstrikes and shelling killed civilians and destroyed entire neighborhoods, as government soldiers maintained a cordon around the city's outskirts, and the remaining rebels within.

In Tobruq, Ali Moussa Mohammed, 43 years old, said he fled Ajdabiya after two of his neighbors were killed by airstrikes from Col. Gadhafi's forces Wednesday morning. "He's just bombing us at random," he said.

Residents spoke of several dozen fatalities in Ajdabiya in the last two days.

The regime's forces firmly controlled the road leading from Ajdabiya to Benghazi, shooting at anyone attempting to travel that way, witnesses said. 

The only way out for civilians was a 260-mile road cutting across the desert and leading to Tobruq and the Egyptian border.

On Wednesday, car after dust-covered car, packed with pots, mattresses and blankets, arrived from Ajdabiya at the Tobruq end of the road. 

"My kids haven't slept for two days because of bombardments," said Ahmed Ali, a 55-year-old day laborer, who left Ajdabiya at noon. "Gadhafi has adopted a scorched-earth policy in the city."

Still nervous after the escape, Mr. Ali said he had a message for President Barack Obama: "Tell Obama I'm pleading with him—launch just one airstrike here. Prove that Gadhafi was wrong when he said that America only cares about business interests, not human rights."

As the Libyan revolutionary movement suffered setback after setback, emboldened regime loyalists who had vanished in the rebels' eastern heartland were coming out of the woodwork, undermining the shrinking rebel zones from within. 

"We're all with Moammar Gadhafi, he is my leader. We are here to defend our country," said Abdelaziz al Kahashi, a burly man in a military jacket, as he watched Ajdabiya refugees arriving in Tobruq. A hundred yards away, two sleepy rebel soldiers manned a checkpoint.

The rapidly unfolding events uleashed anxiety in the port town near the Egyptian border. "People are afraid. We anticipate Gadhafi to come any moment," said Tawfiq Rajab, a 21-year-old laborer in Tobruq, a city of 130,000 that was one of the first to shake off Col. Gadhafi's rule last month, 

Some residents of the city switched sides, saying they had always backed the man they now see as the inevitable winner. At a crossroads leading toward Tobruq, revolutionary graffiti showing a wild-haired cartoon of the Libyan leader was repainted overnight with the green banner of the regime. 

Track events day by day.

Lawyer Nasib al-Haboni, one of five members of the revolutionary committee governing Tobruq, insisted that his city had nothing to worry about. "Gadhafi cannot come here. He doesn't have enough fuel, he doesn't have enough tanks, and his people just fight for the money—while our people fight for freedom," he said.

Some rebels said they had prepared ambushes along the Ajdabiya-Tobruq road, but refugees streaming in said they saw no sign of rebel defenses along the strategic route. 

"There was no one on that road," said Hajji Jibril Zwei, a 55-year-old who escaped with 12 relatives crammed into a Toyota pickup truck. "Not Gadhafi forces and not the rebels."

Government forces also shelled the outskirts of rebel-held Misrata, 130 miles east of Tripoli, residents said, in a fresh assault to regain control of the western city. In Misrata, townspeople have rebuffed almost daily assaults by government troops for weeks.

Residents said they believed they would face reprisals should their city fall. Col. Gadhafi has shown in the past what could happen to Libyans who have defied his power. In 1977, student protest leaders were publicly hanged as traitors. In 1984, leaders of an attempted coup were also hanged, with their executions aired on state television.

In recent weeks, Misrata has been a vivid counterpoint to Col. Gadhafi's threat that chaos would arise in the country should he be forced from power. 

After rebels took control of the city nearly a month ago, Misrata provided the kind of successful self-rule that many Libyans appear to crave.

Misrata residents have a reputation among Libyans for being business-savvy and industrious, as well as being a tight-knit community. These attributes, plus the emergence of strong city governing councils, were credited for keeping the city free and united against Col. Gadhafi's assaults. 

"We feel like we only have each other to count on," said Ahmad, a member of the city militia. "We have no contact from [the rebel's national council in] Benghazi. We have taken matters into our own hands."

The city's lawyers' association took over many of the administrative functions for the bustling commercial city, which is home to Libya's busiest port, including operation of power stations and water services. The council used the local radio station to organize services and inform the town about dangers, residents said. A medical committee coordinated with outside aid groups and nonprofit organizations and managed the complex logistical task of importing three tons of emergency medical supplies valued at $500,000. 

"If the hospitals need a type of blood, then they announce it on the radio. If there's a fire somewhere, they also announce it. That way the fire trucks know where to go," said Iman, a housewife in Misrata.

The city's military council, run by officers who defected from Col. Gadhafi's army in the early days of the uprising, organized neighborhood militias and civil-defense forces to guard key installations from daily attacks. 

After the town's militia repulsed an advancing column of tanks on March 6, fighting a four-hour battle that ended with the retreat of the government forces, The militia also repelled multiple attacks by Col. Gadhafi's special forces against the city's radio antenna, according to two city fighters.residents captured approximately 20 government soldiers, according to two residents. In the celebrations after the victory, the prisoners "disappeared," according to one resident, who said he believed they had all been killed. "The anger was uncontrollable. The people had thought they were going to die and I'm afraid that they took the anger out against the prisoners," the resident said in a telephone interview a day after the battle. The fate of the prisoners couldn't be verified.

Most of the supplies arrived from ships sailing from Malta, which has provided critical logistical support for the city, according to international aid organizer Mohammed al Misrati, who works with Libyan expatriates to funnel donations and emergency aid to the country of his birth.

Mr. Misrati said Misrata officials are better organized and efficient than their counterparts in Benghazi.

"The medical committee gives us a priority list almost daily. They are organized and very professional," he said.

It is unclear how much coordination the city's civil and military committees have—or even how well the different city officials get along. Journalists invited to Tripoli by the central government were prevented from traveling to Misrata, and journalists based in the rebel-held eastern part of the country weren't been able to reach the city, due to the heavy fighting in that part of the country.

 Write to  Margaret Coker at margaret.coker@wsj.com and Sam Dagher at sam.dagher@wsj.com 