Hong Kong's sky-high home prices are the highest among those surveyed in a report by research firm Demographia.

Hong Kong ranked last of 325 cities in housing affordability, according to the report released Monday. Demographia is run by  Wendell Cox, a public-policy consultant who works with several U.S.-based conservative think tanks.

The survey calculates housing affordability by dividing median home price by median household income. In the third quarter of 2010, Hong Kong's median home price, at 2.58 million Hong Kong dollars (US$331,138) was 11.4 times the median household income of HK$225,400. 

By contrast, at $61,400, the median home price in Saginaw, Mich., was 1.6 times the median household income of $39,500. Saginaw was ranked No. 1 for affordability.

With low interest rates and tight supply, Hong Kong's home prices increased 15% in the first three quarters of 2010 after a 30% jump in 2009, according to official data.

Despite government efforts to rein in the market, real-estate agency Centaline Agency Property Ltd. reported earlier this month that the value of luxury transactions in Hong Kong has exceeded the level reached during the 1997 property boom. 

In November, the government levied additional stamp duties of up to 15% for properties bought and sold within two years, and lowered the mortgage limit to 50% for residences valued at HK$12 million or higher.

This is the first time Demographia included Hong Kong in its survey.

Wong Leung-sing, associate director of research at Centaline, a property agency, criticized the firm's methodology as "too simplistic," casting doubt on the validity of its results.

"It doesn't have the most important factor: mortgage rates," Mr. Wong said. Hong Kong commonly calculates affordability using a ratio of mortgage payments to income. The financial secretary had warned families' monthly payments shouldn't exceed 40% of their household income. Overall, Hong Kongers' mortgages make up 36% of their income, according to data from Midland Realty. "Using this, Hong Kong is very healthy," Mr. Wong said.

 Write to  Alice Truong at Alice.Truong@wsj.com 