TAMPA, Fla.—In 1996, Greg Golson was 11, and he started doing two things that he continues to do to this day: playing baseball and admiring Andruw Jones. 

Jones was 19 and a rookie with the Atlanta Braves then. That year, he became the youngest player to hit a home run in a World Series, blasting two in Game 1 against the Yankees. Watching from his family's home in Austin, Texas, Greg Golson found himself a baseball hero.

Since Golson's father was a Braves fan, the two followed Jones' career closely over the successive years: his 12 seasons in Atlanta, his 10 Gold Gloves, the reputation he had as baseball's best defensive center fielder.

 "I don't remember it verbatim. I can't recall the events that happened," Golson said. "But a lot of it, I know it happened, if that makes any sense, and I've seen the stuff he can do on the baseball field, and I don't know. I guess it's humbling."

There is a generation of major-league outfielders who, like Golson, grew up marveling at the way Jones glided after fly balls, and after having signed a one-year, $2 million contract with the Yankees in January, Jones is teammates with three of them: Golson, Curtis Granderson and Brett Gardner. 

"The routes that he ran, the jumps that he got—he always seemed to be in the right spot," said Gardner, who grew up a Braves fan in South Carolina.

The irony of this, of course, is that the Yankees didn't sign Jones to play center field. They plan to start him occasionally in either right or left field and to use him as a right-handed hitter off their bench, manager Joe Girardi said.

 As it turns out, Jones considers left field the most difficult of outfield positions. "Center field is the easiest," he said. "You always move around."

But while Jones, at age 33, no longer has the mobility to play center on an everyday basis, his mastery of the position is a resource from which the other Yankees outfielders can draw. Granderson met Jones for the first time in 2009, when Granderson was with the Detroit Tigers and Jones with the Texas Rangers; sitting in a hotel, the two talked about the nuances of playing center.

In Atlanta, for instance, Jones played behind a pitching staff full of eventual Hall of Famers—Greg Maddux, Tom Glavine, John Smoltz—who were predictable enough in their approaches that he could adjust his positioning from pitch to pitch.

 Also, Jones was familiar enough with opposing hitters to anticipate where they might hit the ball.

"The good thing from playing as long as I have is that there are guys I remember now," said Granderson, who spent six years with the Tigers before joining the Yankees before last season. "Obviously, he knows a lot more because he's played in both leagues."

Perhaps the Yankee who can learn the most from Jones is Golson, 25, a backup who has only nine games of big-league experience in center field. On Sunday, Golson came away from a conversation with Jones understanding a counterintuitive rule about center fielders: They can't play their best defense if they chase after a fly ball at full speed.

If a center fielder is running as hard as he can, his head and eyes will bob up and down, making it more difficult for him to track the flight of the ball. 

More, he risks a collision with either the outfield wall or a teammate because he can't hear his spikes clopping against the warning track or another outfielder's voice calling him off the play.

Jones has been through multiple incarnations as a major-league player. Early on, he gradually morphed from an all-around athlete—he stole at least 20 bases each year from 1997 to 2000—to a pure power hitter, leading the National League with 51 home runs in 2005.

 He remained a marvelous center fielder, though, a rare player whose defensive talents were both evident to the naked eye and, to a degree, quantifiable with statistics. In 2007, he was named the National League's best center fielder by the Fielding Bible, a panel of sabermetricians and other baseball experts.

After an awful 2008 season with the Los Angeles Dodgers—he batted .158 in 75 games—he became a corner outfielder, bouncing from the Chicago White Sox to the Rangers to the Yankees. 

He is a beefy 230 pounds now, neither as fleet nor as graceful as he once was. Golson, though, will forever see him in center field, floating across the outfield's green with ease.

"There wasn't any panic, but there wasn't any loafing," Golson said. "It was his speed. That's what I'm trying to incorporate into my game: learning my speed, learning what makes me the best player I can be."

 Write to  Mike Sielski at mike.sielski@wsj.com 