 A fish-shaped island of roller-coaster green hills and paradisal beaches lapped by aquamarine waters, Elba lies an hour from Tuscany and does indeed belong to Italy. However, as the tall white car ferry draws closer to a coastline of seemingly unscalable cliffs, my thoughts are drawn to the portion of the 19th century when this was French territory and the island's most famous resident—Napoleon—was exiled here.

Used, as he was, to ruling a vast empire, to be in charge of this small island of 224 square kilometers was a huge comedown. However, he'd been forced to abdicate and had no choice. As someone who knew a thing or two about governing, one of his first priorities was to design a flag and to have it flying on the vessel that brought him into the island capital of Portoferraio on May 3, 1814.

Today, French holidaymakers favor the larger neighboring island of Corsica, which belongs to France, while the charms of Elba are sought after by tourists and villa-owners from Germany, Switzerland and mainland Italy. In April, in the colorful hilltop villages, café-owners are only just beginning to roll out outdoor tables and parasols and to take delivery of artisan-made ice cream, while on steeply descending footpaths to the shore, the crop of sweetly scented wildflowers changes day by day. 

Napoleon's cliff-top residence in Portoferraio, Palazzina dei Mulini, is a surprisingly modest apricot-painted villa with gardens offering limited scope for striding about. The current furnishings, however, do include touches of imperial bling; notably a green marble and bronze ink-well-cum-clock with a carving of Napoleon lounging full-length, his boots resting on a globe of the world. A more touching exhibit is the collapsible field bed, specially made by a Paris blacksmith in 1803—complete with supports for mosquito net—which the great military leader took on so many campaigns.

Although Napoleon spent only 300 days on Elba he kept up a whirlwind of activity. The wide-ranging social and economic reforms he introduced were motivated perhaps partly to prevent boredom but also, it seems, to enhance the welfare of the islanders. Napoleon returned to mainland France in 1815 for a final stab at glory but was eventually defeated and banished to the remote South Atlantic island of St Helena.

Today, in the gardens of his former residence on Elba, parties of school children carve their names in the cactus leaves. Tourism is essential to the island's economy, and while visitors come mainly for the wonderful play of light and scent and water in a peaceful setting, Napoleon is still doing his bit. From academic tomes about his stint on the island to snow domes containing miniature figures of him on horseback, the historical association is a money spinner. There's even a range of locally brewed Napoleon beers; one of which, predictably, is labeled Empereur. 

However, there's also a brew named Waterloo after the final crushing defeat of French forces under Napoleon's command that led to his ultimate downfall. The last beer of the evening, perhaps?

Looking south from Elba on a clear day, the tiny, granite Isle of Montecristo rises dramatically from the Tyrrhenian Sea. To see the daunting pyramid cliffs pierce a cerulean sky is to sense the same air of mystery that inspired Alexandre Dumas to write one of the most stirring tales of adventure and vengeance of all time, "The Count of Monte Cristo."

The great French author—who also penned "The Three Musketeers"—was an intrepid traveler who made canny use of material. In 1841, for instance, he published his impressions of the South of France and Florence. Three years later, choice chunks of the same colorful scenes popped up as background in "The Count of Monte Cristo."

The island itself is now a nature reserve, wild and uninhabited, apart from the rangers who look after it. With more applications to visit than permissions granted, the Count's hideaway stronghold continues to guard its secrets.

Today, with French TV-channels broadcasting the Windsor wedding live from London, audiences here can sate themselves with the archaic ritual of monarchy, safe in their post-Revolutionary status as citizens, rather than subjects. The massed ranks of the French media corps will be deployed again in July to cover the Grimaldi wedding of Prince Albert of Monaco.

This vicarious republican desire for royal pageantry—yet another French paradox—was first brought to my attention by Alain Baraton, head gardener at the Château of Versailles. Author of a steady stream of books about the Sun King's opulent domain and assorted royal residents, Mr. Baraton is also known for his wry sense of humor.

Talking about the high number of French visitors to Versailles, he said, "What's very amusing is that almost all French people declare themselves to be republicans and yet the historical monuments they are most attached to are those which best symbolize royalty." 

 Next week, 

 J. S. Marcus in Copenhagen 