BENGHAZI, Libya—Allied airstrikes Sunday appeared to stop Col. Moammar Gadhafi's assault on the rebel capital of Benghazi, a day after his forces penetrated deep into Libya's second largest city, threatening to snuff out the month-old revolution.

The reprieve for the embattled Libyan revolutionaries came after a day of heavy shelling in which nearly 100 Benghazi residents were killed as Col. Gadhafi's Grad rockets, tank and artillery shells rained Saturday on civilian neighborhoods, flattening homes.

The smoldering wreckage of Col. Gadhafi's armored column on the highway south of Benghazi Sunday emboldened the revolutionary fighters, who now hope to seize back the momentum and reclaim the strategic city of Ajdabiya, where rebel forces were routed last week. Witnesses reported renewed fighting near Ajdabiya Sunday.

The allied air campaign was triggered by Col. Gadhafi's Saturday morning attack on Benghazi, where his tanks sprang upsuddenly just a couple of miles from the revolutionary government's headquarters in a courthouse on the Mediterranean corniche.

Some of Col. Gadhafi's forces — dressed in civilian clothes, riding in civilian cars — infiltrated Benghazi neighborhoods Friday night. They took up positions on the university campus and on rooftops and engaged in street battles with the city's defenders.

Track the latest events in Libya.

On Saturday morning, as the artillery cannonade approached Benghazi, Col. Gadhafi's fighter jets streaked in the skies above. Then, a slow-flying jet above the city erupted in a flash of fire, hurtling downwards and setting off a thick plume of smoke. Rebels later admitted it was one of their own; it wasn't clear who shot it down.

On the way to the downing site, a reporter encountered panicked rebels holding Molotov cocktails, rocket-propelled grenades and AK-47 rifles directing traffic away and warning about incoming gunfire. Further down the road, about a mile from the Ouzo hotel in the upscale neighborhood of Tabalino, rebel gunmen with light arms crouched behind a wall.

Col. Gadhafi's forces, they said, were already in the university campus some 800 meters down the road. "They have a tank and pickup trucks," one of the revolutionaries shouted.

Suddenly, incoming bullets started crackling in the air, followed by the loud thumps of shell explosions. "Run away, run away," the fighters yelled as they sought cover behind buildings.

One of the shells later exploded in the parking lot of the Ouzo, where many international news organizations were based, showering vehicles with shrapnel. Preparing to defend the city center, the rebels erected barricades with everything they could—tree branches, tires, and in one case a boat hauled ashore and placed across a street.

Loudspeakers in mosques all over Benghazi relayed nonstop chants of "Allahu Akbar"—"God is Great"—as rebel fighters took up their positions.

"We shall not retreat, we shall not retreat, we shall not retreat," said a rebel radio broadcast. "It will be victory or death."

"The international community is already too late," said Mustafa Gherriani, a spokesman for the rebels' transitional government Saturday.

By 4 p.m., French fighter jets started patrolling skies over Benghazi, and the shelling stopped. Col. Gadhafi's forces pulled back to Benghazi's outskirts, rebels said—though, as it appeared from the bombed armor column on the highway, government troops had planned another assault for Sunday.

By Sunday, the traffic reversed direction. Benghazi citizens began a comeback, hoping that, thanks to Western intervention, their city would finally be safe. 

But late Sunday night, a witness reported renewed fighting.in Benghazi The nature of the fighting could not be immediately determined.

 Corrections & Amplifications 

The military equipment pictured in a photo running with this article is a mobile artillery piece. A photo caption accompanying an earlier version of this article incorrectly said it was a tank.

—Muneef Halawa contributed to this article.

 Write to  Yaroslav Trofimov at yaroslav.trofimov@wsj.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications  The destroyed military equipment pictured in the first photo accompanying this article is a mobile artillery piece. A previous version of the caption incorrectly said it was a tank.