  American International Group Inc.
AIG


0.52
%




 Chief Executive  Robert Benmosche expects to remain in his role for the next 12 to 18 months following an "encouraging prognosis" from his doctors, the company said Monday. 

Mr. Benmosche, who was diagnosed with cancer in October, has been receiving treatment for his condition over the past few months and has so far responded "very well" to the chemotherapy, the 66-year-old said in a statement.

In light of the prognosis, he intends to continue to lead AIG as the insurer moves forward with a large share offering in the coming months, the start of an effort to sell a 92.1% stake held by the U.S. Treasury. 

Monday's announcement, after the market's close, comes at a crucial juncture for AIG. The company and the U.S. government recently picked four banks to lead the coming share sales, and "road shows" to market AIG's shares to investors are expected to commence in the coming weeks. An offering could happen in either March or May; some bankers have advised aiming for March to minimize the risk of volatile markets in the future. 

AIG shares fell $1.05, or 2.4%, to $41.95 in 4 p.m. New York Stock Exchange composite trading Monday, before the announcement. They were slightly higher in after-hours trading. At current prices, the Treasury's majority stake is worth about $69 billion.

Mr. Benmosche's health and AIG's management succession have concerned investors, and AIG's board had expected to get an update from Mr. Benmosche's doctors in early February. 

Mr. Benmosche said he would liked to have waited another two weeks but instead decided to ask his doctors for a prognosis sooner. The doctors found that he had an "atypical positive response" to the drugs, Mr. Benmosche said, leading them to project a longer life span for him than when he was initially diagnosed with the illness, he said. 

"Things may start deteriorating gradually in the future, but I'm not going to wake up one day and feel pretty sick," Mr. Benmosche said, adding the prognosis gave him confidence that he could run AIG until all the government's shares are sold. 

On Monday, AIG said its board of directors received a briefing from a physician familiar with Mr. Benmosche's medical condition and test results. The board noted that, "while … matters of cancer circumstances can change," it anticipates Mr. Benmosche should be able to continue in his role on his previously announced timetable, until sometime in 2012. 

Mr. Benmosche discussed his illness in an interview with The Wall Street Journal on Sunday evening. He said his family members and friends were "devastated" when he told them of his cancer, but have been supportive of his decision to keep working while he receives treatment. "I'm not about to sit home and wait to die," he said.

"My job is not done—it will be done when the last share of the Treasury's is sold," Mr. Benmosche said in the interview.

"If I left now and the [share sales] bombed, I would take responsibility for that. You don't get this close and walk away because you want to play it safe," he said. 

Mr. Benmosche hasn't disclosed what form of cancer he has, saying he wants to avoid uninformed speculation about his condition. He has said he can't be cured but that his condition can be treated. The cancer was detected following a routine checkup last October, and Mr. Benmosche started an aggressive and experimental treatment that month, receiving eight hours of intravenous chemotherapy on a single day, he said. Since then, his treatment regimen has changed, and he now takes a chemotherapy pill daily. The treatment is aimed at stopping or slowing the growth of cancer cells, or reducing them. 

So far, Mr. Benmosche has lost about five pounds, and the medication has caused a skin rash and some acne on his face and upper body. Mr. Benmosche says he otherwise feels fine and continues to run outdoors five or six times a week when the temperature stays above 20 degrees Fahrenheit. 

AIG's board last year outlined a management succession plan that would see Chairman  Robert S. "Steve" Miller step in as interim CEO if Mr. Benmosche has to stop working. The board and AIG's management have also conducted assessments of internal and external CEO candidates. 

Mr. Benmosche said Monday that he is continuing to undergo treatment and expects to return to retirement sometime in 2012. 

Noting that investors want clarity as AIG approaches its share offering, Mr. Benmosche said on Sunday he doesn't want his health to get in the way, but thinks he is well placed to lead the company out of the government's hands.

"The last thing we need at this company is for me to create more uncertainty when we now have more certainty than in the last six years," he said in the interview. "AIG has finally reached clarity, and I don't want to cause a cloud."

 Write to  Serena Ng at serena.ng@wsj.com 