Charles Darwin shook the world with his theory of evolution, but he couldn't figure out what ailed him. 

The British naturalist, who lived from 1809 to 1882, suffered severe abdominal pain for much of his life, vomiting after every meal when it was at its worst. Some of England's most prominent physicians diagnosed lactose intolerance, lead poisoning, hypochondria, gout—even schizophrenia and repressed anger toward his physician father. Nothing helped. 

Guess what ailments may have plagued these famous figures in history.

Now, a new interpretation of his symptoms may have revealed the causes of Darwin's condition. Research presented last week suggests that he suffered from three distinct ailments: cyclic vomiting syndrome (CVS), which generally starts in childhood; Chagas' disease, a parasitic illness contracted during his five-year voyage on the HMS Beagle, and Helicobacter pylori, the bacteria now known to cause peptic ulcers. 

Other physicians have diagnosed either CVS or Chagas' disease. But Darwin's "life-long history does not fit neatly into a single disorder," says gastroenterologist  Sidney Cohen of the medical college of Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia. "I think he had multiple illnesses over his lifetime." 

Darwin's is the latest in a series of medical mysteries to be re-examined at an annual conference held by the University of Maryland School of Medicine. Since 1995, the gathering has invited specialists to apply modern medical knowledge to the enigmatic disorders of historical figures. 

Since 1995, University of Maryland School of Medicine has invited specialists to apply modern medical knowledge to the enigmatic disorders of historical figures. Two of the findings:

Among them is Akhenaten, the Egyptian pharaoh whose oddly shaped head and female breasts may have been due to aromatase excess syndrome, a genetic disorder discovered in 1977. Christopher Columbus may have acquired his crippling arthritis from parrots he carried back from the New World as gifts to Spanish monarchs Ferdinand and Isabella. And Florence Nightingale, the English nurse, suffered disabling depression that may have been caused by post-traumatic stress disorder from the horrors she observed in the Crimean War in the mid-1800s. 

Such findings aren't definitive, says  Philip A. Mackowiak, vice chairman of Maryland's medical school who founded the conference and selects the subjects. DNA is seldom available, and the program does not exhume bodies for study. 

"We are constrained not only by what's available in the historical record, but when you are talking about ancient figures such as Herod or Claudius, you have to rely on translations, which can have huge differences," says Dr. Mackowiak, who collected a dozen cases in his 2007 book, "Post Mortem: Solving History's Great Medical Mysteries." 

Oftentimes, the historical accounts were written by nonphysicians with no understanding of key clinical details. Greek historian Thucydides's description of the rash that accompanied outbreaks of the Plague of Athens about 400 B.C. was so ambiguous that clinicians have argued for two millennia about what caused it. (Most likely typhus, a bacterial disease spread by fleas and rodents, according to the Duke University infectious-disease specialist who analyzed the death of statesman Pericles for the 1999 conference.) 

Darwin's medical records were more modern. Still, "we had no MRIs, no CT scans, no biopsies," says Dr. Cohen.

Dr. Cohen did have other clues to work with—including photos of Darwin in his early and later years showing him looking well nourished. There are also his prolific writings, which suggested no cognitive damage, and his 10 children, evidence that he was not sterile. Several of his family members had similar symptoms, which began before Darwin's historic voyage. 

"Now we know that cyclic vomiting syndrome is a real thing. It accounts for his multiple symptoms over the years," says Dr. Cohen. CVS is still seen today and accompanies migraine headaches in some people.

But CVS doesn't explain the heart ailment that ultimately killed Darwin at age 73 in 1882. Dr. Cohen believes Darwin also contracted what is now known as Chagas' disease from a bug bite he described receiving in the South American Andes range in 1835. The pathogen causes an acute illness and can then lie dormant for years before re-emerging as heart arrhythmias and congestive heart failure, as occurred in Darwin's case. 

Chagas' disease is often contracted along with the H. pylori bacteria, which also causes vomiting and abdominal pain, although Dr. Cohen says he doesn't know what role, if any, it had with Darwin. 

Other historical mysteries re-examined at the Maryland conference include Alexander the Great, who amassed a sprawling empire by age 30, but died in 323 B.C. at age 32. Some accounts suggest he was poisoned or drank himself to death. But historian Plutarch's writings describe a more gradual process in which the Macedonian leader had difficulty walking, then lost his speech and finally became so weak that as his troops filed past him, he could only follow them with his eyes. Ascending paralysis, a consequence of typhoid fever, often spread by contaminated food or water, would explain such a symptom progression and possibly the bizarre account from the embalmers who arrived a week after Alexander's death and found him so lifelike that they were afraid to approach.

"Either the account is apocryphal, or Alexander died much later than his attendants realized. The paralysis may have made it seem like he was dead, since he wasn't moving and breathing very shallowly," says Dr. Mackowiak. 

Last year's conference produced perhaps the oddest outcome. Simon Bolivar, who helped liberate Latin America from Spain in the 19th century, was long believed to have died of tuberculosis. In re-examining his death, infectious-disease specialist  Paul Auwaerter of Johns Hopkins University concluded he more likely died from ingesting arsenic, a popular health remedy at the time. 

Venezuelan President  Hugo Chavez seized on the report as evidence of his long-held conviction that Bolivar was assassinated—and ordered his body exhumed last summer for more testing. No results have been released.

Dr. Mackowiak says he hopes that these historical reassessments hold a lesson for today's physicians.

"Every generation thinks they have the answers to life's great questions, and subsequent generations say, 'Aren't they quaint? What were they thinking of?' " Dr. Mackowiak adds. "In trying to do the best we can, we have to be humble and realize that in the final analysis, it may not be all that good."

—Email HealthJournal@wsj.com 