MEXICO CITY— Carlos Slim has towered above Mexico for years, a seemingly untouchable figure who thwarted business rivals and regulators with such ease that his telephone empire eventually made him the world's richest man. 

For the first time, however, the principal owner of  América Móvil SAB, the world's fourth-largest cellphone company, faces a real challenge from both the Mexican government and competitors, which now include the country's two dominant television broadcasters,  Grupo Televisa SA
TV


0.44
%




B and TV Azteca. 

Last week, Mexico's Supreme Court handed the billionaire his biggest legal setback in years, ruling that his Mexican wireless company, Telcel, couldn't ignore decisions by the telephone regulator regarding interconnection rates while the company challenged those rulings in court, a tactic that Telcel has long used. 

The move came weeks after Mexico's antitrust regulator levied a $1 billion fine against Telcel for alleged monopolistic practices. The fine, which Telcel plans to appeal and will pay only if it loses the appeal, was by far the biggest in Mexico's history. 

"Both of these events could reshape the competitive landscape of Mexico's telecommunications market," says  Julio Madrazo, a public-affairs and political consultant.  Eduardo Garcia, who runs a Mexican website, Sentido Común, that tracks Mr. Slim's wealth, adds: "This is a potential game-changer." President Felipe Calderón welcomed the court decision, calling it "positive."

Mr. Slim's spokesman,  Arturo Elias, declined to comment on whether the regulatory environment is changing in Mexico, but said that Telcel respects the court decision. 

Mr. Slim bought Mexico's state-run phone company, Telmex, in 1990, whipping it into shape. More than two decades later, Telcel still controls 70% of the country's wireless market and Telmex 80% of the fixed-line market. 

As a result, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development estimates that Mexican consumers pay at least $6 billion in above-average telephone costs each year. Mr. Slim disputes the OECD's numbers, saying its methodology is wrong.

Shares in América Móvil fell about 4% in the final hour of trading on the day of the court decision, translating to about $4 billion in lost market value. 

The fine showed that government regulators are becoming more aggressive after years of timid oversight, according to Mr. Madrazo. Until two years ago, the telephone regulator Cofetel was so cowed by Telmex it was jokingly called Cofetelmex. Former Telmex employees still hold high-ranking positions at Cofetel. But the court ruling showed that regulators' power may carry more weight now.

When news of the court ruling broke, cheers erupted at both Cofetel and the antitrust agency, witnesses said. One Cofetel official said she felt like Mexico had just won a World Cup soccer game. "This was huge for us. Now when we make a decision, it actually matters," said Gonzalo Martínez Pous, one of five Cofetel commissioners and the agency's point man in confronting Mr. Slim's companies in court. 

"I was losing hope that we could ever regulate Mexico's monopolies," adds Eduardo Pérez Motta, head of Mexico's antitrust agency. "But this [court] decision gave us all hope." 

For all the hope, no one expects Mr. Slim's companies to lose their dominant position in Mexico's telephone market. The son of Lebanese immigrants remains Mexico's most powerful businessman and his companies maintain overwhelming market power.

"Mexico's government is like the policeman who just doesn't have the power to stop the bank from being robbed," says  Robert Lacy, the chief executive of Grupo Marcatel, a Mexican phone company that competes against Mr. Slim. 

Mr. Lacy has a long track record of trying to challenge Mr. Slim. The American led U.S. phone company MCI's move into Mexico in the 1990s, which ended years later when the U.S. carrier wrote off its $1 billion investment and left. 

The difference now, however, could be Mr. Slim's newest rivals. It may be no coincidence that the billionaire's first serious setbacks in Mexico have come soon after he became embroiled in a fight with Mexico's television duopoly: Televisa, which controls about 70% of Mexico's broadcast market; and TV Azteca, which controls the rest. 

Until recently, Mr. Slim and the broadcasters had been on friendly terms, but tensions rose as technology blurred the lines separating their businesses, prompting Televisa and Azteca to offer "triple play" services: telephone, broadband Internet and TV.

Hostilities broke out in February, when Mr. Slim's entire stable of companies pulled their advertising from Televisa, arguing rates were too high. Televisa executives said the move was retaliation for an attempt by Televisa to stop Telmex from participating in DishMexico, a satellite-TV provider and rival to Televisa's own Sky service. Mr. Elias, the spokesman for Mr. Slim, denied that was the case. 

The rivalry has taken on a personal edge as well. A Televisa executive said Mr. Slim wasn't amused by a series of sassy Televisa commercials that makes fun of Telmex's phone and Internet services by portraying them as a stuffy, overweight person in a suit. Mr. Slim is portly. Mr. Elias, Mr. Slim's spokesman, denied Mr. Slim was upset by the ads.

Shortly after, TV Azteca said it wouldn't allow Mr. Slim's companies to advertise on its network until Telcel lowered the interconnection fee that it charges rivals to connect to its network. Since then, Televisa has forged a business alliance with sometimes-rival TV Azteca. Televisa recently acquired 50% of Iusacell, a cellphone company for $1.6 billion from Ricardo Salinas, who also controls Azteca. 

As it happens, interconnection fees charged by Telcel were the subject of much discussion at the country's Supreme Court. For years, Telcel has charged competitors more money to connect calls to its 66 million customers than it charges its own customers to call within the network, giving rivals no chance to offer competitive rates. 

Under Mexican law, Cofetel, the regulator, can set the interconnection price if rivals can't agree. But every time Cofetel would set a lower price, Telcel would appeal in Mexico's Byzantine court system, where cases can often get tied up for years. Crucially, the company would keep charging its own rate rather than the Cofetel rate while the appeals process dragged on. 

The issue finally came before the Supreme Court late last year. In March, Cofetel was joined in the case by lawyers for Televisa, Azteca and various Mexican government agencies in lobbying the judges. "Suddenly, we weren't alone anymore," says Mr. Martínez Pous, Cofetel's main legal-affairs expert.Mr. Martínez Pous helped his case by getting a letter from the OECD that explained to the court that Mexico was unique among the organization's members in allowing a company to ignore the regulator's ruling for interconnection rates during an appeal.

Consider the effort to counter Mr. Slim's considerable clout on the court. One minister, Arturo Saldivar, before being named to the court, was Telcel's main lawyer in fighting Cofetel over interconnection rates. Another minister was godmother to a child of Telmex's top legal official,  Javier Mondragon. And another minister's husband and son are notary publics whose regular clients include Telmex and Telcel. 

Televisa and TV Azteca made sure those links came to light through several newspaper columnists. Mr. Saldivar recused himself before the vote. The other two court members didn't, and both voted for Telcel in the 6-4 ruling. 

 Write to  David Luhnow at david.luhnow@wsj.com and José de Córdoba at jose.decordoba@wsj.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications:  Mexican cellphone company Iusacell is partly owned by Ricardo Salinas Pliego, who also controls TV company Azteca SAB. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said Iusacell was a unit of Azteca.