"Welcome to my double life. It's like Superman and Clark Kent!" said Joe Petruccio one day last week, taking a lunchtime break from his work at the advertising agency Avrett Free Ginsberg. The firm's executive creative director, who is also the official artist of Elvis Presley's Graceland estate, was referring to his enduring devotion to the Mets, Knicks and Jets.

Every morning during baseball season around 6:15 a.m., after driving to Midtown from Manalapan, N.J., Petruccio takes a cup of coffee and sketches a one-page illustration summarizing the previous night's game. The drawings are topped with tabloid-like headlines and accompanied with short summaries scribbled in ballpoint pen. Sometimes, they're standard portraits.

 More often, he dabbles with comic strips, cartoons and caricatures. He uses bright watercolors for wins and black-and-white shades for losses.

Petruccio has maintained this Mets diary for about a decade, though last season was the first that he uploaded the daily illustrations to his blog, called My Mets Journal. It was also the first time that he successfully chronicled all 162 games—and the sideshows endemic in New York—without giving in to apathy.

On Friday, he walked into his 35th-floor office and reached for a set of notebooks on his desk, topped by mugs bursting with pens and brushes. He found the smallest of the bunch, a softcover Moleskine journal, and fanned through the wavy pages, showing off his achievement. This was his 2010 Mets diary.

Then he grabbed a larger hardcover with a title inked in orange on the cover: "THIS YEAR, WE'RE GOIN' FOR BROKE!" It was his current journal for the Mets, with most of the pages still blank.

The 51-year-old Petruccio grew up in the Bay Ridge section of Brooklyn listening to Elvis and watching the Mets. He also devoured the illustrations of LeRoy Neiman and Bill Gallo, the legendary newspaper cartoonist. "Everybody was idolizing the people they were drawing," Petruccio said. "I was idolizing the guys that were drawing."

He went to college for art but took a job in advertising as a sketch artist. His company had the Mets account, and he brainstormed pitches for his favorite baseball team. Petruccio showed his ideas to an art director, who agreed to bring them to his meeting with the Mets. 

"And when he came back," Petruccio recalled, "He said, 'They bought all of yours.'" Just like that, he was out of the studio.

In 2003, after publishing his artwork in a forum for Elvis enthusiasts, he became one of Graceland's official artists. It was around this time that Petruccio began tracking the Mets in journal-form.

For the team's 40th anniversary in 2002, he purchased an oversized blue journal and pasted a commemorative patch on the cover. He didn't last past May. The next year, with a notebook that was even bigger, he gave up on May 19.

Before last season, though, Petruccio saw the movie "Julie & Julia," about the food blogger Julie Powell's quest to make every recipe in Julia Child's "Mastering The Art of French Cooking" in one year. 

Publishing his Elvis art on the Internet had already resulted in something of a dream job for him, so he decided to blog his sports work, too.

"I figured, if I post my journal, it will give me a little something to finish the book—or make it past May," he said. 

He chose the tiniest notebook he could find, a 90-page pad that slipped into his pants pocket, and he was diligent about posting images every morning to his website. 

The strategic shift invigorated him. Petruccio survived May and made it all the way to October.

From now on, Petruccio intends to complete every Mets, Jets and Knicks season. (He's also a Rangers fan, but "enough's enough," he says.) For this Mets campaign, he upgraded to a 200-page hardcover that he carries in a leather case.

"With the Wilpons and Ponzi schemes and all that stuff," Petruccio said, "I figured I might need some extra pages."

It usually takes Petruccio about 30 minutes to generate an idea, sketch it horizontally on the page and scan it to his desktop.

His Mets website brings in around 4,000 daily visitors, he said, and last year, publishers contacted Petruccio's literary agent about the inevitable progression from blog to book. They eventually demurred when the Mets finished with a 79-83 record.

"You would expect a Yankees journal to always end in the World Series," Petruccio said, explaining why clunkers are so fitting for his project. "But this journal is about the journey of a team and the people that love them and how they deal with it. To a Mets fan, this is a regular season."