TOKYO—In the latest sign of sluggishness in Japan's economy, core machinery orders unexpectedly fell in November, slipping 3% from the previous month as weakness in the telecommunications and transportation sectors pushed down orders from nonmanufacturers.

Economists polled by Dow Jones Newswires and the Nikkei had forecast a median increase of 1.8%. The figure, released Thursday by the Cabinet Office, marked November as the third straight month of decline in seasonally adjusted core orders, a leading indicator of corporate capital investment, which accounts for around 15% of the country's economy.



The poor result further underlines the challenges facing the Japanese economy, which is struggling with stubborn deflation, weak domestic demand and an export-subduing strong yen. Economists say the country's entrenched deflation drags on investment and overall economic activity by pushing up real interest rates and prompting consumers to defer purchases as they wait for prices to fall further.

Nonmanufacturing orders fell 10.5% for the second monthly decline, prompting the government to lower its overall assessment of orders.

While the government continued to say the longer-term trend is toward a pickup in orders, it said "signs of weakness can be seen in nonmanufacturing," the first downgrade to its assessment in a year. Core orders fell 1.4% in October and 10.3% in September.

"The data showed the pace of business investment among nonmanufacturers remains very slow due to a lack of domestic demand," said  Norio Miyagawa, a senior economist at Mizuho Securities Research.

Weakness in orders from finance and insurance sectors also contributed to the fall in nonmanufacturing orders, a Cabinet Office official who briefed reporters said.

A drop in overseas orders was another factor in the overall fall. Overseas orders fell 17.8% from a month earlier, though the official said that was largely an adjustment after the strong 16% gain in October.

Orders from the manufacturing sector rose 10.6%, the second straight monthly gain.

A recent pickup in key overseas markets such as the U.S. and China may sustain further gains in the manufacturing segment ahead, economists said.

"There is a chance that the pace of capital spending growth among manufacturers will accelerate" as overseas companies demand more Japanese machinery, said HSBC Securities chief economist  Seiji Shiraishi.

Such improvement is likely not in the cards for the nonmanufacturing sector, however, because the economic outlook among Japanese service-sector companies remains downbeat, Shiraishi said.

Core orders unadjusted for seasonal factors were up 11.6% from a year earlier in November, the data showed, but economists said the overall level of orders remains low. Moreover, core orders are expected to show a drop of 9.8% in the October-December period, compared with a 9.6% rise in the previous quarter, the data showed.

Core orders exclude ships and equipment ordered by electric-power companies, which are typically large and can swing from month to month, obscuring the underlying trend.

—Takashi Mochizuki contributed to this article.

 Write to  Andrew Monahan at andrew.monahan@dowjones.net 