JERUSALEM—A bomb in central Jerusalem killed one woman, and two Katyusha rockets from Gaza slammed into the southern Israeli city of Beersheba on Wednesday, marking the most serious flare-up of violence between Israel and Palestinian militants in years.

The bomb, which injured dozens and was hidden in a bag at a crowded bus stop, was the first fatal bombing in Jerusalem since 2004. It recalled a campaign of attacks in Israel's big cities during the Palestinian intifada, or uprising, in the early 2000s.

The rocket attacks in southern Israel left one person injured. But they were viewed ominously, prompting school cancellations and spurring an Israeli defense official to speculate that the military will launch a major offensive in Gaza against the Islamist militant group Hamas, which runs the territory. An Israeli military spokesman said about a dozen mortars also were fired from Gaza.

Early Thursday, Israeli airstrikes hit Hamas targets in Gaza, according to news reports.

On Tuesday eight Gazans were killed in Israeli military attacks. 

Hamas took responsibility for mortars fired from Gaza on Saturday, following two years of relative calm observed by Israel and Palestinian militants.

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on Wednesday delayed his departure for a visit to Moscow. 

"We will act aggressively, responsibly and prudently to maintain the calm and security that has prevailed," he said in the evening before boarding his plane. 

As it crafts its response, Israel will consider the simultaneous hostilities in Libya and demonstrations elsewhere in the Mideast. Israel will likely try to keep a low profile, relieved that its conflict with Palestinians isn't the focus of international attention in the region and reluctant to provide a distraction from the pressure faced by some of its neighbors, political analysts said.

Though Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility for Wednesday's rocket fire, Israeli Defense Minister Ehud Barak said Israel holds Hamas responsible for the attacks in southern Israel. "We will not tolerate the harming of Israeli citizens, not in the south and not in Jerusalem," he said. "Hamas is responsible for the firing of rockets toward Beersheba today, and this responsibility has a price."

Deputy Defense Minister Matan Vilnai told Israel Army radio that it was only a matter of time before Israel launches a broad attack on Hamas in Gaza. 

Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas condemned the bombing, according to the official Palestinian news service.

Hamas was quoted on Israeli radio saying that the group wanted to restore the calm that preceded the recent violence.

After the southern Israeli city of Ashdod was targeted Tuesday night, Mayor Yehiel Lasri told Israel Radio he decided to close schools in case Israel's army decides to launch an offensive in coming days.

The force of the Jerusalem blast damaged the windows of a municipal bus near a stop outside Jerusalem's Central Bus Station and the capital's convention center. Israeli news services said a 59-year-old woman, possibly a foreign citizen, was killed.

 Israeli police with bomb-sniffing dogs combed the area for more explosives. Public Security Minister Yitzhak Aharonovitch estimated that the explosive weighed one to two kilograms. 

Nearby, a group of people chanted, "Death to Arabs."

U.S. President Barack Obama condemned the Jerusalem bombing and the attacks from Gaza. He also expressed his condolences for the deaths of civilians in Gaza following Israeli airstrikes Tuesday. All parties should "do everything in their power to prevent further violence and civilian casualties," Mr. Obama said in a prepared statement.

Jerusalem on Friday is scheduled to hold its first marathon, an effort to draw sports tourism and improve the city's image. Less than two weeks ago a couple and three of their children were killed in a stabbing in a Jewish settlement that Israel blamed on Palestinian militants.