WASHINGTON -- President Barack Obama on Friday protested congressional restrictions on his power to try Guantanamo detainees in the U.S. as he signed into law a defense-spending bill that includes those curbs.

The measure for fiscal year 2011, passed at the end of the last Congress in December, blocks the Defense Department from using any money to move Guantanamo prisoners to the U.S. for any reason.

Mr. Obama issued a statement saying the provision "represents a dangerous and unprecedented challenge to critical executive branch authority to determine when and where to prosecute Guantanamo detainees, based on the facts and the circumstances of each case and our national security interests."

However, the president stopped short of calling the measure unconstitutional or saying he would refuse to observe it. He said only that he would ask Congress to repeal the restrictions and oppose any attempt to extend them beyond the current fiscal year, which ends Sept. 30.

The practical effect of the ban is limited because the administration was loath to stir any fights over detainees by bringing them to the U.S. 

Nonetheless, Mr. Obama's decision to sign the law marks another example of how his ambitions on Guantanamo have been stymied, often by opposition from lawmakers of both parties in Congress.

The president pledged on his second day in office to close the offshore prison by January 2010, but a year after that deadline passed the U.S. naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, remains home to about 170 detainees.

In November 2009 Attorney General  Eric Holder said he wanted to bring the most famous Guantanamo detainees -- Khalid Sheikh Mohammed and other alleged plotters of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks -- to New York City for a trial in civilian court. The administration quickly dropped those plans amid local opposition.

By signing the law, Mr. Obama essentially conceded that any civilian trial is impossible in the current fiscal year. However, he defended the concept of prosecuting terrorists in a civilian federal court, saying it is a "powerful tool" in protecting the nation. 

"Any attempt to deprive the executive branch of that tool undermines our nation's counterterrorism efforts and has the potential to harm our national security," the president said.

Mr. Holder had used similar language last month when he warned congressional leaders before the legislation passed that the ban was "an extreme and risky encroachment on the authority of the executive branch to determine when and where to prosecute terrorist suspects."

Republicans and some Democrats say that Guantanamo is the most secure place to keep terror suspects and that moving them to the U.S. raises security problems. They say military tribunals, not civilian courts, are the proper forum for bringing to justice suspects accused of trying to attack the U.S.

Those contentions grew stronger last fall when a New York federal jury acquitted a former Guantanamo detainee of all but one count in the 1998 bombings of U.S. embassies in Africa. 

The legislation signed by the president also puts new conditions on his ability to transfer Guantanamo detainees to third countries. Mr. Obama's statement criticized the conditions, saying they would "hinder the conduct of delicate negotiations with foreign countries."

A recent report to Congress from the nation's intelligence agencies said that of 598 detainees released from the prison since 2002, 150, or 25%, are confirmed or believed to have rejoined terrorist groups. Five of the 69 prisoners, about 7%, released by the Obama administration returned to terrorism or are suspected of doing so, the report said.

 Write to  Evan Perez at evan.perez@wsj.com 