I make my annual economic forecasts using a Magic 8 Ball by  Mattel.
MAT


-1.09
%




 It's more reliable than an economist or Wall Street analyst.

Yet when I asked whether the U.S. economy would fall off a cliff again, as it did in September 2008, it would not answer. Nor would it say what life would be like after it does. "Better not tell you now," it read, as if I might not be able to handle the answer.

Suddenly, my little black oracle is being cagey and pessimistic. Maybe it is filling up with too many bubbles.

 Q: If our economy takes another plunge, won't our government just bail it out again?  A: Reply hazy, try again.

 Q: But fear of a double-dip recession dissipated significantly in 2010, right?  A: Yes.

 Q: And recent upticks in areas such as consumer spending have brightened the economic outlook for 2011. So have we turned the corner?  A: Very doubtful.

 Q: The Dow Jones Industrial Average, stoked by artificially low interest rates, is on a roll. Will it set a new record above 14000 in 2011?  A: My reply is no.

 Q: Will the mortgage-foreclosure crisis that triggered our economic malaise finally end in 2011?  A: Outlook not so good.

 Q: Will unemployment remain near double-digit highs?  A: Without a doubt.

 Q: Will we ever recover jobs our companies shipped overseas?  A: My sources say no.

 Q: Will we ever stop buying goods made in China and oil produced in the Middle East?  A: Yes -- definitely.

 Q: What I mean is, will we do this in time to save our economy from global annihilation?  A: Better not tell you now.

 Q: Will oil prices rise above $100 in 2011?  A: As I see it, yes.

 Q: Won't that drain an already tapped consumer?  A: You may rely on it.

 Q: Some say a rising gold price is God's little messenger, reminding us the money we save for the future is just paper. Will gold spike above $1,700 in 2011?  A: Signs point to yes.

 Q: What about retirement?  A: Don't count on it.

 Q: Can Republicans really rescue the country from Democrats jacking our national debt into numbers only astronomers can comprehend?  A: My reply is no.

 Q: Wars are a big contributor to the nation's debt. And the nation's debt, ironically enough, now threatens national security. Will America keep fighting wars, even as it's led by a president who campaigned on his opposition to war?  A: It is decidedly so.

 Q: Can the banks save us? Can Wall Street save us? Don't they appreciate that we saved them?  A: My reply is no.

 Q: What? Did America's Age of Democracy suddenly end, leaving us a bunch of helpless serfs in a global corporate oligarchy?  A: It is certain.

 Q: So how long before we fall off the cliff again?  A: Ask again later.

 Q: OK, it's later.  A: Reply hazy, try again.

 Q: OK, how about now?  A: Concentrate and ask again.

 Q: I am concentrating. Now?  A: Cannot predict now.

 Q: Oh, no. Were you made in China, too?  A: Yes.

—Al Lewis is a columnist for Dow Jones Newswires in Denver. He blogs at tellittoal.com; his email address is al.lewis@dowjones.com 