 What are your favorite books of 2010 written by women? 

—Patricia Cekoric, Hopewell Township, Pa.

 "Room" by Emma Donoghue. This novel of a kidnapped mother and the son she bears in captivity is emotionally searing and unforgettable. Using her wits and imagination, this mother turns a prison cell into a whole world for her child, who narrates the story. 

 "Good to a Fault" by Marina Endicott. A single, childless woman selflessly takes into her home the three children of a woman whom she injured in an automobile accident. Or maybe she's not selfless but has found a way to steal a family while appearing to be a do-gooder. A graceful and deeply satisfying novel.

 "The Cookbook Collector" by Allegra Goodman. Two sisters choose different paths to love and fortune: One's a dot-com entrepreneur, the other a philosophy student who works in a musty bookstore. Life hands them lemons; they make lemon sorbet. Romantic comedy, morality tale, meditation on food, love and death—they're all here.

 "As Always, Julia," edited by Joan Reardon. This collection of letters between Julia Child and Avis DeVoto is alternately meaty and frothy, appropriate for two women who loved to cook. Families and politics also figure in their correspondence, but their mutual affection over several decades always came back to the chicken or the eggs. 

 "So Much for That" by Lionel Shriver. It's a challenge to make a story about health insurance into a compelling, and often funny, novel, but Ms. Shriver did it. Her hero has built a nest egg to retire on a tropical island. Unfortunately, his savings is needed to subsidize his sick wife's health care. Sound depressing? It's anything but.

 "Major Pettigrew's Last Stand" by Helen Simonson. Ernest Pettigrew, snobby English to the core, could be nothing more than a figure of fun, but Ms. Simonson puts in his path a Pakistani widow who runs a small neighborhood grocery. A tempest in a teapot ensues, but not without stinging reflections on racism, greed and hypocrisy. 

 "Trespass" by Rose Tremain. Southern France is under siege by wealthy tourists looking for an antique mas (farmhouse) to add to their collections of domiciles. Audrun and Aramon are estranged siblings who own such a farmhouse; one wants to sell it, the other doesn't. The result is a dark story of territoriality, entitlement and revenge.

I have favorites by men, too. All you have to do is ask.

—Send your questions about books and reading to Cynthia Crossen at booklover@wsj.com.