Shares of cell-tower operators fell Monday amid fears that  AT&T Inc.
T


-0.91
%




's agreement to buy T-Mobile USA from  Deutsche Telekom AG for $39 billion will reduce the need for new towers from the two carriers. 

AT&T and T-Mobile have said the combination would give it the spectrum required to build out a next-generation network using a wireless standard called Long-Term Evolution to 95% of the country, including many rural areas. Without the combination, it was assumed that the two carriers would need more towers to complete the job. 

"AT&T could go from a net builder of cell sites to a net reducer of cell sites in the next five years," J.P. Morgan analyst  Philip Cusick said. 

As a result Monday, shares of  American Tower Corp.
AMT


0.42
%




,  Crown Castle International Corp.
CCI


-0.61
%




 and  SBA Communications Corp.
SBAC


0.26
%




 hit 2011 lows. The tower operators—which lease space to wireless companies—are frequently mentioned as a way to tap into the world's growing reliance on wireless services, and their stocks tend to be among the most expensive and most volatile in the telecom industry.

In an attempt to ease market concerns, the tower companies updated investors on their agreements with the two carriers. In 2010, T-Mobile USA represented 8% of American Tower's consolidated operating revenues and 11% of Crown Castle's. SBA said the total annualized site-leasing revenue generated by T-Mobile is about $40.1 million; in 2010, SBA had site-leasing revenue of $535.4 million.

American Tower said the average remaining term on the lease arrangements with T-Mobile is between five and six years. Crown Castle put it at seven years; SBA at three. 

American Tower added that it has separate leases for antenna space with AT&T and T-Mobile on the same site at about 3,100 of its 36,000 communications sites. The revenue generated from T-Mobile on these sites represented about 4% of American Tower's 2010 consolidated operating revenue. SBA had separate leases with both carriers on the same tower at about 1,533 of the company's 9,260 sites.

"Historically, when two U.S. wireless carriers merge there is not an immediate impact on cell-site rentals due to the remaining life on the five to 10 year leases," Raymond James analyst  Ric Prentiss said. "This transaction may, however, prove to be a drag on future growth rates [post 2012] as it would effectively eliminate an additional 4G network from being built," as the two carriers would share the network AT&T has started building out. 

  Jonathan Schildkraut, a New York-based analyst at Evercore Partners, said American Tower would "probably lose 10% to 15%" of its estimated medium-term growth in the U.S., noting that the company's expansion into overseas markets had been the right thing to do.

By the end of this year, 30% of American Tower's revenue will come from outside the U.S., Mr. Schildkraut said. That compares with 19% in 2010. 

Nonetheless, the cell-tower stocks plunged Monday. American Tower fell 7.9% to $46.61; Crown Castle dropped 4.6% to $37.37; and SBA Communications lost 8.8% to $37.03.

Some analysts saw the selloff Monday as a buying opportunity. 

"As wireless networks are not known for their overcapacity, there is little potential to cancel leases or consolidate assets," RBC Capital analyst  Jonathan Atkin said. "However, we estimate same-site overlap to be single digits and would buy towers on significant weakness."