Stanley Pleskun was lashed between two Cessnas, engaged in a tug of war with the buzzing airplanes, when he met Zachary Levy, a camerman who had come to shoot the stunt for television. But that show of force was almost secondary to the reason Mr. Levy decided to make a movie about the beefy New Jersey native who calls himself Stanless Steel. "We had this connection," Mr. Levy said. "We liked each other from the beginning."

Starting in 1999, the filmmaker spent more than four years documenting Mr. Pleskun's life. The result, "Strongman," is a portrait of a man struggling for lift-off with a career as anachronistic as the circus showmen he idolizes. In the film, which won the Grand Jury Prize at the 2009 Slamdance Film Festival and opens Wednesday at IFC Center, Mr. Pleskun, 53, bends metal rods over his thigh, hoists trucks and crimps coins with his bare hands, a signature stunt that underpins his claim to be "the strongest man in the world—at bending steel." 

But such feats emerge in the movie without fanfare. They play out on equal footing with scenes of everyday exertion from Mr. Pleskun's personal life. Among them: a grueling day job salvaging scrap metal in New York City; a claustrophobic home life in South Brunswick that includes a drug- and drink-addled brother; and a fraught but tender relationship with his girlfriend, Barbara, who is nursing a long-expired dream of being a model. 

On his way to a recent salvage job, Mr. Pleskun wore his iron-gray hair pulled back in a ponytail. His broad back and shoulders were humped inside a red sweatshirt, blackened at the cuffs. He said his workaday scrap job has done more damage to his body than his strongman regimen, which includes raising a sledgehammer one-handed at arm's length. "I've got some miles on me," he said. "That's the problem—the working is what kills you."

With no music and no narration, "Strongman" reflects the intimate view of a filmmaker who was virtually embedded with his subject. Operating the camera himself and usually accompanied by a lone soundman, Mr. Levy shot 240 hours of footage. Scenes hop from the mundane (Mr. Pleskun laboring over a stencil to jazz up a Stanless Steel T-shirt) to the raw (a drinking session gets ugly and turns the strongman bug-eyed with rage). 

In "Strongman," Mr. Levy, who calls his style "hard-core vérité, follows Mr. Pleskun in performances ranging from a kid's birthday party to a TV variety show in England. But unlike the recent spate of competition-based documentaries, including "Spellbound," about young spelling-bee contestants, Mr. Levy didn't use those performance scenes to pump up the drama.

"To some people, it's the weakness of the film. To others it's what makes it really exciting," the director, 37, said. "When you're not trying to fit somebody into those story arcs to begin with, the shapes of the film become different."

Without a built-in climax to his movie, Mr. Levy said his character study emerged in the editing. For instance, the limitations of Mr. Pleskun's quest for "good energy" and an idealized love come to light in his repeated attempts to train his girlfriend how to introduce his act. Often she fails to muster much excitement or master her few lines. Some of Mr. Pleskun's stunts, though big on grimaces, are visually understated. Bending little pennies, his agent reminds him, won't play in a stadium.

"Even more than a strongman, I think of him as an artist," Mr. Levy said. "Every time he does something, he's risking failure. And that's almost 180 degrees different than what people usually do in the strength world—they don't perform a stunt onstage unless they know they can do it." 

In making "Strongman," Mr. Levy faced a Herculean task of his own. He borrowed cameras and rented cars to make dozens of trips between his home in New York and South Brunswick. He funded the production with a one-off business he launched during the peak of the Iraq war, selling a deck of playing cards satirizing the George W. Bush administration. He went into debt again after promoting his film at a dozen festivals, then worked the phones for more than a year before landing his run at the IFC Center, a process that's ongoing with art-house theaters around the country. 

On a recent afternoon, the director sat between his subject and a reporter in the high cab of Mr. Pleskun's hulking truck, parked beside Radio City Music Hall during a lull between scrap jobs. The strongman, whose stage name is emblazoned above his truck's grille, followed a meandering stream of thought. He touched on the Samson stories his father used to tell, and childhood memories of breaking quartz with a hammer to find pretend diamonds. He handed a flier for the film out the window to a co-worker and talked about Mr. Levy as a friend. "There's calmness in Zach, and he has a way of bringing things out of you," he said.

He also trusts Mr. Levy with his life. To promote a screening of "Strongman" at the Coney Island Film Festival in 2009, the director took the wheel of a Ford Ranger, nosed the truck up a ramp and—for 10 seconds—parked it right on Mr. Pleskun's chest.

 Write to  John Jurgensen at john.jurgensen@wsj.com 