 Sony said hackers breached a second online service, gaining access to personal data on 24.6 million accounts. 17 

 Three Chinese companies aim to raise nearly $3 billion via Hong Kong IPOs this month, adding to a surge of offerings just as the market shows signs of flagging.  

 U.S. authorities sued Deutsche Bank and a mortgage unit, saying they lied about the quality of mortgages to be included in a government insurance program.  

 The audit-panel head at social-networking firm Renren has resigned after allegations of fraud against a company where he is a senior executive.  

 Saab Automobile reached an investment agreement with Chinese auto maker Hawtai Motor Group that could enable the ailing Swedish car maker to restart production as soon as next week.  

 GM, Ford and Nissan reported strong April U.S. sales gains, a sign the industry is riding out the rise in gasoline prices far better than it did in the 2008.  

 U.K. authorities are pushing some European financial institutions to restructure their London operations in ways that would subject them to more oversight.  

 Google's Seoul offices were raided by Korean police as part of an investigation into whether the U.S. search giant's unit has been illegally collecting data on individuals' location through its mobile-advertising platform.  

 ANZ warned that lending growth will slow as interest rates rise and the strong Australian dollar hurts exporters. First-half net rose 38%.  

 Silver prices fell a further 5.1%, adding to a steep decline on Monday that followed an increase in margin requirements.  

 Consumer prices in developed economies rose in March at the fastest pace since October 2008, driven by energy and food inflation.  

 Macau's gambling revenue rose 45% in April from a year earlier, as mainland Chinese visitors to the world's largest gambling market helped push the results to a third straight monthly record.  

 Korean Air posted a 50% jump in quarterly profit under new accounting standards, aided by a stronger won.  

 China stood by its ally Pakistan amid growing U.S. questions about whether the country was complicit in harboring Osama bin Laden.  

 Many in Pakistan, Afghanistan and the Arab world refuse to believe that bin Laden is dead, with the absence of photographs fueling the conspiracy theories.  

 India wants the U.S. to attach tougher conditions to the aid it provides Pakistan and to minimize Pakistan's role in the future of Afghanistan as the U.S. winds down its presence there, an Indian official said, in the wake of the discovery that bin Laden was living in Pakistan when he was killed.  

British police arrested five men near a nuclear plant in northwest England under terrorism laws. 

NATO forces launched an airstrike against a group of private security guards who were contracted to protect military supply convoys along an eastern Afghan highway, killing one of the guards.

Cambodia has asked the U.N.'s highest court to order Thailand to withdraw troops and halt military activity around a temple at the center of a decades-old border dispute that has flared into deadly military clashes.

A tornado twisted through the North Shore of Auckland, New Zealand's largest city, killing two people.