MARKET'S EUPHORIA OVER DEATH OF BIN LADEN MAY BE WEARING OFF —TV news banner, Tuesday morning, May 3 

This is what I hate about special forces storming a secret compound and shooting the most reviled terrorist in the world in the head. You feel great for a day and then it's back to the blahs.

That was me all over on Tuesday, me and the market: bored, peevish and depressed. The high was wearing off, as if I'd run through an addictive prescription—Osamakil. Ask your broker if Osamakil is right for you.

Mentally I checked the label, confirming the indications (To relieve chronic disgust with the world and prolonged incredulity that he rode a camel out of Tora Bora) and running my finger along the dosage chart (Adults………………….One skinny maniac "buried at sea"). 

Sounded about right. We should still have been feeling pretty good, the market and I.

But wait: May cause temporary euphoria and a brief run-up in aerospace/defense, followed by a relapse into workaday doubts and fears. Tingling in the commodities and itchy stop-loss finger have been reported in some cases. Do not savor more than three high-value kills in 24 months. If a vague sense of disappointment persists, consult a professional. 

I turned the bottle around and around in my mind. A professional what? It didn't say. I called my financial adviser.

"Ruby, are you a professional?" I asked.

"Yes, but I'm not Nostradamus," she snapped. "I said it before: I'm sorry about  Sony."

"Forget Sony," I said. "Listen, Ruby, I'm feeling a vague sense of disappointment after Sunday's high-value kill, and I thought I should consult a professional."

My Droid snorted in my ear. "You and everybody else. Have you seen what happened to the market's euphoria?"

"I understand it may be wearing off," I said.

"Wearing off?" she said. "More like Poof! I've seen market euphoria ebb, but never like this."

Maybe I needed to see another kind of professional? As it happened, my dentist brought it up himself Wednesday morning during my cleaning.

"So we got him."

"Aagh yeuh."

"Son of a bitch."

"Aagh yeuh."

"Think they should release the photo?"

"Euh hoho? Ghagh aagh yeuh haagh euh hoho."

"Me too. Did I tell you, I bought a new boat."

I tried an Episcopal priest, an acupuncturist, an actuary and my mechanic, who said he couldn't speak to my vague sense of disappointment without taking the engine apart.

And who could blame it, the market? Who could blame it if its euphoria was already wearing off? We can't expect it to go tap-dancing up a glittering staircase to heaven with top hat and cane like Astaire just because some Navy SEALs snuck into the Pakistani president's back yard while he was playing Angry Birds and took out the most wanted criminal in U.S. history. Not with $4 gas and this housing overhang.

What have you done for me lately, as Moses said to God after the aquatic trick.

It's the way of the world. You turn around your company's crappiest division, the Sugar-Frosted Disk Drive division, in six quarters with the best single idea you'll ever have. The next day the boss looks at you like you've been living unbathed under a railroad trestle since Windows 7 came out.

"Thanks," I said to my wife on my birthday, plucking the ribbon off the Prius and looking for the right bin to throw it in. Ribbons, ribbons ... are they plastic? What are they anyway?

"You don't seem so excited," she said. "Don't you want to take it for a spin?"

"Nah, let's just recycle it," I said.

"I meant the car," she said.

I knew what she meant. I just didn't know how to tell her. I wasn't that into it. She'd already given it to me.

 Write to  Peter Jeffrey at peter.jeffrey@wsj.com 