SINGAPORE—As prices for food and energy climb, a growing number of governments—most recently in Asia—are expanding subsidies, imposing price controls or embracing other short-term fixes to protect consumers that many economists fear will prove counterproductive and lead to higher inflation in the end.

On Monday, India extended longstanding subsidies on diesel and cooking fuels, and additional food subsidies are expected in coming weeks. Hong Kong authorities last week said they will waive public-housing rents for two months and told residents they will get subsidies for electricity bills, and cash handouts of 6,000 Hong Kong dollars (US$770) for retirement funds as inflation heads toward a government estimate of 4.5% this year.

In Singapore, the government is offering tax rebates, cash grants for small and medium-size businesses and other benefits after inflation hit 5.5% in January. Indonesia, where inflation hit 7% annually in January, was planning to lift longstanding subsidies for fuel users beginning in March, but is considering delaying that.

The moves follow earlier steps in China, where authorities directed local governments in November to provide subsidies or use price controls as needed to combat the effects of rising prices. 

The policies are popular with governments because they can temporarily prevent inflation from accelerating further, while helping consumers cope with higher costs. Governments are mindful that rising food prices helped trigger the latest unrest in the Middle East. 

"Most Asian economies do not have the luxury of just leaving everything to adjust through market mechanisms—because the poor are already living on such thin margins," said Thai Finance Minister Korn Chatikavanij in an email. Thailand recently extended until June programs that offer free electricity and bus and train rides for the poor. 

Several Middle East governments have taken similar steps, even when such measures mean unsustainable rises in budget spending. Jordan has boosted fuel subsidies, putting a strain on its budget and triggering warnings by ratings agencies. Algeria has also taken steps to keep a lid on food prices, and Morocco's government has vowed to keep food prices at affordable levels "at any price." 

Subsidies and handouts let governments avoid more painful moves, such as big interest-rate increases, which many governments fear will slow growth and attract more speculative capital that could destabilize their economies. But over the long haul, economists warn, the programs may help drive prices higher by encouraging consumers to spend. Price controls, meanwhile, discourage farmers and manufacturers from producing more food and other goods—which is needed to help bring prices down—and can create other distortions.

"Governments in Asia are basically kicking the can down the road, because subsidies and price controls in the long run are counterproductive," says Frederic Neumann, an economist at HSBC in Hong Kong. Giving people more money to spend through subsidies and handouts is the last thing governments should be doing when prices are rising, he says. 

The policies are also expensive --- Singapore's is expected to cost $6.6 billion Singapore dollars (US$5.2 billion—, though that may not matter much to Asian governments now, when many are rolling in large budget surpluses. 

Mr. Korn, the Thai finance minister, said Thailand should be able to afford most of its subsidies, but a similar program that subsidizes diesel isn't sustainable in the long run.

Rolling back subsidies and price caps could itself incite unrest. Moves to cut subsidies or float fuel and other prices helped trigger protests that brought down the government of former Indonesian strongman Suharto in the late 1990s, and also led to big street protests in Myanmar in 2007. In Bolivia, President Evo Morales recently had to rescind a move to eliminate popular fuel subsidies after the threat of a nationwide transport strike.

 In Venezuela, an outlier in Latin America, with price rises of 27% in 2010, President Hugo Chavez has created a complex web of subsidies for everything from food to housing and transportation, offering a cautionary tale of the complexities of managing subsidies. Lines at subsidized food markets stretch for hours and price controls have led to periodic shortages of items like milk. The state's oil company was brought in to help coordinate the logistics. 

Consumer prices are moving unevenly across the world. See inflation rates across 50 countries.

By contrast, Brazil is combating inflation by trying to boost the country's food supply. It has unleashed billions in subsidized loans in recent years to help major beef and other food producers bulk up to keep pace with demand in a booming economy, efforts that some economists say are more effective in the long term against inflation. 

Meanwhile, as consumers get used to the subsidies, they want more.

"I want the government to take care of the expensive price of goods," says Sukanya Puangsamran, a 20-year-old food vendor in Bangkok. "They have been doing all right about the palm-oil price, but it would be good if they could decrease the price of other stuff by 50%," she said. ‪ 

"The government should work harder to do something about the cost of living of their people," said Yupin Srimek, a 46-year-old hairdresser, who says her customers are tipping less and less these days as they get pinched on expenses which the government doesn't subsidize. 

Some countries have already determined that certain subsidies are unsustainable. Vietnam, which saw its inflation rate surpass 12% on year in February, recently said it would lift fuel prices by up to 24% after it determined subsidies were too costly in the face of rising crude prices. China, too, has allowed some prices to rise. Last month, Beijing raised fuel prices for the third time in four months, though pump prices in China still tend to lag global rises.

—Wilawan Watcharasakwet in Bangkok, Jason Dean in Beijing, Joe Parkinson in Manama, Bahrain, and John Lyons contributed to this article.

 Write to  Patrick Barta at patrick.barta@wsj.com 