NEW YORK—American International Group Inc. and the U.S. Treasury launched a long-awaited stock offering that puts the insurer on a path to exit from government ownership. But the deal still could end up being pulled if the government is unable to sell its shares at a profit, according to people familiar with the matter.

The bailed-out insurer and the Treasury, its majority shareholder, unveiled plans Wednesday to sell 300 million AIG shares, or about 16.7% of the company, to investors later this month. The roughly $9 billion deal was smaller than some investors expected but was sized to improve the company's odds of fetching a higher price for the shares, the people said. 

Just Tuesday, AIG Chief Executive  Robert Benmosche in discussions with the government raised the prospect of postponing this month's stock offering, following a steep fall in AIG's publicly traded shares, according to people familiar with the matter. But he, in concert with the Treasury, decided to move ahead with the offering and a "road show" to pitch it to investors, the people said. 

Investor feedback over the next two weeks will determine whether the share sale actually occurs, one of the people said. 

The Treasury intends to sell 200 million shares to recoup a portion of the insurer's 2008 bailout, while AIG expects to sell 100 million shares to raise cash and pay for a $550 million legal settlement that it entered into last year. Banks handling the offering have an option to sell as much as 45 million more of the Treasury's shares if demand proves strong. 

AIG shares jumped $1.03, or 3.5%, to $30.65 on Wednesday, reversing declines earlier in the week and going against the broader U.S. stock market, which slid about 1%. 

The stock offering commenced Wednesday following lengthy discussions between Treasury and AIG's management and directors about what they want to achieve from the share sales. The Treasury needs to sell its shares at above $28.70 apiece in order to make money on a $47.5 billion cash investment in AIG, in the form of a 92.1% ownership stake in the company.

Following the discussions, the Treasury and AIG are now in alignment about how to proceed with the offering, and they won't sell shares if taxpayers don't earn a profit now and in the future on the sales, according to people familiar with the matter. In other words, if they don't get the price they want, Treasury will "pull the deal," said one of the people.

Government officials have said that in managing their share sale, they are balancing two interests: extracting the government from ownership of a private company while trying to maximize value for taxpayers.

Mr. Benmosche's earlier reservations about the offering mainly had to do with the potential price of the deal, according to people familiar with the matter. He told bankers he would oppose a sale if they couldn't sell the stock at a decent price, and he said the low- to mid-20s wouldn't fly, according to the people.

The stance is a familiar one for Mr. Benmosche, who, since taking the helm of the rescued insurer in August 2009, has maintained it shouldn't rush into selling assets at fire-sale prices as it moves to repay taxpayers. 

Mr. Benmosche will be one of the company executives going on the road show for the stock offering, which starts Thursday in Europe and wraps up in Chicago on May 24. 

Two teams of AIG management, led by Mr. Benmosche and  Peter Hancock, chief executive of AIG's property-and-casualty insurance business Chartis Inc., will start meeting with investors on Thursday in London and Frankfurt, respectively, and then travel to cities including Milan, New York, Boston, San Francisco and Los Angeles, according to people familiar with the matter.

Investment banks will collect feedback from investors daily on how many AIG shares they want to purchase and at what price, and relay that information daily to the company and the Treasury. The final decision on how the shares and the price will be made by the Treasury.

At AIG's annual shareholders meeting in New York on Wednesday morning, Chairman  Robert S. "Steve" Miller said the coming share sale could help reduce volatility in AIG's publicly traded shares. 

"We think that having a larger public float of stock will ultimately be helpful in realizing the underlying value of this company," Mr. Miller said. 

Only about 142 million of AIG's shares, valued at about $4.35 billion as of Wednesday's close, are currently held by investors other than the U.S. government, making the stock price prone to big swings. 

AIG shares were one of the best performers in the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index last year. But they have languished so far this year, losing more than a third of their value since mid-January while the broader stock market has rallied.

—Erik Holm  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Serena Ng at serena.ng@wsj.com 