NEW DELHI—Mounting concerns over damaged nuclear reactors in Japan will prompt India to revisit its own nuclear safety strategies, Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh said, indicating that Japan's trauma will play a role in shaping the final framework for handling nuclear-accident liabilities in India. 

"The tragic nuclear incidents in Japan in the aftermath of the recent earthquake and tsunami should make us revisit our strategies for nuclear safety," Mr. Singh said Friday. "I have ordered a thorough review by the department of atomic energy." 

Mr. Singh's comments follow China's decision Wednesday to suspend the approval of new nuclear projects until revised safety rules are ready.

India and China have ambitious programs to develop their civil nuclear-power programs in order to reduce their reliance on fossil fuels, as energy demand grows in their fast-expanding economies. 

China alone aims to add a further 160 plants, while India plans to build 58 and a total of 482 new plants are being planned world-wide. 

Earlier this week, India said it won't alter its plans to massively scale up its nuclear power capacity following the crisis in Japan, but it may consider implementing "additional safeguards" at its plants to prevent any catastrophe. 

In 2010 India passed a law that exposes companies providing nuclear reactors and equipment to liability, a departure from the standard practice in most nuclear energy markets, where liability is channeled to plant operators. 

The law worried companies such as General Electric Co. and Westinghouse Electric Co. and raised the possibility that they might not sell their nuclear technology to India. Such a development would call into question whether the U.S. will enjoy any commercial benefits from civil nuclear energy, a growing sector as countries try to cut their reliance on fossil fuels. 

India has 20 nuclear power reactors, with a total capacity of 4,780 megawatts, which are operated by state-run Nuclear Power Corp. of India Ltd. since the country doesn't let private sector companies operate nuclear plants. India aims to expand its nuclear power generating capacity to 63,000 megawatts by 2032. 

The company has said it will implement any reinforcement to Indian reactors if needed after reviewing the incidents in Japan. 

 Write to  Mukesh Jagota at mukesh.jagota@dowjones.com and Abhrajit Gangopadhyay at Abhrajit.gangopadhyay@dowjones.com 