It would be a challenge to devise a more epicurean upbringing than Fanny Singer's. Her father is importer, winemaker and restaurateur Stephen Singer. Her mother is legendary chef Alice Waters, who celebrates the 40th anniversary of her restaurant, Chez Panisse, this year. 

Ms. Singer was born in Chez Panisse's 12th year, and her life among its chefs inspired a children's book ("Fanny at Chez Panisse"), a café (Café Fanny in Berkeley, Calif.) and a granola blend (Café Fanny granola, for sale at select gourmet stores). 

Now three years into an art history Ph.D. at King's College, Cambridge, the 27-year-old shared how she adapts her Berkeley upbringing to cramped British student housing. 

 I'm living in a delightful hostel called King's Parade across from King's College chapel. I share a minuscule kitchen with about eight people. It's a 2-by-5-meter rectangle with an electric stove, electric oven, scant counter space, the requisite microwave (which I've never used) and a toaster. We've jerry-rigged all kinds of ways to eat in my room. 

 For friends, I love to make roast chicken. It's called my Fire Alarm Chicken, which goes back to my Yale days, when I made it for a friend's birthday party and got a knock on my door from the New Haven fire department. You just can't get a good skin if the oven isn't at 500 degrees. But I'd rather get my roommates out of their rooms in their bathrobes, unfortunately, than sacrifice the skin.

 I could not live without my Lodge 10-inch cast-iron skillet. I use it for everything: Eggs, pasta, all my sauces. I've started calling it skillet pasta, because I add the noodles back into the sauce to cook the last few minutes, especially if it's a tomato sauce or something else juicy. 

 For making salads, I adore my Benriner vegetable mandoline. Is there anything better than a pile of fennel ribbons tossed with olive oil and lemon juice? I had to import mine from the States since they seem not to sell them anywhere in the U.K.—not even in Asian markets.

 My favorite inexpensive cooking tools are the Victorinox paring knives with the plastic handles and metal 3¼-inch blades. I also have two Japanese knives I love, but these are so sharp, you could make an entire dinner with them. 

 I'm horrible at making desserts. I'm a professional cake sinker: a too-much-baking-powder, forgot-the-eggs type baker. Neither my mother nor I have a particular forte in the sweets department, which led us to a love of fruit as a coping mechanism.

 If I could outfit my entire world from one store it would be The Gardener in Berkeley. The owner, Alta Tingle, has such wonderful taste. She sells these little wine glasses made by LSA. They're super-cheap and beautiful, thin and flat-bottomed, with straight sides. I actually use them as a cup measure when I do bake, which would explain all of my baking problems. 

 My biggest indulgence right now might be the biodynamic limes I found at the Fern Verrow produce stall in London's Maltby Street Market. I think I spent 70 pounds on 12 limes. But they are worth it. I can't use a non-organic lime when I'm going to be eating the entirety of it. Chalk it up to my childhood and my culinary training—I feel morally compelled to keep it pesticide-free.

 My one indispensable ingredient is good olive oil. Fortunately my father imports beautiful olive oils, mostly from Tuscany. In the five years I've lived here I've been the very happy recipient of a couple of large canisters of his high-end oil from the San Giusto estate in Tuscany. It's out-of-control delicious. 

 My mom would be displeased to know this, but, especially in the depths of winter, I'll buy the one occasional non-organic fruit. As a child I was only allowed to eat passion fruit as a rare treat, partly as a function of their being expensive, partly because they're imported. I'm going through a bit of a passion-fruit indulgence phase right now. Sometimes in the afternoon when I've really hit a point of no progress, sometimes two passion fruits, sometimes three, will really help break me through that barrier. 

 My favorite thing to eat is salad. I have a salad almost every day. I fiendishly love it, which is definitely a function of my mother's loving salads, too; we've always been green heads. 

 The best kitchen gift I ever got is a cross between a wooden spoon and a spatula, flat on the edges but rounded, almost like child's trowel. It was given to me by Niloufer Ichaporia King, who wrote the beautiful cookbook "My Bombay Kitchen." I'm always very happy to get a gift from her. She once manifested the most delicious rose syrup and a little packet of basil seeds so I could make falooda at home, one of my favorite of her desserts. She always makes it for Parsi New Year, which they celebrate at Chez Panisse every year.

 My proudest cooking accomplishment is my 20 jars of Seville orange marmalade made from oranges illicitly plucked from trees within the walled gardens of the Alcázar during a recent trip to Seville. The marmalade was my mother's suggestion; the Alcázar was my solution to a super-polluted city. I carried 18 oranges with us to Gaucín and then to Granada and finally to Paris, where I made marmalade at my boyfriend's mother's house on New Year's Day.

 I can't wake up without Pu'er tea. I like mine from the Imperial Tea Court in Berkeley. It's a fermented black tea. I like it because it feels gentle on my stomach but it's pretty caffeine-rich, so it's nice in the mornings. It tastes really, really earthy, almost chocolatey. Sometimes I add a sliver of fresh ginger root to the pot to sweeten it.

 The most overrated ingredient is white pepper. It should be struck from the earth. It is the grossest flavor. 

 The most underrated ingredient might be black pepper. People only use a little bit at a time, but there's no pasta I like more than cacio e pepe with a ton of black pepper in it. You can taste how beautifully aromatic it is as a spice.

 My mom always packed me a really embarrassing soft cooler that was big enough for the seven different Tupperwares filled with the salad ingredients that had to be segregated until I was ready to eat—the separate vinaigrette, etc. These days it's usually one Tupperware's worth of salad with a bag of vinaigrette, shoved into my amazing vintage Eastpak backpack which I found at the Salvation Army. It's massive and hot pink. It's really nerdy, but it's big enough for lunch. 

 I've grown up with such beautiful food, it's hard to pick my most memorable meal. As a kid, "lobster" was one of my first words. My mom would always cook anything I wanted for my birthday, which always meant lobster, though lobster does not come from the Bay Area. It meant a special dispensation to have lobster flown from Maine. I did once force my mom to make, despite her outcries, for my 21st birthday, surf and turf. She was like, No! But it was one of the great meals. Lobster and filet. It must have sent my mom back an extraordinary amount. 

—Edited from an interview by Emily Kaiser

 This refreshing raw salad owes its elegant appearance entirely to the method by which it is prepared—a mandoline is essential to slicing the vegetables into thin ribbons. If you can find any purple, yellow or red carrots, use them—the more color, the more beautiful the presentation. Other vegetables you like eating raw can be added or substituted.  

 For the dressing:  2 small shallots  1 to 2 unwaxed, preferably organic, lemons  1/8 to 1/4 cup high quality extra-virgin olive oil  Salt and pepper

 For the salad:  1 head of fennel  1 to 2 large carrots, peeled  1 cucumber, halved length-wise  2 stalks of celery  1 apple (a crisp, firm-fleshed variety is best, such as Pink Lady), halved and cored  1 beet, peeled  10 basil leaves (or 5 Italian basil leaves and 5 Vietnamese sweet basil leaves)

 What to do: 

 1. Start by dicing the shallots. Put them in a bowl and cover them with the juice of one lemon. Using a Microplane grater, zest about half of one lemon into the bowl with the shallots. Add a big pinch of salt and some freshly ground pepper and leave to macerate while preparing the salad. 

 2. Use a mandoline vegetable slicer on a very fine setting to slice each vegetable (with the exception of the beet) lengthwise into a big bowl. The slices should be semi-translucent but not tissue-thin, as they'll need to stand up to the salad dressing. Slicing lengthwise can be tricky; to avoid cutting yourself, start on a new vegetable when need be (having more than the quantities stated above can be useful). Slice the beet into a separate bowl, otherwise it will color the salad.

 3. Whisk the olive oil into the lemon juice and shallots. Add the juice of the second lemon if necessary for acid balance. Make a chiffonade of the basil leaves by cutting them into fine shreds. Toss the ribbons in the dressing, reserving a tablespoon or two for the beets. Fold in the basil. Dress the beets with the remaining dressing.

 4. Delicately heap the tangled ribbons onto each plate, adding a few beet slices to each and serve.