TOKYO—The Tokyo Stock Exchange said Thursday that trading would continue, despite some calls to suspend operations amid growing fears over radiation levels at the earthquake-ravaged nuclear power facility in northeastern Japan. 

Several foreign banks, including one major U.S. financial institution, lobbied for a temporary shutdown of the Tokyo Stock Exchange to avert a market meltdown, according to people familiar with the matter.

The Tokyo bourse ruled out a closure, saying it will continue trading unless it faces the unlikely scenario of a government evacuation order reaching the capital, where most financial institutions are located.

Foreign investors, on average, constitute 60% of trading on the TSE, giving major foreign investment banks greater clout when dealing with the bourse.

"If trading is suspended, it will only accelerate concerns among some U.S. and European brokerages in Japan," said  Isao Hasegawa, director of the equities department at the TSE. "It may risk deepening fears that Tokyo is falling apart."

Despite repeated reassurances from the bourse, persistent chatter of a possible halt in trading have reached as far away as New York as panicky investors watch Japanese authorities scrambling to contain a crisis at the quake-hit nuclear-power facility. The Nikkei Stock Average plummeted 16% in the two sessions following the quake, closing down an additional 1.4% at 8962.67 on Thursday.

The bourse also said it has a backup system in place to continue trading as the government warned of a possible blackout in the Tokyo region.

Immediately following the quake, the foreign banks and the TSE held talks where the discussion included possibly suspending trading, a person at a foreign bank familiar with the discussion said.

One of the institutions, which backed the suggestion, said Tokyo needed a "cooling period" to prevent the market from collapsing, adding the TSE should follow the temporary suspension of trading on the New York Stock Exchange following the Sept. 11 2001 terrorist attacks.

The TSE can make a decision to suspend trading if brokerages accounting for more than 20% of trading volume cannot do business. But the measure has never been implemented in the cash market.

Concerns about disruption in Tokyo trading have been compounded by speculation that some employees at foreign brokerages are fleeing the country to avoid even a minor risk of radiation in the capital.

On Tuesday, 16 foreign banks, including  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.,
GS


0.25
%




 Citigroup Inc.,
C


1.45
%




 Credit Suisse Group AG, and  Morgan Stanley,
MS


0.05
%




 issued a statement via the International Banking Association saying it was "business as usual." 

But banks face the dilemma of balancing the desire to address employee concerns with the need to avoid market disruption, where a headline-grabbing retreat would hobble already rattled Japanese markets and possibly trigger a negative reaction globally. 

Goldman Sachs, for one, has had regular briefings for its staff, updating them on developments and possible dangers from troubled nuclear-power plants. Since Monday, Goldman has brought in four members of its global management committee to the Tokyo office. 

"The Goldman Sachs message is that we are staying. We're having almost daily briefing sessions with nuclear experts, who continue to emphasize that we are safe in Tokyo," said one Tokyo-based banker for Goldman.

  Ivan Ritossa, an executive committee member of  Barclays
BCS


1.05
%




 PLC's Barclays Capital based in Singapore, also flew into Tokyo on Tuesday with five other senior managers to show support for the local staff. 

At  J.P. Morgan Chase
JPM


0.22
%




 & Co., Chief Executive  James Dimon hopes to travel to Tokyo next week, a person familiar with the matter said. 

Mr. Dimon is in Europe and would like to go to Tokyo to reassure employees and clients that the New York bank doesn't intend to evacuate employees, and will remain there. Mr. Dimon's plans aren't finalized, the person said. 

Some bank executives worry that the evacuation of a big foreign bank would shatter perceptions of Japan's ability to cope, while investors could view an exit as a major loss of confidence in the country and trigger a selloff.

Still, several banks said their employees were free to leave if they felt uncomfortable staying, and many had sent family members abroad. One hedge-fund manager in Tokyo said most of the people around him had left.

Some international companies have been pulling employees out of the country. Billionaire investor  Warren Buffett, CEO of  Berkshire Hathaway Inc., earlier this week cancelled the Japan leg of a trip he is taking to Europe. 

There are other signs of executives leaving the country. 

At one major western bank, many executives have left Tokyo, a person working at the bank said, some to set up offices in other locations in Asia as part of business continuity plans. Many were foreigners and very senior, including department heads, the person said.

So many people are now asking to leave Tokyo that the bank will no longer pay for the airfare or expenses. The issue is becoming serious, the person said, and will likely cause problems within the bank after the executives return. 

"I have never been this busy," a person in charge of equities at a foreign brokerage said. "Foreigners want to buy all the stuff that's oversold."

But he said the situation was fluid as the government battles to cool down the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant in northeastern Japan.

"I might change my mind in five minutes. If there's an explosion, guess what? I'm going to hang up, jump into my car and head to the airport," he said. He has a suitcase at his office.

 Write to  Alison Tudor at alison.tudor@wsj.com and Shai Oster at shai.oster@wsj.com 