From the outside, there are no tell-tale signs that the Continental, a 53-story tower at the southwest corner of Herald Square, is anything but an office building of the rote International Style so commonplace in downtowns across the Western world.

But the building, at 885 Avenue of the Americas, is a 338-unit luxury-apartment house. Across 32nd Street from the Manhattan Mall, the tower has no balconies to indicate "home" and no applied ornament. And because the glass is reflective, there's no hint of any of the interior dishevelment that normally indicates that people sleep there.

That was, says the architect, intentional. 

"From the outside, you just see a sleek wall of glass, and they found that very appealing," said  Alan Goldstein, principal at Goldstein Hill & West Architects, referring to his client, Tower 111 LLC. (When Mr. Goldstein was hired in 2006, he was a partner in Costas Kondylis & Partners. He has since split off and founded a new firm. The client went with him.)

The glass face is neither a curtain wall nor a window wall system, but rather a hybrid of the two. In addition to giving the building a sleek affect, the idea was to give the tenants views. Lots of them. And so, from the tower's eastern exposure, the resident sees a full-body profile of the Empire State Building. From the west, the resident gets a top-to-bottom view of the rather unfortunate-looking Epic, as well as glimpses of the  Hudson River and New Jersey.

The building's massing is the only thing that rescues it from complete monolithic drabness. There's an eight-story base, which houses 15,000 square feet of amenities, and 45,000 square feet of commercial and retail space. Then the building steps back, and two flat extrusions, like darker outcroppings of the monolith beneath, begin to rise, breaking off at different points before the building tops out.

Mr. Goldstein described the extrusions as "facets" that give the building "a certain scale and sculptural interest."

The building is proving popular with young working professionals, and is now more than 30% leased, according to  Cliff Finn, managing director of new development marketing for Citi Habitats Marketing Group.

The tenants are paying between $2,665 and $6,195 in rents for studios, one-bedrooms (some with offices) and two-bedrooms.

"Not everyone will like a glass building," said Mr. Goldstein, who lives on Long Island. "There are people who like stone buildings, who like brick buildings. But you try your best to do a handsome architectural building. On the inside, you try to advantage of the views. Hopefully that makes some of the people on the outside happy and all the people on the inside happy."

 Corrections & Amplifications 

Alan Goldstein was a partner in Costas Kondylis & Partners, before departing to form his own firm, Goldstein, Hill & West Architects. An earlier version of this column incorrectly said that he formerly had worked as a principal at Kondylis Architecture.