HOUSTON -- The U.S. Coast Guard said samples of oil that washed up on Louisiana beaches last weekend match crude that Anglo-Suisse Offshore Partners LLC reported spilling from one of its Gulf of Mexico wells. 

But the closely held Houston oil producer said that it still disagrees with the Coast Guard's findings. Anglo-Suisse maintains that although a few gallons of oil spilled from a shallow-water well it was working to permanently seal over the weekend, the crude that has fouled stretches of Louisiana's shoreline is not its responsibility. 

Anglo-Suisse "continues to question these findings, given that the well in question is non-producing and has been monitored closely for the last six months," the company said in a statement Thursday. 

Although Anglo-Suisse has agreed to join the cleanup and will take the lead in those efforts beginning Friday, it said it has hired an independent laboratory to help prove that the crude that made landfall did not come from its operations. 

The Coast Guard said that tests performed by its own scientists and by Louisiana State University have concluded that oil collected from beaches at Grand Isle and Elmer's Island, a state wildlife sanctuary, are chemical matches to samples from an Anglo-Suisse well located about 30 miles offshore. As such, it has named the company as the party responsible for paying all costs associated with cleaning up the crude. 

The service did not provide an estimate of what those costs might be, but said that in addition to cleanup crews removing oil by hand and installing boom to keep crude from washing into inland waters and marshes, a half-dozen skimmers and five barges have been deployed. 

The Coast Guard has put forth no estimates on how much oil washed ashore between Saturday and Monday, but officers have said that it is certainly more than the five gallons reported by Anglo-Suisse. 

Oil washed ashore in isolated locations spread over 30 miles of shoreline. In all about a half-mile of beaches were touched by viscous crude and a patches of a thin film associated with the oil was at one time documented over an area of about 150 square miles, according to the service. 