  AOL Inc. laid off about 20% of its work force Thursday, eliminating 950 jobs in the U.S. and India in its latest attempt to revive its business.

About 200 employees who work for the Internet company's U.S.-based media and technology groups lost their jobs, according to a person familiar with the matter. The U.S. cuts were focused on pruning staff from AOL's content sites, particularly ones that overlapped with the Huffington Post website, which the company acquired for $315 million this week.

AOL also eliminated 750 jobs from its Indian operations, which largely consist of back-office support staff. About 300 employees who worked for AOL in India have been offered jobs with the company's third-party contractors in the region, said the person familiar with the matter, who said the remaining staffers in India would focus on developing consumer-facing products such as websites and applications for Asia.

In the U.S., AOL laid off reporters and editors who worked for its travel site and business, personal finance sites Daily Finance and Wallet Pop. It also cut across its news and politics sites, including Politics Daily, according to people familiar with the matter. Employees who were laid off started packing up their belongings on Thursday, a person familiar with the matter said. 

One person familiar with the matter said AOL had yet to decide whether to shutter any sites. None of the 250 employees who joined from the Huffington Post lost a job, this person said.

As part of its acquisition of the Huffington Post, AOL created a new group called the Huffington Post Media Group to house the company's news, entertainment, local and other content.  Arianna Huffington, co-founder of the Huffington Post, is serving as president and editor-in-chief of that group. 

AOL executives signaled possible staff cuts weeks ago, saying efforts to reduce overlap between the two companies would save about $20 million in costs.

AOL also said that it would cut back its reliance on freelancers. "Going forward, AOL will invest more heavily in our in-house editorial team and transition away from a reliance on freelance journalists," AOL CEO  Tim Armstrong said in a memo to employees Thursday. "Journalists are the heart and soul of a media company, and our reporters and editors will be working closely with the tech group to produce compelling and engaging editorial content— including lots of video."

AOL acquired the site to bulk up on content it needs to drive traffic and advertising. The move is one of the most significant to date in Mr. Armstrong's effort to transform AOL into a viable ad-supported digital media company, breaking away from its start as a subscription-based service for connecting to the Internet.

Investors are skeptical on the strategy and the recent acquisition. 

AOL shares are trading at their lowest levels since the company split off from  Time Warner Inc.
TWX


0.64
%




 in December 2009. Shares of AOL were off 34 cents, or 1.8%, to $19 in Thursday 4 p.m. composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange. 

"AOL remains in the middle of the disruption that the Internet is causing and we are starting to move from being a disrupted brand to a brand that is leading the disruption," Mr. Armstrong said in his memo. "The changes we are making are not easy, but they are the right changes for the long-term health of the company, the brand, and for our employees."

So far, AOL's attempted turnaround has been rocky. The company's ad revenues dropped 26% in 2010, while the overall online ad market grew around 14%, according to research firm eMarketer Inc. AOL has steadily lost market share to rivals  Google Inc. and Facebook Inc. Mr. Armstrong has said that he expects AOL's online advertising business to start growing again during the second half of the year.

The operations in India are in part a vestige of AOL's old business as an Internet service provider, starting with call center outsourcing into 2002 and later changing into a business operations center. Recently, the group focused more on tech and financial support as well as functions such as advertising operations.

After the job cuts, AOL will employee about 4,000 people. That does not include people who work for its local Patch news sites, which have hired 1,200 staffers.

The layoffs are the second major round of cuts since Mr. Armstrong took over as chief executive of AOL in April 2009. Last year, the company cut about a third of its total work force, or about 2,300 employees.

 Write to  Emily Steel at emily.steel@wsj.com 