It's twilight in Cannes, when the sea turns a fairytale pink and mauve, and throngs of freshly showered film industry people suddenly emerge from their hotels, all spruced up in their black-tie finery. 

Like a perfectly choreographed dance, they strut down the Croisette, dodging the traffic snarl of limos and lunging through swarms of star gawkers, then glide up the famed red-carpeted stairs of the Palais des Festivals.

Call it glam as usual. But the official selection—a bumper crop of auteur films this year—is not the only event Cannes has to offer. Come sunset, you'll also see badge-toting festivalgoers striding briskly in the opposite direction from the Palais pandemonium and disappearing up a side street off the Croisette to queue up with local cinema buffs at the Directors' Fortnight, Cannes's edgy sidebar festival. Open to the general public (tickets are sold in advance until 7 p.m. at a white canvas tent on the Croisette, next to the Palais Stéphanie), it's the place to discover an international lineup of young talent and risk-taking forms of expression. 

"I try to provide an assortment of genres," says Frédéric Boyer, the artistic director of the Directors' Fortnight. "Diversity is important, though it sometimes sparks controversy. The real problem is how to interest young audiences who have been brought up on the very best American TV series."

Now in its 42nd year, the Directors' Fortnight emerged in the wake of 1968 as an upstart noncompetitive "fringe" festival, created by the French Film Directors' Society, a union of filmmakers who vowed to defend the artistic, moral, professional and economic freedom of the medium. 

Throughout the '70s, the Fortnight introduced the Cannes public to era-marking films by directors including Werner Herzog, Martin Scorsese and George Lucas, plus three future Palme d'Or winners—Theo Angelopoulos, Ken Loach and the Taviani brothers. As the festival flourished in the '80s and '90s, directors like Michael Haneke, the Dardenne brothers, Atom Egoyan, Spike Lee and Sofia Coppola were among those who premiered their early films to the Fortnight's eclectic audience—bourgeois housewives, students and shopkeepers elbow-to-elbow with famed film critics, Hollywood producers and the occasional film star.

This year, the Directors' Fortnight is featuring a large number of European films, which take up 15 of the 25 slots in the selection. There are nine women directors and a predominance of portraits of women. Over a third of the selection is first films, and many share themes about communing in some way with nature. 

Considered a showcase for shoestring-budget films that might otherwise not attract international distribution, the Fortnight has made one exception this year with the presence of veteran French director André Techiné. His latest film, "Impardonnables," is about a successful writer who loses his wife and daughter, and tries to start his life anew. 

The curtain raiser is a nouveau burlesque comedy, "La Fée" ("The Fairy"), a French-Belgian co-production, written and performed by directing trio Dominique Abel, Fiona Gordon and Bruno Romy. It's a quirky love story between Dom, who works as a night clerk in a small hotel near the French port of Le Havre, and Fiona, a self-proclaimed fairy, who wanders in one evening, wild-eyed, shoeless and baggage-free, and announces that she'll grant him three wishes. No sooner do two of those wishes come true (a spanking new scooter and an endless supply of gas), than she vanishes. Oddball characters, surreal dance interludes and visual gags à la Jacques Tati abound, as do obvious references to Chaplin—"definitely our mentor," says Ms. Gordon. 

Ms. Gordon, who was born in Australia, came to Paris in the 1980s to study theater at the Jacques Lecoq school, where she soon teamed up with the Belgian Mr. Abel. While on tour with their new vaudeville duo in 1993, they met Mr. Romy, a former theater technician, and the three have worked together ever since.

"We have to have a script, or no one would give us any money," Ms. Gordon says with a laugh. "But our films are usually a physical brainstorming. We don't really talk a lot; we just improvise situations through movement. All the characters are fragile, nonconformist and don't quite fit in—kind of like us." 

Another take on a love story is in store in "The Island," a second feature by Bulgarian director Kamen Kalev, whose €1.5 million budget didn't discourage established French actress/model Laetitia Casta from shooting on a tiny, uninhabited isle in the Black Sea. 

Mr. Kalev ("Eastern Plays"), who studied at Paris's renowned La Fémis film school, sought out Ms. Casta after her performance as Brigitte Bardot in the 2010 biopic "Gainsbourg (Vie heroïque)." 

"The conditions weren't exactly luxurious—we were shooting in an abandoned convent and the nearest village was a 20-minute ride by boat," says Mr. Kalev. "Laetitia threw herself into the part completely, and took on all the risks involved." 

The drama recounts the tale of a passionate couple living in Paris who journey to Bulgaria but flee the crowded beaches for an idyllic island, where unexpected events occur that catapult the couple into troubling emotional territory. 

"You might say the film is really about illusion in love and the journey towards one's inner self," says Mr. Kalev. 

Cannes can be as much a showcase for movies as for actors, and this might be the year of 29-year-old Clémence Poésy.

The actress is starring in the much-awaited third feature film of 44-year-old French director Philippe Ramos, "Jeanne Captive" ("The Silence of Joan").

Her cool, vintage, rock-glam style, pouty red lips and clear blue gaze has been splashed across countless fashion magazines and teenage fan sites, but Ms. Poésy is trying out another image, stripping herself bare for her latest role. 

While film stars promote their latest movies on sun-drenched private beach terraces, La Palme d'Or's two-star Michelin chef, Christian Sinicropi, has been busy in the kitchens of Hotel Martinez, concocting unlikely combinations of ingredients and visually stunning dishes, inspired by his favorite films. 

An avid kite surfer, devoted gardener and painter, Mr. Sinicropi sports a chartreuse-green chef's shirt, ("white is too stiff, too boring," he says) and has cooked for a fair share of cinema's biggest names, from Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie to Clint Eastwood and Gérard Depardieu. But what interests him the most is the emotional impact of a film, and how it tickles his culinary imagination. 

Each year, Mr. Sinicropi's jury dinner is a showstopper of wacky surprises. Last year, in honor of jury president Tim Burton, the jury members were served a panoply of remarkable "Alice in Wonderland" desserts, including a tiny chocolate Burton-look-alike man filled with feather-light mousse, and a delicate pink handbag in spun sugar, containing Alice's key. Mr. Sinicropi and his wife, Catherine, who is a potter, also design fanciful glazed ceramic plates at their atelier at home.

This year, Mr. Sinicropi contacted Warner Brothers to find out more about Robert de Niro's favorite food (fish, fried zucchini-flower fritters—a Provençal specialty—and, not surprisingly, pasta). The menu for Tuesday night's dinner included a wacky 3D "Taxi Driver" appetizer—"It's a New York caesar salad, but with peppers, sangria, foie gras and red and green basil"; a dazzling main course shaped by Martin Scorsese's "Casino"—"I shaped it like a kind of roulette wheel with zucchini flowers"; and for dessert, red berries and sorbet served on a green-lit ice cylinder. 

Mr. Sinicropi's cookbook, "Small Delights, Great Movies" (Ramsay Press), is a cinematic romp, with 60 recipes ranging from classic epics—"Star Wars" yields iced risotto with shrimp and melon on sword-like spears—to "Apocalypse Now," featuring squares of venison with caviar and red-cabbage purée with watercress and pumpkin, artfully arranged as a kind of maze. But the chef's all-time favorite invention is his "Forrest Gump." Served on a tiny ceramic street bench, it's a delicate array of poached codfish, a heart-shaped black truffle and a little Gump-like figure, sculpted from green cabbage and stuffed with smoked snails.

Born and raised in Cannes, Mr. Sinicropi says he loves the 15-day celebration but isn't daunted by the glittery show. When it comes down to it, his biggest thrill is vicarious. 

"I try to put myself in the place of the jury and imagine what they'll feel," he says. "Then, after the festival, the dishes goes straight to the Palme d'Or menu, so everyone can have a taste."

"There's something very modern about Clémence, since she doesn't come from the tradition of classic theater," says Mr. Ramos. 

Best known as the enchanting French witch Fleur Delacour in "Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire" (2005) and "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows" parts 1 and 2 (2010 and 2011), Ms. Poésy has also played Colin Farrell's love interest ("In Bruges," 2008) and, more recently, James Franco's former girlfriend in Danny Boyle's "127 Hours." Born in Meudon, near Paris, Ms. Poésy was raised in a theatrical family and already on stage at age 14. 

"Getting the opportunity to play Joan of Arc is something you can't really refuse," the actress says. "There aren't that many women in history as widely known as she is, and yet she remains a total mystery." 

"It's not easy to dig into a part like this," says Mr. Ramos. "Clémence had real handcuffs on—the ones in heavy steel. She became a true prisoner."

And though the actress is used to mugging as a model (she has appeared in ads for Chloé perfumes since 2008), the most challenging part of the role, says Ms. Poésy, was having to control minute changes in facial gestures and body language. 

"Her silence was what scared me most before we started shooting—how to express the range of what I felt without words," she says. "On set, I discovered it was actually a great strength. It makes you feel strangely powerful compared to the actors who have to go through all their lines to make their point."

Mr. Ramos says, "Joan of Arc moves through the film like an incandescent shooting star, while the men all position themselves around her, but she's totally alone." 

Why revisit this classic tale, when everyone from Georges Méliès, Carl Dreyer and Robert Bresson to Victor Fleming, Jacques Rivette and Luc Besson have already given it a stab? 

"In the same way that artists explore a motif over and over again," says Mr. Ramos. "I guess my interpretation will be something more modern than what has already been done—like the way Francis Bacon might sculpt a pope."

To prepare for the role, the director handed Ms. Poésy a book of stark black-and-white images by American photographer Francesca Woodman (1958-81) to help serve as inspiration, particularly for the film's nude scenes. 

"Philippe compared Joan of Arc in the phase of her life that I play to this photographer, who took some extremely brave and strong self-portraits before she committed suicide at a very young age," Ms. Poésy says. "My references were closer to what Patti Smith writes about death— more about the infinite than anything historical, politic or religious. I hope that will touch people today."

While the Directors' Fortnight is known for its edge, some directors are bringing that edge to the main competition.

After a 10-year gap since her second feature, "Morvern Callar," premiered at the Director's Fortnight in 2002, the 40-year-old Scottish director Lynne Ramsay is back in town, joining ranks with the prize-winning major players of cinema.

"We Need to Talk about Kevin," the only British film competing in the official lineup, stars Tilda Swinton and John C. Reilly, and was adapted by Ms. Ramsay and Rory Kinnear from the best-selling novel by Lionel Shriver. 

It tells the story of a fictional American mother, Eva Khatchadourian, who writes to her husband, trying desperately to come to terms with the high-school murder rampage of their 15-year-old son, Kevin.

"The project came to me fairly early on, about five years ago, before the novel won the Orange Prize," the director says. 

What drew her to the compelling issues in the book?

"Well, I've been thinking of becoming a mother myself," Ms. Ramsay says. "Like Eva, I think all women have these guilty thoughts about unconditional love. What if I have a child that turns out to be a brat? It's like the elephant in the room that everyone ignores." 

Which brings up the inevitable comparison with Gus Van Sant's groundbreaking film "Elephant," about teenagers on a murderous shooting spree at a high school.

"This film is more a perverse love story between mother and son," Ms. Ramsay says. "Like the book, the character Eva has a bit of an edge, and that really comes out in Tilda's performance."

"It's a truly bloody business being a parent," says Ms. Swinton, who is also the executive producer. "For Eva, what is frightening is giving birth to her own violence, as well as alien violence." 

The director describes the 30-day shoot in Stamford, Conn., as "intense" 14-hour days, which included juggling a complex shooting schedule that required numerous babies and toddlers, to comply with the strict U.S. union rules. However, nothing, she says, compared to the Tomatina food fight scene.

"Last August, I had the idea to film a flashback from Eva's past at a Spanish festival in Buñol near Valencia," Ms. Ramsay recalls. "We arrived with only one 60mm handheld camera and no crew. The crowd was quite dangerous and crazy. People were chucking tomatoes at each other—it was total chaos. But Tilda is very resilient and tough. She's up for anything."