SYDNEY—The International Monetary Fund said Thursday it will revise lower its growth forecast for New Zealand in a blow for the Pacific nation's economy, on the same day that rescuers gave up hope of finding survivors amongst the rubble of the earthquake ravaged city of Christchurch. 

The IMF said it will be sending a delegation to New Zealand next week as part of its review of the economy it plans to downgrade. 

"That projection will take account of reconstruction work and other factors supporting growth," the fund said in a statement. 

The IMF's comments come as New Zealand search-and-rescue teams move into a recovery phase, as officials say there is no longer any hope of finding anyone alive after a devastating earthquake razed the country's second-largest city Feb. 22. The last live rescue was Feb. 23 and the death toll from the 6.3 magnitude earthquake now stands at 161. 

Traders said the IMF statement knocked the New Zealand dollar off its daylong high of US$0.7450. The currency, known as the Kiwi, later bounced back to US$0.7456 late Thursday in Wellington. 

New Zealand Prime Minister John Key has estimated a 15 billion New Zealand dollar (US$11.1 billion) blow to gross domestic product from tremors that have destroyed large areas of Christchurch. 

The IMF's most recent forecast for New Zealand was for real gross domestic product, or GDP, growth of around 3%. The fund's plan to downgrade growth—even after factoring in the expenditure on rebuilding, income from the coming Rugby World Cup and higher prices for agricultural commodities—will come as a blow to those hoping for a quick rebound. 

To be sure, the IMF said the government has fiscal room to maneuver, something that could take pressure off the country's credit rating. 

"The impact on the government's budget is buffered [by] sizable reinsurance offshore and the assets of the state-owned Earthquake Commission. Moreover, New Zealand has relatively low net public debt by advanced countries standards, giving it some fiscal space to deal with such shocks." 

New Zealand's public debt stood at 15% of GDP at the end of June 2010. 

Authorities have estimated damage from the two major earthquakes that hit Christchurch since September at up to NZ$20 billion, or 10% of GDP. 

The IMF's statement will add to pressure on ratings agencies to adjust their view on New Zealand's central bank, which is widely expected to cut rates at its next board meeting statement March 10. The Reserve Bank has only once moved between meetings, when it made a 0.5-percentage-point cut shortly after Sept. 11, 2001. 

Moody's Investors Service said last week that it would "await a fuller assessment of the long-term effects on government finances." Moody's rates New Zealand with a top grading and a stable outlook. 

The possibility of a move by the ratings agencies "has got to be rising," said Roland Randall, strategist at TD Securities in Singapore, adding that with a weakened economy, New Zealand doesn't have the ability to tax heavily, pushing out the likely return to surplus. "It's a pretty simple equation that it will push out the return to surplus," he said. 

—James Glynn in Sydney and Rebecca Howard in Wellington contributed to this article.

 Write to  Enda Curran at enda.curran@dowjones.com 