Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker proposed a two-year budget Tuesday cutting more than $1.25 billion in state aid to schools and local governments, part of a broad proposed reduction in state spending of nearly 7%.

The budget plan came as the Republican governor remained locked in a standoff with state Senate Democrats over a bill that would limit the collective-bargaining rights of most of Wisconsin's 170,000 public employees.

"Over the past few weeks, a great deal of attention has been focused on Wisconsin," Mr. Walker said in a speech to a joint session of the legislature. "That's OK, because freedom thrives each time there is a passionate debate in our society."

Democratic Rep. Tamara Grigsby, a member of the legislature's joint finance committee, said Mr. Walker's budget represented "an absolute annihilation of education in this state. There's going to be an absolute decimation of health care."

But the governor said the cuts proposed Tuesday—along with the bill restricting bargaining rights—are necessary to address a $137 million shortfall for the fiscal year ending June 30 and a projected $3.6 billion deficit for the following two fiscal years. He opposes raising taxes.

Mr. Walker recommended cutting total state spending over two years by $4.2 billion, or 6.7%. He's also seeking to limit the ability of local governments to offset state cuts by raising property taxes.

The governor suggested unspecified cuts to Medicaid, the joint state-federal health-care program for the poor. He said some Medicaid recipients would have to start contributing co-pays and premiums.

Mr. Walker also recommended eliminating the state capital-gains tax "for investors in Wisconsin companies that provide jobs for our people."

If the 14 Senate Democrats didn't allow the bill to be passed Tuesday, Mr. Walker has warned, Wisconsin would lose its chance to refinance $165 million in bonds, resulting in more layoffs than already contemplated.

The Democrats fled to Illinois Feb. 17 to prevent a vote on the collective-bargaining legislation and said they weren't swayed by the refinancing deadline. Late Tuesday, no signals emerged to suggest that the Democrats would return to Madison to allow a vote. 

State capital-finance director Frank Hoadley said Wisconsin would have no trouble making its required debt payments even if the debt refinancing doesn't go through. 

The refinancing "is about providing relief to the budget situation by rearranging the payments" over a 10-year period, he said.

The collective-bargaining bill stalled in the state Senate also would require most public employees to contribute 5.8% of their salary this year toward their pension payments and 12.6% of their health-insurance premiums out of their wages. The measure passed the state Assembly last week.

Mr. Walker said that bill would produce savings of $1.44 billion for school districts and local governments, more than offsetting the cuts in state aid he recommended Tuesday.

Critics said the governor's estimate is overstated, because some communities and school districts already require employees to pay more than 12.6% of their health-insurance premiums out of their salaries.

In De Pere, Wis., employees already pay 15% of insurance premiums from their wages. For that reason, and because police officers and firefighters are exempt, "I believe the savings through pension-contribution increases will not be enough to offset the loss of state shared revenue," De Pere Alderman Daniel Robinson wrote in a letter Monday to Republican state Sen. Robert Cowles.

Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett, a Democrat who lost to Mr. Walker in the November election, sent the governor a letter questioning whether the state can force local-government employees to increase their pension payments. 

Milwaukee City Attorney Grant Langley issued a legal opinion saying the bill violates the Wisconsin constitution's "home-rule" provision allowing local governments to set their own pension rules. The governor's office didn't immediately respond.

In Madison, a circuit court judge issued an temporary restraining order Tuesday requiring Mr. Walker's administration to reopen the capitol to the public. The state had closed the building Monday to new protesters and was restricting other visitors. Three union groups filed a petition seeking to have it reopened. Countering the pleas of crowds outside the capitol to be allowed in, the administration said its procedures already complied with the order.

The drama in Wisconsin continues to have parallels elsewhere. Republican lawmakers on Ohio presented amendments Tuesday to a bill that would curb collective-bargaining rights for public employees. Thousands of union members from across the state rallied against the measure on the steps of the statehouse.

The amendments, proposed by Republican state Sen.  Shannon Jones, would prohibit unions representing the state's 400,000 public workers from bargaining over health benefits, pensions and working conditions. Public workers would no longer be allowed to strike and would be subject to fines of up to $1,000 for participating in a strike.

Republican state Sen.  Kevin Bacon said the committee could vote on the measure Wednesday, which could lead to a vote later that day in the Republican-majority Senate. If the bill passes, it would proceed to the Republican-controlled House.

—Kelly Nolan contributed to this article.

 Write to  Amy Merrick at amy.merrick@wsj.com and Kris Maher at kris.maher@wsj.com 