 The European Union's top advisory body on online privacy will issue an opinion this month saying that information collected by phone and Internet companies on customer locations must be treated like names, birthdays and other personal data, EU officials say. 

It likely means smartphone giants like Apple and Google will likely have to obtain user consent before gathering the data, delete the information after a certain period of time and keep it anonymous.



European Union governments are moving toward an agreement on rules that would restrict short-selling of stocks and sovereign debt, after addressing worries that the rules could make it harder for governments to sell debt, EU diplomats say.



European Central Bank forecasters have significantly raised their estimates of inflation in the euro zone for this year, and now see consumer-price inflation well above the ECB's threshold of 2%, the bank said in its monthly bulletin for May.



Europe's manufacturing sector, which has led the region's economic recovery, appears set to grow more slowly as a result of a stronger euro, higher energy costs and a moderation of demand in big developing economies.



The International Monetary Fund has been considering extending the repayment schedule for its loan program to Greece should Athens need more time to complete the program, a fund spokeswoman said.



Europe needs fresh measures to restore market confidence in the rescue packages for Ireland and Greece, Irish Central Bank Governor Patrick Honohan said in an interview. 

He added that Ireland is on track to meet its own targets for bringing the finances of its government and its banks back into order, but admitted that the success of the plan depends on convincing financial markets to lend to it again.



U.K. industrial production expanded at a slower rate than expected in March as maintenance work on oil and gas fields continued to drag on output, official data showed.



The head of Nicolas Sarkozy's political party insisted in an interview that the unpopular French president plans to run for re-election, brushing off speculation that the party would put forward a new candidate.



 French crash investigators said they are optimistic about extracting data from the black boxes of an Air France airliner that crashed in the Atlantic Ocean almost two years ago, despite unprecedented challenges in reading the digital recorders. 



 In Germany, retired U.S. auto worker John Demjanjuk was convicted of thousands of counts of acting as an accessory to murder at a Nazi death camp and sentenced to five years in prison—closing one chapter in a decades-long legal battle. 

 Italians go to the polls in local elections this weekend, a vote that is shaping up as a key test of Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi's ability to hold together his center-right party's governing alliance with the formerly secessionist Northern League of firebrand politician Umberto Bossi. 



Norway's central bank raised its policy rate for the first time in a year, in an attempt to stabilize economic activity and inflation in the year ahead. Norges Bank raised its key interest rate to 2.25% from 2%, where it had been left at the seven previous monetary-policy meetings. 



 Rising food and gasoline prices restrained consumer spending in April, with U.S. retailers seeing a lackluster gain in sales. Separate data showed new claims for unemployment benefits fell last week.  



 Top executives of five of the biggest oil companies operating in the U.S. were challenged by Democratic members of the Senate Finance Committee, who asked them to give up tax breaks as part of the effort to cut the federal deficit—and explain why U.S. gasoline prices have risen nearly 30% since January.  



A group of Senate Democrats wants the Securities and Exchange Commission to push companies to disclose when they have fallen victim to cyberattacks. 



 Treating AIDS patients with antiretroviral drugs makes them strikingly less infectious, researchers said, in a landmark finding that is likely to reinvigorate efforts to slow the pandemic. 

The results were so overwhelming that an independent panel monitoring the research recommended the results be released four years before the multi-country study, funded by the U.S. government, was scheduled to end. 



 One of the reactors at Japan's Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant likely suffered a substantial meltdown of its core, and the vessels that contain the core were likely damaged, operator Tokyo Electric Power said, the first time Tepco conceded that the reactor reached such a precarious state. 

The fuel rods that form the core of Reactor No. 1 have likely more than half melted, a Tepco spokesman, and both of the surrounding vessels may be damaged and still leaking radioactive elements, in a finding that raises new difficulties. 

Japan's government failed to agree on a plan to help Tokyo Electric Power cover compensation claims stemming from the country's nuclear disaster, expected to total in the trillions of yen. Prime Minister Naoto Kan said Cabinet ministers would hold further discussions Friday in a bid to finalize the scheme. 



China moved again to head off inflation by requiring banks to hold more of their deposits in reserve, the eighth such move since November, despite little evidence that the measure is taming prices, and worries that it is depriving needy smaller companies of capital.



 Preliminary charges of terrorism filed against members and supporters of an umbrella Iranian opposition group have been dismissed by investigating magistrates looking into the case, French officials said, following an eight-year probe.  



 Syrian security forces conducted detentions across at least six cities that activists said appeared to focus on not only opposition activists but lawyers, doctors, intellectuals and educated professionals. 

The detentions came as residents reported continued gunfire in restive southern areas, and activist groups placed the death toll of the regime's attacks on two protest centers the previous day at 30 or more people.



 In Libya, NATO pummeled Col. Moammar Gadhafi's sprawling compound with missiles, killing three people the government said were working on a documentary film about supporters gathered there as "human shields" for the country's leader. Twenty-seven others were reported wounded in the predawn airstrikes. 

The assault accompanied military and diplomatic advances by rebels in their battle to end the colonel's four decades of rule. 

The U.K.'s foreign secretary said he plans to provide additional equipment to rebels seeking to overthrow Col. Gadhafi, as the chairman of the rebel administration made an official visit to Britain.



 Ugandan opposition supporters hurled stones at a car carrying Nigeria's President Goodluck Jonathan as he visited the country to attend President Yoweri Museveni's swearing-in ceremony in the capital of Kampala, a government spokesman said. One person was killed when Ugandan security forces fired at the protesters, he added.  

 Ugandan opposition supporters hurled stones at a car carrying Nigeria's President Goodluck Jonathan as he visited the country to attend President Yoweri Museveni's swearing-in ceremony in the capital of Kampala, a government spokesman said. One person was killed when Ugandan security forces fired at the protesters, he added.  