William Paley's "Natural Theology" (1802) begins by juxtaposing a mundane natural object with an intricately designed product of human craftsmanship. Paley, an English Christian apologist, writes: "In crossing a heath, suppose I pitched my foot against a stone and were asked how the stone came to be there, I might possibly answer that, for any thing I knew to the contrary, it had lain there for ever." If Paley stumbled across a timepiece, however, even a cursory inspection would reveal the hand of an intelligent agent. The arrangement of parts pointed to an artificer. The humble stone had no such stories to tell.

Paley was not much interested in geology. The purpose of his "watchmaker analogy" was to provide a way of detecting the power and will of a Creator in nature. Paley's stone was merely a foil by which the intricate complexity of the watch could be highlighted. A geologist, however, would not have taken such a dim view of the rock. Though still a nascent science early in the 19th century, geology allowed naturalists to look at the landscape through the lens of Deep Time and address questions about the age of the Earth and its formation.

As seasoned geologists know, even the tiniest rock contains within it myriad narrative threads relating to the history of our planet. You just have to know what to look for. Now, more than two centuries after Paley kicked his stone aside, it has gained an advocate in geo logist Jan Zalasiewicz. "The Planet in a Pebble" is what the title suggests: an attempt to extract the Earth's story from a small rock, in this case a smoothed, blue-gray pebble, streaked with white, found along the Welsh coast where Mr. Zalasiewicz has spent much of his career.

Carl Sagan famously said, "We are starstuff," and in the same way so is the pebble. The elements inside our bodies and those inside the pebble can be traced back about 13.7 billion years to the initial Big Bang that gave the universe its character. Even though the pebble itself is of more recent origin—having eroded out of its parent strata in a Welsh cliffside within the span of human history—Mr. Zalasiewicz uses the chemical components contained within it to trace the origins of the universe, our solar system and our planet.

In these early chapters, almost any pebble would have been served—the vestiges of these large-scale, ancient changes are detectable in almost all rocks. Yet Mr. Zalasiewicz's choice of pebble shapes the latter half of the book in a particular way.

 By Jan Zalasiewicz  Oxford, 256 pages, $27.95

Many of the events that gave the pebble its unique character transpired more than 400 million years ago. At that time, during the Silurian period, the matter that would eventually form the pebble was a patch of muck on a deep, anoxic sea bottom, where life was essentially nonexistent. Yet the pebble does preserve signs of life. Mr. Zalasiewicz chips into the pebble to reveal the remains of tiny marine organisms that flourished near the ocean surface before drifting down to the harsh bottom waters.

Among the most remarkable of the tiny fossilized creatures Mr. Zalasiewicz excises from the stone are graptolites—an entirely extinct variety of oceanic drifters that formed intricate, communal chains. By studying these creatures, we gain a window into long-vanished ecosystems as well as a tool for scientists to use in divvying up slices of geological time.

Like the strings of tiny fossils embedded in the rock, lines of physics, chemistry, biology and history run through "The Planet in a Pebble." Thanks to Mr. Zalasiewicz's deft storytelling—and his policy of always keeping the pebble in sight—the book succeeds in steering readers through material that might have left them feeling like William Paley out on the heath stubbing his toe. We learn, for instance, that the mineral grains inside the pebble were eroded off the long-lost continent of Avalonia more than 600 million years ago, and, more recently, around 420 million years ago, tiny crystals of fool's gold (pyrite) settled on the ancient mud to fill in the body cavities of tiny animals whose bodies had sunk into the muck. And, despite its seemingly static nature, the pebble did not remain in one place. Baked by the heat of the earth, the stone's parent rock layer underwent a journey that took hundreds of millions of years, pushed along with the changing continents and thrust up into what is now the Welsh coast.

Although the records contained within the pebble are often incomplete and are not always preserved in high fidelity, they still allow us to feel the rhythms of planetary change. "In some ways the pebble is like one of the new computer chips," Mr. Zalasiewicz writes, "tightly packed with more information than one could ever surmise from gazing on its smooth surface."

—Mr. Switek, a research associate at the New Jersey State Museum, is the author of "Written in Stone: Evolution, the Fossil Record, and Our Place in Nature."