For some perspective on the recent "debate" over "civility" and "eliminationist rhetoric," let's turn to Montana, home of the MCT Community Theater. A recent production there gets a bad review today in a letter to the editor of the Missoulian, the local daily:

Well, perhaps Olds made a clerical error and one of Andrew Sullivan's works got into the Arthur Sullivan file.

In all seriousness, though, like much of what we have been writing about in the past few weeks, this incident is shocking but not surprising. For all the bogus accusations being thrown at Rush Limbaugh, Glenn Beck and Sarah Palin, genuinely hateful political rhetoric is commonplace in the art world, even in art that is not overtly political.

The Missoula incident reminds us of an experience we had in 2005 and wrote about for The Wall Street Journal in 2008. At the invitation of our then-girlfriend, we attended a reading of poems from a book her mother had edited. The poet who served as mistress of ceremonies, Daniela Gioseffi, hijacked the event and turned it into an anti-Republican hate rally. Her rhetoric was not eliminationist--that is, she didn't call for anyone's death--but it was dehumanizing: "You can't be politically disengaged and be human."

 James Taranto on the left's hateful rhetoric. 

Nor is dehumanizing left-wing rhetoric limited to the world of high art. It can be found in popular culture as well. Blogger Howard Portnoy notes a video in which Tracy Morgan, until 2006 a member of the Now Ready for Prime Time Players on NBC's "Saturday Night Live," banters with basketball sportscasters on the TNT cable network. (TNT is part of the Turner Broadcasting System subdivision of Time Warner.)

One of the hosts jocularly asks Morgan: "Tina Fey or Sarah Palin?" Fey was the former "Saturday Night Live" player who returned to the program in 2008 to perform a refulgent impression of the newly famous Palin. Another host elaborates: "Sarah Palin is good-looking, isn't she? Tina Fey is good-looking!"

The query is frivolous, but Morgan's answer is indecent: "Yo, let me tell you something about Sarah Palin, man. She's good masturbation material. The glasses, and all of that? Great masturbation material."

Portnoy observes: "For a liberal male, the degradation of Palin as sexual fodder--which frankly is about as low as one can go in degrading a member of the so-called 'fairer sex'--is a way of dismissing the fact that (like it or not) she is a difference maker in the American body politic. But why is it that the nation's most accomplished liberal females haven't spoken up against this unseemly treatment?"

The answer, as we argued last Wednesday, is that liberal women are the driving force behind hatred of Sarah Palin. But Portnoy's complaint about male liberals--the word "men" doesn't quite seem appropriate here--echoes ours: "Liberal men [sic] put down Palin as a cheap way to score points with the women in their lives, or they use her as an outlet for more-general misogynistic impulses that would otherwise be socially unacceptable to express."

 Now Would I Say Something That Wasn't True?  Reader Mark Kirby writes with a thoughtful criticism of some of our recent work:

We agree entirely with Kirby's broad argument and think he makes an important point. Not all falsehoods are lies, and it cheapens the truth to toss around accusations of lying when referring to falsehoods that are the product of ignorance or negligence--or, for that matter, to mere differences of opinion.

But when this column accuses someone of lying, we do it advisedly--and, we think, justifiably. 

Example: New York Times columnist Paul Krugman was not lying on Jan. 8 when he tied the attempted murder of Rep. Gabrielle Giffords to the Tea Party. As we wrote Jan. 11, he was engaging in irresponsible speculative fantasy. But Krugman and the Times editorial board did lie on Jan. 10 when they continued to claim such a connection after the facts had proved it to be false. 

Krugman also lied when he cited Michele Bachmann's call for her constituents to be "armed and dangerous" as an example of "eliminationist rhetoric." In fact, she did not call for violence, and the context makes clear that she meant "armed" with information. Krugman either knew what she actually said or falsely claimed to know. Either way, a deliberate misrepresentation of the truth.

Likewise with Ehrenreich's false claim that Frances Fox Piven urged "economically hard-pressed Americans" to "organize a protest at the local unemployment office." In fact, Piven wrote that she would like to see "something like the strikes and riots that have spread across Greece." Ehrenreich either knew what Piven actually wrote or falsely claimed to know.

It is true that this column has recently included an unusually high number of accusations of lying. That is because there has been a lot of lying going on.

  'Government Is Getting in the Way of Everything'   Esquire has a profile of New York's Mayor Michael Bloomberg, pegged to the possibility that he may run for president as an independent next year. Author John H. Richardson accompanied the mayor to China, where he gathered this anecdote:

The word "capitalist" has two distinct meanings, which those on the left like to blur. Bloomberg is a capitalist by occupation, which is to say that he is a business tycoon. But he is not an ideological capitalist. He does not believe in freedom.

Some say neither does Barack Obama, but the president at least had this to say in his State of the Union Address:

It is tremendously damning of Bloomberg that Obama, the progressive liberal who has never had a productive job in his life, sounds more like Milton Friedman than the mayor, who echoes Thomas Friedman instead.

  Bushism of the Day   "At about 21:39 in this YouTube video interview posted yesterday, President Obama declares, 'As I said, we will be out of Afghanistan by the end of this year.' Then he declares, 'Combat operations in Afghanistan have ended.' "

As blogger Ira Stoll notes: "Neither of these statements is accurate. He was getting Afghanistan mixed up with Iraq."

  Metaphor Alert   "Waves of Unrest Spread to Yemen, Shaking a Region"--headline, New York Times, Jan. 28

  With DNC in Mind, City Bans Carrying Urine, Feces   "The Enema of Your Enemy Is Your Friend"--headline, Slate.com, Jan. 27

  If He's Lost Conason, He's Lost Middle America   "Obama Shows Why Election Was a Mistake"--headline, Joe Conason syndicated column, Jan. 27

  He Wants to Find Out What Comes After Trillion   "Obama Turns Attention to Supercomputing"--headline, ComputerWorld.com, Jan. 27

  The People Spoke, and the TSA Listened   "A New Twist on Junk Gets Nice Reception"--headline, The Wall Street Journal, Jan. 28

  'Worst Dip in the World!' Raves Keith Olbermann   "Wholly Guacamole Becomes Official Guacamole of the Biggest Loser"--headline, PerishableNews.com, Jan. 26

  We Hold These Brews to Be Self-Evident   "The United States of Beer"--headline, Houston Press, Jan. 27

 Life Imitates 'South Park' 

  A Joke in Search of a Punch Line   "The Difference Between Commentary and the Jewish Funds for Justice Rabbis"--headline, Commentary website, Jan. 27

  It's a Trick Question. They're Looking for 'Sarah Palin.'   "Hitler or Stalin: Who Was Worse?"--headline, New York Review of Books website, Jan. 27

  The Haughty, French-Looking Massachusetts Vampire . . .   "Galvin: Kerry Needs Fresh Blood"--headline Press Association (Britain), Jan. 27

  . . . Who by the Way Served in Vietnam   "Kerry Edge Phoney War"--headline, Independent (Ireland), Jan. 24

  'I Have the Hat'   "Kerry Legend for Ballintubber Dinner"--headline, Connaught (Ireland) Telegraph, Jan. 28

  What Would Charlie Sheen Do Without Experts?   "Experts: Charlie Sheen's Lifestyle Hurting His Kids, Career Could Be Next"--headline, FoxNews.com, Jan. 28

  Next: West Virginia Gets Indoor Plumbing!   "Detroit Has Grocery Stores!"--headline, BoingBoing.com, Jan. 27

  Worst Porn Movies Ever   "Jealous Davos Mistresses"--headline, Reuters website, Jan. 25

  Now if They'll Catapult Some Menudo, We Can Get Cooking   "Smugglers Catapult Pot Over U.S./Mexico Border"--headline, Orange County (Calif.) Register, Jan. 27

  Questions Nobody Is Asking   "A New Low in Democratic Party Hate Speech?"--headline, PowerLineBlog.com, Jan. 26

 Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  It's Always in the Last Place You Look   "Iranian Book Celebrating Suicide Bombers Found in Arizona Desert"--headline, FoxNews.com, Jan. 27

 Too Much Information 

  Everything Seemingly Is Spinning Out of Control   "Breast-Feeding Canadian Moms Create Flash Mob at Mall"--headline, AOLNews.com, Jan. 27

  News of the Tautological   "Leak Causes Issue at Cheshire County Jail"--headline, Keene (N.H.) Sentinel, Jan. 27

  News You Can Use   "How a Spot of Morning Passion Can Make You Glow All Day Long"--headline, Daily Mail (London), Jan. 28

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  The Butler Did It! No, the Maid! Yeah, That's the Ticket . . .   Tanks rolled into the streets of Cairo today as part of a brutal crackdown on dissent by the dictatorship of Hosni Mubarak. Perhaps coincidentally, yesterday "internet traffic suddenly plummeted in Egypt," MicroScope.co.uk reports:

It reminds us of the "tiger suit" scene from "Monty Python's The Meaning of Life." Or maybe Tommy Flanagan has joined the Egyptian foreign service.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to F. Douglas, Hillel Markowitz, Jerry Skurnik, Marion Dreyfus, Heather Smith, MIke Brennan, John Bobek, Peter Grace, Leonard Peirce, David Hoffman, John Sanders, Peter Huntsman, Kyle Kyllan, Deane Hartley, Ethel Fenig, Michele Schiesser, Bruce Goldman, Evan Slatis, Rod Pennington, Bill Gnade and T. Young. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)