 Toyota intends to make a sharp cut in the size of the company's board, a move that has renewed tensions within the auto maker's management. 

Italian auto maker Fiat will start selling Alfa Romeo cars in Mexico in June and remains on track to bring the sports-car brand to the U.S. in 2012, said Fiat Chief Executive Sergio Marchionne.

Budget carrier Thai AirAsia plans to list on the Thai stock exchange in the fourth quarter after selling at least a 25% stake through an initial public offering to raise a minimum of $150 million. The carrier plans to maintain the interest of local shareholders at 51% after the IPO. 

 Barclays Chief Executive Officer Bob Diamond pocketed a £6.5 million ($10.58 million) bonus for 2010 and almost £14 million in Barclays shares tied to prior years' incentive plans, making him the best-paid British banking boss and a likely lightning rod for criticism of such windfalls. 

Duemme SGR, a unit of Mediobanca, and hedge fund Algebris Investments announced the launch of a new fund that will specialize in investing in convertible bank bonds. The Duemme CoCo Credit Fund will specialize in so-called contingent convertible bonds, a debt security that regulators have urged banks to consider issuing. 

Stuart Hendel is heading to Bank of America Merrill Lynch to head its global prime brokerage unit, after resigning as the global head of UBS's prime brokerage unit, say people familiar with the matter. Two other senior UBS executives who reported to Mr. Hendel also quit Monday.

Earlier, UBS named Matthew Grounds and Simon Warshaw to join the top echelon of the bank's investment banking advisory business, according to an internal memo.

State-controlled, PKO Bank Polski, Poland's largest bank by assets, said 2010 net profit rose 40% to 3.22 billion zlotys ($1.13 billion) on higher volumes and a strong performance across its businesses, and that net profit growth may continue in double digits this year. 

Austrian building company Strabag said it has simultaneously acquired two smaller Swiss construction firms, making it the third-largest in the Swiss market in terms of sales. The two purchased companies, Brunner Erben and Astrada, have about 1,050 employees and jointly generate annual sales of about €245 million ($342.7 million). 

 BP has backed off from plans to sell assets in Algeria, the country's energy minister said, a blow to potential Russian buyer TNK-BP but a vote of confidence for the nation amid unrest in other parts of North Africa.  

Spanish oil company Repsol said it has agreed with two U.S. companies to explore for resources jointly in Alaska and will invest at least $768 million in acquiring and developing a stake in development blocks there. Repsol said the deal is with GMT Exploration and a unit of Armstrong Oil & Gas and concerns a number of blocks in Alaska's North Slope. 

Tullow Oil and the Ugandan government have resolved a tax dispute that should allow Tullow to bring Total and China National Offshore Oil Co. into its oil projects in the East African country, Uganda's junior energy and minerals minister said in an interview. The government also restored two licenses in its oil-rich Lake Albertine Rift basin to the U.K.-based Tullow, he said. 

India's Oil & Natural Gas Corp. is seeking to launch its follow-on share sale by April 5, after deferring the sale from its earlier deadline of March 15, two people familiar with the matter said. India's federal government, which owns 74.14% in ONGC, plans to sell a 5% stake in the company to raise funds for social welfare and infrastructure projects.

Chennai Petroleum plans to invest 123.4 billion rupees ($2.75 billion) over the next five years to expand its flagship Manali refinery, as the state-run company seeks to take advantage of rising refining margins worldwide and India's growing demand for energy. 

 LVMH Möet Hennessy Louis Vuitton agreed to take a controlling stake in Italy's Bulgari, adding to the French firm's watch and jewelry brands and underscoring the strength in the luxury sector. The deal is valued at about €4.3 billion ($6.01 billion). 

 ING Groep said it will pay back €2 billion ($2.8 billion) in Dutch state funds in two months' time and that it plans to repay the remaining aid it received during the financial crisis by May 2012, as it awaits the outcome of a legal brawl with the European Commission over the heavy price it's paying for being bailed out.  

 Nomura Holdings unveiled a broad reshuffling of its senior management, promoting a non-Japanese foreigner to the highest role in the company's 86-year history and naming its first female senior executive.  

Japan's Terumo will buy major U.S. blood-transfusion-technology firm CaridianBCT Holding, a wholly owned unit of Sweden's Gambro, for $2.63 billion. 

The chairman of Xstrata, Willy Strothotte, will retire in May after nine years in the post and will be replaced by the current chairman of Vodafone, John Bond. 

Competition to develop Mongolia's Tavan Tolgoi coal mine—one of the world's biggest undeveloped deposits—is intensifying after the government narrowed the race down to six bidders from 15, a Korean participant said. 

Japan's health ministry said it has temporarily suspended the use of Prevnar, made by Pfizer, and ActHIB, made by Sanofi-Aventis, as it investigates whether the deaths of four children are linked to the pediatric vaccines. 

 Western Digital agreed to acquire Hitachi's hard-disk-drive business for about $4.3 billion in cash and stock, the latest in a series of recent tech-sector deals. The Japanese conglomerate, which has been moving away from consumer electronics toward large industrial projects, will own about 10% of Western Digital's stock after the issuance. 

Nokia will sell its Qt commercial licensing and services business to technology-services firm Digia, both companies said.

AOL said it completed its $315 million acquisition of online news and commentary site, the Huffington Post. Following the close of the acquisition, AOL could lay off a portion of its employees, AOL Chief Executive Tim Armstrong said recently.

Software makers Microsoft, Adobe Systems and Autodesk settled separate copyright infringement lawsuits against a midsize Chinese steel structure engineering company, Guangzhou Wuyang Steel Structure, the industry group Business Software Alliance said. 

 Daimler and Rolls-Royce Group said they are in talks to jointly acquire control of German diesel-engine maker Tognum, which has a market capitalization of more than €3 billion ($4.2 billion). 

 Kuoni Holding said it is acquiring travel services provider Gullivers Travel Associates for 654 million Swiss francs ($706.3 million) from privately-held Travelport to expand its online holiday-bookings business. 