Money managers remain optimistic about Indian stocks this year, even though stocks are not as cheap as they were at the beginning of 2010. They like stocks of companies tied to infrastructure, heavy machinery and engineering because they expect increased investment in these sectors. However, they note that inflation and corruption pose risks to stock gains.

Here is the outlook for Indian stocks this year, from three leading mutual fund managers:

   Kenneth Andrade, head of investments, IDFC Asset Management Co. Ltd. 

All things remaining equal, we would get double-digit growth rates in corporate earnings this year. Markets should largely reflect that. I'm not optimistic that we will do much better than the 15% stocks gained last year. 

Foreign flows would be a continued driver for stocks. 

Which sectors look attractive, and which are you bearish on?

We think that 2011 will be a nice year to build a portfolio back into the investment economy, such as infrastructure, capital goods and commodities. 

These sectors have not performed well in the last two to three years, partly because these projects take a long time to come to fruition and also because many of these companies had borrowed a lot of money.

If the government effectively starts spending, or if private investment picks up, you'll see the investment economy recovering. The idea is to capture that growth.

Until now, we've played the consumer part of the economy. That will continue to be a dominant theme. We expect consumption-related sectors like media, staples, automobiles, and pharmaceuticals to outperform (the broad index). They're not cheap but we have been adding certain stocks. 

We remain neutral on financial companies. We like banks and some non-banking finance companies, particularly those funding infrastructure.

In real estate, if we find companies with a transparent and scalable business model we may choose to invest in them. 

Risks for the stock market:

Inflation and high interest rates are not really conducive for any asset class anywhere in the world. Interest rates in India have been rising for nearly two years. That could be a dampener.

Also, investors need to watch out for whether stocks gain value much faster than corporate earnings. If the market goes up 20%, and your corporate earnings are growing at 12%, that could be a problem. 

   Sharat Shroff, lead manager, Matthews India Fund 

The outlook for equities this year is not as clear-cut as it was in 2009. 

Inflation continues to pose a challenge. Also, stock prices are not as low as last year. 

The ideal scenario for Indian stocks would be if commodity prices remain under control, the pace of flows continues, and there is no violent shift in global capital markets which causes investors to reassess their exposure to emerging markets. 

Over the long term, we are bullish. India's economic growth remains steady and could accelerate. That is not something that you can say about many economies in the world. 

Which sectors look attractive, and which are you bearish on?

Capital spending may pick up in the next few months as firms build more capacity and there is more infrastructure development. This will help companies which benefit from capital spending such as heavy machinery manufacturers. 

We are optimistic about select financial companies. We like banks which have high deposits versus liabilities because they tend to be beneficiaries of a high interest rate environment. 

In telecom, there's quite a bit of uncertainty. There is a lot of competition. There are also some regulatory challenges. For instance, mergers within telecom companies can't be done easily in India. Unless there's some clarity on that, it may be difficult for these companies to generate significant performance.

In the short and medium-term, the outlook for consumer-related stocks is not the rosiest. Valuations are above their historical averages. With high inflation, the ability of the consumer to spend money on big-ticket items comes into question. 

We sometimes buy convertible bonds to dampen volatility in our portfolio and to get exposure to companies whose stocks might be expensive. 

Risks for the stock market:

Corruption might continue to dominate the headlines. It can have negative repercussions with investors potentially reassessing their commitment to India. It really depends on how it's handled by the government. 

 Sukumar Rajah, managing director of Asian equities, Franklin Templeton Investments 

The case for India remains strong over the medium to long-term. India's young population, as well as a rise in government and corporate spending, will continue to support economic and corporate earnings growth over this period. Meaningful progress in reforms and investment in infrastructure remains critical to sustaining high growth. 

Which sectors look attractive, and which are you bearish on?

Sectors that can piggyback on the domestic consumption and investment themes are good opportunities from a medium to long-term perspective. They will benefit from growing income levels and increased spending on infrastructure and capital expenditure. 

India's financial services sector has huge growth potential. The penetration of banking and financial services in India is very low but, as personal incomes rise, the demand for financial services is high.

Recent regulatory uncertainty in the telecom industry has led to value in some of the top telecoms stocks. The industry will consolidate as new entrants face losses and exit. The surviving companies will benefit from the introduction of 3G services. 

We continue to have very little exposure to the real estate sector because of the lack of transparency. We like some South-based real estate players who benefit from a revival in the demand from the information technology and services sector. 

Risks for the stock market:

Global imbalances, currency frictions, austerity measures (in Western countries) and inflation will have an impact on global flows. So, there will be continued volatility in the markets.

While India ranks high in corporate governance among its global peers, recent events related to the telecom spectrum allocation and loans for realty companies can have a negative bearing on the perception about corporate governance.

—Follow Shefali Anand @twitter.com/shefalianand 

 Write to  Shefali Anand at shefali.anand@wsj.com 