Asian steelmakers are watching warily as floodwaters choke off vital coal supplies from Australia, with many saying production is set for now but could stumble if mining outages persist. 

Mining companies slowed by flooding in the Australian state of Queensland are turning to their stockpiles of coking coal—which is used to make steel—in the absence of new mine production. But energy-consulting firm Wood Mackenzie warned Thursday that those stockpiles were likely to be exhausted beginning next week.

Steelmakers in China, Japan, India and South Korea that depend on Australian production would then have to dip into their own stockpiles. 

In interviews, regional steel giants including Japan's  Nippon Steel Corp.
NSSMY


1.41
%




 and South Korea's Posco said they had supplies that could cushion their production for a month or more—enough to maintain production unless the outages in Australia linger. 

"Generally speaking, we have enough iron ore and coal stocks for one month of production," a spokesman for Japan's JFE Steel Corp. said, adding the amount doesn't include shipments already on their way from Australia. 

A spokesman for Nippon Steel declined to reveal how much the company buys from Australia, but local industry data show Australian supply constituted 60% of the coal used by Japanese steelmakers. 

Even if the industry avoids major production interruptions, coal prices are expected to climb, impacting steelmaker profits and putting upward pressure on prices for consumers. Disruption to mining and transportation could drive prices of spot hard coking coal up to $350 a metric ton from current levels of around $250 a ton,  Commonwealth Bank of Australia
CBAUY


0.00
%




 said in a report Thursday. 

Spot long steel prices in Mumbai have risen nearly 11% from a month ago to 27,700 rupees a ton, or about $612.50.

Asian steelmakers Thursday declined to discuss price specifics but said cost pressures will likely be felt industrywide. 

"We do not source our coke from Australia, so we are insulated to an extent," India's Essar Steel Chief Executive  Malay Mukherjee said. But overall coke and coking coal prices may rise in the January-March quarter as a fallout of the floods, he said. 

Around a third of the 172 million metric ton-per-year sea-borne trade in hard coking coal is mined from the Collinsville Shelf, a single 250-kilometer geological formation in northeastern Australia. All 18 mines on the seam have been hit by heavy rain and flooding in recent weeks to differing degrees, according to mining companies and local contractors. 

In China,  Zhang Chi, a spokesman for Baosteel Group Corp., the country's second-biggest steelmaker by volume, said coal supply from Australia has been affected, but the company's operations are continuing without disruption as it has enough stocks for now. Baosteel is the unlisted parent of Shanghai-listed  Baoshan Iron & Steel Co.
600019


-6.46
%




 

According to China's General Administration of Customs, Australia accounts for only about 38% of the coking coal used by Chinese steel mills, with the rest coming from Indonesia, Mongolia, Russia, the United States and Canada. China is set to produce more than 3.2 billion tons of coal this year, making domestic production a key component of overall supply. About a seventh of this is coking coal, leaving imports less of a concern for Chinese steel mills. 

Some Indian steelmakers said they have stocks to last more than two months. 

"We have not experienced any delays in supply so far. Even if there is a delay, we have sufficient stocks for around two and a half months," Bhushan Steel Ltd. Chief Financial Officer  Nittin Johari said. Spot prices may rise following the floods "but quarterly contract prices will not see much impact," Mr. Johari said. 

JSW Steel Ltd. Director  Jayant Acharya said the company would be able source coal from South Africa and the U.S, should there be a fall in supply from Australia. 

—Kazuhiro Shimamura in Tokyo, Chuin-Wei Yap in Beijing and Prasenjit Bhattacharya in New Delhi contributed to this article

 Write to  Denny Kurien at denny.kurien@dowjones.com 