CHICAGO—Rahm Emanuel was one of Washington's most powerful men when he resigned as President Barack Obama's chief of staff to run for mayor of Chicago. Less than four months later, he leads his closest rival by 20 points and has raised nearly $12 million in campaign cash—but he can't get on the ballot in his hometown. 

Mr. Emanuel's road from the White House to Chicago City Hall hit a big bump Monday when a three-judge Illinois Appellate Court panel ruled that he isn't eligible to run because he forfeited his residency when he moved to Washington in 2009.

The 2-1 decision by the panel, which heard oral arguments last week, reversed a lower-court ruling that had given Mr. Emanuel permission to remain on the ballot.

"When the president asks you to serve the country as his chief of staff, that counts as part of serving your country," Mr. Emanuel said at a news conference. "I have no doubt that we will, in the end, prevail at this effort."

On Monday evening, the Illinois Supreme Court received an emergency motion from Mr. Emanuel's lawyers asking the court to immediately prevent the Chicago Board of Election Commissioners from taking Mr. Emanuel's name off the ballot, pending a court review, and for the court to deal with the case in an expedited manner if it decides to take the case.

Time is in short supply. Jim Allen, a spokesman for the election board, said a printer would begin churning out absentee ballots Monday night without Mr. Emanuel's name because early voting for the Feb. 22 election starts on Jan. 31. 

The appeals court ruled that Mr. Emanuel did not meet the requirements to run for municipal election because he did not physically reside in Chicago for a year prior to the election. Mr. Emanuel had argued that he maintained his residency by paying property taxes on his Chicago home while renting it out during his stint in Washington. Mr. Emanuel moved back to Chicago in October.

Earlier rulings in the case had interpreted the concept of residency more broadly, turning on Mr. Emanuel's intention to remain a Chicago resident despite his Washington sojourn. A Cook County judge cited the clothing, furniture and family heirlooms the Emanuel family had stored in their home here as evidence that Mr. Emanuel had not abandoned his Chicago residency. 

Mr. Emanuel's lawyers had argued that even if he didn't meet the residency requirements, Illinois law made an exception for those who move out of state to do business for the U.S. 

Rahm Emanuel's chief rivals for mayor of Chicago

The appeals court agreed that Mr. Emanuel's work in the White House "constituted 'business of the United States,'" but said the exception only gave him the right to vote in Illinois, not to run for office. 

Monday's ruling is a political bombshell in Chicago because Mr. Emanuel has been the front runner since shortly after Mayor Richard M. Daley announced in September that he wouldn't seek a seventh term and is retiring after 22 years in office.

A poll conducted last week by Chicago Tribune/WGN TV found that 44% of city voters supported Mr. Emanuel. Former U.S. Senator Carol Moseley Braun was in second place with 21%, and Gery Chico, a former chief of staff for Mayor Daley, was in third place with 16%.

Mr. Emanuel has raised four times as much money as Mr. Chico. Ms. Moseley Braun has less than $200,000 in cash on hand. 

The political question here before Monday wasn't whether Mr. Emanuel would win election—but when. If Mr. Emanuel or any of the other five candidates musters a majority of votes on the first ballot, the race is over. If no one earns a majority, a runoff will be held in April.

On Monday, Ms. Moseley Braun held a press conference alongside U.S. Congressman Bobby Rush and Rev. Jesse Jackson. She called the appellate court decision "a major milestone for our campaign," and said she respects the rule of law and hopes Mr. Emanuel's supporters will consider joining her. 

 Read the ruling.

"I am extending a hand of friendship to all the fine Chicagoans who have been supporting Rahm, and all those that haven't made up their minds yet," she said.

It is unclear which candidate would gain the most if the ruling stands. Many pundits think Mr. Chico may be the biggest beneficiary. "Today's news is a surprise, but it will not impact how we run our campaign," Mr. Chico's campaign said in a statement.

Paul McKinley, one of the citizens who filed objections to Mr. Emanuel's candidacy, was less restrained. "We're very elated that the common man and woman has finally been vindicated of our accusation about the hijacking of the election Rahm tried to do." 

Mr. Emanuel addressed reporters shortly after the ruling and reiterated that Chicago is his home. "I do believe the people of the city of Chicago deserve a right to make a decision about who they want to be their next mayor," he said.

Mr. Emanuel cited the strong dissent of one member of the appellate panel, Judge Bertina E. Lampkin. She wrote that Mr. Emanuel didn't abandon his Chicago home in favor of a new one elsewhere "with the intent to make it a permanent home." 

She added that "the majority's decision disenfranchises not just this particular candidate, but every voter in Chicago who would consider voting for him. Well-settled law does not countenance such a result."

Chicago rules allow any candidate who has been removed from the ballot after Dec. 23 to file as a write-in candidate, according to the election-board spokesman. Michael C. Dorf, a Chicago election-law attorney, says that any write-in would likely face legal challenges.

Michael Kasper, a lawyer for Mr. Emanuel, says he is not considering the write-in option at the moment because he is solely focused on the Illinois Supreme Court. "I am not involved in the planning of anything except the appeal to the Supreme Court," he says.

 Write to  Douglas Belkin at doug.belkin@wsj.com and Lauren Etter at lauren.etter@wsj.com 