 The Bell House  149 7th St., Brooklyn, (718) 369-3390  Tuesday

A dexterous singer with a surfeit of soul at her disposal, Mavis Staples came up with the family gospel group the Staple Singers in the 1950s and '60s, when church music started to swirl with secular R&B in the realm of pop. No history of the era can go long without accounting for Ms. Staples, but she's no mere legacy act, as she showed with the success of her 2010 album "You Are Not Alone." It paired her with an unlikely collaborator in Wilco's Jeff Tweedy, who produced the record, wrote its stirring title song and helped usher Ms. Staples back onto concert bills she might not have graced otherwise—including this one in Gowanus with indie Americana artist Jolie Holland and TV on the Radio's hirsute utility-man Kyp Malone.

 (Le) Poisson Rouge  158 Bleecker St., (212) 505-3474  Friday

Doveman is Thomas Bartlett, who doubles as a wrenchingly delicate singer-songwriter and a crack studio musician for the downtown art-music set. He's worked with everyone from David Byrne and Laurie Anderson to Yoko Ono and Nico Muhly, and he's known to call in favors when he plays live. Here, in the first of a series of shows titled "The Burgundy Stain Sessions," Mr. Bartlett will share the stage with a few friends who played on his 2009 album "The Conformist." The primary Doveman sound features Mr. Bartlett laying his whisper of a voice over orchestral pop backdrops that spotlight graceful piano, lightly brushed drums and different kinds of strings. Some of those will come by way of Sam Amidon, who plays the banjo and boasts the voice of a 150-year-old coalminer. Others will owe to English folk chanteuse Beth Orton and Glen Hansard, leader of the Irish band the Frames and breakout actor in the 2006 film "Once."

 Cielo  18 Little W. 12th St., (212) 645-5700  Sunday

Who better to entrust one's Martin Luther King tribute listening to than Questlove, storied leader of hip-hop group the Roots and, increasingly, a magnanimous man about town. Ever since the Roots set up as the nightly studio band on "Late Night Wth Jimmy Fallon," Questlove and his compatriots from Philadelphia have become welcome fixtures in New York, playing late-night DJ sets and jam sessions at clubs all over the city. But this party, organized by the dependable dance-music enterprise Giant Step, offers a little extra thematic thrust. Together with MC Yameen Allworld, Questlove will serve as DJ for a night "inspired by MLK and freedom" that will lead into the holiday on Monday. As a DJ, Questlove has earned his keep on a few celebrated mix-disc releases including the likes of Smokey Robinson, Bill Withers and Sly & the Family Stone, so expect the drummer to get funky, wicked and—as is his wont—down.

 Terminal 5  610 W. 56th St., (212) 582-6600  Tuesday

The standard-bearer for a trend of rambling, shambling Canadian rock collectives that would also give rise to Arcade Fire, Broken Social Scene emerged from Toronto at the beginning of the last decade. The group's 2002 breakthrough, "You Forgot It in People," ushered in a carnivalesque rock sound at the time, as well as a new sense of scale achievable for bands in a changing indie culture bolstered by the Internet. While all that may scan as distant history now, Broken Social Scene's music has continued to expand over the years. The band made a strikingly assured soundtrack to the film "Half Nelson" in 2006, and 2010's full-length "Forgiveness Rock Record" showcases a large group—the roster has been known to swell from a core of around 10 to nearly 20 members at various points—congealed around a tight, tuneful sound with lots of energy and a healthy amount of release.

 Knitting Factory  361 Metropolitan Ave., Brooklyn  (347) 529-6696  Sunday

The Toasters started playing ska in New York in 1981, not long after a wave of English bands picked up on the precursor of reggae and celebrated its innate sense of community and joy. In the former context, ska stood for unity and thus folded itself into the progressive politics of punk. In the latter context, ska got by on simply being a blast to listen to. Here, the Toasters will celebrate their 30th anniversary with a show likely to make good on both aspects. Bandleader Robert "Bucket" Hingley has been an American ambassador for the style for a long time, and the Toasters play it devotedly down the middle, with an ear for the music's political elements as well as its roots as nourishing Jamaican dance music. What that means is the occasional insouciant snarl mixed in with lots of horns, bass-lines and upshot drums.