A Brooklyn physical therapist pleaded guilty Friday in federal district court to five counts of submitting false and fraudulent claims to Medicare for physical-therapy services that were medically unnecessary and never performed.

According to the indictment, Aleksandr Kharkover was charged with billing Medicare about $11.9 million from January 2005 through July 2010. During that period, Medicare paid out $7.3 million, according to a person familiar with the investigation. 

Mr. Kharkover was profiled in a December 2010 Wall Street Journal article about possible financial abuse involving physical therapy, a growing area of fraud in Medicare.

In February, he was indicted by the Justice Department. People close to the investigation said the federal probe had begun before the Journal article was published.

The Journal identified him by mining the Medicare-claims database, a computerized record of Medicare payments that the newspaper obtained together with the nonprofit Center for Public Integrity.Mr. Kharkover's billing was far above the norm.

According to a person familiar with the case, in one instance Mr. Kharkover allegedly submitted a bill for a service he performed personally, but on a date when he was on a vacation cruise. Mr. Kharkover hasn't yet been sentenced.

His lawyer, Montell Figgins, said there was no plea deal. In a phone interview, Mr. Figgins said Mr. Kharkover "just pled guilty to all charges listed in the indictment." 

Parts of the Medicare-claims database are closed to the public. Due to a successful 1979 lawsuit brought by the American Medical Association, the government cannot release Medicare billing records of individual doctors. The AMA suit was based on doctors' privacy interests. 

The Journal's publisher, Dow Jones & Co., filed court papers earlier this year seeking to overturn the 1979 injunction.

The case against Mr. Kharkover was investigated by the Office of the Inspector General for the Department of Health and Human Services and the New York State Office of the Medicaid Inspector General. It is being prosecuted by the Fraud Section of the Criminal Division of the U.S. Department of Justice.

—Maurice Tamman contributed to this article.

 Write to  Mark Schoofs at mark.schoofs@wsj.com 