As a onetime equity trader with a major bank,  Ken McCadden is used to putting in long hours and tackling difficult assignments. But nothing quite compares to his routine of late.

Read the full  Foreign Exchange report .

The Saddle River, N.J., resident usually starts his "day" at around 5 p.m. Eastern time in Asia. He then heads to Europe in the wee hours of the morning, before concluding his grind in the U.S. by sunrise.

Mr. McCadden's work doesn't involve any actual travel, however. Rather, he trades foreign currencies online from home when most folks are fast asleep, fueled by a potent cup of Sumatra coffee, brewed extra thick and strong. "I make it so that your spoon stands up in it," he says.

Such is life on what might be dubbed "The Forex Late Show." For a new breed of investor in search of diversification and a potentially higher-yielding alternative to stocks and bonds, it's all about flipping schedules around or sacrificing a few hours of sleep to squeeze in some extra trading. 

The reason for the brutal hours is obvious enough: Currency trading is a 24-hour beast, with peak trading periods aligning with the times Asia, Europe and North America intersect with one another during their respective workdays. Foreign-exchange investors think in terms of currency "pairs"—say, the euro and dollar—so they are particularly mindful of times when news and information is flowing out of two countries or regions—say Europe and the U.S.—simultaneously; otherwise, an investor is working with just one piece of a two-piece puzzle. 

In addition, currency trading is largely shaped by the global news cycle, from the latest employment report out of Asia to the latest sovereign-debt crisis in Europe. While such news can affect stocks, too, equity traders can sleep a little easier in that even significant overnight foreign news won't necessarily have a profound impact on every U.S. company. In the case of foreign exchange, it's all news, all the time. "It's like trading a stock that has earnings reports five times a day," says Mr. McCadden.

There isn't one way to trade currencies—or one type of currency trader. Some, like Mr. McCadden, make a living out of it; others do it in their spare time. Traders typically find a pattern that suits them best, depending on the currency pairs that interest them and their need for sleep. But veteran traders and foreign-exchange brokers say that if there's one constant, it's that currency trading tends to attract type-A investors who live for the constant action, not unlike a Vegas poker player who stays at the table through the night.

"Forex is an addiction," says  Leon Yohai, chief executive of ZuluTrade Inc., an online platform that connects traders to one another. Mr. Yohai says the significant degree of leverage in the foreign-exchange market—investors can borrow as much as 50 times the actual capital in their accounts to make trades (and that's even with the new limits that went into effect last year)—is what particularly fuels the late-night culture. "When you have an open position and a high leverage, you have to stay awake at night," he says. "Otherwise, you might wake up and have nothing."

Another factor behind the round-the-clock foreign-exchange fanaticism: It allows investors with day jobs—from doctors to teachers—to play the markets at their height. That's an opportunity simply not afforded them by the U.S. equity markets, which hew to regular working hours. "I was left watching on the sidelines," says  Dana Efremovska, an investment accountant in New York who turned to currency trading and now trades when the Asian and European markets overlap.

Ms. Efremovska's schedule? She comes home from work, goes to bed at 8 p.m. and then wakes up at midnight for a full nine hours of trading. "During my trading session, the adrenaline takes care of making sure I stay awake," says Ms. Efremovska, who gets by on about four hours of sleep each weeknight. (She sleeps as late as 1 p.m. on the weekends to compensate, she says.) But she isn't complaining. She says she has more than doubled her investment of $200,000 since entering the foreign-exchange market two years ago.

Other investors haven't been as lucky.  Paul Evans, a manufacturing supervisor who lives in Hopewell, N.J., says he's down 90% on his currency investment of about $1,300 over the past four years. He admits he sometimes gets hooked on currency trading because of the thrill. "That is definitely a potential pitfall of this market," Mr. Evans says. "My goal is to control the trades instead of the other way around." 

Meanwhile, with the midnight-to-8 a.m. shift often accounting for more than a third of overall trading volume at brokerages large and small, a whole industry devoted to servicing those who invest in off-hours has sprung up. "We field a lot of calls from clients overnight," says  Robert McKeon, senior vice president of FXDD, a New York-based online foreign-exchange broker

Brokerages say they've beefed up staff to meet demand—in some cases adding employees in the actual countries where trading is taking place (daytime duty for those workers), but in other cases adding U.S.-based personnel who work true "graveyard" hours. "When I go into the health club at 6 a.m. before I start my day, I'm seeing a guy who's doing his workout after he's finished his day," says  Eric Viloria, a senior currency strategist with New York-based broker Forex.com, a unit of GAIN Capital Holdings Inc.

Of course, just as with equity markets, there are ways to invest in currencies that don't require live trading. Automated orders and stops, for example, can easily be put into place, though many traders say the movements in foreign-exchange markets are such that it can be difficult to make money without actively monitoring positions. 

  Mark Mc Donnell, who owns ForexEarlyWarning.com, an online subscription-based trading-alert system, says there is an alternative: He trades in a key four-hour window, starting three hours before the U.S. stock market opens. He says that's a time when the U.S. is beginning its workday and Europe is still going strong, so traders can get a good sense of how market conditions will affect the currencies of many countries. He also says he gets a full-night's sleep and enjoys his morning coffee before rushing to the computer. "I've got my wits about me," says Mr. Mc Donnell.

Therein lies the real danger in late-night trading, say many foreign-exchange veterans: While there may be opportunities to make money in those overnight hours, there's also the potential to make mistakes if you're groggy and not fully focused on the task at hand. It's why  Winsor Hoang, a full-time foreign-exchange trader who offers strategies to investors through Currensee.com, has gone fully automated. When he started trading currencies five years ago, he found he was up at all hours and "walking around like a zombie." In short, he lacked discipline with his trading, he says. 

Mr. Hoang, based in Vancouver, British Columbia, switched to automated trading about three years ago and says he was up about 20% last year. His health and social life have improved, too, and he says he doesn't miss the action that so many foreign-exchange night owls seek. "Trading should be monotonous," he says. 

 Mr. Passy is a staff writer for SmartMoney magazine in New York. He can be reached at charles.passy@dowjones.com. 