After reading "Scorecasting: The Hidden Influences Behind How Sports Are Played and Games Are Won," the overriding feeling is a sense of relief that authors Tobias J. Moskowitz and L. Jon Wertheim aren't coaching one's favorite team. They suggest such curious strategies as taking close pitches on 0-and-2 counts (the umpire will likely give you the benefit of the doubt), swinging freely on 3-and-0 counts (the ump will probably call a strike anyway), leaving NBA stars on the court with five fouls (they're "no more valuable at the end of the game" than otherwise) and going for it on fourth-and-4 from the 20-yard line (yes, either 20-yard line).

As general managers, however, the authors of "Scorecasting" might have potential. They maintain that teams grossly overvalue high draft picks, calculating that the chances are only slightly better than 50-50 that the first player picked at a given position in the NFL draft will be better than the second (or third, or fourth). If you reflect on the NFL's collective struggle to decide between future Hall of Famer Peyton Manning and legendary bust Ryan Leaf before the 1998 draft, and on another sure Hall of Famer, Tom Brady, having been picked seventh among quarterbacks in 2000, this isn't hard to believe. The authors also convincingly argue that teams across sports undervalue future picks. So perhaps the surest way to build a winning franchise is to trade down—or, better yet, to trade one pick today for several tomorrow.

None of this, you may have noticed, has to do with forecasting scores. In fact, Messrs. Moskowitz (a University of Chicago finance professor) and Wertheim (a Sports Illustrated writer) don't forecast a single score in this compelling, readable, inaptly named book. But they offer plenty of provocative claims—some convincing, some not.

Their aversion to punts and place kicks, for example, is based on an intriguing study by economist David Romer. They fail to note, though, that it uses third-down statistics to gauge the likelihood of fourth-down success—overlooking the fact that defenses will take more risks on fourth downs.

Similarly, the authors cite several unconvincing studies to conclude "momentum doesn't exist in sports." One focuses simply on free throws, another doesn't take into account the extra attention that defenses pay to "hot" players and a third (their own) merely shows that momentum swings back and forth. During college football's recent title game, momentum's importance was repeatedly emphasized by commentator Urban Meyer, a cerebral coach who has won four BCS bowls and two national titles in the last five years: I'll go with Mr. Meyer.

 By Tobias J. Moskowitz and L. Jon Wertheim  Crown, 278 pages, $26

Another unconvincing claim is that Major League Baseball is more likely than the NFL to crown its best team as champion. The authors describe the NFL's single-elimination playoff format as "much more conducive to upsets, much more likely to generate randomness" than Major League Baseball's best-of-five or -seven format.

The authors write: "The NFL has been holding the Super Bowl only since 1967, but already 18 of the 32 franchises have won . . . and all but four have appeared . . . almost the same number of teams [two] that have never been to the World Series—and they've been holding that since 1903." Never mind that only 16 of baseball's current 30 teams existed in 1903, that 20 teams have won the World Series since 1967 and that only one team that existed in 1967 hasn't made the World Series since then (the Cubs). Elsewhere, the authors warn readers to be aware that writers "pick and choose data." Indeed.

In truth, baseball's playoffs are far more random than the NFL's. Inferior teams simply win more often in baseball, where the elusive object is to "hit 'em where they ain't"—thus, you'll see 1-15 NFL teams but never an 11-151 baseball team. With expanded playoffs (three rounds versus one round in days of old), baseball's best teams are usually knocked off before the main event—despite having proved their merit across 162 games.

In fact, in the past half-dozen seasons, only five of 12 World Series teams were even among the four best teams that year (based on regular-season performance)—compared with seven of 12 in the Super Bowl, eight of 12 in the NBA finals, seven of 12 in the NCAA basketball finals and 12 of 12 in the BCS National Championship Game. Among the three major American sports, baseball used to have the most meaningful regular season, but now—at least in its relevance to crowning its champion—it has the least.

Another factor the authors overlook is home-field advantage. In the NFL, playoff games are hosted by the team with the better regular-season record (until the neutral-site Super Bowl). In baseball, home-field advantage is divided almost evenly. This omission is ironic, considering that perhaps the best part of "Scorecasting," spanning nearly a quarter of its length, is a mostly persuasive discussion of why home-field advantage exists. Ultimately, the authors conclude that home-field advantage is, in fact, fueled by the fans—and the more numerous, louder and closer they are, the bigger the advantage. The authors assert, however, that fans don't principally influence the players. They influence the zebras.

Elsewhere, Messrs. Moskowitz and Wortheim rightly argue that defense doesn't win championships (any more than offense does), a notion that Auburn's recent national championship supports. They confirm that refs are indeed reluctant to blow their whistles near the ends of games. And they demonstrate that Cubs fans' attendance is more heavily influenced by beer prices than by winning percentage. (Can you guess why the Cubs don't win?)

One weakness of the book is that, almost every time players, coaches or executives don't act as Messrs. Moskowitz and Wertheim think they should, the authors chalk it up to "the notion that we hate to lose more than we love to gain": "Psychologists call this loss aversion." After the 32nd (I counted) reference to "loss aversion," one gets the sense that maybe something else is in play here—perhaps an aversion to questionable advice. 

But while Messrs. Moskowitz and Wertheim aren't always right, it often takes some thinking to figure out why, and that makes this book a worthwhile and diverting read. The authors hope they'll "settle a few bar fights," adding: "With any luck, we'll start a few, too." I suspect they'll stand a good chance— especially in Wrigleyville.

—Mr. Anderson is co-creator of the Anderson & Hester Rankings, one of the six computer rankings used by the Bowl Championship Series.