  (See Corrections & Amplifications item below.)  

"Something is happening in the tunnels," said Kevin O'Connor, the man responsible for making New Jersey Transit's trains run on time, as he watched the giant map inside the Penn Station Central Control center at 5 p.m. on a recent Tuesday. "I can't get my trains from Sunnyside."

Without trains from Sunnyside Yard in Queens, about a quarter of NJ Transit's rush-hour capacity was suddenly lost. Over the next one-and-a-half hours, Mr. O'Connor and his dispatchers canceled trains, rerouted others and turned expresses into locals in an effort to get as many passengers home to New Jersey as possible.

It was another rough evening for NJ Transit, the Long Island Rail Road and Amtrak, the three systems that share Penn Station and the track that feeds into it. One small problem badly disrupted the delicate dance the three railroads perform each evening.

NJ Transit, LIRR and Amtrak must get 170 trains loaded on 21 platforms in four hours, moving more than 120,000 commuters and long-haul travelers out of Manhattan. It is the nation's busiest station. If all goes according to plan, a train opens its doors on a platform every 60 to 90 seconds, picking up or dropping off about 900 passengers—the equivalent of two full Boeing 747s. 

In 2010, 6% of peak-period NJ Transit trains were late through November, with delays more common on most of the lines that run in and out of Penn. Sometimes the failures are catastrophic and perhaps unavoidable, as following the late-December snowstorm that delayed scores of trains for days. But other delays—malfunctioning signals, overhead wires knocked down by trees that the railroad can't afford to trim—can be chalked up to factors like human error, poor planning or a lack of funding.

Penn Station is one of many choke points in the aging transit system moving people around metro New York. In an era defined by states' austerity and tapped-out transit authorities, much of the fundamental infrastructure is outdated and overcrowded. And there's little prospect of it getting much better without politically unpalatable steps being taken, such as higher fares and tolls or a major reallocation of taxpayer dollars.

All of the trains arriving and departing Penn Station, which opened a century ago, come from two tracks toward New Jersey and four tracks toward Long Island. All must arrive on one of the 21 tracks, but many trains can't fit on some tracks with shorter platforms. By contrast, Grand Central has 46 tracks—and far fewer delays.

Relatively small glitches at Penn Station can have an outsize impact that delays hundreds of trains. Even one late long-haul Amtrak train—due in at 3:30 p.m. but arriving at 5 p.m. because of trouble in, say, Rhode Island—can tie up a precious platform for more than a half hour. That, in turn, forces dispatchers to make other trains wait, delaying thousands of commuters.

While much of the region's suburban growth is expected to be in New Jersey in coming years, NJ Transit doesn't have room to grow. Its plan to build a new rail tunnel under the Hudson and a terminal near Penn became in October the region's first big capital project to be killed by a governor scrambling to save money to fill a gaping hole in his budget amid the recent downturn. It's unlikely that it'll be the last such project killed or delayed.

The demise of the tunnel has left railroad officials scrambling to find other, smaller improvements. Every time the Jets or Giants play an afternoon game at the Meadowlands, a special NJ Transit train runs along Metro-North's New Haven line, through Penn and on to New Jersey. That's not about football, said the MTA's planning director, William Wheeler. The MTA is investigating whether it can run trains through Penn and into New Jersey, shaving precious minutes off the amount of time each spends on a platform, freeing up some capacity. It's also looking at running some Metro-North trains into Penn once a project to provide LIRR access into Grand Central Terminal is finished. 

None of that helps Mr. O'Connor, the 51-year-old acting general manager and vice president for NJ Transit's rail operations.

Each afternoon, his staff works with their counterparts at Amtrak and LIRR in a big room near Penn Station that looks like a cross between a movie theater and trading floor. Dispatchers scurry from one desk to another, figuring out which trains will go where. 

Because NJ Transit pays Amtrak for use of its space at Penn, its staff doesn't sit on the floor of the dispatch center. While all three railroads say they work well together, big decisions about Penn are made by Amtrak and the LIRR.

Things began well enough for Mr. O'Connor on that recent Tuesday. Then, just before 5 p.m., signals failed on an Amtrak-maintained line near the edge of Sunnyside Yard. Someone had stolen a cable that links the signals to the central control center. NJ Transit keeps 18 trains at Sunnyside during the day and releases them at rush hour. Suddenly, NJ Transit had no way of getting 16 of those trains to Penn Station.

"It doesn't matter for us what it is," said Mr. O'Connor. "It's play the hand that's now been dealt you. Unfortunately sometimes the hand sucks." He and his deputies began ripping up the schedule. The 5:03 train to South Amboy was canceled. Many others were delayed.

The signal failures weren't the only the problem. A driver had crashed a car through a grade crossing along the North Jersey Coast line, cutting off train service between Point Pleasant and Manasquan. And Mr. O'Connor's boss, NJ Transit Executive Director James Weinstein, was emailing, looking for an explanation of the delays.

Dozens of NJ Transit trains had been delayed by 6 p.m. as Mr. O'Connor checked in on how long it would take to provide a bus brigade for the North Jersey Coast passengers whose trips were cut short by the errant driver.

Shortly after 6 p.m., things started getting better. Crews along the Jersey Shore cleaned up the car wreck that was blocking traffic there quicker than expected. The buses could be called off.

Since NJ Transit uses its trains from Sunnyside early in the evening rush, its delays started to taper off as the evening went on. But they continued on the LIRR. By 6:28 p.m., the trains to New Jersey were all running on time again. And at 7 p.m., an Amtrak employee was able to start operating the Sunnyside signals from a control center in Queens, giving the three systems much of their capacity back.

In all, 31 New Jersey trains carrying roughly 28,000 passengers had been delayed.

Mr. O'Connor asked a station supervisor about the status of one particular departure. It was on time, the supervisor said, and it would be running express. Mr. O'Connor phoned home, put on his coat and headed out into the station to catch a train home to Hamilton.

 Write to  Andrew Grossman at andrew.grossman@wsj.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications:  A few trains enter Penn Station each day via tracks that run north through Manhattan and the Bronx. This article incorrectly says that all trains enter the station through tunnels under the Hudson and East rivers.