The exterior of Related Cos.' new Middle of Manhattan, or MiMA, project falls short of the building's ambition. 

Rising from a single block along 42nd Street between 10th and Dyer avenues, MiMA's 63-story, glass-walled residential tower stands in stark contrast to both the cheap-looking brick- and stone- apartment towers nearby and the adjacent mishmash of traffic and chaotic transportation infrastructure near the entrance to the  Lincoln Tunnel and the Port Authority's bus station. 

Gleaming and smooth, MiMA, in the manner of Related's other mixed-use tour-de-force, the Time Warner Center, looks far more like a statement office building than an apartment building, and in doing so seems garishly ordinary among all the grit. 

Another problem is the way the modernistic facade is weighed down by brownish limestone slabs of the podium, which hug the building around its bottom stories like a drab squid, and are the primary eye-catching element from 42nd street. 

But in other ways the design succeeds. Designer  Bernardo Fort-Brescia, of Miami-based Arquitectonica, says the building was a "Rubik's cube" of a project because of the challenge of providing access to all four of MiMA's uses—500 rental apartments, 151 condos, a 669-room Yotel-brand hotel with tiny, pod-like "cabins" and a complex of three Off-Broadway theaters—along a single block of street-side storefronts. One of those access points, the entranceway to the theater lobby, is slated to have a typically whimsical Frank Gehry-designed awning. "We don't want the layman to feel like they are arriving to a site of complexity," Mr. Fort-Brescia says. 

Transitions between the different segments of the building are smooth, despite the underlying complexity of Related's plans. MiMA's designers laid out the building in a way that accords with a future plan to connect the complex to a planned extension of the No. 7 subway line that would run under it. 

Another strong point: the interiors, designed by  David Rockwell, a New York architect who has done restaurants for a number of the city's most famous chefs, and who recently redesigned John F. Kennedy International Airport's  JetBlue
JBLU


-1.11
%




 terminal. Mr. Rockwell's design emphasizes a subtle segregation of each lobby or common space into parts, using dividers made out of artfully twisted finished wood described as "twizzlers" after the licorice candy. 

Between these and a series of hand-blown reflective glass bulbs arrayed below the ceiling of the rental apartment's lobby area and an almost aquatic, bubbly aesthetic of repeated curvilinear shapes on the building's wallpaper and fabrics, the interiors are a light-hearted compliment to the exterior's severity. 

 Write to  Robbie Whelan at Robbie.Whelan@wsj.com 