Justin Tuck's the star: the Pro Bowl defensive end, the Giants captain, the guy who won the Super Bowl. And every time he does something particularly big- time, Rich Salgado gets on the phone to him and says, "Yeah, but it was me your owner was looking for just before the Super Bowl."

"That's 'Big Daddy,'' Tuck says, the eye-roll stretching to his voice. "Rich is bigger than life."

Figuratively and, um, literally. 

Once a 6-foot-4 Maryland offensive lineman, then a 340-pound good-luck talisman during the Giants stunning 2007 Super Bowl season—with whom Giants co-owner John Mara needed to shake hands before every game—Salgado is now jack-hammering space outside the niche he already has as one of the country's premier insurance men for athletes.

Salgado, his younger brother Lewis and business partner Bobby Hotaling have married the the Hotaling Group to "Big Daddy's" Coastal Advisors, cornering a market that's growing exponentially. They sell insurance: life, business, disability, even property. They underwrite carriers and mix and match policies for corporate clients just as they do for major stars, like Michael Strahan or 50 Cent. 

No, it's not terribly sexy. But as the NFL lockout slogs on and an NBA lockout looms, their services have never been more in demand. During a recent two-day stretch, the elder Salgado fielded 12 calls from athletes seeking coverages. 

And, well, there's Salgado himself, a man Tuck affectionately calls "the socialite," ESPN analyst Adam Schefter compares to "that guy Lenny on the Today Show, because he's everywhere." He's ultimately as New York as the Umberto's pizza he drives from Long Island to East Rutherford for the Giants' equipment staff every Friday.

If the tenet says half of life is showing up, "then I'm the guy who shows up," Salgado says.

He and his partners are not agents negotiating contracts or even financial advisers looking to fashion portfolios for their clients. They have taken one specific segment of financial services they say is grossly underrepresented within an industry whose earners' power is limited in years, and become Pied Pipers—educating and informing and capitalizing at a very unique time.

Right now, quarterbacks, like the Giants' Eli Manning at Hoboken High School or the Jets' Mark Sanchez in California, are organizing informal workouts that are totally uncovered by any league or team disability policy —which therefore leaves players exposed. Right now, NFL players are experiencing up-close life without a paycheck, and are more explicitly seeing the need for sounder financial planning.

Hotaling says their business is to "use life insurance as a financial instrument." 

Tuck, who said he fields at least two calls a day from someone with a "great" investment opportunity," says Hotaling and Salgado's roster of clients and their refusal to hard sell is why he went with them. 

"A lot of athletes don't know this stuff. You're playing baseball, you're thinking about getting a hit off Pedro Martinez, not about estate planning or leaving something for your kids," says Rondell White, a 15-year veteran of seven teams, including the Yankees, and a client. "Life insurance, death insurance, Bobby's teaching me a lot. And he's a straight shooter."

Within the group, Hotaling, 47, is the one who is elbow-deep in the nitty gritty of the back room. Lewis Salgado, a former Hofstra lineman, went to work with Hotaling before going to work for his brother. Neither is the red carpet fixture the elder Salgado is: Hotaling lives with his wife in Manhattan and has two teenaged daughters. Lewis, 41, is in the Bronx and frankly says, "As long as I can put money in the bank, I don't care."

Not so for "Big Daddy." He's at the Pro Bowl and the NFL Combine, at hockey games and Bernard Hopkins fights. He was the one ferrying around the four clients the group had go in the NFL draft's first round two weeks ago and cajoling the 265-pound Tuck in a pedi-cab after a charity event a few years ago.

He grew up on Long Island. He still lives there. And his passion for good food is matched only by his passion for tailored suits.

 He's on the road upwards of 150 days a year and has a Rolodex that Hotaling says he'd put against any in the entire New York-metro area.

 Schefter said when he moved to New York and needed a new license, it was Salgado who took him through a back entrance of a Long Island DMV. When he wanted to buy tickets to the Wiggles, it was Salgado who sent him a guy's number.

Three years ago, doctors discovered an aneurysm in Salgado's brain; he put off surgery a week while he attended to business in California. 

"I've never seen him upset except once," Hotaling says. "Lewis, he can be upset if he's on the phone with the cable company. With Rich, if the building's falling down, he'll shrug and say, 'Alright, let's get our stuff and go.'"

The dynamic amongst the three is like in a family. There's little ego and loosely defined roles. They happily match corporate clients with their athletes—Tuck said two of his foundation's three biggest donors were introduced to him by his insurers.

The group is expanding with a Boca Raton, Fla., office, which Lewis will likely spend a lot of time in. Their client list of active and retired football players numbers close to 200, hockey close to 100, and they are focused on getting their baseball and basketball numbers—now hovering around a dozen—up there too.

"Big Daddy'' says he'll never leave this business, even as he spends more time as a regular guest on various Fox News shows. 

He got a television coach after his first few appearances and the network's vice president of programming, Bill Shine, says there's little surprise in that.

"He likes to do everything well," Shine says. "For us, Rich is a 'been there, done that' guy. He has the credibility."

And as long as he has that, Tuck can expect those crowing phone calls. 

"I'll never live that down," the Giant said. "Of all the people Mr. Mara had to see that day, he was looking for "Big Daddy.'"

 Write to  Aditi Kinkhabwala at aditi.kinkhabwala@wsj.com 