SAN'A, Yemen—As violence rises in protests here, opposition ranks are swelling with members of the nation's vast tribal network from outside the capital, complicating the challenge President Ali Abdullah Saleh faces in quelling unrest.

Mr. Saleh was dealt a blow in late February when Sheikh Hussein al-Ahmar, a leading figure in Yemeni tribal politics and member of one of the nation's most influential families, resigned from the ruling party before tens of thousands of tribesmen. That started a flow a tribesmen into the protests, and the pace has risen quickly in recent days.

Their presence is a delicate issue for Mr. Saleh's government. Killing or injuring young urban elites is one thing; doing the same to a member of a prominent tribe brings on the sort of retribution and grudges that could undermine his government.

Citing government corruption and a lack of basic infrastructure in their regions as primary grievances, thousands of tribesmen have poured into the capital in recent days. They now appear to account for nearly half of the demonstrators camping out in the ever-expanding tent city that has taken over major roads surrounding San'a University. 

Yemeni security forces and government supporters clashed with opposition protesters in San'a Thursday, firing live rounds and tear gas at demonstrators, injuring at least 10, said medical workers there. 

Yemen, the most impoverished Arab country, has seen a dramatic increase in violence in recent days as protesters throughout the nation call for the immediate resignation of Mr. Saleh, president of 32 years. On Wednesday, security forces opened fire on opposition demonstrators in the western port city of Hodeidah. Ten were injured from gunshots.

At least 40 have been killed since demonstrations began in January, says Amnesty International. The violence, intended to disperse demonstrators, seems to be having the opposite effect, uniting them and drawing more protestors.

San'a's opposition movement, which began as dozens of student protesters in January, now involves tens of thousands of youth, Islamists, opposition party members and tribesmen. The growing participation of the tribesmen, traditionally a bulwark of support for Mr. Saleh, complicates his rule.

"There has historically been an agreement between the government and the tribes," said Abdel Kareem al-Islamy, a parliament member who recently left the ruling General People's Congress party to join the opposition. "But that relationship has suffered and now the tribes are joining the protest."

For now, the tribal presence could restrain the government from further attacks. Revenge killings are not uncommon amongst Yemen's tribes, which are notoriously well armed, and the government will be cautious, analysts say. "The government knows that if any of the tribe members are killed in the violence at protests, there is going to be a swift response," Mr. al-Islamy said.

But observers say it's only a matter of time before tribal participants are hurt or killed. Any response from their brethren could take a variety of forms, but some fear it could spark the start of broader conflict or attacks on Yemen's frail economy.

Yemen's tribes control vast swaths of land used for oil production, which accounts for over 70% of the country's gross domestic product.

"There is definitely the threat of expanded violence," said Sana'a-based independent political analyst Abdul Ghani al-Iryani. "But the most significant response could come from the tribes in Marib, who control the oil pipelines."

On Monday, tribesmen in Marib attacked a pipeline carrying oil from Marib to the Red Sea. The pipeline supplied over 120,000 barrels per day, causing production to halt in two oil fields.

Local reports attributed the attack to the government's lack of response to the 2010 death of Jabir al-Shabwan, the former deputy governor of Marib. Tribal leaders had demanded an investigation into the circumstances of his death.

Mr. al-Iryani said the timing of the attack implies a direct connection with protest movement.

"The fact that the sheikhs have now begun taking action against the government is almost certainly due to the protest activity," he said.

On Saturday, a council consisting of tribal leaders from Marib and al-Jowf issued a statement condemning violence against demonstrators. On Monday, Marib's governor Ahmed Naji al-Zaidi was stabbed in the neck during an attack amidst an anti-government protest.

"We don't want violence," said Sheikh Mohammad al-Dhiab, a tribal leader from Marib who, along with dozens from his village, has camped out at the university. "But we are ready for it." 