SINGAPORE— CapitaMall Trust's
C38U


-0.46
%




 former chief executive,  Pua Seck Guan, plans to raise about 1 billion Singapore dollars (US$778.5 million) through an initial public offering of a real estate investment trust in Singapore, a person familiar with the situation said Tuesday. 

The REIT, to be launched by Perennial Real Estate, a property investment firm set up by Mr. Pua, will largely comprise Chinese assets, the person said. The name hasn't been decided. 

Meetings with prospective investors will start late January, the person said. "If all goes well, the initial public offering will be launched in February, and listing is targeted for March," the person added. 

The listing structure is expected to be similar to that of  CapitaLand Ltd.
CLLDY


-1.39
%




, which injected its retail assets into  CapitaMalls Asia before listing it in November 2009. 

Mr. Pua left CapitaMall Trust in 2008 to set up Perennial Real Estate, which is engaged in real estate and real estate-related activities, including fund management, asset management and retail management. 

A spokeswoman for Perennial declined to confirm the IPO plans, but said, "Perennial Real Estate's core business markets are China, India and Singapore and we continue to explore opportunities in these markets in the course of our business." 

The planned IPO comes as Singapore seeks to establish itself as a base for property companies hoping to raise funds and as strong economic growth in the city-state boosts demand for residential and commercial space. 

Last year, several big companies raised close to S$2 billion through REIT listings, including a S$1.2 billion initial public offering by  Mapletree Industrial Trust,
ME8U


-0.64
%




 a company linked to Singapore state-investment company Temasek Holdings Ltd., as well as  Sabana Shari'ah Compliant Industrial REIT's
SBBSF


1.63
%




 S$666 million IPO. 

Singapore's economy grew 14.7% in 2010, the fastest pace since the city-state's independence in 1965. Although once-climbing property prices appear to be stabilizing because of various government measures, Singapore continues to be an attractive destination for REITs to raise funds. 

 Write to  P.R. Venkat at venkat.pr@dowjones.com 