The first round of the Cricket World Cup isn't usually a spectacle to set the pulse racing.

Even for ardent followers of a sport which can last for days and still end in a draw, there is nothing as mind-numbing, sleep-inducing and patently absurd as the group stage of this quadrennial tournament.

Stretched across four weeks, it's an interminable but oddly inconclusive parade of cakewalks and mismatches. Everyone knows which eight teams will reach the knockout rounds, but the tournament takes a month to get there anyway. Only five times in the past 36 years has a team ranked outside the top eight in the ICC rankings advanced to the knockout stage.

But amid the usual collection of snoozers in half-empty stadiums, one country has somehow managed to electrify the opening weeks of the 2011 tournament. 

With its jaw-dropping comeback against South Africa last Sunday, preceded by nail-biters against the Netherlands, India and an almighty upset loss to the Irish, England is in the midst of a World Cup campaign for the ages. "You can't take your eyes off this England team right now," said Michael Holding, a former West Indies bowler and now a cricket analyst.

As England prepares to play Bangladesh in Chittagong on Friday, it's become the only team to watch at this World Cup. The English have contrived to lose to Ireland in the same week they beat South Africa. They managed to tie with India days after barely squeaking past the Dutch. At cricket.

More significantly, its string of improbable upsets, topsy-turvy epics and wild finishes has helped revive a tournament many felt was nearing extinction. "We've brought the competition alive a bit," said Jonathan Trott, the England batsman.

For one thing, England's collection of unexpectedly close games hasn't come a moment too soon for cricket's one-day international format. Introduced in the early 1970s, one-day games were devised to offer instant appeal—a day's excitement instead of the strung-out epics over five. 

But these days, the 50-over game is starting to look less like a colorful alternative and more like an unwanted gray area between Test cricket, the traditionalist's favorite, and the new dominant form of the game, Twenty20—which is basically one-day cricket without the boring bits. 

"The problem with one-day cricket is that it's neither one thing nor the other," said  Stefan Szymanski, an economics professor at London's City University and an advisor to the Indian cricket board. "So nowadays it can seem a bit ho-hum."

Last year, television audiences in Australia for one-day international matches reached a 10-year low, while England and South Africa have scrapped their domestic 50-over competitions amid waning interest from fans, players and broadcasters. Former cricket stars including Australia's Shane Warne and Imran Khan, of Pakistan, have even led calls for one-day internationals to be removed from cricket's overcrowded calendar.

At this World Cup, though, England's electrifying displays have highlighted the one-day format's enduring capacity to enthrall. The team's heart-stopping tie with India drew a television audience of 42 million in India, making it the most-watched World Cup game there for more than a decade, according to TAM India, a media research firm. Of all the games not involving the host nation, England's loss to Ireland is the highest-rated. The win over the Netherlands with seven balls to spare is third-highest.

"We're definitely doing our bit to advertise the 50-over format," said Andrew Strauss, the England captain.

That's not the only nagging problem that's been addressed by England's run. The country's suspenseful games against the Irish and the Dutch have stirred a debate about the future of the game's developing nations, which were in danger of being frozen out of future tournaments under proposals by the International Cricket Council to cut the number of countries at the 2015 World Cup from 14 to 10.

But England's struggles against Ireland and the Netherlands has led to calls for a qualifying campaign to ensure that small nations and big upsets remain a feature of the World Cup. "Ireland played fantastically and they have to be a part of this competition," said Sourav Ganguly, the former India captain.

What's most extraordinary about all of this is that England has emerged as the neutral's team of choice. In cricket, where the sport's colonial history invariably gets wrapped up into the outcome of a game played with a red leather ball, almost everyone loves to see the English lose.

Even for those countries without an ancient rivalry, England's one-day international team hasn't been easy to love. While other nations have developed aggressive tactics to capitalize on fielding restrictions in the 50-over format, England has muddled along with the same basic approach that got it to the last of its three World Cup finals—in 1992. Which explains why English batsmen have hit fewer sixes in World Cup games than every other Test-playing nation since 1996.

If there's a reason for England's sudden transformation into world cricket's most fun-to-watch team, some say it's down to a uniquely gruelling winter schedule. England's Ashes tour to Australia began back in October and comprised three warm-up games, five Test matches and a seven-game one-day series, meaning the players finally returned home in mid-February. Four days later, the team embarked on its World Cup campaign.

"I think they're knackered," said Phil Tufnell, a former England bowler who played in the 1992 World Cup. "Cricketers are much fitter than they used to be, but emotionally it takes a toll. It's why they can get up for the big games against India, and then struggle against Ireland."

But what no one seems to agree on is what all this drama means for England's chances. There are those who say the experience of coming through a series of frantic finishes will make England a threat in the knockout rounds. Others remain less convinced: Oddsmakers have England sixth in the list of likely winners, largely because no team has ever won the tournament after failing to win two of its first four games.

"You don't win a World Cup by losing to Ireland," said Chris Stephens, a member of an England fans group. "Put it this way—can you imagine [winner of the past three World Cups] Australia losing to the Irish? It would never happen. We'll be lucky to reach the semifinals, but it should be quite a ride."

 Write to  Jonathan Clegg at jonathan.clegg@wsj.com 