TOKYO—Japan's annual budget gap could hit 23.2 trillion yen ($279.4 billion) in the fiscal year ending March 2021 without additional economic reforms, a new government estimate showed Friday, likely bolstering the government's view that taxes need to be raised sharply to plug the hole in public finances. 

The estimate, included in a conservative scenario prepared by the Cabinet Office, is 1.5 trillion yen higher than a previous forecast made in June, partly reflecting the impact of tax changes on municipal coffers, officials said 

The new figure, which refers to combined central and local government finances, comes as Prime Minister Naoto Kan tries to rally support for an increase in the country's 5% consumption tax rate as part of a planned overhaul of Japan's strained tax and social security systems. 

Although it rests on numerous assumptions about Japan's future economic growth, the latest estimate is likely to offer support to the government's case that higher sales taxes are needed to rein in Japan's ballooning public debt, which stands at twice annual economic output. 

Many economists agree that officials must triple or even quadruple the consumption tax rate to balance the nation's budget by fiscal 2020, one of the goals of the Kan government. To achieve that goal solely by increasing the consumption tax would require a tripling of the rate to 15%, based on the Cabinet Office's estimates. 

But the government must tread carefully to minimize the pain of any tax increases, as putting a greater burden on consumers could harm economic growth, some economists say. 

"A country's fiscal sustainability won't improve if measures to overhaul the fiscal state cause the growth rate to decrease," said Hiromichi Shirakawa, chief Japan economist at Credit Suisse. "Considering the severe situation in which the Japanese economy stands, it is extremely important to ensure consistency between economic growth and tax policy." 

The new estimate refers to the government's main budget target, known as the primary budget balance, which compares annual policy spending with revenue excluding borrowed money. Eliminating the primary deficit—a gauge of reliance on borrowed money to fund policy steps—is a minimum requirement for Japan to stem growth in its debt relative to gross domestic product. 

The estimated fiscal 2020 deficit will make up roughly 4.2% of Japan's economic output, not adjusted for price changes, in that year, the scenario prepared by the Cabinet Office showed. 

Even so, the wider budget deficit forecast by the Cabinet Office for fiscal 2020 would still represent an improvement on the current state of Japan's public finances. The government tips the primary balance for the next fiscal year at 27.1 trillion yen in deficit, or 5.6% of GDP. That's better than this fiscal year's 30.9 trillion yen, or 6.5% of GDP. 

Among the various assumptions made in the Cabinet Office's conservative scenario are: 

But because of the rising cost of caring for an aging society, the spending will climb after that to 78.4 trillion yen in fiscal 2020. 

In another, more optimistic, scenario offered by the Cabinet Office, Japan's real growth rate is seen staying above 2% from fiscal 2012, while the nominal growth rate will rise to 3.8% in fiscal 2020. 

Even in this case, however, Japan will post a 16.2 trillion yen primary deficit in that year, or 2.5% of GDP. An increase of roughly seven percentage points in the sales tax would be needed to plug the gap. 

 Write to  Takashi Nakamichi at takashi.nakamichi@dowjones.com 