The market for securities backed by commercial mortgages has begun to recover from the financial crisis, but some market participants are worried about the declining quality of the securities being offered. 

Investors in these securities, bonds backed by shopping malls and office buildings, are concerned by what they see as a lack of diversity in the bonds as well as the increase in loan-to-value ratios. Those with higher loan-to-value ratios generally are seen as riskier.

The average "stressed" loan-to-value ratio on bonds valued at about $8 billion offered in 2011 is 89%, up from 82% on the nearly $10 billion of bonds sold in all of 2010, according to data from Amherst Securities in New York, a dealer and market maker in mortgage-backed securities. 

When ratings firms evaluate a bond, they consider what would happen to the value of the property if the economy is weaker and unemployment increases such that the value of the property declines further. This is called the "stressed" loan-to-value ratio.

In 2006, before the recession, the average stressed loan-to-value ratio stood at 99%, rising steadily to about 110% in 2008. 

What is particularly worrying about the rising loan-to-value ratio this year is that the quality of assets underpinning new bonds has deteriorated, market participants said. Also, the speed with which the ratio has increased is worrisome, some said.

But others said that last year was a period with conservative underwriting, so some slippage is reasonable.

"The rating agencies applied ultraconservative metrics by which to measure credit quality," said  Lisa Pendergast, managing director of commercial mortgage-backed securities strategy and risk at Jefferies & Co.

Ms. Pendergast said the composition of commercial mortgage-backed securities is "a reflection of the loans out there," and if investors are worried about the reliance on retail or the quality of underwriting they "should vote with their feet and walk away." 

Some market participants said that the first few securities sold this year had properties with many strong anchor tenants. The more recent ones have been backed by some buildings occupied by weaker businesses. For example, one of the more recent securities included a loan collateralized by a building with a Borders Group Inc. store as a tenant, the book retailer that filed for bankruptcy protection this year.

The decline in asset quality this year is clear "around the edges," said  Paul Norris, executive vice president and head of structured products at Dwight Asset Management Co. LLC in Burlington, Vt. "But if we are still stumbling along in the economy, with a little blip, property values will go down quite a bit, so there is less wiggle room." 

Investors also are bothered by the fact that 60% of the loans contained in some securities are for retail property.

"That's a concentration people may be concerned about because there has been no turnaround in this sector," said  Darrell Wheeler, senior managing director of strategy at Amherst Securities. "These are supposed to be diverse pools, so the investor base doesn't like to see more than 30%" of any one type of property.

 Write to  Anusha Shrivastava at anusha.shrivastava@dowjones.com 