BRUSSELS—Euro-zone governments are working towards an increase in the capacity of the European Financial Stability Facility to help members that have problems borrowing from the bond markets, Belgian Finance Minister Didier Reynders said Tuesday. 

Mr. Reynders was speaking to reporters as he arrived for a meeting of finance ministers from the European Union's 27 members. A smaller group of finance ministers from the 17 nations that use the euro met Monday, but weren't able to agree an immediate boost to the EFSF's lending capacity. 

A number of weaker euro-zone countries want to raise the total amount of emergency financing available to euro-zone countries from €750 billion ($996.3 billion) to around €1 trillion. 

But Germany is opposed to the idea, preferring instead to ensure that the full €440 billion pledged by euro-zone governments is actually available for lending. 

Bond investors had hoped for a deal this week, but finance ministers seem unlikely to deliver, although Mr. Reynders stressed progress is being made. "We are in a good process to increase the capacity of such a fund, not only in the quantity of money but the quality of interventions," he said. 

But governments that are providing financial help to their weaker counterparts stressed the need for fundamental changes to the way the euro zone works. 

German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble said the currency area will need closer economic and political integration to address faults exposed by the debt crisis. 

"We need better political, economic coordination," Schäuble told reporters. "We need an improvement to the Stability and Growth Pact, and then better economic coordination." 

Swedish Finance Minister Anders Borg echoed that sentiment. "We had too much talk on the fund size," he said. "We need to concentrate more on fiscal discipline." 

Investors continue to be uneasy about the solidity of the euro zone's banking system, which feeds into concerns about sovereign debts because a new round of bailouts would lead to a further increase in already high levels of government debt. 

The EU intends to conduct a new round of stress tests on the bloc's banks, and Mr. Reynders said they should be comparable with those undertaken in the U.S. 

"We need to maybe organize the same kind of stress tests as on the other side of the Atlantic because if you don't have the same kind of stress test we will have many criticism," he said. 

—Matthew Dlaton, Riva Froymovich and Costas Paris contributed to this article.