FRANKFURT—Two of Germany's public-sector lenders are expected to fail European "stress tests" if they can't find a way around new regulations prohibiting inclusion of some non-voting government stakes in their core capital ratios.

NordLB and Helaba were among the rare German banks that survived the financial crisis without any state aid. However, both banks are dangerously low on capital when their silent participations, a special type of subordinated debt that makes up as much as half of the banks' capital, is discounted.

Both banks are trying to restructure their capital before the deadline at the end of April. However, it is uncertain whether they will manage to do so.

A failure of either bank is expected to have a profound effect on the structure of the so-called Landesbanks, a network of eight state-controlled lenders that mainly offer commercial banking services to Germany's small and midsized companies.

For years, Landesbanks have come under pressure from private banks and the federal government to consolidate or privatize, but local politicians, whose powerful state governments own various stakes in the banks, have resisted. 

For decades, the banks served as a useful political tool, providing loans for infrastructure and other projects and well-paid jobs to constituents.

If the banks fail the test, it "would actually argue in favor [of] those calling for a privatization or even a down-sizing of the market share the Landesbanks hold at the moment," said  Thorsten Polleit, an economist at Barclays Capital in Frankfurt.

The European Banking Authority is testing 90 top European banks in an effort to quell longstanding fears about the health of lenders, something that has been at the heart of the euro-zone sovereign-debt crisis for the past year.

On Friday, the testing authority revealed that banks will need to show they can maintain capital buffers representing 5% of their risk-weighted assets in a tough economic environment, tougher standards than last year's tests, which were largely criticized as too easy.

Although some more recent types of silent participations will be counted as part of tier one capital—including most of the state aid handed out during the crisis—the older hybrid capital held by NordLB and Helaba will not qualify.

As a result, NordLB's chief executive said in a press conference Tuesday that the bank plans to transform 1.2 billion euros of silent participations into equity shares, in order to better its chances. 

The bank has silent participations of 2.9 billion euros, with a total core capital of nearly 8 billion euros.

Helaba is in talks with its shareholders to transform part of its capital to meet the test criteria.

Experts–and the banks themselves–acknowledge that the short time frame will make it difficult to do any restructuring in time to affect the outcome of the tests, and that there's still a possibility one or both will fail.

NordLB and Helaba have two options to avoid failing the test. They can either work with their state governments to convert the silent participations into equity shares, or they can try to add the additional characteristics needed to change the capital to meet the 14 criteria.

In order to qualify as core capital under the new stress test rules, it must meet 14 criteria, which include factors such as length of duration and guaranteed backing.

NordLB and Helaba have two options to avoid failing the test. They can either work with their state governments to convert the silent participations into equity shares, or they can try to add the additional characteristics needed to change the capital to meet the 14 criteria.

Both of the banks' owners have until the end of the month to try to propose one of those solutions for approval to the European Commission.

—  Eyk Henning contributed to this article.

 Write to  Laura Stevens at laura.stevens@dowjones.com 