  Hutchison Whampoa Ltd. aims to raise up to $6 billion by listing its southern China ports assets in Singapore, a person familiar with the situation said, in what could be Asia's biggest public offering this year. 

Hong Kong-listed Hutchison Whampoa, which is controlled by billionaire  Li Ka-shing, appointed DBS Bank Ltd.,  Deutsche Bank AG and Goldman Sachs (Singapore) Pte. as joint bookrunners and joint issue managers for the global offering.

Hutchison's decision to list its Hutchison Port Holdings Trust business in Singapore is a coup for the city-state's stock exchange. If successful, the IPO would be Singapore's biggest ever public offering, topping a listing by Singapore Telecommunications Ltd. that raised around 4 billion Singapore dollars (US$3.11 billion) in 1993.

One person said that if all necessary approvals are obtained, Hutchison Whampoa's IPO could hit the market either in late February or early March, though another person close to the situation said the end of March or early April was more realistic. 

Hutchison said the initial business portfolio will comprise Hutchison Whampoa's interests in the deep-water container ports in Hong Kong and China's Guangdong province, as well as related businesses in the same area.

The structure of HPH as a business trust was a decisive factor in the decision to list in Singapore rather than Hong Kong, according to one of the people familiar with the situation. While Hong Kong listing rules allow real-estate investment trusts to list on the local exchange, they don't allow the listing of other types of business trusts, as Singapore's exchange does.

Another person close to the situation cautioned that raising as much as $6 billion could be a challenge. The port assets being listed are mature businesses that don't necessarily offer the growth potential of other ports operations, which could limit interest, and Singapore's biggest IPO to date was only about half that size. 



 Write to  Peter Stein at peter.stein@wsj.com and P.R. Venkat at venkat.pr@dowjones.com 