Andrew Lloyd Webber has just told me he started collecting wine when he was still at school. It's a surprising admission, not least because moments before he claims to have been introduced to the pleasures of wine when he was in his "preteenage years."

"When I first tasted wine, I was very, very young," he recalls. "My aunt and uncle had quite a good collection of Italian wines and so I would have tasted my first glass when I was probably not even in my teens." I suppose it follows that, unlike most oenophiles, who tend to discover wine at university, Lord Lloyd Webber's seminal tasting experience—a glass of Bordeaux's 1961 vintage—came while he was a pupil at Westminster College in London. "I remember tasting Château Palmer 1961 when I was at school and thinking, even then, this was better than the others. It just tasted fantastic."

A gift of membership to the Wine Society from his uncle followed and it wasn't long before he was asking the headmaster for permission for the wines to be delivered to the school—a practice that might well get you expelled these days. "In a way, I have never really regarded myself as a collector," he says. "I have always approached it as someone who loves it, who wants to try and taste it. "

So how many bottles does he have in his cellar? "Far too many," he chuckles, "far too many. Anyway, I'm not going to tell you." Actually, I suspect the man who has produced some of the most successful musicals in the history of theater doesn't know himself. 

The catacombs below Sydmonton Court, his 16th-century home in Berkshire, England, have been purged before; in 1997, he sold more than £3 million worth of fine wine through Sotheby's in London. Now it's time for further pruning, and next Saturday will see 747 lots go under the hammer at the Mandarin Oriental in Hong Kong in a sale Sotheby's expects will realize more than £2 million. But despite the removal of vast swathes of vintages—around 8,600 bottles—there is still plenty of wine maturing under the Berkshire Downs. 

"I went down [to the cellar] the other day and said: 'Are we supposed to be having a sale?'" he laughs. "The trouble is if you fall in love with wine, you are not necessarily rational. Somebody will ring up and say 'Andrew, for God's sake, there is a really good parcel of so and so I think you should buy,' and I always say yes. But there comes a time when you ask 'Am I realistically going to drink this all myself?' And over the last few years there has been a realization that I am not going to get through all of it."

His collection is a Francophile's dream. As one would expect from someone who has written "Cats," "Phantom of the Opera" and "Evita," Lord Lloyd Webber can afford any wine in the world. And, boy, has he exercised that privilege. The collection is peppered with some of the greatest châteaux and domaines from Bordeaux, Burgundy and Champagne. You want Domaine de la Romanée Conti? There's a magnum of the 1990, a jeroboam of the '83, as well as parcels of the '96 and 2002. If Château Lafite Rothschild takes your fancy, there are eight vintages to choose from, including five magnums of the celebrated '82 vintage. Latour, Margaux, Haut Brion, Pétrus are all represented, as well as a case of Château Palmer 1961, a wine with a reputation as big as one of his hit musicals and, of course, the one that first inspired his palate.

Critics will no doubt point to the fact that there are no New World wines to speak of, let alone the top estates from Italy, Spain and Germany, and the collection is packed with the sort of blue-chip wines and vintages that lack the personal touch of the genuine connoisseur. But few can argue that he hasn't bought wisely, particularly as the value of the wines, one suspects, has increased significantly from what he originally paid for them.

"Anybody who goes into wine as an investment is probably cuckoo," he says. "To think of something that is essentially a living thing purely as an investment commodity is, to somebody that is a wine lover such as myself, a complete anathema. Even when I was buying the 2000 vintage nobody could have foreseen how fantastically expensive wine would become.

"But I suppose one of the great joys about wine is that anything can happen. I remember the 1989 Château Bahans Haut-Brion which was a wine I used as my office Christmas present. Then I tasted it and thought I wonder if I can just call the rest of my office and suggest they might like something else. Who could have predicted the rise in the price of second wines."

It's clear he loves wine and has a genuine love of France, in particular the medieval villages of Burgundy, where he can indulge his other passion: architecture. He is a great storyteller too, dropping anecdotes about luminaries of the British wine trade, such as Christie's former head of wine Michael Broadbent and wine writer Edmund Penning-Rowsell. He doesn't think wine helps him compose, but admits that it can unlock the intellect. Can it achieve the same effect on the nervous system as listening to a beautiful piece of music? "Really, really great wine can literally take your breath away," Lord Lloyd Webber says. 

It was at Oxford, where he began reading history at Magdalene College, that he met Tim Rice and formed a partnership that spawned, among others, the musicals "Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat" and "Jesus Christ Superstar." It also led to him to drop out of university after only one term. If Lord Lloyd Webber missed out on the college's wine cellar, his early success enabled him to start collecting seriously. "When I was starting out and my career began, I was around the world an awful lot. And in those days, you were considered in many countries to be thinking it was Christmas if you asked for a glass of wine. Of course, it was so different then," he says. "I remember being in Long Island and seeing Lafite '61 served upside down by the measure, with the label glued on the other way round. That was in 1971; It is amazing how everybody's taste and interest in wine has completely changed."

He says the first wine auction he can remember was the sale for the London Wine Company, which collapsed in 1973. Lord Lloyd Webber says he will be sad to "say goodbye" to some of the Romanée Conti's and the Palmer '61, which was one of the defining wines in his life. But he admits it is probably time to move on.

And with that, it's time to go; he has to get back to rehearsals for his forthcoming production of "The Wizard of Oz," while I have a round of 2009 Burgundy en primeur tastings to attend. It's a vintage that, after I tell him my initial impressions, I strongly suspect he will be buying. You can't stop the magpie instinct.