Personal income, hit hard by the recent recession, rebounded across the U.S. last year, but only 10 states saw individuals' earnings surpass their prerecession peaks.

Data released Wednesday by the Commerce Department show the uneven nature of the recovery. Incomes in Nevada, hit hard by the housing downturn and unemployment, gained just 0.3% in 2010 from a year earlier, while nearby New Mexico showed the strongest performance, a 4.2% increase in personal income.

Personal income in New York state picked up 4.1%, driven by a rebound in the financial-services sector there. Regions benefiting from high commodity prices, such as Texas and Oklahoma, also were among the strongest gainers last year. They experienced shallower downturns than other parts of the U.S.

"Texas and the states in the central part of the country that did not have the big housing boom and bust have been stronger through the recession," says Jim Diffley, an economist at IHS Global Insight. Meanwhile, states such as Arizona and Florida "are still very much in the depths of the problem caused by real estate."

While most industries showed earnings growth, only the professional-services industry recovered fully last year from the downturn, with earnings hitting a level 0.2% above their prerecession peak. This growth is expected to continue this year, driven in part by a pickup in hiring of temporary workers. 

Earnings in the construction sector continued to fall, dropping 4.8% to the lowest level since 2001. Real estate fell 2.3%, bringing its earnings to the lowest point since 2000. Growth in health care and educational services accelerated.

Ten states saw earnings last year move above their previous peaks: Arkansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, New Mexico, North Dakota, Pennsylvania, Vermont, Virginia, and West Virginia. Earnings in those states increased 2.9% on average after a 1.5% decline a year earlier. Alaska, which didn't see an earnings drop in 2009, grew 3.2% in 2010. All other states' earnings rose 2.3% after a 4.5% average decline in 2009.

Separately, the Commerce Department said sales of new homes tumbled 16.9% in February from the prior month to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 250,000, the lowest level since the series began in 1963.

Severe winter weather may have exacerbated the decline. But the market has been sinking since last spring–-following a short-lived recovery after the recession—when a federal tax credit for new home buyers expired.

A rush of foreclosures also is pushing home prices lower. The median price for a new home sold in February fell 13.9% from the prior month to $202,100, the lowest since December 2003. The supply of new homes for sale at the end of the month was 186,000, or almost nine months of inventory at the current sales pace.

Sales fell in all regions of the U.S. The Northeast posted a 57% drop, followed by a nearly 28% drop in the Midwest. Sales fell almost 15% in the West and more than 6% in the South.

 Write to  Sudeep Reddy at sudeep.reddy@wsj.com 