LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton SA is to take a controlling stake in Bulgari SpA, a person familiar with the matter said Sunday, underscoring the French group's acquisitive streak as the luxury market rebounds.

The deal, expected to be announced Monday, would put the family-controlled Italian maker of jewelry and fine watches into the hands of LVMH, which owns some 50 luxury brands, including Louis Vuitton, Moët et Chandon and TAG Heuer.

Bulgari has a market value of about €2.3 billion ($3.22 billion).  Paolo Bulgari and  Nicola Bulgari, along with Chief Executive  Francesco Trapani, also a relative, own about 51% of the company.

Under the agreed transaction, the family is to swap its shares for stock in LVMH, the person familiar with the matter said. LVMH will then launch a tender offer for the Italian company's remaining shares, the person said.

Bulgari shares rose 0.7% to €7.64 in Milan trading Friday.

Senior members of Bulgari's controlling family are likely to take roles at LVMH, the person said. News of the deal was reported earlier by the Financial Times.

The transaction comes as the luxury-goods market is rebounding sharply from a deep trough during the recession. Bulgari itself reported a 21% jump in quarterly revenue in January, helped by strong sales in Japan, pushing its annual sales well over €1 billion. 

Watch sales account for about a fifth of Bulgari's revenue; jewelry accounts for nearly half. Mr. Trapani aims to push more aggressively into China this year.

Bulgari will add to LVMH's watches and jewelry holdings, which include Zenith and Hublot as well as TAG Heuer. The division last year posted revenue growth of 29%, the fastest of LVMH's main business groups. But it remains by far the company's smallest, with €985 million in revenue, less than 5% of LVMH's total.

The agreement with the Bulgaris contrasts sharply with LVMH Chief Executive  Bernard Arnault's standoff with  Hermès International SCA. LVMH shocked the family-owned luxury brand last year when it disclosed it controlled 17% of the smaller company, a stake LVMH boosted in December to about 20%.

Mr. Arnault recently described the Hermès investment as peaceful but not passive. It was the latest acquisitive move by a company that in the past has made moves on competitors such as Gucci, Fendi and Donna Karan.

 Write to  Elizabeth Holmes at elizabeth.holmes@wsj.com 