TUCSON, Ariz.—Doctors said Sunday they were encouraged by the nature of U.S. Rep. Gabrielle Giffords's injuries and her response to brain surgery performed after a man shot her at point-blank range at a political function Saturday.



Ms. Giffords, 40 years old, who was conscious when she arrived at University of Arizona Medical Center, was able to move two fingers when asked by doctors, a tell-tale sign of high-level brain function, said Dr. Peter Rhee, head of the hospital's trauma center. She remains in critical condition.

The suspected gunman, 22-year-old Jared Lee Loughner, allegedly shot Ms. Giffords and 19 others outside a Tucson Safeway supermarket where she was meeting with constituents. Six of the victims died. 

On Sunday afternoon, Mr. Loughner was charged with five federal counts—two for murder and three for attempted murder. He is in federal custody in Tucson.

"This is an attack on our institutions and our way of life," Federal Bureau of Investigation Director Robert Mueller said Sunday at a news briefing held at the Pima County Sheriff's Department in Tucson. 

Authorities released a photograph and a description in the early hours Sunday of a man "possibly associated" with Mr. Loughner in the shooting of Ms. Giffords. The sheriff's department said it was looking for a man between 40 and 50 years old wearing jeans and a dark blue jacket. But later on Sunday the authorities said they had identified the man as a cab driver who had brought Mr. Loughner to the scene, but had no involvement in the shooting.

Ms. Giffords was taken to the operating room 38 minutes after arriving at the hospital, and the intervention lasted about three hours, Dr. Rhee said. The doctors removed bone fragments and wounded brain tissue, as well as the left part of the skull, to minimize swelling.

The bullet that tore through her brain from the back of her head damaged only the left hemisphere; that type of wound is less critical than if the bullet had damaged both hemispheres, said Dr. Michael Lemole, UMC Chief of Neurosurgery.

"We are all very happy at this stage," Dr. Rhee said, although he cautioned that the consequences of brain swelling could be potentially dangerous. Dr. Rhee said it wasn't uncommon to see people achieve "tremendous types of recovery" from similar wounds after a rehabilitation process. That process could last "weeks or months," he said.

The other four patients who suffered critical wounds were moved out of intensive care and are recovering "relatively well," Dr. Rhee said.

The shooting occurred Saturday morning at a shopping center called La Toscana Village during a small "Congress on Your Corner" event that the lawmaker was holding in her district.

Among those killed at the scene was Tucson's chief federal judge, John Roll, a friend of the lawmaker who had dropped by the event to say hello. Judge Roll had ruled on a number of heated immigration cases in the southern part of Arizona, which includes Ms. Giffords's district. 

A nine-year-old girl, Christina Taylor Green, was among the dead. She died of her wounds at the hospital. Born on Sept. 11, 2001, Christina had recently been elected to her school's student council and had come to the event with a neighbor to meet the congresswoman, according to local news reports.

The others who died were identified by the sheriff's office as Dorothy Morris, 76; Dorwin Stoddard, 76; Phyllis Schneck, 79; and Gabriel Zimmerman, 30, a staff aide to the congresswoman.

Law enforcement officials said Sunday that the shooting was captured on a surveillance video that showed Judge Roll chatting with an aide to Ms. Giffords moments before the violence erupted.

After the shooting, investigators searched a safe connected to Mr. Loughner, and found a letter in which Ms. Giffords's office thanked him for attending a similar event in 2007.

Prominent political shootings involving members of Congress.

Much remains unknown about what may have motivated Mr. Loughner. But the initial evidence, including the constituent letter, has led law enforcement officials to think that the suspect had been thinking about the congresswoman for years, according to people familiar with the case. Investigators also found paper on which the suspect apparently wrote the word "assassination" and "I planned ahead." The meaning or significance of that writing isn't clear.

Law enforcement authorities said Mr. Loughner used a Glock 9-mm pistol that he had purchased Nov. 30 from a local Sportsman's Warehouse. A manager at the store declined to comment on Sunday.

Eyewitnesses at the Saturday shooting said that a couple dozen people had assembled in a line at around 10 a.m. to talk to the congresswoman when the gunman arrived. He cut in front of the line and shot her point-blank in the head with a semi-automatic pistol.

The gunman then sprayed the crowd with shots in rapid succession. The sheriff's office said the pistol had an extended magazine, which allowed him to take more than 30 shots at the crowd, which was hemmed in by a table and concrete pillars. 

Pima County Sheriff Clarence Dupnik said that the shooter was stopped when a woman on the scene, who was herself injured, grabbed a fresh magazine of bullets from his hand when he was trying to reload. Mr. Loughner allegedly was able to fire 31 shots from the first magazine, according to the sheriff. 

After the injured woman, who wasn't identified by authorities, grabbed the second magazine, the suspect was able to load a third magazine with 31 additional rounds. The gun then malfunctioned and at that point two other male bystanders were able to subdue Mr. Loughner and take control of his weapon, according to authorities.

Steven Rayle, a Tucson area primary care physician and a former ER doctor, had come to the mall with a friend to meet Congresswoman Giffords. He was only moments from meeting her when the shooting began.

"I looked up and saw someone firing at Ms. Giffords," Mr. Rayle said. "Young guy. He looked determined and just kept firing."

As the shots continued, Mr. Rayle said he sought cover behind one of the concrete pillars. "I laid on the ground and pretended to be shot and dead," he said. 

Moments later, Mr. Rayle saw that the shooter had been tackled to the ground. He said he looked over to see Ms. Giffords leaning against a wall, and a staffer had placed an arm around her.

"Her face was bloody, but she was moving -- she was conscious, moving her fingers. So that was an encouraging sign."

Bob Feinman, a local trade consultant, arrived on the scene moments after the shooting. "People are laying there in pools of blood, people hysterically crying, saying, 'Gabby Giffords got shot! Gabby Giffords got shot!'" he said.

"It wasn't chaos, because it was a very small group -- and most of the people were shot," Mr. Rayle said. "There were some mortally injured people that obviously were dead immediately."

Eyewitnesses said it took more than 10 minutes for the first ambulances arrive. Five people died on the scene.

The U.S. Army said in a statement that Mr. Loughner had tried to join the Army but was 'rejected for service. In accordance with the Privacy Act, we will not discuss why he was rejected."

Sheriff Dupnik told reporters Saturday that Mr. Loughner had had run-ins recently with local police, but didn't elaborate. "He was a subject of some police interest in the recent past," he said.

Pima Country College in Tucson said that Mr. Loughner had been a student there from 2005 until September, when he was suspended for "violating the Student Code of Conduct." In a statement, the college said that police at the college had had "five contacts" with Mr. Loughner last year "for classroom and library disruptions."

Mr. Loughner was then suspended after the college police found an objectionable video he made online. The college then informed Mr. Loughner and his parents that he would be allowed to return only if obtained a "mental health clearance indicating, in the opinion of a mental health professional, his presence at the college does not present a danger to himself or others."

In his press briefing Saturday, Mr. Dupnik, a Democrat, repeatedly lashed into political extremism and said that Arizona had become "the Mecca of prejudice and bigotry." He said Ms. Giffords was the explicit target of the attack.

"There's reason to believe that this individual might have a mental issue, and I think that people who are unbalanced might be especially susceptible to vitriol," the sheriff said of Mr. Loughner.

Ms. Giffords, a Democrat, was first elected to Congress in 2006 after serving several years in the Arizona state House and Senate. She married the space shuttle astronaut Mark Kelly in 2007.

The shooting unleashed numerous statements of sorrow and outrage from leaders and lawmakers in Washington. House Speaker John Boehner ordered the flag at the Capitol to be flown at half-mast. All voting in the House will postponed for the week, including a key vote to overturn Mr. Obama's health-care overhaul.

The shooting stirred debate about the country's political tone.

"We are in a dark place in this country right now, and the atmospheric condition is toxic," said Democratic Rep. Emanuel Cleaver, on NBC's Meet the Press.

Republican Sen. Lamar Alexander of Tennessee, speaking on CNN, disputed that the shooter had any ties to either the right or the left. "What we know about this individual is that he read Karl Marx; he read Hitler," he said. "Most of the incivility doesn't come from people who are elected to public office. It comes from other people."

Republican Sen. Jon Kyl of Arizona advised against a "rush to speculate," saying "we really don't know what motivated this young person, except to know he was very mentally unstable."

Ms. Giffords was recruited to run for Congress in 2006 by Rahm Emanuel, the former White House chief of staff who was at the time head of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee. Mr. Emanuel noted that she was shot while "doing the Congress on your corner" kind of event that he pioneered in his home district in Chicago and that he encouraged new Democratic lawmakers to do regularly when back home.

The shooting was not the first time the congresswoman has had brushes with violence. Following the health care overhaul vote this year, her district office was vandalized.

"The rhetoric has gotten incredibly heated," she told MSNBC in March. "Not just the calls, the emails, the slurs. Things have really gotten spun up."

She also specifically called out a "targets" website created by Republican former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin for the 2010 midterm elections that featured cross hairs over her district as well as others. Republicans campaigned heavily against Ms. Giffords, a moderate Democrat in a Republican-leaning district, last year.

In a posting on her Facebook page Saturday, Ms. Palin expressed her "sincere condolences" to the families of those killed or injured in the shooting and said she was praying "for peace and justice."

Ms. Giffords earned a reputation as a strong fund-raiser and campaigner who was deeply engaged in Arizona's bitter immigration debate.

Photos from her career.

A member of the fiscally conservative Blue Dog Coalition, she won a tough re-election battle last fall against a Republican, Jesse Kelly, who was championed by many tea-party groups. She won the race by fewer than 4,000 votes.

The 8th District shares a 100-mile-long border with Mexico.

Ms. Giffords's district is overall politically moderate, represented for years by an openly gay, moderate Republican, Jim Kolbe, then by Ms. Giffords. But the GOP in southeastern Arizona is deeply divided. A moderate Republican hand-picked by Mr. Kolbe to succeed him after he retired in 2006 was beaten badly by Randy Graf, a staunch conservative who ran a strong, anti-immigration platform. He was in turn beaten badly by Ms. Giffords.

The pattern repeated itself in 2010. While Arizona Democrats were swamped in November, Ms. Giffords survived in large part because Republican primary voters picked the most conservative candidate to challenge her.

The district includes part of Tucson, but also large stretches of ranch lands stretching to the Mexico border, where anti-illegal-immigration sentiment runs strong. During the run-up to the November election, the other Tucson representative, liberal Democrat Raul Grijalva, had his office vandalized.

—Peter Sanders, Jason Gay and Darren Everson contributed to this article.

 Write to  Neil King at neil.king@wsj.com, Andrew Morse at andrew.morse@wsj.com and Angel Gonzalez at angel.gonzalez@wsj.com.

 Corrections & Amplifications:  Dorothy Morris, 76, has been identified as one of the victims of the shooting. Because of erroneous information provided by law enforcement, an earlier version of this story mistakenly identified her as Dorothy Murray. 