 General Motors said it will bolster production at a Michigan pickup factory to meet growing demand for heavy-duty trucks. 

GM also announced the company and its joint venture partners sold more vehicles in China than in the U.S. for the first time in history. The auto maker said it sold 2.35 million vehicles in China, 136,000 more than in the U.S.

 Daimler increased efforts to develop lightweight carbon-fiber auto-body parts, a burgeoning but costly approach to improving fuel efficiency, as it announced plans to set up a manufacturing venture with Japan's Toray Industries in Germany. 

Toyota barely managed to retain its position as the world's biggest car maker in 2010 after getting whacked by massive recalls and as General Motors closed the gap in the global sales race, putting the company in danger of losing the top spot in 2011. 

Honda Motor said improper transactions recently discovered at a trading business subsidiary will cause a loss of about 15 billion yen ($181.6 million), highlighting one of the reasons Japanese companies have tried to focus their operations in recent years. 

Air France-KLM, prompted by a long-awaited outside review of its operations, said it has received and is implementing 35 safety recommendations including a system of in-flight observation of cockpit crews. Europe's second-largest airline said it wouldn't release the report or make public the specific recommendations. 

Eurocopter, the helicopter division of European Aeronautic Defence & Space, said its revenue was likely to be at least stable in 2011 although deliveries were expected to decline for the second consecutive year. 

Standard Chartered plans to acquire GE Money Pte., a unit of General Electric's GE Capital arm and a provider of auto and personal loans in Singapore, for 850 million to 900 million Singaporean dollars (about US$662 million to US$701 million), a person familiar with the deal said. 

Japanese private-equity fund Advantage Partners is in talks with creditors about giving up board seats at Tokyo Star Bank and control over the eventual sale of the lender, a person familiar with the matter said. 

India's largest private lender by assets, ICICI Bank posted a near 31% rise to 14.37 billion rupees ($315 million) in its financial third-quarter net profit from a year earlier, aided mainly by a sharp fall in provisions.

 Royal Philips Electronics said fourth-quarter net profit rose 84% to €463 million ($630.4 million) from a year earlier, as its health-care business grew and the company benefited from cost savings and lower restructuring charges. 

India's Mahindra Group acquired a minority stake in luxury brand The East India Co. The companies didn't give details of the deal. East India Co. was established in 1600 to trade in commodities such as silk, cotton and tea, and was re-launched last year as a brand selling high-end food products. 

Halliburton's fourth-quarter earnings more than doubled to $605 million, up from $243 million a year earlier as the oil-field services company continued to benefit from a resurgence of drilling in North America. 

 Macau casino operator SJM Holdings Chairman Stanley Ho has transferred his interest in the company's parent to the families of two of his longtime female companions, but the latest effort by the aging tycoon to pave the way for his succession leaves many questions over the company's future unanswered.  

Luxottica reported a 16% year-to-year rise in fourth-quarter revenue to €1.35 billion ($1.84 billion), driven by strong retail sales at its Sunglass Hut store network, while its chief executive is optimistic the maker of Ray-Ban and Oakley eyewear can continue to grow at last year's pace. 

American Express's fourth-quarter profit grew 48% to $1.06 billion as cardmember spending climbed 15% and loss provisions dropped sharply. 

Sara Lee will decide its future this week as it weighs offers from Brazilian beef processor JBS and a group led by private-equity firm Apollo Global Management and investor C. Dean Metropoulos, people familiar with the matter said.

Novartis said it is acquiring U.S. laboratory diagnostics services company Genoptix in an all-cash offer worth $470 million. Genoptix is a publicly traded laboratory specializing in diagnosing cancers in bone marrow, blood and lymph nodes. 

 De La Rue shares dived after Oberthur said it wouldn't make a bid for the U.K. banknote printer which earlier rejected an improved indicative offer from its French rival worth about £926 million ($1.48 billion). 

Rock-Tenn, maker of packaging for food and consumer products, said it agreed to buy Smurfit-Stone Container for $3.5 billion in cash and stock just seven months after Smurfit emerged from bankruptcy proceedings.

Singapore Exchange said it has secured long-term funding worth close to US$3.8 billion for its proposed deal to acquire Australia's ASX, reaffirming its intention to complete the transaction this year. 

Rio Tinto's 3.9 billion Australian dollar (US$3.86 billion) takeover of Riversdale Mining received a boost when the last holdout on the coking-coal miner's board recommended the deal along with its other directors.

Drugs giant Sanofi-Aventis extended its $18.5 billion offer for Genzyme for a second time without changing the terms of the bid and said talks between the two companies are ongoing. The $69-per-share offer now lasts until Feb. 15, at midnight. 

 McDonald's said fourth-quarter earnings rose 2.1% to $1.24 billion as it posted strong same-store sales, helped by its McRib sandwich and an addition to its successful McCafe coffee lineup. Chief Executive Jim Skinner said the company expects January global same-store sales to increase 4% to 5%.  

J.C. Penney agreed to name activist investor William Ackman and chairman of Vornado Realty Trust Steven Roth to its board as the department-store operator outlined plans to close underperforming locations, wind down its catalogue and outlet operations and consolidate its call centers. 

Texas Instruments' fourth-quarter earnings rose 44% to $942 million, as the chip maker's sales increased. 

 Huawei Technologies sued in U.S. federal court in Chicago to delay the sale of some Motorola assets to Nokia Siemens Networks, claiming it would improperly transfer the Chinese company's intellectual property. 

 Facebook ended a long-running privacy dispute with German regulators by agreeing to change the way it handles the personal data of non-users of the social network via its "Friend Finder" feature.  

Intel's board authorized the company to buy back another $10 billion in stock as the chip maker seeks to return cash to shareholders and resurrect a depressed stock. 

 Mozilla plans to add a do-not-track feature to its Firefox Web browser, which could let users avoid having their actions monitored online. The announcement makes Firefox the first Web browser to heed the U.S. Federal Trade Commission's call for the development of a do-not-track system.  

 The European Union's top antitrust authority is investigating an agreement between Spanish telecommunications company Telefonica and Portuguese peer Portugal Telecom SGPS to ascertain if they broke competition rules. 