Situated on the fourth floor of an abandoned factory along a strip of land that once jutted up against the Berlin Wall, there is nothing about the provisional appearance of the GraftLab offices to suggest that its founders are pop stars in the world of architecture.

Their celebrity status came quickly and was in no small part thanks to their early association with Los Angeles, where they became known as actor Brad Pitt's favorite architects. When asked about Mr. Pitt, Lars Krückeberg and Thomas Willemeit give a complex response. It is obvious they are proud of the personal and professional association that has helped turbo-charge their careers. But you get a feeling they are tired of answering questions about their relationship to the famous actor. There is an underlying tension, an awareness that borrowing Mr. Pitt's fame puts them under greater pressure to establish their name apart from their prominent client and sometime partner. "The work we did for Brad Pitt put us on the map," says Mr. Willemeit. "But that lasts about five seconds. After that, you have to prove yourself." With their collection of current projects strung across the globe, it is clear that the folks at GraftLab have something to say.

Messrs. Krückeberg and Willemeit founded GraftLab in Los Angeles in 1998 with Wolfram Putz, who they studied with at the Technical University in Braunschweig. From their first job working with Mr. Pitt on his personal studio, the business has grown to include 100 architects and artists, and offices in Berlin and Beijing. The trio's collaboration with Mr. Pitt has been constant throughout their development. Mr. Pitt tapped GraftLab to coordinate designs and recruit firms to work on the actor's Make It Right project to build 150 low-cost, sustainable houses in New Orleans's Lower Ninth Ward to replace the homes that were destroyed in 2005 by Hurricane Katrina. "We are the curators and coordinate the designs," says Mr. Krückeberg. As part of the project, GraftLab built two houses of their own design, and five of their designs have been realized by other firms. So far, 80 homes have been built or are under construction, says Mr. Krückeberg. 

The effort represents one of GraftLab's core principles about urban architecture: acceptance of innovative design by the local community. "At its basic level, sustainability in architecture is just checking the boxes off to get the certification," says Mr. Krückeberg. "But architecture is also about beauty and responding to a specific community. You have to think globally, but always act locally. Quality architecture is not created by simply checking off the boxes on an application form."

The result in Louisiana was a single-family house called the Shotgun, which incorporates traditional New Orleans design with modern design and green building. It also includes some local specifics, such as putting the house on stilts for future flood defense and creating a rooftop sanctuary where a family could safely wait for rescue workers in the event the levees, visible just a few hundred meters away, should burst again. GraftLab's designs there won them the prestigious American Architecture Award in 2009. "They combine a higher quality of living standard with the demand for affordable costs in an innovative way," jury member Markus Fischer, head of corporate design at German power-tool maker Festo AG, said in a statement at the time. "This seems to be an important characteristic for living in urban surrounds in the future."

"We are passionate about the idea of sustainability," says Mr. Krückeberg. "That means we build green, smart, that we want to save energy. But at the same time, it is something that we call social sustainability." That concept can also be seen in work GraftLab has done on larger projects, such as the elaborately high-tech, eye-catching summer home dubbed Birds Island in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia; a house in Japan that is built into the side of a mountain and covered with solar panels that look like foliage unfolding down the hillside; the Dalian Daily towers in China, a multipurpose complex that contains apartments and the Dalian Daily newspaper offices; and Vertical Village, a solar-powered luxury home, hotel and entertainment complex in Dubai. 

"It's all about creating beautiful spaces, buildings and products," says Mr. Willemeit. "The technical specifications for sustainability make up the foundation, but it's not the end. That's not a building yet."

Taken together, GraftLab's projects also seem to be replicating nature in not-so-natural environments—part of a movement among architects, urban planners and sociologists to redefine urban space in the age of megacities. 

Viewed from above, the group's Vertical Village resembles a giant plant, with its roofs spreading out like enormous leaves on a crawling vine, covered with solar panels that help power the apartments, hotels, restaurants, shops and cinema inside. What look like veins in the leaves are really channels built to transport water, heated by the solar panels, back into the building. "We live in artificial environments," says Mr. Krückeberg. "We are beginning to understand that these environments—cities rather than jungles—are our nature now. We are creating our own nature." One of their latest projects, still in the design and marketing phase, called the Smart Air House, is an attempt to revamp the concept of suburban living by reducing the ecological footprint of homes and improving the air quality within them. GraftLab has chosen sustainable, nontoxic building materials that also minimize dust, and removed the vapor barrier to help increase air circulation. An early standard practice in passive energy homes was to create a vapor barrier to keep heat inside the building, but the lack of circulation locked in bad air and fumes. 

Another project, the Solar Kiosk, aims to create a kind of franchise model that would see entrepreneurs in places like Africa operate and maintain solar-powered kiosks, which could become the nucleus of a local economy by bringing power, in small bursts at first, to areas where there is no electricity. "In Africa," explains Mr. Willemeit, "the biggest growth industry is mobile phones. Everyone has one. But out in the villages, no one has electricity to recharge their phones. They walk miles and miles to charge their phones."

A model for the kiosks sits in the middle of the kitchen in GraftLab's Berlin office. It is a wooden box, a small shed, really, with open sides. Inside are crates of mineral water and a few car batteries. The kiosk is connected to solar panels on the roof that power the batteries, which can then be used to recharge mobile phones, laptops and the like. 

It is hard to say if the idea will catch on. But the small kiosk concept says a lot about the big ideas driving the architects at GraftLab. "We really need the big 'ivory tower' projects and exclusive clients to go deep, to fund the research and be radical," says Mr. Krückeberg. "Only then can you really take your ideas and do things that really effect changes in society."

 Write to  William Boston at newseditors@wsj.com 