Toney Douglas, a 24-year-old guard, is the longest continuously serving player on the new-look Knicks. It's an unlikely role for such a youngster, but he's found himself in an even more bizarre position this week: temporary savior.

While star Chauncey Billiups recovers from a bruised left quadriceps, Douglas is the team's starting point guard. In that role Wednesday night, he scored 24 points in a 107-88 win over the New Orleans Hornets, outplaying All-Star point guard Chris Paul in the process. Douglas's success has calmed fears about depth at point guard, and more importantly, Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni said, his play has continued to help the disjointed Knicks build chemistry. 

Since Billups is still listed as doubtful for Friday night's game against Cleveland at the Garden, Douglas will likely get another crack at the laboratory. 

"I think the other three games he was deferring, with all the change and everything he was looking and not playing," D'Antoni said. "He was playing [Wednesday]. He and Anthony [Carter] both did a good job." 

Carter, acquired in the Carmelo Anthony trade, is also playing point guard in Billups's absence. 

Douglas said he received plenty of advice from Billups before the game, mostly about playing his style. Douglas has become the team's up-tempo specialist since Billups, who is known for his slow pace, was acquired. "I'm trying to be aggressive," Douglas said. "Coach told me, Chauncey told me, teammates told me to be me."

With Anthony and Amar'e Stoudemire as the offense's primary options, Douglas said that leaves plenty of open shots for others, including him. He had five assists Wednesday.

The stars that surround Douglas now are a far cry from most of the 33 Knicks he's played with during his two-year career with the team. In fact, Douglas's emergence has buoyed a team that has been in flux since Anthony's arrival. 

D'Antoni admitted the team hadn't clicked offensively before Wednesday night's game, with low shooting percentages and inconsistent team performances. Anthony said Douglas's skills were a boost for the team's confidence, especially what his aggressiveness brought to the rest of the offense.

If anything, Douglas's comforting performance has kept up the patter of positive feelings all over the Knicks' facility. On Thursday, new players were overheard filming videos, asking fans to get loud for the playoffs and most interestingly "To Beat The Heat," even though they wouldn't play the Heat again until deep in the playoffs. 

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 