File the following under famous last words: "A clear victory. A draw or a defeat are out of the question. We're the better team. One on one against us, Dortmund has no chance."

That's what Bayern Munich president  Uli Hoeness said he expected from Saturday's match with league-leading Borussia Dortmund. You can see just why Hoeness would have been tempted to raise the stakes. Bayern was coming off a 1-0 away win against Inter Milan in a rematch of last year's Champions League final, and the Borussia game was pretty much Bayern's last shot at reopening the Bundesliga title race. 

A win would have left Bayern 10 points back with 14 games to go, which is still a hefty gap. But then, Bayern had gained four points in its previous seven matches, and it has finished strong in recent years. Plus, his gifted wingers—Arjen Robben and  Franck Ribery, known sometimes as "Robbery"—were both finally healthy and productive at the same time. Given the circumstances, why not spice things up and rattle the opponent with a bit of bluster?

Turns out, his bold pronouncement backfired spectacularly, as Dortmund rolled to an emphatic 3-1 victory. But it wasn't just the one-sided nature of the result that put the final nail in Bayern's coffin. It was the fact that both teams executed their offensive game plans. Dortmund's was just clearly superior.

Bayern, per its legendary coach  Louis van Gaal's credo, controlled 70% of the possession and moved the ball crisply to set up plenty of chances. But Dortmund was more than happy with its 30%, using it to implement the kind of devastating fast breaks that would have made  Paul Westhead proud. Dortmund ended up outshooting Bayern despite the possession disparity.

Dortmund has been doing it with youth, enthusiasm and blinding speed all season long. Its colorful coach, Jurgen Klopp, is often portrayed as a goofy, mad-scientist type, given his passing resemblance to Beaker from "The Muppet Show" and his penchant for physical and fashion mishaps. (He broke his glasses celebrating after the match.)

His team is ridiculously young—goalkeeper apart, the average age of Dortmund's first-choice lineup is 22—and it was built on a shoestring budget. His starters cost around $20 million total, less than half what Bayern paid for center forward Mario Gomez alone. In short, Klopp can dress and celebrate any way he likes.

Klopp also has a kindred spirit in general manager  Michael Zorc, and the pair has unearthed some real gems. Shinji Kagawa, 21, was a promising midfielder at Cerezo Osaka, so underappreciated that he was cut from Japan's World Cup squad. Dortmund picked him up for less than $500,000, and he responded in the first half of the season with 11 goals before an injury at the Asian Cup ended his campaign prematurely.  Kevin Grosskreutz, 22, arrived as a free agent from a second-division club. This season, he has appeared regularly for the national team. The team's top scorer,  Lucas Barrios, is an Argentine-born Paraguayan who was signed from Chile's Colo Colo in the summer of 2009 for $6 million. Today, he'd fetch three times that on the open market. 

But perhaps most satisfying of all was the signing of central defender  Mats Hummels, who scored the third goal against Bayern. The 22-year-old spent his entire youth career at the Bavarian club, where his father, Hermann, is a youth-team coach. Yet Bayern never showed real belief in his potential and let him go for just $5 million, a laughable price for a guy who has arguably been the Bundesliga's best defender.

At the same time, Klopp and Zorc have shown faith in the club's youth academy. That system has produced a steady stream of gifted youngsters, like left back  Marcel Schmelzer (23) and midfielders Nuri Sahin (22) and  Mario Goetze (18), who may be the pick up the bunch. 

With the Bundesliga all but wrapped up, the challenge now for Dortmund is retaining all this young talent and allowing these players to grow together. But with Klopp and Zorc, both of whom have plenty of admirers around Europe, locked into contracts through 2014, it's easy to like their chances. 

Having believed in their young stars, often bucking conventional wisdom in the process, the least the kids can do is give their management a couple of years before they move to the next level. Of course, that's assuming the youngsters don't choose to take Dortmund to the next level first. 

  Cristiano Ronaldo has already scored 34 goals this season in La Liga, the Spanish Cup and the Champions League. That's impressive enough. But it pales in comparison to another statistic: his playing time. Real Madrid has played a total of 3,600 minutes this season. Ronaldo missed just 175. He hasn't skipped a minute in Real's La Liga matches, either. This would be like  Phil Jackson playing  Kobe Bryant at least 45 minutes in each regular-season game.

In soccer, it's not uncommon for goalkeepers to play every minute of every game. Outfield players are a different matter: It's extremely rare for any non-keeper to play more than 90 percent of minutes in a season. There are injuries, suspension and off days, and most of all, these players become tired. That's why there are substitutions. 

Several other factors make all this even more remarkable. Ronaldo's style of play— direct, dribbling runs, usually at full-throttle—means he gets fouled a lot and takes tremendous amounts of punishment. He also hasn't exactly been the epitome of durability. In his eight-year career with Sporting Lisbon, Manchester United and now Real Madrid, he has never started more than 31 of 38 league games.

Yet Real coach  Jose Mourinho has driven his talent mercilessly, as the team tries to challenge record-setting Barcelona. After Saturday's results—Real tied at Deportivo La Coruna and Barcelona extended its lead to seven points with a 3-0 win against Mallorca—Real's task appears more prohibitive. Mourinho has substituted Ronaldo only twice all season, and not in a 4-1 rout of Real Sociedad or an 8-0 throttling of Levante in the Spanish Cup.

The approach is risky and certainly counterintuitive. Then again, Mourinho, the self-described "Special One," is accustomed to doing things his way. He's been proven right enough times in the past to justify himself.

—   Gabriele Marcotti is the world soccer columnist for The Times of London and a regular broadcaster for the BBC. 

