The men's Sportswear Tee (which is also fab for women) comes from Levi's Vintage Clothing line, a division that draws from the denim company's archives. Made from thick cotton jersey, it's been distressed for a slightly pilled effect and dyed a light indigo, resembling foam atop wave caps. The cut, which is slightly longer than normal with a single left chest pocket, is inspired by Marlon Brando in the 1953 flick "The Wild One." $85, saturdaysnyc.com 

 From top left: 1. For outdoor showers, organic Rhode Island-based line Farmaesthetics's Saltwater Rain soap evokes the smell of the ocean ($13, farmaesthetics.com). 2. For moisturizing limbs, Mitchell & Peach body cream smells like a summer evening in the English countryside and includes lavender oil from the Mitchell family's fields in Kent ($60, shen-beauty.com). 3. For protecting delicate skin around the eyes, nose and for lips, La Prairie's Ultra Protection SPF 40 Stick goes on clear ($65, shoplaprairie.com). 4. For a non-streak self-tanner, try Dr. Dennis Gross Skincare's new Alpha Beta Glow Pads, which lend a subtle glow ($32, dgskincare.com). 5. For nights out, cult beauty line By Terry's classic Gloss Delectation for lips comes in punchy colors that match a late summer tan—or a manufactured one, via the brand's hydrating Blush Terrybly, which simulates an August tint (gloss $44, blush $70, b arneys.com). 6. For après sun, Weleda's sea buckthorn berry oil is packed with essential fatty acids that repair skin after a long day on the beach ($25, usa.weleda.com). 7. For sunburns or after shaving, Ligne St Barth's Aloe Vera Gel with Mint assists regeneration and cools the skin ($29, lignestbarth.com). 

In the spirit of the new trio of shirts from Band of Outsiders—which are printed with photos from legendary surf lensman LeRoy Grannis—the brand's California-based designer Scott Sternberg curated a list of music for the dog days. Download and feel sunny. $340, openingceremony.us 

 1. "Love Scene Improvisations" Jerry Garcia Band, "Zabriskie Point" soundtrack 

 2. "Turquoise" Donovan 

 3. "Paris 1919" John Cale

 4.  "Holy Man" Dennis Wilson 

 5. "Burning Airlines Give You So Much More" Brian Eno

 6. "Are You Ready for the Summer?" "Meatballs" soundtrack

 7.  "This Is England" The Clash

 8.  "Six Different Ways" The Cure

 9.  "I Dream a Highway" Gillian Welch

 10.  "Summertime Rolls" Jane's Addiction

 11.  "Breathe and Stop" Q-Tip

For casual beach weekends, precious gems seem square. Our two favorite pieces for sunset cocktails and bonfire nights are New York designer Pamela Love's Tribal Spike resin cuff (which makes almost any outfit instantly cool), and new Brooklyn-based line St. Kilda's enamel and brass matchstick earrings. $195, pamelalovenyc.com; from $193 each, stkildajewelry.com 

A combination of the words "salud" (health) and "sol" (sun), Soludos espadrilles can (and should) be worn around the clock come summertime—whether with bikinis and board shorts or cocktail dresses and linen suits. $28 each, soludos.com 

  