Sir Howard Davies resigned as director of the London School of Economics, the most prominent casualty so far of the scandal involving ties in the academic world to the Gadhafi family.

Sir Howard had come under intense criticism since the start of the Libyan uprising over LSE's decision to accept donations from a charitable foundation controlled by the Gadhafi regime. 

LSE said that it would return the bulk of the money it had received from the Libyans, and that it had commissioned an independent inquiry into its relationship with Libya and with the Libyan leader's son, Saif al-Islam Gadhafi, to be conducted by Harry Woolf, former lord chief justice of England and Wales.

In 2009, the Gaddafi International Charity and Development Foundation, which is headed by Saif Gadhafi, gave LSE's Global Governance Research Unit a grant of £1.5 million (about $2.4 million). 

Saif Gadhafi earned a Ph.D. at the college in 2008 on the subject of "the role of civil society in the democratization of global governance institutions." LSE is currently investigating allegations that the thesis was plagiarized.

LSE erupted into protests last month over the donations, with placard-waving students occupying administrative buildings to demonstrate against the school's ties to the Gadhafi clan.

In his resignation letter, Sir Howard said he was "responsible for the school's reputation, and that has suffered." 

"There were risks involved in taking funding from sources associated with Libya, and they should have been weighed more heavily in the balance," he wrote in a letter to Peter Sutherland, chairman of the court of governors of LSE.

He also acknowledged that he had made a "personal error of judgment" in accepting the British government's invitation to be an economic envoy to Libya, and the Gadhafi regime's invitation to advise Libya's sovereign-wealth fund. He said the work had been modest, unpaid and fully disclosed, but it had made it "more difficult for me to defend the institution than it would otherwise have been."

Sir Howard became director of the LSE after having served as the first chairman of the Financial Services Authority, the U.K. financial regulator. He was deputy governor of the Bank of England from 1995 to 1997.

Sir Howard had initially offered to resign his position as head of LSE when reports of the Gadhafi grant came to light, but Mr. Sutherland asked him to reconsider, and on Tuesday the LSE council offered him its support. But Sir Howard decided it was nonetheless right for him to step down. 

The independent inquiry will investigate why the LSE accepted the £1.5 million donation, as well as $50,000 in return for Sir Howard's advice to Libya's sovereign-wealth fund in 2007. Other developments under investigation include the authenticity of Saif Gaddafi's Ph.D. thesis; a £2.2 million contract between the LSE and Libya's Economic Development Board to train Libyan civil servants and professionals; the payment of £20,000 to teach the head of the Libyan Investment Authority; and the acceptance of an award from Saif Gadhafi's charity of £22,857 to support travel costs, mainly airfares, for academic speakers to travel to Libya.

 Corrections & Amplifications 

The first name of Peter Sutherland, chairman of the court of governors of the London School of Economics, was omitted in an earlier version of this story.

 Write to  Guy Chazan at guy.chazan@wsj.com 