ZURICH—Shares of european reinsurers fell sharply Friday on the prospect of big losses from the powerful earthquake that struck Japan, causing damage in Tokyo and sending a tsunami toward the country's northeastern coast and Pacific Rim countries. 

Shares in  Munich Re,
MURGY


0.37
%




 the world's largest reinsurer, were 4.7% lower at €111.30 ($153.47),  Hannover Re
HVRRY


-0.60
%




 was down 4.2% at €39.13. In Zurich,  Swiss Re, the second-largest reinsurer worldwide, plunged 5% to 50.90 Swiss francs ($54.61).  Scor, a French reinsurer, fell 4% to €19.49.

Reinsurance stocks experienced steeper declines than did primary insurers. Reinsurers typically act as insurers of last resort for their clients, primary insurers. That means that in the event of a big natural catastrophe they often take the bulk of the losses, as their insurance clients can claim some of their costs back from them. 

This year already has had a number of costly natural catastrophes. The recent earthquake in Christchurch, New Zealand alone could cost the insurance industry as much as $12 billion, Swiss Re has estimated. 

Swiss Re expects its pretax loss from the New Zealand earthquake to be around $800 million. Coming on top of floods in Australia, the reinsurer will have pretty much used up the $1 billion budget for big natural catastrophes after little more than two months into 2011. 

Swiss Re has market exposure in Japan and investors are worried about big losses, said  Georg Marti, an analyst with Zuercher Kantonalbank. Swiss Re said it was too early to comment;  Zurich Financial Services AG
ZURVY


-0.19
%




 said it was too early to provide estimates. 

"Swiss Re has already been affected by the disasters in Australia and New Zealand, but it is possible that Japan could cost them even more," Mr. Marti said.

Still, reinsurers will have a good case for demanding higher premiums from clients in the next renewal round for reinsurance contracts, Mr. Marti said. 

The Japan earthquake cast doubt on Munich Re's ability to maintain its 2011 profit target. Thursday it said it would achieve its profit goals for this year only if the cost of disaster claims falls below the long-term average for the rest of 2011. It added that claims in the first quarter had already used up its annual budget for natural disasters. Munich Re,  Allianz SE and Hannover Re all said it was too early to provide loss estimates. 

Munich Re's bill for the earthquake in Christchurch, New Zealand, floods in Brisbane, Australia, and Cyclone Yasi in Australia was $1.5 billion. Hannover Re, a smaller competitor but still one of the world's biggest reinsurers, said recently it expects a maximum net cost of €150 million for the earthquake.

The earthquake that hit Japan was a magnitude 8.9, the most powerful temblor there in at least 300 years. It triggered a 10-meter (30-foot) tsunami that engulfed cars and buildings in its path in northern Japan, forcing tens of thousands of people to evacuate their homes and setting off tsunami warnings for 53 countries around the world. The damage was particularly severe in areas facing the northern Pacific coast.

  Catlin Group Ltd. has exposure in Japan. A Catlin spokesman said it was too early to comment. On Thursday, it said its exposure to the New Zealand earthquake was $125 million. 

—Michael Arnold, John Revill, William Launder and Vladimir Guevarra contributed to this article. 

