The state of Missouri asked a federal judge Thursday to block the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers from blowing a 2,000-foot hole in a levee that would flood rich Missouri farmlands in a bid to ease near-record flood levels at the confluence of the Mississippi and Ohio rivers. 

Maj. Gen. Michael Walsh, president of the Mississippi River Commission, expects to decide no sooner than this weekend whether to blow up the levee just downstream from Cairo, Ill. That would divert some floodwater into a channel 35 miles long and as much as 12 miles wide known as the Birds Point-New Madrid Floodway.

See the latest data from flood gauges throughout the Midwest and South.

The floodway was constructed in the late 1920s but has been used only once, in the record flood of 1937. The land inside is privately owned, but the government has easements to run water over it.

Missouri officials argued the owners of some 130,000 acres of farmland and some 75 homes with 200 residents would face serious hardship if the plan went through. "They will be losing their crops. They will be losing their homes. And they will be losing the value of their land," said Jack McManus, chief counsel for the Missouri attorney general's office. 

Ed Passarelli, an attorney for the federal government, said the area could flood even if the levee isn't blown. He added that the floodway was designed for this purpose, and an appeals court two decades ago said in a similar case that the decision to explode a levee was up to the government.

Rising floodwaters are nearing the 1937 record of 59.5 feet on the Ohio River at Cairo. The reading Thursday evening was 58.87 feet, with an expected crest of 60.3 feet lasting several days beginning between Sunday and Tuesday. Opening the floodway would divert about a quarter of the flow of the Lower Mississippi River, reducing river levels by three to four feet upstream on both the Ohio and Upper Mississippi rivers, a Corps spokesman said. 

Cairo, a city of about 3,000, is surrounded by aging levees. In a court filing, Illinois Attorney General Lisa Madigan said a breach in a levee protecting the city would inundate it with 18 to 20 feet of water.

Judge Stephen N. Limbaugh Jr., in Cape Girardeau, said he hoped to rule on the matter quickly. 

 Write to  Joe Barrett at joseph.barrett@wsj.com and Ilan Brat at ilan.brat@wsj.com 