SYDNEY—Australia Thursday reported a surprising drop in jobs in April, sending the Australian dollar down as expectations faded for an interest-rate increase as early as next month.

The number of employed fell 22,100, the Australian Bureau of Statistics reported, against forecasts of a rise of 17,000. The number of full-time jobs fell a massive 49,100.

Still, a silver lining was found in the unemployment rate, which remained at an as-expected seasonally adjusted 4.9% in April.

Economists said the drop in the number of employed last month doesn't reverse the strong job-creation trend, which has carried 300,000 into new jobs over the past year. Treasurer Wayne Swan Tuesday announced ambitious plans in the government's 2011-12 budget to create a further 500,000 jobs by mid-2013.

The Australian dollar tumbled nearly a full cent against the U.S. dollar immediately after Thursday's job report was released, as fresh questions were raised about the need for the Reserve Bank of Australia to raise its policy interest rate in coming months. As of 0500 GMT the local currency had recovered to US$1.0643, still down nearly half a cent from US$1.0692 just ahead of the data.

Grant Turley, the head of currency strategy at ANZ Bank, is among a number of economists who said April's greater-then-usual number of holidays may have prompted many to close business and take leave, partly explaining the surprising jobs number.

Mr. Turley said the RBA will look through the volatility and consider first that the unemployment rate remains below 5%, indicating labor scarcity and raising the chances of wage-driven inflation pressures.

Last week, the central bank signaled clearly its growing willingness to tighten monetary policy further after it revised higher its medium-term inflation forecasts and said it expects economic growth to surge over the next year.

But the weak April jobs number will give the RBA more time to consider its next move, said Stephen Walters, chief economist at JPMorgan.

"The pressure is still there on the Reserve Bank to nudge up the cash rate but I don't think they will be doing it in June," he said, adding that an August increase is most likely.

The data leave the Australian dollar vulnerable for the moment, coming at a time of fresh volatility in global markets, including weaker commodity prices. The currency was savaged overnight as sovereign debt woes remained at boiling point in Greece.

If the local currency falls below the key support of US$1.0500 it could be in for a "serious" selloff, BNP Paribas FX Strategist Robert Ryan said.