As National Football League team owners and the players union dig in for a potentially lengthy legal battle, NFL officials said owners have already set aside enough money to cover them in case the 2011 season is canceled. 

In addition, NFL officials said there isn't an immediate financial threat from the $4 billion in television-rights revenue that may be withheld because of a recent legal ruling. According to the owners' plans, they only would need that money if the labor strife drags on to the 2012 season.

The window into the NFL's finances and the revelation that the NFL had planned to set aside emergency funds to last two seasons, provided by two officials with direct knowledge of the league's budget, came as the league and its players union begin a legal battle that will test their wills—and cash reserves. 

At issue is how to divide some $9.3 billion in annual revenue.

  George Atallah, deputy executive director of the NFL Players Association, said the league's stockpiling of money shows "there was a clear and premeditated plan to lock out the players."

  Bob Batterman, the lead outside counsel for the NFL, said the league expects to hold a 2011 season but the owners had prepared for the worst. "We hope and expect this will get resolved," Mr. Batterman said Sunday. 

Team owners locked out the players beginning Saturday, ending all off-season workouts and off-season pay immediately. The drafting of college players will still take place next month, but without a resolution, training camps won't open in July and the season won't start on schedule in September. 

After negotiations for a new collective-bargaining agreement broke off on Friday, a series of legal maneuvers began to unfold that will go a long way toward determining whether the NFL has a season in 2011.

By late Friday, the players union had been decertified. That allowed the players to file an antitrust suit against the league, which they did late Friday afternoon in federal district court in Minnesota. Several of the league's biggest stars, including quarterbacks  Tom Brady and  Drew Brees are the lead plaintiffs in the case. 

The suit asks the court to issue an injunction prohibiting the league from locking out the players, a move owners made when the collective bargaining agreement expired Saturday morning. A ruling on that injunction isn't expected for at least three weeks, though a temporary restraining order could come sooner. 

The NFL also amended a complaint it filed with the National Labor Relations Board in February, in which it claimed the players union wasn't bargaining in good faith. The amended complaint alleges that the decertification is a sham. 

The players union denies that and said a settlement in a previous lawsuit with the NFL prohibits the league from opposing the decertification.

The NLRB must conduct an investigation into the matter before deciding whether to file a complaint on behalf of the NFL with an administrative law judge, whose decision could take six months.

The legal twists and turns in federal court will likely unfold more quickly, lawyers from both sides said. 

The argument that the decertification is a sham will form the backbone of the league's litigation strategy as it tries to prove the players union is simply trying to escape its obligation to collective bargaining. 

Mr. Batterman said owners were prepared for the court to issue a preliminary injunction in the coming days that could temporarily end the lockout and would appeal such a ruling.

"There may be some sloppiness this week in terms of injunctions and stays," Mr. Batterman said. "When it all plays out, the lockout will remain in place and the union will be back at the bargaining table."

 Write to  Matthew Futterman at matthew.futterman@wsj.com 