DETROIT—Mayor Dave Bing wants to get the feds off his back.

Detroit's police department has been under federal court supervision since 2003, following allegations of excessive use of force by officers and poor jail conditions. Its water and sewer system, one of the nation's largest, has been overseen by a U.S. judge for 34 years, stemming from Clean Water Act violations.

Mr. Bing's goal is to resolve the compliance issues by year's end, finally freeing the city of U.S. oversight. "If we're going to be a city of change, a city that can run its own affairs, the best thing we can do is get from under that cloud," he said in an interview. "We should be watching it ourselves, managing it better, and I think we have the capability to do that."

Detroit has made some progress toward the goal, forging a new power-sharing agreement to manage the water system and improving some police procedures. But meeting Mr. Bing's timeline could be tough. The city hasn't been able to recruit a water department chief, despite raising the salary 60% to $250,000. And a person familiar with police compliance efforts said the timeline is too ambitious, given slow progress to date and a persistent lack of resources.

Even as Mr. Bing makes the case to end federal oversight, he faces a possible state takeover of the city if it can't fix its finances, including a $155 million deficit. Detroit's public schools have been run by a state-appointed manager since early 2009. 

The federal babysitting is the legacy of a pattern of municipal corruption and mismanagement that Mr. Bing has labored to change. The former basketball star and auto-supply entrepreneur was elected in 2009 to succeed ousted Mayor Kwame Kilpatrick, who is awaiting trial on a federal racketeering indictment involving the water department while he is in prison on state obstruction-of-justice charges.

Mr. Bing says Detroit can't afford to be perceived as incompetent to run such basic services as police and water. Neither can it afford the expense: Outside monitors and consultants have cost the city more than $10 million for the police department, and millions more for the water department, he said.

Detroit's water system, which serves four million people in a 1,079-square-mile region, came under scrutiny in the late 1970s, when the U.S. sued the city for failing to meet new standards for handling wastewater. That case put the department under the jurisdiction of U.S. District Judge John Feikens and court-appointed monitors. The self-styled "sludge judge" held the case for three decades before retiring last fall at age 92.

Even with the monitoring, Detroit has been chronically unable to treat the required 550 tons of wastewater a day. And the water department was plagued by cases of corruption, including one involving a prominent city councilwoman who pleaded guilty in 2009 to taking bribes to back a sludge contract, and the contract-rigging case that led to the indictment against Mr. Kilpatrick and the department's former director last year. That case alleged that more than a dozen crooked deals worth more than $10 million provided hundreds of thousands of dollars in kickbacks to the mayor, his family and aides. Mr. Kilpatrick has pleaded not guilty to the charges.

Suburban customers seized on the indictments to demand a regional takeover of the water system. Mr. Bing held them off with a deal that gives suburbs direct control over water-board appointments, but lets Detroit run the department and set its rates. 

"Some saw [the indictments] as a political opportunity," Mr. Bing said in February. "I saw it as a reminder of our responsibility, and an opportunity to change the way we do business."

Chris Brown, a Bing deputy and interim head of the water department, said the city now has new systems in place to prevent future violations and will make its pitch by August to end federal supervision. Bing aides hope Judge Feikens's successor, U.S. District Judge Sean Cox, will take a fresh look at the city's progress in an effort to close out the case.

Oversight of the police began when then-Mayor Dennis Archer called in federal authorities in 2000 to investigate a string of controversial shootings involving police officers, as well as reports of mistreatment of people in custody. One officer remained on the force after he was involved in nine shootings that killed three people and wounded a fourth. 

In a pair of consent decrees reached with the Justice Department, Detroit agreed to improve its investigations of officers involved in repeated or egregious cases of the use of force. They also called for in-car cameras and improved holding cells.

Still, "there was a culture that thought the Department of Justice was making it difficult to do police work," current Police Chief Ralph Godbee said in an interview. Amid more incidents, the city was forced to spend more than a $1 million a year on court-appointed monitors to evaluate its progress.

The city is seeing some improvement, with citizen complaints about Detroit police down 8% for the first two months of the year, compared with a year earlier. Detroit Police Commission Chairman Jerome L. Warfield said open cases of citizen complaints under investigation by the department's internal affairs have dropped to about 350 from 1,100 two years ago, including 800 that were more than three months old.

In his latest report, current monitor Robert Warshaw cited steady gains in compliance levels since Mr. Bing took office. But problems remain, he said, including failures to photograph suspects' injuries and lax supervision of officers' frisking procedures.

Despite Mr. Bing's year-end target, the city's latest court filing seeks another extension—to mid-2013—to fulfill its obligations under the decree.

 Write to  Matthew Dolan at matthew.dolan@wsj.com 