While investors remain riveted to the turmoil in the Middle East, North Africa and Japan, U.S. corporate profit margins have quietly risen to a level that suggests they may be peaking. 

It may be time for investors to shift their portfolios—and prepare for smaller gains ahead.

Corporate profit margins—that is, the percentage of a company's sales that it retains after expenses—among members of the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index were about 8.2% during the fourth quarter of 2010, the third consecutive quarter above 8%, according to S&P data. Meanwhile, the Federal Reserve on March 11 reported that corporate profits as a percentage of national income, another measure of profitability, were 12.7% for the second consecutive quarter. Both are near record levels. And on Friday, the Commerce Department said overall corporate profits reached a record high in the fourth quarter. 

On first blush, this would appear to be positive for investors, since it means companies are running leaner than in the past. The question is how long it will last. 

Profit margins tend to be "mean-reverting"—meaning that when they are at extreme levels it is only a matter of time before they return to the average. During the past 15 years, the average profit margin for the S&P 500 has been about 6.1%, while the average share of corporate profits since 1951 is about 10.5%. 

The direction of profit-margin movements is a bigger driver of stock prices than the absolute level. During the past 50 years, the S&P 500 has averaged a return of 12% a year when profit as a share of national income has been rising, but just 2% a year when it has fallen, according to  Doug Cliggott, managing director for U.S. equity strategy at  Credit Suisse Group AG in Boston. 

"This is the first time since margins bottomed in 2008 that we didn't get an improvement," Mr. Cliggott says. "We are at an area now that is elevated enough to be the peak."

Why are margins poised to erode? For starters, commodity costs are rising. The S&P GSCI Commodity Index has jumped about 14% this year, helping to push the producer-price index up 5.6% in February, the most since March 2010. Even when volatile food and energy prices are excluded, the PPI rose by 1.9% last month—the biggest jump since March 2009. 

Profit margins also have been juiced by cost cutting—chiefly in the form of layoffs. But from here, companies will likely have to spend more to boost revenues. Capital expenditures, which include spending on property, factories and equipment, rose to 6.6% of gross domestic product in 2010, up from 5.4% in 2009, according to the Fed. Some companies also will hire workers. "You can't continue to cut your way to better earnings," says  Howard Silverblatt, senior index analyst at S&P Indices. 

High margins don't necessarily signal the end of a bull market. Margins can remain elevated for long periods. Beginning in March 2006, for example, S&P 500 profit margins remained above 8% for six consecutive quarters, according to Standard & Poor's, the longest streak since at least 1993. And even if profit margins decline, companies can offset the hit to earnings by boosting revenues. That typically is what happens as the economy turns from recovery to expansion.

"It's pretty normal," says  Tobias Levkovich, chief U.S. equity strategist at  Citigroup Inc.
C


0.98
%




 in New York. "You start getting businesses with more confidence making investments again and costs go up."

Yet look no further than  Nike Inc.
NKE


-0.31
%




 for an example of what happens when margin pressures unexpectedly arise. The footwear maker has dropped 9.5% since reporting on March 17 that gross margins dropped 1.1 percentage points. 

So what should investors do? To begin with, focus on industries that have a history of outperforming during economic expansions and margin compression. Since 1975 the best-performing sectors during expansions have been health care (+8.8%), staples (+2.9%) and technology (+2.0%), according to Strategas Research Partners. The worst-performing sectors have been consumer discretionary (-5.8%), utilities (-2%) and materials (-6.2%).

Given the pricing pressures this time around—from rising commodity prices much more than from wage growth—investors might want to be extra selective. Some typically defensive sectors, like consumer staples, may underperform this time because they will take a hit from rising commodity prices, which make up a large portion of their expenses, says  Aaron Gurwitz, chief investment officer at Barclays Wealth, while receiving little of the benefit from cheap labor. Technology, on the other hand, should do well because it is more labor intensive and should benefit from increased capital spending. 

Even within sectors, investors are differentiating among companies based on gross profit margins. For instance, among consumer-staples producers,  Estee Lauder
EL


0.25
%




 Cos.,  Altria Group Inc.
MO


-0.23
%




 and  Tyson Foods Inc.
TSN


-1.18
%




 showed a 2% improvement in gross margins during the fourth quarter, while  Mead Johnson Nutrition Co.
MJN


-1.92
%




,  Coca-Cola Co.
KO


0.04
%




 and  Clorox Co.
CLX


0.91
%




 had drops of more than 2.5%, according to AllianceBernstein. The ones with expanding margins outperformed those with shrinking margins by 11 percentage points this year. Overall, companies with expanding margins have beaten those that don't by 3.5 percentage points in 2011, the firm says.

"How much higher can margins go, given that we are already at a high level?" asks  Vadim Zlotnikov, chief market strategist at AllianceBernstein in New York. "The downside is enormous once they start to erode."

 Write to  Ben Levisohn at ben.levisohn@wsj.com 

