The U.S. trade deficit narrowed in February from the seven-month high hit in January, but not as much as expected, suggesting trade weighed on the economy in the first three months.

The U.S. deficit in international trade of goods and services decreased 2.6% to $45.76 billion, the Commerce Department said Tuesday, as high prices sapped demand for oil and imports from China fell sharply. The January trade gap was revised up to $46.97 billion from an originally reported $46.34 billion.

U.S. exports declined 1.4% to $165.12 billion from $167.54 billion the previous month. Imports also decreased, down 1.7% to $210.88 billion from $214.51 billion in January.

An easing in the U.S. trade gap late last year provided some support to the slow economic recovery. Trade was the biggest contributor to growth in the fourth quarter as exports rose sharply and imports, which subtract from growth, fell. But high oil prices, and the subsequent rise in gasoline prices, are now expected to weigh on the economy.

Economists have been steadily marking down their predictions for first-quarter economic growth amid high energy and food prices, which are expected to hurt spending. A Wall Street Journal survey published Monday, before the latest data, showed economists downgraded their estimate of first-quarter growth in gross domestic product to 2.7% at a seasonally adjusted annual rate. That’s down from an average first-quarter forecast of 3.6% just two months ago.

Following Tuesday’s data -- which also showed a sharp drop in the small business optimism index for March and a strong rise in import prices -- economists further cut their growth predictions.

February’s wider-than-expected trade balance, combined with the January revision, indicates trade weighed more on the economy than previously thought, J.P. Morgan economist Daniel Silver said. The bank will wait to see retail sales and business inventories data due Wednesday, but is likely to cut its first-quarter gross domestic product forecast to 2% from 2.5%.

Forecasting company Macroeconomic Advisers lowered its U.S. GDP estimate to just 1.5% from 2.1% previously.

February’s trade data showed imports fell for the first time in four months. With oil prices surging above $110 a barrel for the first time in more than two and half years amid ongoing unrest in the Middle East and North Africa, the U.S. has cut back on its energy imports.

The U.S. bill for crude oil imports in February fell to $21.13 billion from $24.51 billion the month before, despite a $2.83 jump in the average price per barrel to $87.17 -- its highest level since October 2008. That’s because crude import volumes tumbled to 242.37 million barrels from 290.67 million.

“The narrowing in the trade deficit in February is a brief respite before the impact of the more recent surge in oil prices pushes the deficit sharply wider,” Paul Dales, economists at Capital Economics, wrote in a note. He said the data provide evidence that higher commodity prices pose greater risks to economic growth than to inflation.

Separate data Tuesday showed that U.S. import prices extended their climb in March, staging the largest monthly increase since June 2009, as costs for petroleum and food jumped.

The price of goods imported to the U.S. rose 2.7% in March from the month before, the Labor Department said Tuesday. That followed a 1.4% rise in February and a 1.5% increase in January.

During the first quarter of 2011, import prices rose by 5.7%, the biggest three-month increase since the second quarter of 2008, heightening concerns about accelerating inflation.

Federal Reserve officials are torn on whether to reverse their easy-credit policies to prevent inflation from rising further, but the most powerful decision-makers believe the central bank can wait to raise interest rates because the rise in commodity prices should have a temporary effect on U.S. inflation.

In another negative sign for the economy, the National Federation of Independent Business’s small business optimism index fell 2.6 points to 91.9 in March. The decline was similar to a drop seen in June of last year, after Europe’s sovereign debt crisis hit confidence across the globe and hurt the U.S. economy. 

 Write to  Luca Di Leo at luca.dileo@dowjones.com and Tom Barkley at tom.barkley@dowjones.com 