LONDON—U.K. industrial production expanded at a slower rate than expected in March as maintenance work on oil and gas fields continued to drag on output, official data showed Thursday. 

The Office for National Statistics said industrial production, which includes sectors like mining and energy supply, increased 0.3% in March from February. On an annual basis, industrial production expanded 0.7%. 

Oil and gas extraction in March decreased by 12.4% compared to the same month last year. An ONS official said the fall was caused by maintenance work, which held back production. 

The official said the quarterly output figure of a 0.2% increase was lower than the initial forecast of 0.4% used to calculate first-quarter gross domestic product. However, he said the lowered estimate would have a minimal effect on the overall first-quarter GDP number. The first estimate of first-quarter GDP showed the economy expanded by 0.5%. 

Thursday's data also showed that manufacturing output rose by 0.2% in March from February, and 2.7% on an annual basis. 

The ONS traced the year-to-year increase in manufacturing output to car and food production. Motor vehicle production expanded 14.2% in March compared with a year earlier, while the manufacture of bread, pastries and cakes increased 19.3%. 

  Hetal Mehta, U.K. economist at Daiwa Capital Markets, said with output having been flat in February and increasing only modestly in March, it appears that manufacturing growth is returning to more typical levels. "Looking ahead, the sector is likely to make a smaller contribution to GDP growth than in recent quarters."

Separately Thursday, the National Institute of Economic and Social Research said the U.K.'s economic growth slowed at the start of the second quarter, suggesting the economy will struggle to regain momentum after an already sluggish start to the year.

The think-tank estimated that the economy grew 0.3% in the three months through April from the previous three months. 

That forecast is down from the official estimate of 0.5% growth in the first quarter and marks the latest in a string of downbeat signals on the U.K. economy. 

The Bank of England on Wednesday downgraded its growth forecast compared with three months ago, and said the skew of risks to growth is to the downside. 

NIESR's estimate is supported by recent survey evidence for April, which has pointed to a slowdown in private-sector output growth. 