A slain former aide to three U.S. presidents and leading voice for Vietnam War veterans was recorded on a security camera limping and disoriented 14 hours before his body was found in a Delaware dump, police said. 

Videotape captured John "Jack" Wheeler inside an office building in downtown Wilmington, Del., around 8:30 p.m. on Dec. 30, police said.

A worker at a Wilmington landfill saw Mr. Wheeler's body tumble from a garbage truck at 10 a.m. the next morning. Police determined that the truck made all 10 of its pickups that morning at commercial Dumpsters in Newark, Del., including a bank, a library, a car dealership and a McDonald's. Those stores are about 12 miles from where Mr. Wheeler was last seen alive.

Police have said Mr. Wheeler's case was a homicide, but have not said how or why he was killed. His body was identified Monday.

Another videotape taken on the evening of Dec. 29 from a courthouse parking garage in New Castle, Del., showed Mr. Wheeler holding one of his shoes and wearing a rumpled suit.

Mr. Wheeler, 66 years old, a defense contractor who was pivotal in the creation of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Wall in Washington and an aide to Presidents Ronald Reagan, George Bush and George W. Bush, lived with his wife in New Castle.

The Dec. 29 video, which didn't contain audio, shows Mr. Wheeler talking to the garage's parking attendant, who was behind a plexiglass window. Mr. Wheeler then shuffled down the hall, turned around, threw both arms into the air and shuffled back toward the attendant. He then calmly entered an elevator. 

The attendant said Mr. Wheeler was trying to pay for parking, even though his car wasn't parked there.

Police said his car was parked in his usual spot at a municipal parking garage near the Amtrak station in Wilmington and was not considered part of the criminal investigation.

Police said that on the afternoon of Dec. 30, Mr. Wheeler was approached by several people inside the Nemours Building on 10th Street and Orange Street in Wilmington, because he appeared to them to be disoriented. Mr. Wheeler, who wasn't wearing an overcoat even though there was snow on the ground, refused their help, police said.

Five hours later, police said, he returned to the same building. That is the last confirmed sighting police have of Mr. Wheeler alive.

Mr. Wheeler had been involved in a legal dispute with his neighbors who were trying to build a large, new home in a neighborhood designated as a historic preservation district.

Asked if ill feelings over the legal battle could have led to Mr. Wheeler's demise, his attorney,  Bayard Marin, said he had doubts. 

"I don't think so, but anything is within the realm of possibility," he said. "It could have been ordinary street thuggery. The city of Wilmington has seen a number of shootings over the years."

 Write to  Sean Gardiner at sean.gardiner@wsj.com 