Christie's International sold $156 million worth of Impressionist and modern art on Wednesday, including Claude Monet's 1891 landscape, "Poplars," which fetched $22.4 million. 

The overall total failed to match the auction house's own presale expectation of $162.3 million and also fell shy of Sotheby's $170.4 million sale the night before—a signal that bidders may not have been impressed with some of Christie's offerings. Dealers said some of its asking prices were also slightly high. 

The challenge for the auction houses in this rebuilding year boils down to supply: Buyers from Asia, America and Eastern Europe are once again eager to snap up eye-catching masterpieces, but sellers don't necessarily want to part with their best pieces yet because they believe their work could sell for much more later on in the cycle.

This reluctance on the part of sellers often shows up first in the trophy-hunting category of Impressionists and modern masters, where buyers prefer to splurge on key examples by Monet and Picasso but may not bid on much of the rest.

Dealers said one of the hands-down masterpieces in Christie's sale was Maurice de Vlaminck's 1905 "Suburban Landscape," a textbook example of brightly colored Fauvism that was being sold by hedge-fund manager Steven Cohen. Two bidders doggedly fought for it, one represented by private dealer Guy Bennett and the other by New York dealer Bill Acquavella, bidding over the telephone. Mr. Acquavella won it for $22.4 million, within its $18 million and $25 million estimate.

A four-way bidding war also erupted over Pablo Picasso's "The Women of Algeria, Version L," a somber, smoky-hued harem scene the artist painted in 1955 as he mourned the death of his artistic foil, Henri Matisse. A telephone bidder eventually won it for $21.3 million, just over its $20 million low estimate.

A current exhibit at the Metropolitan Museum of Art exploring artists' depictions of open windows may have given a boost to Matisse's cherry blossom-colored "Open Window" from 1911, a view of his seaside studio in Collioure looking southwest toward the Pyrenees mountains beyond. A private European collector paid $15.7 million for it, over its $12 million high estimate. Maximilien Luce's purple-pink "Notre Dame of Paris" also sold to a European buyer for a record $4.2 million.

Picasso held his own, mostly. His tabletop steel cut-out sculpture of a shepherd, "Man with Sheep," sold for $7.1 million, over its $6 million high estimate, and his late-era "Woman Sitting with a Hat," sold for $4.3 million, over its $4 million estimate. But his cheery 1901 work, Children and Toys," stalled at $4.4 million and went unsold. It was priced to sell for at least $5.5 million.

In the night's largest casualty, Christie's also failed to sell Monet's door-sized "Mauve Irises" from 1914-17, a work which had been priced to sell for at least $15 million. After the sale, Christie's auctioneer Christopher Burge said the painting had been shopped widely on the private market before coming to auction, a move which may have made it seem "familiar" to buyers now.

Both auction houses hold a round of contemporary-art auctions next week.

 Write to  Kelly Crow at kelly.crow@wsj.com 