ObamaCare is now under attack on two fronts. By a vote of 245-189, the House yesterday approved the Repealing the Job-Killing Health Care Law Act. A day earlier, as the Associated Press reports, six more states--Iowa, Kansas, Maine, Ohio, Wisconsin and Wyoming--joined the lawsuit in Florida federal court seeking to overturn ObamaCare. This brings the total number of state-government plaintiffs to 26, which is nearly half of the 57 states and a majority of the 50.

Three Democrats--Dan Boren of Oklahoma, Mike Ross of Arkansas and Mike McIntyre of North Carolina--joined all 242 Republicans in voting "yes." National Review Online reports another North Carolina Democrat, Rep. Larry Kissell, initially assented to the bill but switched at the last minute. (Thanks to a Democratic gerrymander, Democrats have a 7-6 majority in North Carolina's House delegation even after last year's election. But Republicans control the redistricting process this time around, so that Tar Heel Democrats are an endangered species.)

 Politico reports that the result had "the same partisan feel of the March vote to pass the law, underscoring once again the hardened political lines of the health care debate." That's one way of looking at it. Another is that the March vote, at 219-212, was a lot closer and would have gone the other way had moderate Democrats not been bullied into supporting the legislation.

The Daily Beast finds "surprising unity" on the Democratic side of yesterday's vote, but anyone who's surprised wasn't paying attention in November. Of the 34 Democrats who voted against ObamaCare in 2010, only 10 voted against repealing it in 2011. The remaining 21 didn't even make it to the next Congress, having retired or been defeated. (All but one of them were replaced by Republicans.) And what's with the 10 who voted against both ObamaCare and repeal, anyway? Are they just obstructionists who say "no" to everything?

Politico reports that House Majority Leader Eric Cantor is challenging Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid to bring the repeal bill up for a vote:

Cantor would seem to have the better of this argument. Democrats still hold a 53-47 majority in the Senate, so they could defeat the bill with a simple majority. If Reid is right, such a vote would be a political winner, so why not hold it?

Rep. Gabrielle Giffords, an Arizona Democrat who voted for ObamaCare, was the only member absent from yesterday's vote. She is still in a hospital in Tucson after an attempt on her life Jan. 8. On Jan. 9, Rep. Chellie Pingree of Maine, writing for the Puffington Host, made a very odd suggestion:

To be sure, the bill's name is awkward. It is also arguably tendentious, though no more so than Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, which to our mind is downright Orwellian. But it would take a mind at the extreme of either dullness or perversity to draw a line from disapproval of "job killing" to approval of actual killing. (Perhaps someone ought to ask Michigan's Rep. Dale Kildee what he thinks of Pingree's proposal.)

If Pingree is really interested in "civil dialogue," she might want to have a little chat with her colleague Rep. Steve Cohen of Tennessee. ABC News reports that in the debate that preceded yesterday's vote, Cohen exploded "in an extraordinary outburst":

Even the left-wing Politifact, however, did not go so far as to liken ObamaCare critics to Nazis. 

To be sure, this is not the first time Nazi analogies have been employed in the debate over ObamaCare. There were a few scattered cases of Tea Party protesters using Nazi imagery on their handmade signs, and as we noted last March, Nolabelist John Avlon, America's most irresponsible purveyor of extreme nonpartisan rhetoric, likened a few minor incidents of vandalism to Kristallnacht.

But Cohen isn't just some yahoo pundit or protester, he is a sitting member of the U.S. House of Representatives. The Hill reports that his defense is that the Nazi comparison was a simile rather than a metaphor:

That's the same John King who, as we noted yesterday, apologized on air for a colleague's having referred to a political candidate putting another in the "crosshairs."

A big part of our job consists of pointing out stupidity and hypocrisy in politics and the media. With people like Pingree, Cohen and King around, it's like shooting fish in a barrel. With a camera, of course.

  Make That 'Shooting Monkeyfish in a Barrel'   From National Review Online's Matthew Franck:

Think about this. One of the most powerful men in America--a man entrusted to interpret words in ways that often have life-and-death consequences--apparently doesn't know what a wrench is. He thinks it's part of an animal's anatomy. Does anyone else find this more disturbing than funny?

  Furious Yellow   Imagine a hybrid form of journalism that combines the National Enquirer's sensationalism with the New York Times's reckless disregard for the truth. Actually, you don't have to imagine. Behold Jose Lambiet of the Palm Beach (Fla.) Post. Lambiet looks into the political affiliations of Gerald and Emily Lemole, parents of Michael Lemole, the Arizona neurosurgeon who has been treating Rep. Gabrielle Giffords:

So far as we know, even the New York Times hasn't yet sought to blame O'Donnell for the attack on Giffords. What does Lambiet think she did, cast a spell on suspect Jared Loughner?

  Stale Gail   Commentary's John Podhoretz aptly describes New York Times columnist Gail Collins as "the bastard child of Don Rickles and David Broder," meaning that she combines the former's grace with the latter's wit. Today she weighs in with a boring column moaning about how boring and offensive she finds Sen. Joe Lieberman, the Connecticut independent Democrat who announced yesterday that he won't seek re-election next year.

"In the contest for unfunniest columnist in America," Podhoretz observes, Gail Collins would win hands-down." We would qualify that. There's one paragraph in this Collins column that is unwittingly funny. She faults Lieberman for seeking the Democratic presidential nomination in 2004:

What Collins doesn't mention is that the Democrats actually did nominate John Kerry, the haughty, French-looking then-junior senator from Massachusetts, who by the way served in Vietnam--a man who also voted for the Iraq war and is an even worse public speaker than Lieberman!

  Band of Brothers   "Pressure Mounts on All-Male Kerry Bastion"--headline, Irish Echo, Jan. 19

  Halp Us Jon Carry--We R Stuck Hear in Aman   "Kerry Jibe at Jordan"--headline, Sun (London), Jan. 19

  Sarah Palin Is Partly to Blame   "Official: Drivers Not Solely Responsible for Ped. Deaths"--headline, WTOP-FM website (Washington), Jan. 20

  Al Gore to Replace Dick Holbrooke?   "All-Seeing Blimp Could Be Afghanistan's Biggest Brain"--headline, Wired.com, Jan. 18

  Separate but Equal   "Huffington Post [sic] to Add African-American Section"--headline, Associated Press, Jan. 20

  Come to Switzerland, You'll Want to Stay Forever   "Suicide Tourists Make Swiss Uneasy as Terminally Ill Seek Death"--headline, Bloomberg, Jan. 18

  12 Angry Toms   "Cat Is Summoned for Jury Duty in Boston; Court Rejects Owners' Appeal to Disqualify Him"--headline, Daily News (New York), Jan. 17

  It Was in Repute?   "Camel Racing Thrown Into Disrepute"--headline, Daily Telegraph (London), Jan. 20

 Questions Nobody Is Asking  

  Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking   "So Why Is Black Swan a Huge Hit, Anyway? (Hint: Lesbians)"--headline, MovieLine.com, Jan. 18

  Breaking News From Stardate 8390   "Search Goes On for Whale in Peril"--headline, Honolulu Star-Advertiser, Jan. 20

  News You Can Use   "Better to Live in Mich. if You Win the Lotto and Never Divorce Scuzzball Hubby"--headline, Detroit News, Jan. 20

 Bottom Story of the Day 

  Climate of Fraud   "An online news service sponsored by the world's premier scientific association unwittingly promoted a study making the false claim that catastrophic global warming would occur within nine years," reports London's Guardian, a global-warmist daily:

The BBC, meanwhile, has a story titled "Climate Scientists Targeted for Fraud":

We strongly disapprove of fraud even against climate scientists, but we can understand why some would feel that turnabout is fair play.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to T. Young, John Sanders, Ethel Fenig, Rod Pennington, Cynthia Lewis, John Williamson, Hillel Markowitz, Michele Schiesser, Ed Lasky, Ed Thompson, David Clark, Dave Tinkle, Joe Perez, David Gerstman, Steve Goss, William Schultz, Skip King, Mark Zoeller, Jeanie Ribble, Dennis Powell, Peter Huntsman, Doug Welty, Bill Briggs, Steve Maley and Peter Kraus. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)