MUMBAI – Reliance Industries Ltd. said Friday projections of a decline in natural gas sales volume from two of its main fields are provisional and subject to change in the future. 

The comments by India's biggest company by market value came after energy industry website Indian Petro, citing a letter written by Reliance Industries to India's upstream regulator, said the company expects gas sales from its D1 and D3 fields to decrease. 

Reliance's shares dropped as much as 4.3% after the report. The shares later pared losses to close down 3.7% at 993.15 rupees ($22) on the Bombay Stock Exchange, lagging a 1.5% fall in the benchmark index. 

Indian Petro said gas sales from the two fields in the D6 block of the Krishna Godavari basin are projected to fall 12%-13% to 38 million metric standard cubic meters a day in the financial year that starts April 2012, from 43-44 MMSCMD currently. 

After market hours, Reliance said in a regulatory filing that "the projected production figures referred to in the media are purely provisional and indicative and are subject to such variations as may emerge during the actual operations in the future years." 

India's biggest natural gas producer also said that the variation in gas production levels can be due to "physical inputs, work program as well as geological and reservoir complexity." 

"Reliance Industries has ongoing discussions, consultation and correspondence with the Director General of Hydrocarbons in respect of regulatory compliance, technical reviews and finalisation of work program and budgets for the future years," the company said. 

The D6 block in the Bay of Bengal is India's first deep-water oil and gas producing asset, and the nation's richest gas find. The D6 block contains three producing fields--Dhirubhai-1, or D1, Dhirubhai-3, or D3, and Dhirubhai-26, or MA1. 

Declining gas output at D6 is a cause of concern for investors as it is a major contributor to Reliance Industries's revenue and also accounts for bulk of the country's gas production. 

In February, Reliance Industries agreed to sell a 30% stake in 23 of its oil and gas blocks to BP PLC for $7.2 billion, plus another $1.8 billion linked to future exploration success. 

The D6 block is part of the deal and analysts expect gas production to recover once BP brings in its deep-water drilling expertise. 

Indian Petro also reported that new wells won't start production before mid-2014 and, therefore, a significant increase in D6 output can't be expected until then. 

 Write to  Rakesh Sharma at rakesh.sharma@dowjones.com 