Governments around Asia have been on heightened alert since Monday in case local Islamist terror cells try to retaliate for the killing of Osama bin Laden. Those fears are certainly justified. Yet the region's counterterrorism front has also changed dramatically for the better in recent years, and it behooves us to understand why.

Indonesia offers a telling case study. The world's largest Muslim-majority democracy has also long been home to a violent radical fringe. Terror groups there were quick to hail bin Laden as a martyr. "He fought for Islam and he fought for the lands colonized by America," Son Hadi, a spokesman for the terrorist group Jemaah Ansharut Tauhid (JAT) told an AFP reporter. "Al Qaeda didn't die with him. Jihad will not be dampened just because he's dead." 

Ties between al Qaeda in the Middle East and groups in Southeast Asia have always been hard to pin down, and financial and logistical support has flowed in both directions at various times. Umar Patek, a senior member of Jemaah Islamiyah (JI) and one of the last alleged perpetrators of the 2002 Bali bombing to elude capture, was arrested in January in Abbottabad, Pakistan, which we now know was the location of bin Laden's villa. 

Yet the groups making Monday's veiled threats are very different from what the government in Jakarta would have confronted only a few years ago. JI, one of the largest threats from that era, has been dramatically curtailed as a fighting force despite its ongoing propagation of extremist rhetoric.

The group was linked to the 2002 and 2005 Bali bombings, among many other attacks of the time. But after that, Jakarta racked up one victory over JI after another. A steady succession of leaders were killed or arrested, including Riduan Isamuddin, aka Hambali, in 2003, and Abu Dujana and Zarkasih in 2007. 

The military's elite counterterror Detachment 88 hounded violent JI splinter groups with equal tenacity. The most significant scalp was that of Noordin Mohamed Top, killed in a shootout in 2009 alongside several of his comrades. He and a band of about 30 followers allegedly masterminded the 2009 Jakarta hotel bombings. His death has made Indonesia a significantly safer place.

None of this is to say that progress has been linear: Successes were accompanied by a string of terrorist attacks throughout the decade. But the effects are coming into focus now. Indonesia has become a much more difficult environment for groups aspiring to perpetrate attacks requiring large-scale preparation. Analysts have noted that the model is shifting away from JI-type organizations to stand-alone cells attempting smaller-scale attacks. This appears to be the case with a recent string of letter-bomb attacks on moderate Muslim leaders, as well as a suicide bombing at a mosque last month. 

Indeed, terror groups have been so degraded in their capabilities that the most recent attacks claimed only one life: the suicide bomber himself. While it would be better for peaceable Indonesians to not have to worry about such a prospect in the first place, this still marks a dramatic improvement over recent years.

Jakarta must still reckon with its own shortcomings. The government of President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono is struggling to find ways to counter radical Islamist proselytizing in schools, mosques and prisons. The judiciary has not kept pace with the military in its approach to suspected terrorists, as witnessed by the ongoing problems with the trial of cleric Abu Bakar Bashir, tied to the Bali bombings and now accused of other militant activities. There's no room for resting on Jakarta's laurels.

As in Indonesia, so too in many other places. Bin Laden's death finds Asia on the whole a much less hospitable place for terrorists than it once was.

Following the November 2008 Mumbai hotel attack, the Indian government has stepped up antiterror enforcement. The home minister installed after Mumbai, P. Chidambaram, has injected new energy and accountability into counterterrorism agencies, and boosted intelligence sharing among different branches. In the year leading up to Mumbai, India suffered at least four major terror attacks and many smaller ones. In the two and a half years since, it has suffered four, only one of which claimed more than 10 victims.

Australia and Singapore also boast impressive antiterror policing capabilities. While all governments still face challenges—some much more than others—Asia is nonetheless become a safer place.

If there's a weak spot, it's the Philippines. Manila has never been able to get a handle on separatist terrorism originating in the majority-Muslim Mindanao region in the south. The most worrying of the terror groups is the Abu Sayyaf Group, with ties to JI. Unlike its counterparts elsewhere, the Philippine government seems to lack the will, let alone the ability, to make inroads against ASG and other terrorists. That's a danger both to the country's own citizens and, potentially, to their neighbors.

A "long war" such as this demands more than one victory. Osama bin Laden's death is an important win for America and its allies. It's also an opportunity to remark on the other victories that have been won over the past decade. 

Such victories are interrelated. Earlier counterterror progress in Asia could help deprive terrorists here of an opportunity to exploit bin Laden's demise for their own ends by staging retaliatory attacks. By the same token, the Umar Patek case suggests that keeping pressure on al Qaeda in Pakistan can be good for Asia. The obverse is true, too: Pakistan's ambivalence to terror fighting has made it a safe haven from which jihadists can threaten India and Afghanistan.

 Asia must still confront heightened danger of an attack in the immediate future. It's worth reflecting, however, on the progress that Asian governments have made in protecting themselves from this existential threat. This is how the long war will be won in the end.