LONDON—U.K. manufacturing expanded at its fastest rate in 16 years in December, adding weight to indications that the country's economic recovery is picking up pace. 

But other figures also released Tuesday provided a more cautious view of economic prospects. The Bank of England said growth in the money supply accelerated only slightly in November and net consumer lending was weaker than expected despite a rise in the number of loans approved for house purchases. 

Overall, the data support the view that the next move by the BOE is more likely to be an increase in interest rates than an extension of stimulus. Still, the central bank is expected to keep policy on hold for some months, until a clearer need emerges for action. 

The purchasing managers index for the manufacturing sector rose to 58.3 in December from 57.5 in November, said Markit Economics and the Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply. December's figure is the highest since September 1994. A reading above 50 indicates the sector is expanding, while a reading below 50 indicates it is contracting. 

The unexpectedly strong manufacturing PMI figure saw sterling rise to $1.5607 against the dollar from $1.5473 late in New York Monday, while the euro lost ground against the pound, falling to £0.8575 from its opening level Tuesday of £0.8628. 

But the BOE figures showing that the housing market remains subdued tempered the robust manufacturing data. Banks and other financial institutions approved 48,019 mortgages for home purchases in November, up from an eight-month low of 47,315 in October and the highest total since July. Still, the number of approvals remains lower than the 59,019 seen in November 2009 and the previous six-month average of 48,145. 

Net lending to individuals slipped to £668 million ($1.03 billion) in November from £1.5 billion in October, and versus economists' predictions for it to stand at £1.1 billion. The struggling housing market, coupled with the low level of mortgage approvals, is a sign that residential property prices could fall further, economists said. 

Other data released by the BOE Tuesday were also less encouraging. The BOE's preferred measure of broad money supply picked up only modestly in November, with the pace of growth remaining weak, underscoring the likelihood that the central bank will keep policy on hold for some time. 

The figures showed that broad money supply, excluding those financial institutions whose activities distort underlying trends, rose 3.5% in November in three-month annualized terms, stronger than 2.7% in October. 

"Although the pace [of money-supply expansion] is probably just under half the pace we would hope to see in 'normal' conditions, we suspect the Bank of England will take comfort from the fact that the growth rate is moving in the right direction—at least on the headline measure," said  Alan Clarke, U.K. economist at BNP Paribas. 

The BOE suspended its £200 billion policy of quantitative easing—buying U.K. government bonds with freshly created central bank money—last February, but it has left open the possibility of restarting it if conditions deteriorate. Monetary Policy Committee member  Adam Posen has voted for further stimulus at recent meetings, while  Andrew Sentance has called for modest policy tightening. 

In a rather ominous sign, the PMI survey also recorded an increase in average input costs, with manufacturers in sectors such as clothing, food products and chemicals hit hard by demand exceeding supply for certain input products, as well as rising energy costs. 

"The hawks on the Bank of England's Monetary Policy Committee will be further unnerved by these rising price pressures," said  Rob Dobson, senior economist at Markit. 

Meanwhile, a survey by Citi and pollsters YouGov published Tuesday showed the inflation expectations of the U.K. public rising to two-year highs in the last month of 2010 as price growth remained strong. 

Average annual inflation expectations for the year ahead were 3.5% in December, up from 3.3% in November and the fastest rate of growth since September 2008. Five-to 10-year expectations also posted their highest rate since May 2008, increasing to 3.8% in December from 3.5% in November. 

  Andrew Goodwin, senior economic advisor to the Ernst & Young ITEM Club, said the PMI figure provided confidence for a firm reading for fourth-quarter gross domestic product. Manufacturing output accounts for 12.8% of U.K. GDP. 

"The pace of growth may slow a little, given that we cannot rely on construction to keep contributing in the way it has done recently, but the recovery appears to have some good momentum behind it," he said. 

While December's figures show the manufacturing activity is growing steadily, the sector faces a number of challenges throughout 2011 as the government implements the bulk of its spending cuts and tax increases. 

An example of such a tax increase came Tuesday with the increase in the country's sales tax to 20% from 17.5%. However, U.K. Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne tried to assuage fears of further tax rises, saying the government has no hidden plans to introduce further increases to fix the public finances. 

—Laurence Norman and Paul Hannon in London contributed to this article. 



 Write to  Ainsley Thomson at ainsley.thomson@dowjones.com, Natasha Brereton at natasha.brereton@dowjones.com and Nicholas Winning at nick.winning@dowjones.com 