 New York 

Though Rembrandt's reputation remains bullet-proof, he no longer receives—and probably never needed—the cultic adulation he enjoyed in the 19th and early 20th centuries. Yet it was precisely such passion that animated two of his latest and most fervent votaries, the collectors Henry Clay Frick and Frits Lugt. As a tribute to both men, the Frick Collection has just mounted about 80 paintings, drawings and etchings in "Rembrandt and His School: Masterworks from the Frick and Lugt Collections." 

The Frick Collection

Through May 15

Frick (1849-1919) and Lugt (1884-1970) were buying up Rembrandts at the very zenith of the artist's glory, although for slightly different reasons and in markedly different ways. This is important, since the current exhibition focuses as much on art collecting as on the art itself. Though fairly well-to-do by birth and marriage, Lugt was hardly in the same league as Frick, who liked to boast that he owned more railroad shares than any man alive. While Frick collected big oil paintings the way Theodore Roosevelt collected big game, Lugt inclined toward the humbler, frailer medium of drawings. With one exception from the Metropolitan Museum, all of the drawings at the Frick come from the collection that Lugt began to assemble at the precocious age of 14. Let it also be said that, as a Dutchman, Lugt's interest in Rembrandt cannot be separated from national pride.

Thirty-five years younger than Frick, Lugt had almost a modernist's appreciation of the fresh and wayward spontaneity in Rembrandt's drawings, as well as in the drawings of such followers of the master as Lambert Doomer, Govert Flinck and Philips Koninck, who are also included in the exhibition.

Most of Rembrandt's mature works were portraits, landscapes or depictions of classical and biblical subjects. In his drawings, however, we see another side of him, more intimately involved in the here and now. The almost dreamlike film that seems to cover his paintings, softening and refining reality, is swept away in the drawings on view, which have the immediacy, the circumstantiality, of life itself. In one of them, a mother consoles a child at the instant when a dog appears and frightens it. In another, the artist's wife lies in a canopied bed while a bored servant tends to her knitting: Here the bedclothes, the canopy and a nearby chair form a tangle of angled lines, aided by a liberal use of wash, that somehow mass into the things they are meant to depict. One would have to wait 2½ centuries for Edgar Degas to depict a woman combing her hair with the casualness, the plausibility, the verisimilitude that Rembrandt achieves in a pen-and-ink drawing of 1637.

As for the drawings that Frick purchased as authentic works of the master, they are either of inferior quality or have since been reattributed and have no part in this exhibition. And his motives for collecting Rembrandts were somewhat different from Lugt's: Quite aside from the Dutch master's pure, monetized heft, Rembrandt was the greatest Protestant painter in history, which meant a lot to Anglo-Saxon sensibilities more than a century ago. Moreover, Rembrandt's subject matter and technique resembled and inspired the mainstream 19th-century art that Frick was raised to admire.

The famous industrialist has put New York—indeed, North America—in his debt by luring to our shores the artist's great self-portrait of 1658, an archetypal evocation of old age, of exhaustion, even of capitulation to the buffets of time and fortune, that was produced when the artist was only 52 years old. Like Rembrandt's famed "Carcass of Beef" in the Louvre, the Frick self- portrait presents us with a supremely beautiful rendering of a supremely unbeautiful subject. That said, it is looking better today than it has in centuries, having just been restored in the laboratories of the Met.

It is hanging, for the duration of the show, in the small oval room just east of the long gallery where it usually resides. Now flanking the work are two other Rembrandt paintings: "The Polish Rider" (1655) and a fine early portrait of Nicolaes Ruts. This latter work was created when Rembrandt was only 25 and it entered the collection after Frick's death. Painted just before Rembrandt moved to Amsterdam from Leiden, it depicts an eminent local burgher, clad in dark robes and rising up majestically against a twilight background. There is a firmness and precision to the paint that are very different from the more expressionistic textures of the 1658 self- portrait, but hardly less evocative for that.

It is to the Frick Collection's credit that it has exhibited, directly across from the three Rembrandts, two paintings that Frick purchased as works by the artist, though the weight of recent scholarship has gone against those attributions. The "Portrait of a Young Artist" (1650s-1660s) is now ascribed to a "Follower of Rembrandt," while "Old Woman With a Book" (c. 1650s) is recognized as the work of Carel van der Pluym.

Even if Frick wasn't always right about Rembrandt's paintings, and perhaps never right about his drawings, he fared very well where this artist's etchings and drypoints were concerned. The genius of Rembrandt's works in these media is that they preserve and propagate the idiosyncratic fluidity of his best drawings. But because, almost by definition, these works are created for other eyes than the artist's (unlike most of his drawings), they possess an elaborate structure and a finality that are neither sought nor attained in those drawings. Some of Rembrandt's best-known etchings can now be seen at the Frick: "The Hundred Guilder Print" (c. 1643-49), "The Three Crosses" (1653) and the haunting "Landscape With Three Trees" (1643) And though it is quite likely that visitors to the Frick will have seen these works before, they are hardly likely to have seen them in a finer or fresher state.

 Mr. Gardner is a critic based in New York.  