Experimental Off-Off Broadway theater isn't the most obvious career move for Reggie Watts—not after being plucked by Conan O'Brien from the top ranks of New York's alt-comedy scene to serve as the opener for last year's national "Legally Prohibited from Being on Television Tour." But then, nothing is "obvious" for the comedian-slash-musician-slash-performance-artist polymath, who for two weeks beginning Friday will present "Radio Play," a collage of collaborative vignettes at PS122 in the East Village.

Mr. Watts, 39 years old, is known for his hyper-observational channeling of international characters, his improvisational song-making, in which he often sings against vocal beats or melodies he has live-recorded—and for his prodigious afro. The biracial son of a French mother and an Air Force sergeant father, he was born in Germany and bounced around Europe before his family settled in Great Falls, Mont., when he was five. After dropping out of college, he played in several Seattle-area bands, then moved to New York in 2005 to pursue performance. Quickly, if not overnight, Mr. Watts amassed a substantially mixed audience of music, comedy, theater, and high-art crowds before earning national acclaim through Mr. O'Brien and various short comedic videos online, the most popular of which has an unprintable title and more than two million hits on YouTube.

But if he's forced to pick one artistic discipline, it is theater. "To me it's the ultimate art form," he said Tuesday during a rehearsal break at PS122. "It incorporates every single medium you can imagine. You feel people in the room, and it's completely human-powered."

"Radio Play" is meant to be listened to more than seen, which is why much of it occurs in the dark. Inspired by a media that is now virtually extinct, it features songs, stories and even commercials in the model of an old-time radio program. But these aren't your grandma's stories: In one, a couples-only camping trip leads not only to infidelity but an outrageously loud loss of bodily control; in another, actress Mary Jane Gibson rattles off the entire plot of "Fatal Attraction." 

The show is funny and not funny and, as is common in Mr. Watts's work, it is not always clear whether something is funny or not funny or what it is at all. Aided by the spooky sounds of a theremin, "Radio Play" explores what he called "a fragmented psychology," and leads audiences in and out of familiar and disorientating material—a technique he also employs in his stand-up comedy act. "It should feel like a day dream," he said, "like a journey through ideas."

After the rehearsal break, Mr. Watts and his cast members returned to their positions on a set comprising outdated technologies like faux wood-paneled televisions, cassette players and photo slides. Technical rehearsals are restrained and halting exercises in detail and precision, and this production, with dozens of subtle sounds and lighting cues to keep the show on its wheels, is no exception. To an outsider, the process might seem tedious more than anything, but it was an odd kind of paradise for Mr. Watts. Quiet moments of technical tinkering were accompanied, not infrequently, by his spontaneous channeling of lite-rock hits ("Biggest Part of Me," by Ambrosia, and "She's Always a Woman" by Billy Joel). In contrast to his freestyle solo act, he said, the rigor and deliberation of theater feels grounding. "It's good for me. I can actually be part of a structure but still have my moments of improvisation," he said.

After rehearsal, the comedian was joined by playwright and "Radio Play" co-writer Tommy Smith, 33, whom Mr. Watts described as "my favorite person to create with," a "freewheeling surrealist and a master of narrative arc and structure." The pair traveled across Ninth Street toward Café Pick Me Up and debriefed about the rehearsal. But with no outside seating at the café, and with frequent fan interruption, the two men decided to head into Tompkins Square Park. Mr. Smith sat on a bench, and Mr. Watts laid out sideways on the ground, head in hand, remaining there even after his collaborator pointed out several large rats nearby. Mr. Watts didn't flinch. "Just as long as they don't start nibbling me," he said, before resuming the conversation.