 The raid on Osama bin Laden's compound yielded a trove of intelligence the size of a small college library, a top White House official said, adding that it represents the largest cache ever obtained from a terrorist and that it indicated that in addition to being the group's symbolic leader, bin Laden was involved in strategic operations. 

 Pakistan's spy agency, the Inter-Services Intelligence, is facing unprecedented public condemnation for its failure to catch bin Laden or anticipate the U.S. raid that killed him, putting its influential and powerful chief, Lt. Gen. Shuja Ahmad Pasha, under pressure to take responsibility for the lapses amid calls for him to quit. 

 Pakistan's leaders, already battling to control the diplomatic, political and military fallout from the raid that killed bin Laden inside their country, face one particularly divisive question: What should they do with the house where al Qaeda's leader lived? 



 Europe's debt crisis has returned full circle to the problem that started it more than a year ago: How to save the malfunctioning Greek state from running out of money. 

Greece has been slipping further behind its targets for cutting its budget deficit and is expected to need nearly €30 billion ($43 billion) additional financing for 2012, according to euro-zone officials.

The country's growing reliance on aid from other euro members is fueling a debate over if Greece should hold talks with its private creditors about extending the maturity of its bonds, a step that Germany is quietly pushing but other euro nations are resisting. 



 Slovakia's ruling coalition government must fully back the €700 billion ($1 trillion) European Stability Mechanism, the euro zone's permanent rescue mechanism, before counting on the Central European country's largest opposition party, Smer-Social Democracy, to vote for it in Parliament, said the leader of the left-of-center party, in an interview. 



 Portugal's financial bailout will be tough for the country's banks, but they should be able to raise capital ratios without tapping aid, the heads of the main Portuguese banks said. 



 The European Central Bank's anti-inflation resolve remains firm despite recent comments by ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet signaling that an interest-rate rise is unlikely in June, Austrian central bank governor Ewald Nowotny—a top member of the ECB—said in an interview. 



 U.K. Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg shrugged off suggestions he step down as leader of the Liberal Democrats in the wake of his party's humiliating losses in local elections and voters' rejection of the party's plan to reform the U.K.'s electoral system. 



 A record increase in clothes prices kept U.K. factory-gate inflation high in April, but falling commodity prices could push the rate of inflation down in the coming months.  

 No British agencies contributed to the 52 deaths when suicide bombers struck London's transport system in 2005, a judge ruled in an inquest, disappointing some victims' families who believe intelligence lapses and a slow emergency response were partly to blame. 



 German industrial production climbed more than expected in March, data showed, as steady growth continues for Europe's largest economy. 



 Germany's controversial ex-defense minister Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg plagiarized swathes of his doctoral thesis "intentionally," according to the university that awarded him his doctorate. 



 Italian police and coast-guard officials on Sunday rescued some 400 illegal migrants coming from Libya whose boat was tossed against rocks near a port in the tiny southern Italian island of Lampedusa after the steering malfunctioned, officials said.  



 Russia's ability to balance its $375 billion budget has come under threat after a sharp drop in crude prices, especially since the Kremlin plans on boosting spending during a year of parliamentary elections and preparations for the 2012 presidential vote. 



 The H-1B visa program, which is designed to supply skilled foreign workers to companies in the U.S., has slowed sharply, attracting about 50% fewer petitions so far this year than last year, and 80% fewer than in 2009, according to U.S. immigration officials. 

 The Louisiana state supreme court is expected to hear a novel argument Monday in the long-standing debate over the legacy of the Confederate flag: Is it so prejudicial that its presence at the courthouse should allow a man convicted of murder in 2009 to walk free?  

 Wages are rising in China, heralding the possible end of an era of cheap goods, an issue that is likely to hover behind this week's talks between Chinese and U.S. leaders in Washington at their annual Strategic Economic Dialogue. 



 Faced with a Japanese government demand for an immediate shutdown of its Hamaoka nuclear plant, Chubu Electric Power is scrambling to find options that would fill the potential electricity void in the peak summer months.  

On Friday, Prime Minister Naoto Kan held a dramatic news conference demanding that Chubu Electric close its Hamoaka nuclear plant—located in a coastal area seen as vulnerable to earthquakes and tsunamis—until it could bolster its safety procedures.

The company said its board met Saturday to consider the matter but adjourned without making a decision about whether to accept Kan's demand. 



 Opposition leaders scored their biggest gains ever in weekend general elections that provided the strongest signal yet of a loosening of Singapore's tightly controlled political system. 



 Indonesia is hoping to raise its global profile by helping members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations address some their biggest problems, said Indonesia's foreign minister. 



 Taliban fighters flooded southern Afghanistan's main city this weekend, seizing key buildings to stage attacks on government agencies in a two-day battle that brought Kandahar to its knees and showcased the insurgency's strength.  



 The man accused of masterminding an attack on a Baghdad church last year wrestled a gun from a guard at an Iraqi detention facility, freed his comrades and launched an hours-long assault that ended with 17 people dead, including a top counterterrorism officer. 



 Syrian security forces arrested more than 200 people early Sunday and a 12-year-old boy has died, as President Bashar Assad expanded a campaign to crush the country's seven-week, nationwide uprising, activists said. 



 Bahrain's King Hamad called Sunday for emergency law in the Sunni-ruled island to be lifted on June 1, a sign the authorities feel they have got the country under control. after carrying out a brutal crackdown on the opposition and pro-democracy activists during the last two months. 



 A deadly sectarian clash at two churches near Cairo on Saturday that left at least 12 dead was blamed by Christians on Egypt's ultra-conservative Salafis, a radical Islamist group whose growing influence is worrying both secularists and the country's Christian minority.  



 Col. Moammar Gadhafi has turned to Libya's tribal leaders in a new effort to erode a Western-backed insurgency, but the initiative, including the promise of an amnesty, is having no immediate impact on the stalemated conflict. 