SINGAPORE—Tens of thousands of people gathered in a suburban field here this week, waving light blue flags and cheering a dozen opposition candidates onstage.

The rally, and others like it over the past week, are rare for Singapore, where public dissent is muted. They also point to rising momentum for opposition parties in elections on Saturday, which analysts say are likely to be the most fiercely contested in a country where a single party has dominated since independence in 1965.

Gains for the opposition are far from assured. Residents have flirted with opposition candidates in the past only to abandon them on election day. Although analysts believe there is a strong chance opposition groups will gain at least a few new seats in Singapore's Parliament, they say it is also possible opposition leaders will win more votes than in the last polls in 2006—and still wind up with less power than before, depending on which seats they claim.

Singapore's opposition candidates are looking stronger than ever in the general election being held Saturday. Take a look at the key players, including Nicole Seah, below, one of the youngest candidates on the ballot.

Saturday's general election is expected to be the most fiercely contested in the country since its independence in 1965. Opposition parties collectively are challenging 82 out of 87 parliamentary seats. Review the major parties.

The stakes for Singapore are high, either way. Voters are increasingly disenchanted with inflation and a wide gap between rich and poor, and many fear the country's economic model—which relies heavily on exports to the West—isn't sustainable. Singapore's founder and guiding architect, Lee Kuan Yew, is 87 years old, leaving many residents worried about what will happen whenever he exits the stage.

As a result, some analysts believe Saturday's election could spell the beginning of the end of one-party dominance in Singapore—or, it could provide a mandate for another generation of Mr. Lee's People's Action Party to carry on once Mr. Lee is gone.

Pre-election polls, unlike the U.S. and some other countries, aren't common in Singapore. But although opposition parties are collectively challenging 82 out of 87 parliamentary seats—a record high and sharp leap from 47 out of 84 seats contested in 2006—it's widely assumed the opposition won't come close to gaining control of Parliament. A more realistic possibility, analysts say, is that the opposition will pick up its first "group representation constituency," or GRC, which is a winner-take-all bloc of seats ranging from four to six representing a wide geographic area.

Opposition candidates could also pick up one or more single-member seats, on top of the two they have already. If all that happens, it could intensify pressure on leaders to fine-tune economic policies to make growth more inclusive, including more social-welfare schemes to redistribute wealth, which economists say could slow growth in the years ahead.

The vote is also drawing attention elsewhere in Asia, where other governments hold elections with weaker oppositions than is common in the West. Mr. Lee has argued that Western-style democracy isn't appropriate for every country, and many Asian political theorists have looked upon Singapore as a template for maintaining single-party control over time. 

If opposition leaders do pick up more seats, it "would be quite a breakthrough," says  Terence Chong, a research fellow at the Institute of Southeast Asian Studies in Singapore. It would send a "clear signal that people do not completely trust the PAP to steer their destiny."

A key area to watch, analysts said, is the five-seat GRC known as Aljunied in Singapore's eastern suburbs.

Colloquially described as part of Singapore's "heartland," where the city-state's socioeconomic tensions weigh heaviest, it is there that opposition leaders feel they have the best chance of weakening the PAP's dominance of Parliament. In the 2006 election, the ruling party won 82 of 84 seats with 67% of the popular vote.

The Workers' Party, which won one seat in 2006, scored a coup in recruiting corporate lawyer Chen Show Mao for its slate of candidates there; he is seen as a symbol of the opposition's rising credibility.

The 50-year-old partner at Davis Polk & Wardwell's Beijing office possesses credentials to which PAP candidates used to lay exclusive claim, including degrees from Harvard, Stanford, and Oxford—where Mr. Chen was a Rhodes Scholar—and a work portfolio that includes advising Industrial & Commercial Bank of China Ltd. and Agricultural Bank of China Ltd. on initial public offerings.

Born in Taiwan, Mr. Chen lived in Singapore when he was younger and served as an infantry officer in its army before living in Beijing and elsewhere.

"I return home to contest this election in the hope of giving back to society, and to contribute to the building of democracy," he said at a news conference last week. He has argued more must be done to share economic growth with lower-income Singaporeans. 

In 2006, a PAP team led by Foreign Minister George Yeo kept hold of Aljunied with 56.1% of the vote against the Workers' Party's 43.9%—the ruling party's smallest victory margin in that election. The constituency's voter profile is also favorable to the opposition, with many middle-class citizens thought to be concerned over inflation. 

"The PAP passes everything in Parliament without any opposition. A lot of Singaporeans who are affected by rising prices feel that they are trapped," said Audrey Yeo, a 66-year-old housewife and an Aljunied resident for over two decades. "We need the opposition to speak up for us."

Losing the Aljunied constituency wouldn't be "the end of the world," said the elder Mr. Lee, who now serves as "minister mentor" in Singapore's cabinet and is the current prime minister's father, according to comments published in the local Straits Times newspaper. "If Aljunied decides to go that way, well Aljunied has five years to live and repent" before the next election.

"It's good that we are contested, and contested strongly," Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong said last week in a news conference. "A stronger opposition will crystallize the issues and make Singaporeans realize more what is at stake in these elections."

Critics in the opposition have long argued the PAP tilts the playing field in its favor, including warning citizens it will prioritize public refurbishment programs for housing projects and public areas in constituencies won by the ruling party.

But the PAP has also highlighted its track record of creating a financial dynamo on the small, resource-poor island, and restoring strong growth after the recent financial crisis. Prime Minister Lee has pledged more growth and to tighten immigration rules.

Whatever the outcome of the vote, at least nine opposition politicians will enter Parliament, as mandated by constitutional amendments passed last year. If fewer than nine are elected, the balance will be drawn from the defeated opposition candidates with the best results. But those added opposition parliamentarians would be "nonconstituency members," with limited voting rights, and some analysts have discounted their significance.

Crowds as large as 40,000 people have attended the opposition's nightly outdoor rallies, strategically interspersed across Singapore's numerous lower- and middle-income public housing estates.

"Last year, our GDP grew by 14.5% but Singaporeans' median household income increased by only 3.1%. Where did the 11% go?" Mr. Chen said in his rally speech Monday. "The test of our progress as a nation is not whether we add more to those who already have much, but whether we provide enough to those who have less," he added, to cheers.

Still, "rally attendances don't translate into votes," Lem Yang Fong, a 28-year-old architectural assistant and Aljunied resident, said. "Aljunied has always been a very close fight. It's hard to speculate but I think it'll be very close." 

—Patrick Barta contributed to this article.

 Write to  Chun Han Wong at chunhan.wong@dowjones.com 