Columbia Sportswear CEO  Tim Boyle, 61, has paid $8.3 million cash for a five-bedroom house at the Four Seasons' Hualalai Resort in Hawaii. 

The acre-plus golf-course property had originally been listed for nearly $9 million. The home measures about 5,900 square feet and has 270-degree views. Mr. Boyle's grandparents founded the company in 1938.

  Brandon Wood of Pacific Resort Realty and  Edward Rapoza of Island Land Company represented Mr. Boyle and  Robert Kildow of Hualalai Realty had the listing.

Home Depot co-founder  Arthur Blank has dropped the price of his Atlanta home, above, to $4.9 million, 55% off his original $10.9 million asking price three years ago.

Mr. Blank, who also owns the NFL's Atlanta Falcons, bought the house in 1993 for $3.4 million. The seven-bedroom, white home has several terraces and sits on 4.2 acres in the Tuxedo Park area of Buckhead. The property has a pool and extensive gardens with a waterfall and a lake. Mr. Blank and his wife, Stephanie, moved nearby for what a spokeswoman has said was the chance to renovate a historic home and to be within walking distance of shops and their children's school.

  Betsy Akers of Atlanta Fine Homes, a Sotheby's International Realty affiliate, has the listing. "This is priced at land value and you get the house for free," she said.

T.R. Knight, a former star of ABC's "Grey's Anatomy," has taken his Los Angeles home off the market.

Mr. Knight listed the English Tudor-style home last year, asking just under $4 million for it. He reduced the asking price to $3.2 million shortly thereafter. He paid roughly $2.9 million for the home in 2007, through a trust, and completed a restoration over three years. 

The 1930s home is in Los Feliz, on about one-third of an acre near Griffith Park, and has four bedrooms and mountain views. There's a two-level great room with vaulted wooden ceilings and a fireplace and a master bedroom with a domed ceiling. There's also an art studio and a bathroom tiled entirely in black. Mr. Knight recently appeared on Broadway in David Mamet's "A Life in the Theatre." 

Listing agent Peter Lorimer of Peter Lorimer Group Estates declined to identify his client last fall but said the owner had relocated to New York. 

—Juliet Chung

—Email: privateproperties@wsj.com 