Mumbai -- Venture capitalists find personal finance websites attractive, and see opportunities in these start-ups that attract young, Internet-savvy Indian consumers looking for mortgages and help with filing taxes.

Recently, Chennai-based loan website BankBazaar.com received $6 million from Walden International, an American venture capital fund. This was the second tranche of funding for the site which earlier got a $1-million investment from Chennai-based AVT Infotech in August 2008. 

It also is the latest in a series of investments on sites linked to personal finance that started a couple of years ago. Typically, these offer greater efficiency, allowing customers and providers of services to reduce costs, said  Robin Roy, associate director, financial services, at audit and consultancy firm PricewaterhouseCoopers.

Despite the limited Internet penetration and broadband availability, which curbs the number of people who can access such sites, interest in these sites is high. 

"India has a young population with a majority under 35 years, who are Internet savvy," said  Rajesh Subramaniam, managing director of Walden India, formerly with ICICI Bank Ltd. "Internet penetration is low and only likely to rise, which is a huge opportunity."

Last November, Span Across IT Solutions Pvt. Ltd, which runs online tax filing service TaxSpanner.com, raised an undisclosed sum from Delhi-based Indian Angel Network Services Pvt. Ltd, a network of investors.

Earlier, Rupeetalk.com received 42 million rupees in two tranches from Seedfund, before it was taken over by venture funded NetAmbit Infosource and e-Services Pvt. Ltd in December.

Bankbazaar chief executive officer Adhil Shetty said the company preferred venture capital to debt because more money could be raised, besides which it could get access to expertise.

"We now have tie-ups with six banks and plan to double it in the next 12 to 18 months," he said. "Debt would only give us 20 million rupees, but through venture capital we could get large risk investments." 

NetAmbit, which bought out Rupeetalk in December, obtained venture funding twice in the last four years.

The company received 150 million rupees in 2007 and 100 million rupees in 2009 from US-based Bessemer Venture Partners. Helion Venture Partners also invested 400 million rupees in 2009.

Apart from funding, venture investors help improve strategy, said  Girish Batra, chairman and managing director at NetAmbit. 

"The idea to acquire Rupeetalk was theirs," he said, adding, "they knew Rupeetalk was looking for funds and said we should look at buying a company rather than building it bottom up." 

The Rupeetalk acquisition extended NetAmbit's Internet presence to 140 offline locations.