WASHINGTON—The Obama administration imposed asset freezes and business bans on senior Syrian government officials, part of a growing international effort to pressure President Bashar al-Assad to end a violent crackdown on political protesters.

The U.S. action, which included sanctions on members of Mr. Assad's family, will be followed by formal European Union moves in coming days. EU officials meeting in Brussels on Friday said that they have reached a political accord to start work on an arms embargo on Syria but stopped short of endorsing an asset freeze or travel ban on Syrian leaders.

Washington and Europe also pressed their case Friday against Mr. Assad at the United Nations, with the United Nations Human Rights Council in Geneva calling for a formal investigation into violence that has estimated to have killed more than 400 people. U.S. and European officials said they are considering taking the Syrian case to the U.N. Security Council in an effort to force Damascus to stand down.

"The United States believes that Syria's deplorable actions toward its people warrant a strong international response. We welcome the decision today by the U.N. Human Rights Council to condemn the Government of Syria for its violent crackdown against peaceful demonstrators. The Syrian people's call for freedom of expression, association, peaceful assembly, and the ability to freely choose their leaders must be heard," the White House said.

The Obama administration's announcement of sanctions marks a significant ratcheting up of pressure on Mr. Assad. But the White House and State Department pointedly didn't demand the Syrian leader step down, as they have with Col. Moammar Gadhafi of Libya and former Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak in recent months. U.S. officials said it remained up to the Syrian people to decide Mr. Assad's fate. 

The U.S. targeted President Assad's brother, Maher al-Assad, and his cousin, Atif Najib, for directly overseeing Syrian military units accused of suppressing the protesters. The younger Assad heads the Syrian army's Fourth Armored Division, a presidential guard that protects the Syrian leader. Mr. Najib headed the Political Security Directorate in Deraa province, which has been at the center of the anti-Assad uprising and has seen the most violence. 

The U.S. Treasury also sanctioned Syria's top spy agency—the General Intelligence Directorate—and its chief, Ali Mamluk. Washington also targeted the overseas arm of Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, the Qods Force, due to charges that it is playing a significant role in helping Mr. Assad crack down on dissent.

U.S. officials said Mr. Assad and other members of his family could still be targeted in future sanctions decisions.

The U.S. imposed broad sanctions on Syria in 2004 that banned virtually all trade between the two countries. The Obama administration eased some sanctions in 2009, but the White House said Friday it was ending this effort while extending other sanctions on Damascus.

U.S. officials acknowledged Friday the sanctioned entities and individuals are unlikely to hold significant assets inside the American financial system. But these officials said they believed the sanctions, coupled with similar measures to be taken by the EU, could create rifts inside the Assad regime.

EU officials said they expect work to start on Monday not just on the logistics of an arms embargo, but also on how to apply an asset freeze and travel ban. One official said they would expect restrictive measures to be signed up to and agreed in advance of May 23, which is the date EU foreign ministers next gather.

The targeted sanctions by the U.S. are meant to "show the direct personal costs" of participating in the crackdown, said Jacob Sullivan, the State Department's Director of Policy and Planning on Friday. "We're working to sharpen the choice for the Syrian leadership," he said.

The U.S. has employed a similar strategy in trying to force Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi to end a military campaign against his own people. The U.S. imposed sanctions on one of Col's Gadhafi's closest aides, Musa Kusa, but lifted them once he defected.

—Jay Solomon

 Write to  Jay Solomon at jay.solomon@wsj.com 