LONDON—U.K. police said Wednesday that they are reopening an investigation into the reporting tactics of the News of the World tabloid, a move that came as the newspaper said it had fired a senior editor. 

The developments are the latest in a multiyear saga involving the paper's use of private investigators to obtain personal information about celebrities, politicians and other public figures, notably through breaking into mobile-phone voice mailboxes, or hacking.

The News of the World's royal-family correspondent and a private investigator employed by the Sunday tabloid were jailed in 2007 after a two-year investigation found them guilty of hacking into phone messages of the royal family. 

News of the World's parent—News Corp.'s News International—initially described the case as the work of a single reporter. 

But new information has surfaced through civil suits brought against the paper by a number of people, including actress Sienna Miller. 

That led News International to suspend Assistant Editor  Ian Edmondson in December following what it called "a serious allegation." The company then launched an internal probe, and material found during that process led to his dismissal, News International said Wednesday.

Mr. Edmondson didn't respond to requests to comment.

London's Metropolitan Police Service, known as Scotland Yard, said Wednesday that it received "significant new information" from News International in relation to the allegations of hacking in 2005 and 2006. "As a result, [Scotland Yard] is launching a new investigation to consider the material," the police said.

News International said it "has informed the police, and handed over the material it has found and will give its full cooperation going forward."

News Corp. also owns Dow Jones & Co., publisher of The Wall Street Journal. 

The renewed probe comes less than a week after the tabloid paper's former top editor,  Andy Coulson, resigned his post as U.K. Prime Minister David Cameron's chief media adviser amid continuing scrutiny of the hacking case.

Mr. Coulson, who stepped down as the paper's editor in January 2007, has denied the hacking went beyond the reporter involved, and said he was unaware that such practices were used in his newsroom.

Recently, former Prime Minister Gordon Brown added his name to the list of celebrities and politicians asking police to investigate whether his phone had been hacked, said a person familiar with the matter.

Some media specialists say others newspapers may have used similar tactics. "This seems to have been a widespread practice across Fleet Street that was known of by many journalists," says Mark Lewis, a lawyer representing a number of people who claim they were victims of phone hacking. Fleet Street, which is the name of a road that used to be home to many of the U.K. newspaper publishers, is used to refer to the newspaper industry generally.

Among his clients is former Member of Parliament Paul Marsden, who recently said that he had initiated legal action against Trinity Mirror PLC's Mirror Group, publisher of the Sunday Mirror. 

Mr. Marsden said he had "strong reasons to believe" he was the victim of unlawful hacking by a Mirror Group reporter who subsequently moved to News of the World. "We are accumulating information and evidence steadily that will allow court action against individuals," Mr. Marsden said in a posting on his website Monday. 

A spokesman for Trinity Mirror denied Mr. Marsden's allegations on Wednesday, calling them unfounded. "Mr. Marsden has failed to produce a single shred of evidence to back up these claims despite numerous requests from our lawyers," the spokesman said. All of the company's journalists work within the criminal law and Press Complaints Commission code of conduct, he added. 

—Alistair MacDonald contributed to this article.

 Write to  Paul Sonne at paul.sonne@wsj.com and Cassell Bryan-Low at cassell.bryan-low@wsj.com 