NEW DELHI--A retired Supreme Court judge examining the allocation of telecom licenses and bandwidth by the government from 2001 to 2009 submitted his report Monday and said he has named the officials who violated rules. 

"We have identified the officials on whose part there were deficiencies or violations or lapses...we have also suggested remedial measures,"  Shivaraj V. Patil told reporters after submitting the 150-page report, with 1,300 pages of annexure, to Communications Minister  Kapil Sibal. 

The former judge at India's top court, who was given the task on Dec. 9 and was to present a report within four weeks, said the "enormity" of the work led to the delay. Mr. Patil didn't reveal the identity of the officials he named in the report, nor did he say what remedial measures has he suggested. 

The report marks the next step in the government's efforts to clean up the image of India's telecom sector, which has been tarnished by allegations of favoritism and manipulation that led to the resignation of Andimuthu Raja as telecom minister in November. 

Mr. Sibal, who replaced Mr. Raja, appointed Mr. Patil to examine whether the Department of Telecommunications, or DoT, and government procedures in allocating licenses and bandwidth since 2001 were consistent, transparent, or if there were any deviations. 

Mr. Sibal said Monday the government will study the report and its conclusions, but he declined to provide a time-frame for making the report public, or for any action to be taken. 

The report comes amid simultaneous investigations by a federal agency, the Central Bureau of Investigation, into the allocation of air waves to telecommunications companies since 2001. A government auditor late last year condemned the DoT's decision to allocate licenses and bandwidth in 2008 at prices fixed in 2001, saying it cost the government $38.9 billion in potential revenue. 

The auditor had also said that as many as 85 of 122 licenses, which were bundled with bandwidth, were issued in 2008 to companies which didn't have the required capital. These companies "suppressed facts, disclosed incomplete information and submitted fictitious documents," it said. 

The government has since issued notices to some operators that received licenses despite being ineligible and those which failed to launch services on schedule, asking why their licenses shouldn't be cancelled. Some operators, who had been pulled up for not meeting roll out schedules, have already paid penalties "under protest." 

The allegedly flawed process of license allocation is a black mark on India's telecom sector, which many tout as one of the most successful aspects of economic reforms in the past decade. While there were about four million mobile users in 2001, the number swelled to more than 300 million by 2008. India now is the fastest-growing and the second-largest market after China for wireless services with nearly 730 million users. 

 Write to  R. Jai Krishna at krishna.jai@dowjones.com and Romit Guha at romit.guha@dowjones.com 