TOKYO—More than a dozen Japanese communities reported elevated radiation levels in the drinking-water supplies Friday, while authorities listed six types of vegetables with traces of contamination for the first time in suburban Chiba prefecture just outside Tokyo.

In the capital, however, radiation levels in both air and water fell Friday, and the metropolitan government declared tap water safe for drinking for all ages, including infants. Earlier in the week, officials had warned parents not to give Tokyo water to young babies.

Meanwhile, with more countries detecting radioactive contamination in food imported from Japan, efforts to prevent it from spreading through the global food chain gained a new urgency. China, Taiwan, and South Korea announced bans on food imports.

As radioactivity from the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear complex spreads to neighboring regions, two types of radioactive contamination have been reported in recent days: iodine and cesium. Both are byproducts of the process that produces electricity inside the nuclear reactor.

While elevated iodine pollution has been more widely reported, the limited traces of cesium, such as those found this week on mustard spinach, have been more alarming because that element has a half-life of about 30 years, compared with eight days for iodine.

But scientists say iodine-131 still appears to pose a greater threat to human health than cesium-134, at least at the current levels that have been measured.

The Japanese government monitors radiation levels around the country. Track these measurements over time.

"For now, the most urgent problem to address is the spread of radioactive iodine," said  Shunichi Yamashita, a professor of biomedical science at Nagasaki University who specializes in radiation-emergency medicine.

Iodine, he said, appears more hazardous to humans because it often accumulates in the thyroid. In long-term studies of large groups exposed to radiation in Hiroshima, Nagasaki, and Chernobyl, a statistical correlation has been observed between exposure to radioactive iodine and cases of thyroid cancer, particularly in children, said Dr. Yamashita.

Cesium has a tendency instead to accumulate in muscles. And there has been no proved increase in cases of muscle-related cancer, according to studies of Chernobyl, he added.

The Fukushima plant could potentially emit many other radioactive materials, but iodine and cesium are so far the most likely to spread to broader areas, as some materials are too heavy to travel long distances, Dr. Yamashita said.

While Tokyo's water readings have improved, a water reservoir serving seven cities in neighboring Chiba prefecture reported iodine levels above the threshold for consumption by infants. In Ibaraki prefecture north of Tokyo, radioactive iodine in doses larger than permissible for infants was found in samples taken Wednesday and Thursday from household taps in five cities. Tochigi prefecture in northern Japan also reported elevated radiation in its water supplies.

China said it is banning imports of dairy products, fruit, vegetables, seafood, and other "water products" from five areas near the crippled nuclear plant. The General Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine didn't say how long the ban would last.

Taiwan and South Korea also banned the import of food produced in the provinces worst-hit by the crisis. Taiwan was among the first to detect mild levels of radiation in a shipment of fava beans, but decided to ban imports only after radiation was also found in a batch of imported Japanese clams, tested Thursday.

In South Korea, the prime minister's office said the importation of food products from Fukushima, Ibaraki, Tochigi and Gunma prefectures in Japan has been banned effective immediately. The ban mainly involves products such as spinach, parsley, broccoli and milk. 

Singapore said it found radioactive contamination in four samples of vegetables imported from Japan and has extended the ban to food from two more Japanese prefectures. The Agri-Food and Veterinary Authority said radioactive contamination was found in Mitsuba (Japanese wild parsley), Nanohana (rapeseed plant), Mizuna (Japanese mustard) and perilla leaf samples.

Other countries that have imposed restrictions on food imports from Japan include Australia and the U.S. While countries are stepping up efforts to stay vigilant, the potential for danger to human life through imported food is still considered limited as these are very mild levels of radiation.

 Write to  Juro Osawa at juro.osawa@dowjones.com and Hiroyuki Kachi at hiroyuki.kachi@wsj.com 