SYDNEY—The damage done by Cyclone Yasi to the Great Barrier Reef, Australia's top attraction, will take decades to fully mend, according to a growing number of scientists—which could reduce both visitor numbers and the local fishing industry's catches. 

In the worst-hit areas "there was hardly a coral to be found left alive," said  Paul Marshall, a reef ecologist who coordinated a survey on the storm's impact for the Great Barrier Marine Park Authority. 

"Big piles of coral rubble and broken plates had been ripped off the reef and tossed about or dumped at the bottom of the reef in piles," he said. "That was pretty heart-wrenching to see." 



Mr. Marshall's team surveyed 36 reefs in a 300-kilometer stretch of the Great Barrier Reef, from Townsville north to the city of Cairns, where the cyclone was strongest. 

The Great Barrier Reef—the only living organism visible from space, and at 348,000 square kilometers larger than the U.K. and Ireland combined—is a network of more than 3,000 reefs and 900 coral islands stretching along the northeastern coast of Australia.

The Great Barrier Reef was selected as a World Heritage Site in 1981 and labeled one of the seven wonders of the natural world. More than two million people visit the reef each year, generating more than two billion Australian dollars (US$2.02 billion) in annual income. 

Category-five Cyclone Yasi slammed the northern coast of tropical Queensland state in February, destroying homes and crops and displacing thousands of people. While the major tourist centers were spared the worst of the cyclone, winds of up 285 kilometers an hour raged across about a portion of the Great Barrier Reef. 

The cyclone hit at a particularly bad time for the reef, which scientists say suffered from the outflow of fresh water as well as pollution from devastating floods that washed across the state and threatened the regional capital of Brisbane.

The center of the cyclone toppled heavy coral bomboras or "bommies," large isolated pieces of reef up to four meters wide and centuries old. 

Elsewhere, the most fragile corals—typically the most beautiful to look at for scuba divers, such as stag horn and plate corals—were badly damaged.

"The reefs in the path of the cyclone have been heavily impacted," said  Michelle Devlin, a scientific researcher at James Cook University who specializes in water quality issues. "Basically, they've been just munched up." 

To be sure, adverse weather cycles are nothing new for the reef, which has often confounded scientific concerns that climate change or pollution threaten its future. From 1970 to 2005, there were 116 cyclones buffeting the Great Barrier Reef, but none rated category-five strength. Since 2006, there have been three category-five cyclones, say scientists investigating the area. 

Cyclone Yasi hit as the reef was already under threat from flooding rivers along Australia's east coast, sending freshwater and fertilizers from farms onto the reef. Flood plumes from the Fitzroy River near the town of Rockhampton have caused some coral bleaching around the nearby Keppel group of islands, according to Ms. Devlin. 

Bleaching, which occurs when symbiotic colored algae is expelled by coral under stress or dies, can hinder reproduction and growth.

"What we've found this time though is the different environmental conditions in which the reef has to recover," said Ms. Devlin. "With impacted water quality, it is much more difficult for the reefs to come back." Ms. Devlin said the bleaching may spread and dirty water can make it difficult for coral to clean itself, stunting growth.

Thousands of fish species depend of the Great Barrier Reef's ecosystem for food. Coral trout, which command a high price on local and international markets such as Hong Kong, live among the coral and depend on a variety of reef fish for food. 

  Michael Gardner, president of the Queensland Seafood Industry Association, said fisherman are reporting "extensive" damage to the reef from Yasi as far down the coast as Mackay, 327 kilometers south of Townsville, and "very depressed" catches. 

"A lot of fisherman have just tied their boats up," he said. 

Fishermen like Terry Must, who has fished coral trout on the reef for 30 years, said the average daily catch at Bowen harbor has fallen from 250 a day before Cyclone Hamish two years ago to fewer than 10 now. 

"I don't hold any hope for a return of fish in the near future," said Mr. Must. "The amount of coral damage out there is unbelievable, we've never seen anything like this."

 Write to  Rebecca Thurlow at rebecca.thurlow@dowjones.com 