  George Milne wants to keep deep-sea exploration, research and education afloat in Connecticut. 

The former Pfizer executive and venture-capital investor is making a $1 million donation to the Sea Research Foundation as part of a large-scale restructuring of the environmental and conservation organization, that coincides with a $19 million debt reduction that closed earlier this month with Citibank, the foundation's lender. 

Based in Mystic, Conn., the Sea Research Foundation operates the Mystic Aquarium, which specializes in marine mammals and has a museum focusing on deep-sea exploration; the Institute for Exploration, a research center headed by explorer  Robert Ballard, who is credited with the 1985 discovery of the RMS Titanic; Immersion Learning, an after-school distance-learning and digital-media program; and the JASON Project, an online educational science program in partnership with the National Geographic Society. Nearly three million people participate in the foundation's programs every year, with 750,000 people coming through the museum. 

"Over the last three years we've been pressing very hard to bring financial and operational management to a higher plane," Mr. Milne says. "Now that we're on the path to putting our financial house in order, I wanted to make this investment so the foundation can realize even more fully the promise it has for education and conservation." 

The foundation has been struggling over the past few years to sustain more than $34 million in debt it took on as part of a large-scale renovation and expansion in the early 1990s. The expansion included the creation of one of the largest Beluga Whale facilities in North America, as well as a new entry pavilion and a museum hall on deep-ocean exploration. 

"The board at the time thought the Mystic Aquarium would be able to double attendance and garner additional donations," says  Stephen Coan, president and CEO of the Sea Research Foundation. 

However, when the recession hit, attendance sunk by roughly 8% and donors "were concerned their donations would be used to keep the doors open and reduce the debt rather than for mission-driven programs," Dr. Coan says. 

To keep the organization going, Dr. Coan turned to the foundation's donors, board members and lenders to create a new business plan. The organization announced on Jan. 4 that Citibank agreed to reduce the organization's debt to $10 million from $34 million. As part of the deal, the foundation raised $6 million in the past six months, including a $1 million grant from the State of Connecticut. 

"The capital campaign isn't about frills, it's about improving our bottom line through better visitor amenities and experiences," Dr. Coan says. "We have no intention on taking on anymore debt, all new construction will be funded before we proceed." 

Mr. Milne, who has served as the chair of the foundation's board of trustees since 2001, was the first individual donor to step in to give $1 million to the foundation, part of which will go toward upgrading the organization's current facilities and building a new research and education center over the next two years. 

With a P.h.D in organic chemistry from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Mr. Milne spent 32 years at Pfizer where he served as the head of research and development. Now Mr. Milne serves as a partner at Radius Ventures LLC, a venture-capital firm that focuses on early-stage biomedical companies. He also serves on the board of the New York Botanical Garden. 

"I don't like to quit," Mr. Milne says. "Now, not only are we going to survive but we are going to thrive and continue to get young people interested in science, conservation and environmental research." 

 Write to  Shelly Banjo at shelly.banjo@wsj.com 