WASHINGTON—The White House notified Congress Wednesday that it was ready to begin talks on passage of trade agreements with South Korea, Colombia and Panama, after Colombia complied with the first stage of an action plan to improve labor rights in that country. 

The Obama administration at the same time pledged to seek talks with Seoul over lifting remaining restrictions on U.S. beef imports after the Korea trade pact is passed. The move was aimed at winning support for the Korea deal from Senate Finance Chairman Max Baucus (D., Mont.), who has pushed hard to lift Korea's ban on beef from cattle older than 30 months. Mr. Baucus hailed the pledge as a "crucial commitment."

The White House told Congress in a letter that renewal of programs designed to train and assist workers displaced by trade agreements is vital to the administration's legislative agenda on trade. So too is an agreement that lowers tariffs on imports from certain Latin American countries, including Colombia, in order to discourage growth of the drug trade in those nations. 

Renewal of those programs is a "key component" of the administration's overall plan on trade, U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk said in Wednesday's letter to Congress. A vote to renew the Trade Adjustment Assistance program and the Andean Trade Preferences program failed this year over concerns about its costs and Republican demands that the administration move to complete the Colombia trade deal first. 

Mr. Kirk further pressed Congress to establish Permanent Normal Trade Relations for Russia as that country pursues entry to the World Trade Organization, which the U.S. supports. 

Colombia had until April 22 to begin a series of steps to comply with international standards for the protection of labor organizers and unionized workers, including preventing violence against labor leaders and prosecuting those in the government who harass or attack union leaders. Bogota has had a history of violence against union leaders and organizers. 

"A grand bargain on trade is taking shape,"  John Murphy, vice president for international policy at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, said in a statement. "In the weeks ahead, the United States has a chance to move forward in a bipartisan fashion to secure approval of the pending trade agreements with Korea, Colombia, and Panama."

In addition to the administration's plan to seek talks with Seoul on beef, the U.S. Agriculture Department will award an additional $1 million in 2011 to the U.S. Meat Export Federation to supplement the trade group's promotion of U.S. beef products in South Korea. The export group has created a 5-year, $10 million beef promotion plan.

  Write to  Elizabeth Williamson at elizabeth.williamson@wsj.com 