The former longtime clubhouse manager for the New York Mets was charged Wednesday with stealing more than $2.3 million worth of team memorabilia that prosecutors said he stashed in a friend's basement and planned to sell to fund his retirement.

Queens District Attorney  Richard Brown said  Charles Samuels had been collecting jerseys, bats and baseballs—some autographed—for much of his 34 years with the team. 

The nearly 1,700 items that were discovered in November included a signed jersey from the team's 1986 championship and another from 2001 honoring Sept. 11 victims. Both are valued at $7,500.

"He had probably one of the best jobs that any sport enthusiast might have, and he threw it all away," Mr. Brown said. "His greed is alleged to have gotten the better of him." 

Led into the courtroom in handcuffs, Mr. Samuels, 53 years old, was arraigned before Queens Supreme Court Judge  Fernando Camacho and released on $75,000 bail. Mr. Samuel's attorney,  Michael Bachner, said his client collected the memorabilia legally and used his access to players to autograph pieces.

"The property that he is alleged to have taken was authorized by the Mets," he said afterwards. "There is no criminal conduct here. Our position is that this indictment barely makes it to first base. It's just not coming home."

The criminal charges were the result of yearlong investigation led by Major League Baseball and law enforcement officials, said a law enforcement official working on the case. 

During the arraignment, prosecutors said some of the information against Mr. Samuels was obtained using a wiretap. The friend in whose cellar Mr. Samuels is alleged to have stored the memorabilia is cooperating with authorities, officials said.

Mr. Samuels was hired by the Mets in 1976, made equipment manager in 1983 and was later promoted to clubhouse manager and traveling secretary. He was making $83,750 a year when he was fired and had taken in an average $200,000 a year in tips from players since 2005, prosecutors said. Mr. Samuels was fired in November. 

The Mets said in a statement that the club has cooperated with authorities. 

Mr. Samuels was also charged with filing nearly $25,000 in inflated expenses submitted to him by game umpires and evading roughly $40,000 in taxes by under-reporting nearly $400,000 in income in 2008 and 2009. 