More than 1,000 Republicans will pack an Indianapolis ballroom Thursday night to catch the state's most anticipated political speech in years. 

The speaker? Not Indiana Gov. Mitch Daniels, but his wife, Cheri, a woman who famously hates politics and has long shied from the political spotlight.

Cheri Daniels's keynote appearance at the state GOP's spring dinner is generating buzz—and more than a few TV satellite trucks—for a simple reason: Party leaders see her as the main hurdle to Mr. Daniels's entry in the 2012 presidential race, a move many top Republicans hope the governor will make.

"Everyone knows he won't run unless she gives the go-ahead," said James Bopp Jr., a prominent Indiana Republican. "That's what makes this all so intriguing."

The Cheri Daniels event is far outselling the group's ballyhooed speaker last fall, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie. "This is the biggest crowd we've had in at least a generation," said Pete Seat, the state party's spokesman.

The governor insists his wife has no plans to break news. "She's going to talk about the life of the first lady, which she's never made much of a display of," he told reporters Monday. 

But the mere fact that she's addressing the state's GOP faithful is stirring speculation that Mr. Daniels, a former aide to Presidents Ronald Reagan and George W. Bush, is gearing up for a 2012 bid. He says he will decide within weeks.

The Indiana first lady's distaste for politics is legendary. Her husband crisscrossed the state for months in an RV to win his two elections for governor, first in 2004 and then in 2008. His wife stayed away. 

"She hated the idea," Mr. Daniels told The Wall Street Journal earlier this year. She agreed to let him run, he said, on the condition that she never would have to appear at campaign events. "And I can say I have stuck to that [promise] to this day," he said.

Campaigns are populated with spouses of varying enthusiasm. Colin Powell's wife, Alma, opposed a White House run in 1996, fearing for her husband's safety. He chose not to run. Judith Steinberg Dean, the wife of 2004 Democratic candidate Howard Dean, stayed so remote from the campaign that her absence became a topic of debate.

The 2012 race is no different. Marsha Barbour, the wife of Mississippi Gov. Haley Barbour, told a local TV station last month that she was "horrified" by the thought of him running. A few weeks later, Mr. Barbour opted not to run.

Other spouses are markedly more gung ho. Aides to former Minnesota Gov. Tim Pawlenty boast that his wife, Mary, a former judge who is active in evangelical circles, will be a major asset on the campaign trail. Mr. Pawlenty described her at a rally in Iowa last year as his "red-hot smoking wife."

Ann Romney, the wife of former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney, told the Boston Globe in 1994 that they had never had a marital argument, and that if they did she would "dissolve into tears." She was almost constantly at his side during his unsuccessful 2008 campaign.

Newt Gingrich's wife, Callista, is both his business partner and his near-constant companion on the road. 

The Danielses' history is complex. Cheri Daniels broke off their 16-year marriage in 1994 and moved to California, leaving Mitch Daniels with their four daughters, the eldest of whom was 14. She got married there, but then divorced her second husband and returned to Indiana, remarrying Mr. Daniels in 1997.

Both decline to talk about that time. In a rare allusion to the split, Mr. Daniels told the Indianapolis Star in 2004 that theirs was a story of "happy endings" and that "love and the love of children overcame any problems."

Longtime friends say that if Mr. Daniels does run, his wife will continue to go her own way. 

"She will participate, but I doubt she will be out there campaigning," said Pat Kiely, president of the Indiana Manufacturers Association, who has known the couple for decades. 

The first lady is no shrinking violet. She is a constant presence at both weeks of the annual Indiana State Fair. She won two blue ribbons at the 2007 fair, one for cow milking and the other for long-distance watermelon-seed spitting. (She spit one 15 feet, one inch.)

Every month she takes on a new "chore" she then describes as part of a radio show she hosts, "First Fridays with the First Lady." Some highlights: dump truck driving, bartending, clog dancing, grooming a horse.

"She is funnier than hell," Mr. Daniels said. "And half the time she is ragging on me or making fun of me for something."

 Write to  Neil King Jr. at neil.king@wsj.com 