On the first Tuesday of the new year, personal trainer Monica Vazquez was helping a client stretch when she heard the blare of Latin hip-hop competing with the piped-in music at the Manhattan gym.

Looking up, she saw a man in sweat pants and orange snow boots using his cellphone as a makeshift boombox, pumping iron to the beat. "He was new. All we could do was shake our heads," Ms. Vazquez says.

January is the month when longtime members almost don't want to go to the gym. It's because so many newcomers do.

Fresh from their New Year's resolutions, pudgy novices are flooding into the nation's fitness clubs this time of year—meaning well but, innocent of the folkways of gym life, often leaving trails of sweaty equipment, soiled towels and exasperation.

Gym regular Mark Herman spots them by the way they inadvertently break unwritten rules of gym etiquette, like talking loudly on their cellphones while exercising.

A marathoner, Mr. Herman went to his LA Fitness gym in Chicago on the first Monday of 2011 to log some miles on one of its treadmills. They were all taken. When one finally opened up, he found the user had left sweat dripping off the hand grips, apparently unaware it was customary to wipe them dry. 

New Jersey attorney Jacqueline Rosa finds the January newcomers' numbers daunting. They line up outside classrooms to get a spot, she says, and when the doors open, "It's like a damn cattle call where you pick up the 'steppers' and everyone races to get a spot." 

When she went to her "Mega Mix" aerobics class at a Lucille Roberts gym in Clifton, N.J., the first week of the year, Ms. Rosa says, attendance had swollen to over 50 from 30 and the quarters were so tight she had to take care not to whack anyone with the kick-boxing and other moves.

Those crowding into classes aren't just the newbies, says Carl Liebert III, chief executive of 24 Hour Fitness, where usage typically jumps about 20% in January. He says  veteran members defend their turf by lining up outside classrooms up to 45 minutes in advance and reserving spots for their friends. "During this time of year it looks like a turnstile at Disney," he says. 

Machine thievery tends to spike under these conditions. Samantha Shelton noticed a woman waiting for a free treadmill at an Equinox in Manhattan last week. When the woman went to refill her water bottle, another member swooped in and grabbed a machine that had opened up. 

Where Mr. Herman spots newcomers by their infringement on gym taboos, Ms. Rosa says she knows them by their coordination, or lack thereof. "They look completely awkward," the 26-year-old says. In yoga class, "new people stand in front of you and wobble everywhere, throwing off my balance." She is shelling out for semi-private classes until the crowds thin out. 

One newcomer, Courtney Hopkins, doesn't deny her limited fitness, which, of course, is why she's at the gym in the first place. One day last week Ms. Hopkins began a spin class at an Arlington, Va., branch of Gold's Gym—a chain that can see as much as a 100% increase in member sales in January. After 20 minutes on the stationary bike, "I was panting," she says, and from then on "was pretty much coasting."

 Rather than just sit on her bike until the hour-long class ended, Ms. Hopkins summoned the courage to get off and walk out. "I tried not to make eye contact and just bee-lined to the door," she says. 

Ms. Hopkins says she often meanders the floor aimlessly in search of the right equipment, or "stands there for five minutes trying to figure out where my machines are." 

Ms. Vazquez, who is a trainer at a New York Sports Club branch in Manhattan, had a mini-confrontation with a new member unfamiliar with the place and its ways. The newbie disrupted a personal-training session by taking one of Ms Vazquez's client's dumbbells, and then by lying down on the client's towel. When Ms. Vazquez explained that the area was strictly for personal training, the man "became incredibly defensive," she says, but went off to a different section.

Spin instructor Robyn Abell had to defuse a bit of tension at a World Gym in Owings, Md., when a new member set up camp on a bike reserved by a regular, who snidely informed her, "That's my bike." The newcomer apologized but was clearly taken aback, Ms. Abell says. "I had to compensate for the awkwardness by chuckling and showing her to the sign-in sheet," she says. 

Such stumbles aren't necessarily the newcomers' fault. Gym etiquette is something learned mostly by osmosis. 

One client who hadn't absorbed much showed up at a Manhattan club. As gym regular Amy DiTullio pedaled a stationary bike in an empty spin-class room, a man she had never seen before came in and hopped onto the instructor's bike, then plugged his iPod into speakers meant for the instructor and blasted his "New Agey" music through the room. 

"I was so flabbergasted and upset," says Ms. DiTullio, whose glares went unnoticed. After 10 minutes or so, the man moved on.

Town Sports International Holdings Inc., which has New York Sports Clubs, Boston Sports Clubs and others, has been running short vignettes on the television sets on its cardio equipment showing some no-nos of gym behavior. One shows a man talking loudly on his cellphone, bothering others. 

Mindy Goldstein, who works out four times a week at a New York Sports Club in Manhattan, is sympathetic with the January newcomers, up to a point. "This time of year it's hard because [new] people are working out thinking they're doing the right thing, but they're really just getting in the way of all the rest of us," she says.

Ms. Goldstein takes comfort in the evanescence of New Year's resolutions. "Last year, within six weeks it was back to normal," she says. 