U.S. Ambassador to China Jon Huntsman Jr. will land in Washington on Friday with a presidential campaign-in-waiting, including staff and volunteers in New Hampshire, South Carolina and Florida, a polling firm and a fundraising operation built on a billionaire father's network.

The only question: Does the campaign have a candidate?

In the slow-moving 2012 presidential campaign, the saga of Mr. Huntsman adds still more uncertainty to the Republican nomination contest. The former Utah governor has told nobody in his political operation what he intends to do, the people involved say, but the operation is moving forward without him.

He has served for nearly two years in one of the most sensitive foreign policy posts in the Obama administration. He shares President Barack Obama's positions on civil unions for gay couples and a comprehensive approach to immigration issues. As governor, Mr. Huntsman joined a coalition of western governors to combat climate change, and welcomed the president's economic stimulus plan to help lift his state from recession.

Yet top aides say they believe Mr. Huntsman is returning home to challenge his boss for the White House. His intentions will be clear within a week, aides say—even though no one in the political operation says he has actually talked to the potential candidate. Not John Weaver, the political director, Fred Davis, the media guru, Whit Ayres, his pollster, Peter Spaulding, his New Hampshire strategist, Richard Quinn, his South Carolina strategist, or Rob Wasinger, his conservative outreach coordinator.

Mr. Weaver, an iconoclastic GOP operative and senior aide to Sen. John McCain's White House campaign in 2000, brought the group together under the banner of Horizon PAC, a political action committee of Huntsman supporters run out of Salt Lake City.

Under the federal Hatch Act, a federal government employee, such as the ambassador to China, by law cannot be involved with electoral politics, and Mr. Huntsman's ambassadorship does not end until midnight Saturday, known as "the witching hour" to Team Huntsman.

"The last communication I had with him was a Christmas card," Mr. Weaver said.

What that team has is a belief that the Republican field of candidates needs a fresh face, and a hunch that Mr. Huntsman wants to run. "There is a clear and obvious discomfort among Republican primary voters around the country with the current set of choices," said Mr. Ayres, whose Republican polling and strategy firm has been hired by the political action committee formed by Huntsman supporters. 

Mr. Huntsman has accepted commencement-address invitations from the University of South Carolina on May 7 and Southern New Hampshire University May 21, taking him to two early primary states. He will make his Washington debut on Saturday as a guest at the White House Correspondents Association dinner, where he is expected to attract more than his fair share of attention.

Whether the Republican electorate is clamoring for Mr. Huntsman is an open question. Aides and volunteers talk up his conservative credentials, his private-sector background in his father's chemical conglomerate, and his foreign-policy experience. As governor, he signed some of the toughest anti-abortion laws in the nation. He is a staunch defender of gun rights.

But Mr. Huntsman believes in human-induced climate change and has embraced immigration policies that include an avenue for illegal immigrants already in the U.S. to remain if they obtain a work permit and meet other conditions. 

"Not many people think we need to deport 11 million people," said Mr. Quinn, a Columbia, S.C., strategist. "Most people believe we need to do something about the environment, carbon pollution and reducing dependence on foreign oil."

Such positions could be problematic with the conservative Republican primary electorate were it not that Mr. Huntsman's rivals for the Republican nomination carry their own ideological baggage, aides said. Former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney—like Huntsman, a Mormon—has also worked to combat climate change, as have former Minnesota Gov. Tim Pawlenty and former House Speaker Newt Gingrich. Mr. Romney has the additional burden of shepherding the Massachusetts health care plan into law, providing a model for Mr. Obama's national health law, which is unpopular among Republicans.

"He's not going to be judged against super-perfect candidates. He's going to be judged against Romney, Pawlenty and God knows who else," one Huntsman aide said.

In his home state of Utah, his conservative credentials have frayed considerably. 

"I was really grateful when President Obama took him out of our state and sent him to China," said Jacqueline Smith, founder the STAR Forum, or Save The American Republic, a conservative coalition in Utah.

But Mr. Huntsman has valuable assets: a growing political organization; money through his father, one of the richest men in the world and through the Huntsman Corporation; a telegenic presence and a broad background. 

"Within a matter of a couple of weeks, we will have the best, most extensive organization outside Romney's," boasted one top Horizon PAC official.

 Write to  Jonathan Weisman at jonathan.weisman@wsj.com 