'Stieglitz, Steichen, Strand," at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, is another display of institutional opulence for the age of austerity.

Metropolitan Museum of Art

Through April 10

Like MoMA's "Abstract Expressionist New York" and the Whitney Museum's "Modern Life: Edward Hopper and His Time," the Met's exhibition is a reminder about the hidden depths of the city's art collections. That all of these museums, forced to hold down costs after the 2008 financial debacle, have mounted comprehensive 20th-century surveys from their own vaults—without relying on expensive loans to plug conspicuous historical gaps—is astonishing. 

Appreciative visitors are likely to say, "if this is what you're giving us in a recession, bring on the Depression." Alfred Stieglitz, Edward Steichen and Paul Strand were crowd favorites in their own lifetimes and have been ever since. In the annals of early 20th-century American Modernist photography they constitute "The Big Three," to quote the title of the fine catalog essay by curator Malcolm Daniels.

Bringing the old gang together again is instructive, as well as smart box office. The three rooms of superb and, in some cases, unique prints suggest what the trio had in common as artistic allies and also which vestigial traits eventually split them apart. 

Stieglitz was the eldest (b. 1864) and the acknowledged leader in the U.S. at the turn of the century in the drive to establish photography as a modern art the equal of any other. Tireless and mercurial as a young man, he became increasingly autocratic as an older one. His frequent swerves of style are well represented in this sample. A tiny pale print of a horse and coach in the rain (1899-1900) epitomizes the preciosity of his photo-secession phase. "The Terminal" (1893)—seen in two versions, one boldly cropped—and "The Steerage" (1907) reflect those unpredictable times when his social conscience erupted to the surface. 

An eroticism suffused his photographs, especially as he aged. This quality is most obvious in the George O'Keeffe portraits, but also not hard to detect in the dreamy views of New York City at night; or in the leisurely pictures taken near his family home at Lake George of forking tree trunks and of four ripe, rain-glistening apples hanging on a bough. 

His protégé Steichen (b. 1879) was drawn to voluptuous forms, too, but commonly lacked Stieglitz's refinement. The three sinuous female nudes in the back of the middle room at the Met—"In Memoriam," "La Cigale" and "The Little Round Mirror" (all from 1901)—are vampish knock-outs. At the same time they exemplify Steichen's weakness for grandstanding. He felt compelled to floor his audience with his lighting and printing mastery, whatever the subject.

The three studies of the Flatiron Building on a rainy night (1904-1909) are masterpieces of the period, balanced between the foggy atmospheres of art nouveau and the razor edges of modernism. Whether Daniel Burnham's jaunty skyscraper is better appreciated when lavished in gum bichromate and platinum is another matter. The Met has a display explaining how arduous a printing process this was, which doesn't negate the impression that Steichen has applied too much makeup.

It was fitting that in the 1920s he took a high-paying job as a celebrity portraitist for Vanity Fair and Vogue. (There is a lovely example from 1924, of the pearl-draped niece of Czar Nicholas II.) Steichen knew his commercial ambition would lead to a break with the purist Stieglitz, but he seems to have decided that Condé Nast's paychecks and his own growing celebrity amply compensated for banishment from his former mentor's circle of artists. 

Steichen's fleeting interest in abstract construction ("Time-Space Continuum" and "Triumph of the Egg," both from the early 1920s) may have been inspired by Strand, who in 1916-17 had made a pair of triumphant appearances in Stieglitz's magazine "Camera Work." Among the eclectic group of photogravures he published were jagged landscapes and off-kilter studies of bowls and furniture built with the crooked timber of cubism. 

Strand was 26 years younger than Stieglitz, 11 years younger than Steichen, and thus did not have to refight battles for artistic self-respect they had already won. The most solitary of the three, he was also the most militant on social issues, becoming a founder of the Photo League and a member of the Communist Party. 

If Steichen ingratiated himself with the powerful—he initially enraged J.P. Morgan with his 1909-10 portrait, only to have the financial titan quickly realize that the photograph was admiring of his fearsomeness—Strand always sided with the dispossessed. His "Wall Street" from 1916 depicts J.P. Morgan's bank in a raking morning light. Although attracted at first by the geometry of the building and the long shadows of the pedestrians, Strand later decided he had intended to portray the place as a soulless tomb, its windows dark as gravepits. 

His style of portraiture evolved from the bluntly realistic—the canonical "Blind" from 1916 shows a blind woman flush against a wall, as though ready for execution—to a stark but lustrous monumentality, seen here in his Mexican pictures from the 1930s and '40s. Ironically, when he exhibited photographs of a Canadian fishing village at Stieglitz's gallery in 1932, the two had a falling out. The 68-year-old impresario believed Strand's dignified portraits did not fully express the dire political plight of the poor during the Depression. 

The "Big Three" represent one of the peaks of American art photography. As a bonus, the Met has mounted a smart companion show in its adjoining galleries that reveals how many kinds of photographs were being taken around the world during the same period (roughly 1910-1920) when Modernism was taking hold.

"Our Future is in the Air," the title chosen by the curator Douglas Ecklund, includes a selection of prints by Charles Sheeler of a farmhouse and barn in Bucks County, Pa. (Another American "S" artist, Sheeler might have qualified to be part of a "Big Four" exhibition, if the Met had enough of his early work.) He is joined by modernists from Europe (Christian Schad, Eugène Atget) and by transatlantic figures (Man Ray and Alvin Langdon Coburn). 

These pedigreed photographs mingle with those of a utilitarian or vernacular background. There are postcards of Tolstoy's burial in 1910; Lady Ottoline Morrell's snapshot of children dancing around like raving maenads; a scrapbook of images by a teenage boy titled "Girls I Have Known"; and a 1918 aerial view of a bombarded French village from World War I, taken by Steichen, who had helped organize the U.S. Army's Aerial Reconnaissance Division.

I'm not sure what it means about the state of fine-art photography but it is the pictures made without inflated aspirations that will likely intrigue today's young artists. In an age when mockery seems to be the only safe response to Modernist idealism, the "Big Three" at this distance loom as too immense, familiar and revered to be anyone's role models.

 Mr. Woodward is an arts critic in New York. 