TOKYO—The Japanese government will spend about ¥10 trillion ($124 billion) on reconstruction after the devastating March 11 earthquake and tsunami, which is likely to shave 1% off Japan's economic growth this year, the country's economy minister said Friday. 

But any additional government-debt issuance to finance those efforts needs to be backed up with a clear source of funding to avoid further denting Japan's credibility in financial markets, Minister for Economic and Fiscal Policy Kaoru Yosano said in an interview with Dow Jones. 

"My rough guess is that the government will spend about a little bit more than ¥10 trillion," Mr. Yosano said. "However, if we are to forget fiscal discipline and issue government bond without any basic philosophy for reimbursing that special debt, the credibility of the government will be hit." 

He said that the government spent about ¥5 trillion on reconstruction after the magnitude-7.3 earthquake in Kobe in 1995, which caused a total of about ¥10 million in damage and left more than 6,400 people dead. 

Using that as a precedent, Mr. Yosano said the estimate for damage to roads, buildings and other infrastructure from the March 11 disaster stands at ¥16 trillion to ¥25 trillion. 

The magnitude-9.0 earthquake and ensuing tsunami struck Japan's northeast region, destroying factories and triggering a nuclear power-plant crisis which has led to power shortages. It has left about 25,000 dead or missing, and 11,500 people are still taking shelter in evacuation centers. 

Mr. Yosano said the impact of the disaster would eat away 1% of economic growth for this fiscal year ending March 2012, which had been projected at 1.6%. 

But he said production facilities in the affected areas are likely to return to pre-quake levels by the end of the year, referring to a Bank of Japan growth projection. The central bank has forecast 2.9% growth for the next fiscal year. 

Asked about concerns that the prospect of further government spending and borrowing may hurt Japan's credit rating, Mr. Yosano stopped short of saying tax hikes were needed, but said the government will come up with a plan for comprehensive tax reform next month. 

"Politics requires to say it in nice words, so we will simultaneously reform our welfare and tax systems," he said, referring to ongoing debate about how to finance ballooning social welfare costs resulting from Japan's ageing population. 

Last month, Standard & Poor's cut its outlook on Japan's sovereign rating to negative from stable reflecting the potential for further deterioration of its fiscal condition in the wake of the March disaster. 

Prior to the earthquake, S&P had cut Japan's rating to AA-minus, its fourth-highest rating and one notch below Moody's Investors Service's Japan debt rating of Aa2. 

In the same interview, Mr. Yosano also expressed discomfort over the dollar's recent weakness, saying the world's global reserve currency should be strong--the latest sign of international concern over the value of the greenback, which recently fell to near three-year lows. 

"We're seeing a weakening dollar, and I think this is a problem," the economic minister said. "We want to see the key (global reserve) currency have a very stable, reliable, strong value." 

While U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner and Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke have recently reiterated support for a robust dollar, Mr. Yosano suggested skepticism toward the country's official strong dollar policy. 

"I don't know what people are thinking in Washington," he said. "But still, we want to see our currency rate stable, at least stable vis-a-vis the dollar." 

 Write to  Andrew Monahan at andrew.monahan@dowjones.net 