MOSCOW—Russia stepped up radiation monitoring and other precautions in Far East regions near Japan Friday, as officials sought to reassure nervous residents that the Fukushima reactor disaster doesn't pose any risk at the moment. 

President Dmitry Medvedev also offered to host Japanese displaced by last week's massive earthquake at Russian resorts, adding that Moscow should consider offering work to those who lost jobs as a result of the quake "especially in the thinly populated regions of Siberia and the Far East."

At a meeting with security-agency chiefs Friday at his residence outside Moscow, Mr. Medvedev ordered officials to "take all additional measures to protect the population from possible consequences from the earthquake in Japan." He said any panic "should be extinguished. There is no reason for panic."

Russia's atomic-energy chief,  Sergei Kiriyenko, said at the meeting that his agency had calculated that even in the "maximally, crazily unfavorable scenario" of all the units and the stored fuel at the reactors melting down and being released into the atmosphere, "there is no threat" to residents in Russia's Far East.

Prime Minister Vladimir Putin is scheduled to visit Russia's Sakhalin Island north of Japan Saturday. The trip, for a meeting on gas prices, was planned before the nuclear accident, officials said. 

Authorities said they were dispatching special monitoring equipment to Yuzhnosakhalinsk, a regional capital. A group of specialists in radiation sickness also was scheduled to arrive from Moscow. Local officials in the region said they were stockpiling relief supplies including respirator masks and protective equipment and conducting extra training for emergency workers.

"The process is tough going,"  Taimuraz Kasayev, the local emergency chief, told a meeting of officials in Yuzhnosakhalinsk, the Interfax news agency reported. "We've forgotten the time of Chernobyl and what kind of danger nuclear facilities can present."

Monitors showed no increase in radiation in Russia's vast Far Eastern territories, officials said. But local residents said people remained nervous and two airlines added flights to Moscow from Yuzhnosakhalinsk to accommodate the extra demand. 

In Yuzhnosakhalinsk, 1,100 kilometers (684 miles) north of the Fukushima reactor, loudspeakers spread across the center of town report radiation levels every ten minutes. "The reports are read by a calming female voice," said  Alexander Ivelsky, spokesman for the local branch of the Ministry of Emergency Situations. 

Special mobile-monitoring stations have been deployed around the city, he added. "They go where there are large groups of people," he said. "People walk up to them and ask them to take measurements."

Unlike many other countries, Russia hasn't evacuated its nationals from Japan. But many have returned on their own. 

Russia's strategic bombers, which in recent years have caused air defenses to scramble in Japan and other neighboring countries with their flights, have diverted away from Japan, Air Force Chief  Anatoly Zhikharev told Interfax.

—Olga Padorina contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Gregory L. White at greg.white@wsj.com 