Italian fashion house Prada SpA Thursday said it plans to list its shares in Hong Kong, the company's latest attempt to break a decade-long cycle of ditched stock-market listings.

The initial public offering would help bankroll the Milan trendsetter's international expansion. Prada, famous for its black nylon bags and cutting-edge fabrics, has been rapidly opening stores, notably in Asia, where millions of newly wealthy consumers are snapping up luxury goods. Funds from the listing also could help pay down debt, people familiar with the matter said.

Prada has canceled several market listings in recent years because of lackluster market conditions. As a result, the company is cautious in revealing its resuscitated IPO plans. It declined to specify when it aims to list and what percentage of the company will be sold, though people close to the situation say it will certainly be a minority stake.

 Prada Comes With Some Baggage 



Prada, which also owns brands such as Miu Miu and Church's, is 95% owned by designer  Miuccia Prada, her husband, Prada Chief Executive  Patrizio Bertelli, and other family members. Italian bank Intesa Sanpaolo owns the remaining 5%.

The listing could value Prada at over €6 billion ($8.24 billion), according to a person close to the situation. Its market valuation would likely be higher in Hong Kong than elsewhere, because investors in the region see the growth potential and are eager to be a part of it, according to analysts.

"We can now face the coming challenges with serenity and seize the best opportunities offered by the international capital markets," Mr. Bertelli said in a statement.

Prada is joining the parade of foreign companies listing in Hong Kong rather than their home markets. French skin-care chain L'Occitane International SA was the first French firm to join Hong Kong's bourse with its IPO last year. As the only Chinese exchange fully open to foreign investors, Hong Kong has benefited as global investors shift more funds toward China and other emerging markets in search of better returns than they can find in the developed world. Prada would be the first Italian company to do its IPO in Hong Kong.

Prada's road to the stock market has been long and filled with potholes. The company first tried to list shares in 2001 and again in 2002 and 2007. Each time the plug was pulled because of deteriorating market conditions. 

 Write to  Alison Tudor at alison.tudor@wsj.com and Christina Passariello at christina.passariello@wsj.com 