Fannie Mae has begun testing a foreclosure-prevention program in Florida aimed at getting banks to meet with troubled borrowers to negotiate mortgage modifications and other alternatives earlier in the process.

A number of states have passed laws in recent years that require banks to meet face-to-face with borrowers facing foreclosure in an attempt to hammer out a settlement. But state officials complain the process is hampered by delays that leave homeowners with little chance to avoid foreclosure by the time mediation begins.

Fannie Mae's program, aimed at speeding up those mandatory negotiations, began in mid-September and operates in six of Florida's 20 judicial circuits. 

The program has brought borrowers to the mediation table within four months of falling behind on the mortgage, compared with eight months or longer under normal circumstances, according to the Collins Center for Public Policy, a Miami-based nonprofit hired by Florida to run mediations in the six circuits. 

"The key is engaging people at an early enough stage in the process where a loan modification that salvages the property is still a very realistic possibility," said Ned Pope, a vice president at the Collins Center.

The center said it had received 1,800 notifications of default from mortgage servicers since the program began. So far, only a few dozen cases have been settled. 

Martha Guerra of Hialeah Gardens, Fla., lost her job as an account executive at HSBC Bank USA in March 2009 and fell behind on her mortgage the following year. Ms. Guerra said she repeatedly contacted her service provider, a unit of her former employer, to inquire about a loan modification but was unable to reach a resolution.

In September, Ms. Guerra was told the bank would foreclose on her home. But the case went instead to the Collins Center program, which offers mediations before foreclosures are filed in court. 

On Tuesday, Ms. Guerra received a trial modification under the Obama administration's Home Affordable Modification Program, which lowered her mortgage payments by $500. 

"I'm happy with the outcome," Ms. Guerra said.

The pre-file program involves only loans owned or guaranteed by Fannie Mae. Janis Smith, a company spokeswoman, said the program was initiated to provide a broader range of foreclosure-prevention initiatives given the volume of foreclosures in Florida, which has the highest U.S. foreclosure rate. 

Some 24.7% of all mortgages in Florida were at least 30 days delinquent or in some stage of foreclosure at the end of September, according to the Mortgage Bankers Association, compared with around 13.8% of loans nationally.

"Earlier intervention is always preferable,'' she said. "The longer you're in default, the higher the costs are and the more overwhelming it becomes for the borrower.'' 

The company said it was assessing whether to expand the program to other Florida circuits and other states with court-ordered mediation.

Freddie Mac said it also plans to initiate a similar fast-track mediation program in Florida in the near future. It isn't clear whether other banks or investors will embrace pre-file mediation because many mortgage servicing companies don't own the underlying loans. 

 Write to  Nick Timiraos at nick.timiraos@wsj.com 