Indian stocks tumbled after the central bank raised interest rates more than expected, but Chinese stocks edged higher after data indicated that manufacturing growth in China had slowed, easing concerns of further monetary tightening there.

The Reserve Bank of Australia as expected kept rates unchanged, but the market there fell, weighed by a warning from  Australia & New Zealand Banking Group.
ANZBY


-1.21
%




 

India's Sensex tumbled 2.4% to 18534.69, Australia's S&P/ASX 200 dropped 0.8% to 4784.6, South Korea's Kospi fell 1.3% to 2200.73 and Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index fell 0.4% to 23633.25,.

China's Shanghai Composite, which was closed on Monday, rose 0.7% to end at 2932.19.

Markets in Japan were closed for a public holiday.

The broad declines came as investors scaled back bets on risky assets amid extended declines by many commodities. In addition, European Central Bank Vice President Vitor Constancio said Monday that restructuring Greek debt isn't an option, renewing doubts over the euro zone's ability to manage its trouble spots.

In Mumbai, the Sensex fell sharply after the Reserve Bank of India raised its policy interest rates by 0.5 percentage point to bring inflation under control. Only five of 15 economists polled by Dow Jones had foreseen that large an increase, with the rest predicting 0.25.

Several interest rate-sensitive stocks fell after the RBI move.  Tata Motors dropped 5.3% and real estate major DLF shed 2.6%.

Banks were also hit by the RBI's decision to increase the rate on savings-bank deposits to 4% from 3.5%, and to increase the amount money lenders must set aside as protection against certain types of bad loans. State Bank of India and Icici Bank, the country's two largest banks by assets, were down 4% and 2.8%, respectively.

The Shanghai market digested data released Sunday that showed China's official Purchasing Managers Index fell to 52.9 in April from 53.4 in March. A reading above 50 indicates manufacturing activity expanded.

"The decline is a boost for the market, as it indicates that inflationary pressures will likely start to ease, as well, which would help companies facing margin erosion from higher costs," said Capital Securities analyst  Jacky Zhang.

Cement producers and steelmakers rose after China President Hu Jintao and Premier Wen Jiabao said separately over the weekend that Beijing remained determined to ensure a sufficient supply of public housing. China is targeting the construction of 10 million public-housing units this year.

  Anhui Conch Cement rose 2.3%,  Tangshan Jidong Cement was up 2.9%, while  Inner Mongolia Baotou Steel Union rose by the 10% daily limit.

  Baoshan Iron & Steel was up 2.2% after the China Daily reported Tuesday the company will build a plant in the southern Guangdong province port city of Zhanjiang this year, with the project expected to produce five million metric tons of high-end steel a year initially, and eventually 10 million tons.

In Sydney, lender ANZ warned that its lending growth will slow as high interest rates and the strong Australian dollar pressure local retailers and exporters. Its shares fell 2.1%, and  National Australia Bank and  Commonwealth Bank of Australia
CBAUY


0.00
%




 took the hint, falling 0.8% and 0.7%, respectively.

The RBA's remarks—that inflation remains close to its target and that the local currency's strength was helping to hold down consumer prices—were less hawkish than expected. The Australian dollar fell to $1.0883 from $1.0920.

"In Australia, the high Australian dollar is fueling expectations of further [profit] downgrades," said RBS Morgans investment adviser Chris MacDonald.

  Fairfax Media
FXJ


1.22
%




 slumped 8% after the company forecast a 6.1% drop in annual operating earnings.

Resources plays were also lower, in line with broad weakness in commodities.  BHP Billiton fell 1.4% and  Newcrest Mining
NCMGY


0.00
%




 shed 1.5%.

In Hong Kong, merchandise-trading firm  Li & Fung
LFUGY


0.07
%




 dropped 3.4%,  China Resources Land
1109


-0.90
%




 gave up 1.8% and  China Coal Energy shed 1.7%.

South Korean stocks retreated after touching a record Monday, with profit-taking hitting auto and chemical plays. Hyundai Motor lost 4.9% and Hanwha Chemical tumbled 6.6%.

—Leslie Shaffer contributed to this article.

 Write to  Shri Navaratnam at shri.navaratnam@dowjones.com 