SCOTTSDALE, Ariz. – Besides perfect records, revolutionary offenses and less than dominating defenses, Auburn and Oregon have something else in common. Both got jobbed by the Bowl Championship Series.

Not this season, of course. But it's a testament to the endurance and contentiousness of college football's postseason system that we already have a national-title matchup between two schools that feel they were unfairly left out before.

The BCS Victims Society, established in 1998 (when the system began), has three levels of membership. The first and least aggrieved is for teams deprived of a spot in one of the non-title-game bowls because of a rankings quirk. Take Kansas State in 1998. The Wildcats didn't get to play in a BCS bowl despite being ranked third. And in 2004 California lost out on a Rose Bowl bid to Texas and coach/lobbyist Mack Brown.

The second level is for teams that plausibly could've played in the national-championship game but really don't have that great of an argument. The 2006 Michigan Wolverines belong here, as do all of the undefeated mid-majors that have been left out of the title game (Tulane, Hawaii, Boise State, etc.). The mid-majors play less worthy opposition and therefore are less worthy of playing for the championship (regardless of how good they actually are), while the Wolverines—who were leapfrogged by Florida in the final 2006 BCS ranking while idle—had their chance against No. 1 Ohio State and lost.

Full analysis of the five Bowl Championship Series games, including insights from the Journal's Darren Everson and key stats to watch.

And then there's the top level: major-conference teams with unimpeachable credentials that nevertheless didn't play in the championship game. Those include Miami and Washington (both in 2000), Southern California in 2003 (although the Trojans still shared the title with LSU) and the 2001 Oregon Ducks and 2004 Auburn Tigers.

And don't think that players from back then have forgotten, even though both Oregon and Auburn are getting their shot this year.

"It's something that still annoys you," former Auburn quarterback Jason Campbell said.

It's hard to fathom now, but in 2004, a Southeastern Conference team managed to go 12-0 and get left out of the championship. Two other undefeated squads went instead: USC, the 2003 Associated Press champion, and Oklahoma. This could never happen today, due to the SEC's unchallenged reputation as the nation's best conference. But at that time, the SEC had won two of the first six BCS titles. (It has won four of six since.)

Auburn's problem was its non-conference schedule, which consisted of Louisiana-Monroe, the Citadel and Louisiana Tech. Plus, fairly or not, voters considered the fact that USC routed the Tigers 23-0 in Auburn during its title run the previous year. As an undefeated defending AP champion, USC wasn't getting left out again.

It was the choice of Oklahoma that was unfortunate. The Sooners didn't have any standout non-conference victories either (Bowling Green, Houston and Oregon, which finished 5-6), and they had been a disappointment in their 21-14 title-game loss to LSU the previous season. "We felt like we'd done everything possible," Mr. Campbell said. He couldn't have felt any better after USC hammered the Sooners 55-19 in the Orange Bowl.

But while 2004 was basically a case of three equals for two spots, the choice of Nebraska over Oregon in 2001 remains one of the BCS's most regrettable.

The Ducks were ranked second in the human polls, but just fourth in the BCS. Nebraska reached the title game over Oregon and third-ranked Colorado despite suffering a 62-36 blowout loss to the Buffaloes to close the regular season. Not only did the Cornhuskers fail to win the Big 12, they didn't even win their own Big 12 division. (They went on to get routed by Miami in the national-title game as well.) Oregon was left out because the Ducks beat 5-6 Oregon State by only three in their regular-season finale—which led the BCS to remove margin of victory from the formula of its computers.

Of course, the change came too late for Joey Harrington and the Ducks. "Seeing them make that correction was hearing them say, 'Whoops, we made a mistake and you should've been there,'" Mr. Harrington said. "It really did bother me at first, but things finished on a fantastic note." Oregon beat Colorado—the same team that battered Nebraska—by 22 in the Fiesta Bowl.

None of this is to say that Oregon and Auburn would be looking for a second BCS title Monday if only the system hadn't failed them. The Miami and USC teams that went on to win in 2001 and 2004, respectively, were two of the most dominant teams of the BCS era. Both Oregon and Auburn would've been clear underdogs.

But they would've loved to have had the chance. "You don't know what would've happened," Mr. Campbell said.

 Write to  Darren Everson at Darren.Everson@wsj.com 