In our desensitized era of 24-hour cable news and rampant Internet sharing, images of political violence and suffering still spark strong emotional reactions. Are these images valuable in illuminating the stories they illustrate? Are they exploitative pieces of art meant simply to attract eyes? In her book "The Cruel Radiance: Photography and Political Violence" (University of Chicago Press), journalist and NYU professor Susie Linfield posits that photographs of violence, such as those from the Holocaust or modern-day human-rights atrocities, have been important in creating a global consciousness and raising awareness.

Ms. Linfield, the director of NYU's Cultural Reporting and Criticism program, said she became interested in photography and criticism after seeing an exhibit by the photojournalist James Nachtwey. In "Cruel Radiance," she examines the history of photography and its critics, from Bertolt Brecht to Susan Sontag, who have often viewed photography and its purpose with suspicion. Ms. Linfield spoke with the Journal last week. 

 Your book suggests that many photography critics don't really like the medium. 

I think they care about photography and the effect they think it's having on the public. But they are certainly not fans in the way that Pauline Kael was with movies or Greil Marcus was with music. Their stance is being disapproving of how normal people use photography. Susan Sontag was very good at pointing out the ways in which photos can manipulate and fail to tell us the complete histories of events they document. But the valuable aspect of photography and the ways it calls up emotional reactions in us—I think all of that Sontag was oblivious to.

 What's the story behind the book's cover image of a young Asian girl staring into the camera? 

It's a photo of a 7-year-old girl in a Khmer Rouge torture and execution center called Tuol Sleng. The Khmer photographed many Cambodians before they were executed. The girl's sobriety and dignity draws people in. When they find out the story behind the image, they recoil. I love the cover because it really brings home the point of the book: photographs of violence and suffering aren't necessarily bloody photographs or war photographs. 

 Is there a particular photograph that has been a lightning rod for those who believe images of political violence shouldn't be seen? 

Four images that I talk about in the book were taken in Auschwitz by prisoners, one of which is quite horrific and shows naked women running through the forests to the crematoria. The photos were shown as part of an exhibit in Paris and there was a tremendous outcry against them. People said, "This is exploitation and to look is re-victimizing the victims." This seems to me to highlight the absurdity of the anti-photography stance. These were taken by the victims themselves at great danger. 

 Why do such photos hold value for you? 

Not only is there a value to the photos as historical documents, but there's a value to us looking at them. The emotion that photography calls up in us—I don't think that's a negative and dangerous or a bad thing. If we're going to talk about the politics of human rights, it has to start from that emotional standpoint. If you don't have that, I'm not sure why you would care about what happens in the rest of the world. 

 How do you think the war on terror is being played out visually? 

When the Taliban was in power, they banned photographs; now the Taliban has its own media production unit. They obviously make videos of beheadings, and these are circulated. There is a war of images. I see them in a duet with each other, with each side trying to use images as forms of humiliation. 

 With the rise of cell-phone cameras and the Internet, will we see more of these instant, "nonprofessional" photos documenting violence? 

From the time photography was invented, one of the criticisms was that it was a populist form, a mass form, anyone could do it. Now, really anyone can do it. We saw in Iran, in the demonstrations a few summers ago, that images were published in newspapers and magazines all over the world—and taken on cell phones. Those were very powerful. But there's also a limit to what images can do. [Mahmoud] Ahmadinejad is still president. 