Photos from around the world.

 "Justice has been done" and more.

A look at Monday's front pages of U.S. newspapers on the news of Osama bin Laden's death. 

On the ground

Diagram from the U.S. government

Photos inside and out

SHANKSVILLE, Pa.—When Toner Bower, a plumber in Port Matilda, Pa., woke up Monday morning, his wife, Bonnie, was watching the news on television about Osama bin Laden.

 "We need to go to Shanksville," she said. 

They then drove about 95 miles from their home in central Pennsylvania, to the site where the Flight 93, hijacked by terrorists on Sept. 11, 2001, crashed after passengers attacked the terrorists. 

The mood there was somber, with a touch of quiet celebration.

The Bowers strode hand-in-hand to a chain-link fence that borders the rural patch of land about 80 miles east of Pittsburgh. Small American flags left by visitors snapped in the wind. Mr. Bower pulled a spool of fishing line from his pocket and knotted a copy of his local newspaper, the Centre Daily Times, to the fence. "Bin Laden dead," the headline announced. 

Flight 93, originally en route from Newark, N.J., to San Francisco, was crashed when passengers and crew members tried to overtake the terrorists. A federal commission determined that the terrorists planned to crash Flight 93 into the Capitol in Washington but were prevented from that when some of the passengers stormed the cockpit. 

A rutted, two-lane road with few signs to point the way leads to the memorial, which is still under construction. Its first phase is due for completion by Sept. 11. On Monday, a bulldozer crew worked to level a hill to make it easier for visitors to see where the plane went down. 

Nagib Khalifa, a retired urologist from Chambersburg, Pa., who was born in Egypt but is now a U.S. citizen, said he was passing through the area and decided to stop. "We got rid of bin Laden—that big snake," Dr. Khalifa said. "It's a great victory for the U.S." 

Bob Steinmetz, a retired data-processing technician from Cleveland, smoked a cigar pensively after paying his respects. "One down, a bunch more to go," he said. "That's not going to be the end of it, that's for sure."

Gordon Felt, whose brother Edward was killed in the crash and is President of the Families of Flight 93, said the death of Bin Laden was important news for the group and the world. "It cannot ease our pain, or bring back our loved ones," he said in a statement. "It does bring a measure of comfort that the mastermind of the September 11th tragedy and the face of global terror can no longer spread his evil."

Mrs. Bower, a teachers aide for special education classes, said she was glad to hear the news about Mr. bin Laden, but was worried about retaliatory attacks by his followers. 

National Park Service officials said more than 200 people had visited the memorial site by Monday afternoon—at least twice as many as would normally be expected on a Monday in early May.

The memorial's first phase will include improved roads and a wall with the names of the 40 passengers and crew members. Eventually, the site will include a visitor center with exhibits and a 93-foot Tower of Voices containing 40 wind chimes.

The front page of the Journal on Sept. 12, 2001.

For now, visitors are invited to tack up notes on a wall in a temporary visitor center with a corrugated steel roof. On Monday, one wrote: "We came to tell you your foe was destroyed moments ago on your behalf." Another scrawled: "Give peace a chance." 

