 Melbourne, Australia 

To this day  Leander Paes and  Mahesh Bhupathi will not answer the question that has been on the lips of millions of tennis fans in India and beyond: Why did the subcontinent's most successful tennis players split up nine years ago?

And as far as why the doubles pair decided to reunite after years of acrimony, the two are not really more expansive.

"Time is the best healer," said Mr. Paes. "We both take responsibility of whatever happened in the past, and now we're a lot more mature about it."

Messrs. Paes and Bhuphati are competing here in their first Grand Slam tournament together since 2002 and are chasing the only major title missing in their crowded trophy cabinets. The pair is seeded third in Melbourne, and after two rounds deftly negotiated through talent, guile and grit, they rate their chances of winning the championship favorably.

Respectively 37 and 36 years old, Messrs. Paes and Bhupathi are among the oldest players on tour, but doubles play looks kindly on aging competitors. Movement is limited, and Grand Slam doubles matches require less stamina, as they are played best of three sets compared with best-of-five-sets singles matches.  Martina Navratilova, for instance, was able to win her last mixed doubles title about a month shy of her 50th birthday.

It is also increasingly a specialist's game. Whereas past champions routinely competed in both singles and doubles at Grand Slam tournaments, they now stick to one or the other.  Serena Williams has won a number of major titles along her sister Venus, but  Rafael Nadal and  Roger Federer, the top two players on the men's side, have rarely entered the doubles events for fear that it would derail their quest for singles titles.



Mr. Bhupathi has never made much of an impact in the singles game, with a career-high ranking of 217th in the world. But on his own Mr. Paes found some measure of success. He captured one singles title on Newport's grass courts in 1998 and holds a winning record against  Pete Sampras, courtesy of a lone victory. He also conquered an Olympic bronze medal in Atlanta in 1996—at the time, the first individual Olympic medal for India in 44 years.

Still, it is by combining forces that Messrs. Paes and Bhupathi have left their mark in the sport. In 1999 the "Indian Express"— as the pair became known—rolled through the draws of major tournaments, winning both the French Open and Wimbledon and reaching the finals of the Australian Open and the U.S. Open.

But trouble was brewing. The two threatened to part ways in 2000 over a coaching issue and split for good two years later. They continued to win tournaments—including Grand Slam events—with various partners, but popularity waned as Indian-Czech or Indian-Belarusian pairings were less appealing to fans back home than an all-Indian team, and other local tennis stars, like  Sania Mirza, started to emerge.

The reasons for the breakup have never been publicly disclosed, but many fans put it down to a clash of egos. That is now a thing of the past, Messrs. Paes and Bhupathi say.

"We try to make each other look good rather than compete against each other now," Mr. Paes said. "Now we also look at giving each other space and time to grow as individuals."

Arnaud Clément, a veteran doubles player, said neither Mr. Paes nor Mr. Bhupathi is an extraordinary shotmaker, but he said they move exceptionally well around the court, which makes them nearly impossible to pass.  Rohan Bopanna, himself a talented doubles player from India, said Mr. Bhupathi's powerful serves and returns and Mr. Paes' quick hands at the net make for a deadly combination.

Mr. Bhupathi suggested that the two might have won more titles had they reunited earlier, but that the timing had never been right because of their associations with other partners.

"There is no doubt that we play the best we can with each other," he said.

So far, the reunion has paid dividends. The pair won its first tournament of the year in Chennai, and a testy second match here found the two men trading barbs with their opponents rather than each other.

But risk remains that the two may pull in different directions. They haven't yet committed to playing tournaments together beyond this spring, although that might change if results are favorable. Their increasing off-court commitments also have the potential to threaten their partnership. Mr. Paes has, of late, added acting in Bollywood films to his résumé, and Mr. Bhupathi dedicates much of his time to his management company for celebrities.

Mr. Bhupathi is also planning his wedding later this year with actress  Lara Dutta. In a sign of a warming relationship, Mr. Bhupathi confirmed that Mr. Paes had been invited to the ceremony.

 Write to  Nicolas Brulliard at nicolas.brulliard@dowjones.com 