Global stock markets dodged a gauntlet of worries—including two lurches to the brink of disaster in Europe and near-constant worry of a double-dip recession in the U.S.—to ring up postcrisis and all-time highs.

Whether that run can continue in 2011 will depend on a delicate mix of good news: a steadying U.S. recovery, sustained economic growth in emerging markets and the absence of any major shocks from Europe, the Korean peninsula and elsewhere.

Read the complete  Year-End Review report .

U.S. blue chips ended the year up solidly, climbing above the point they were at before Lehman Brothers' collapse, but the ride there was anything but smooth

It is also possible that global investors will have to cope without a key tail wind driving the market rally for much of 2010, namely the help of the Federal Reserve. The flood of cash unleashed by the U.S. central bank ended up pumping up asset prices around the world. But with the economic benefits of easy money likely to be more muted, the onus is greater than ever on a steadying global recovery.

That all adds up to what could be a fragile year for global stock markets. 

"If there are any surprises to the downside, they're going to be worse than normal because we won't be able to buffer them as much," said  Dori Levanoni, a partner and global macro strategist at asset-management firm First Quadrant LP. "In a vacuum, if the world economy can keep up this slow growth then it's good, but we are more sensitive to outside risks" because growth is slower than it has traditionally been in recoveries.

If investors are looking for proof that this is possible, they needn't look any further than 2010, when the markets managed to tack on impressive gains despite an anemic recovery and a host of unexpected crises.

"Not only did the world not end, but we realized the world can stand some misfortune and still churn forward," said  Jeffrey Knight, head of global asset allocation for Putnam Absolute Return fund.

The ability to withstand misfortune was especially true in European stock markets, many of which managed to rise despite several flare-ups of sovereign-debt crises that threatened the common currency and roiled European Union resolve.

To be sure, all five of the so-called PIIGS countries—Portugal, Italy, Ireland, Greece and Spain—finished in negative territory for the year. Many of these countries face the prospect of years of fiscal austerity and a long road to recovery in their banking sectors. 

Still, the broad Stoxx Europe 600 added 9% to finish the year at a two-year high. Germany, the most core of the so-called core countries, surged 16% to levels not seen since early 2008. The U.K.'s FTSE 100 rose 9%, near a two-year high.

Tops in the region, however, were Turkey, Denmark and Russia, which finished with gains of 25%, 35% and 23%, respectively. Those markets managed to largely sidestep the debt woes of the Continent, allowing investors to focus on their strong domestic stories—in particular fundamental growth in Turkey and Russia.

Investors seem to think the run-up can continue.

"Germany is well-positioned to outperform again in 2011," said  Kate Moore, global equity strategist for Bank of America Merrill Lynch, pointing to an export sector likely to be buoyed by its exposure to emerging-market demand and a euro that is unlikely to strengthen much in the medium term. "The more economic data we get out of Germany, the more we look at the balance sheets of these [German] companies, the more conviction we have that the good story will continue."

Strong economic recovery and increased attention from global investors drove most markets in the region to not only gains but also to record highs. 

Markets in India, Indonesia, the Philippines, Malaysia and Thailand all rocketed to record highs. South Korea rose 22% to within a whisker of its all-time high, despite two high-profile incidents with North Korea—the sinking of a naval ship in March and the November bombing of a disputed island.

Only the region's two biggest economies, China and Japan, finished in the red. The Shanghai Composite fell 14% and the Nikkei Stock Average shed 3%. 

With such a strong run-up in many of these markets, there is concern that some are in danger of a bubble bursting.  Marc Harris, co-head of global research for RBC Capital Markets, acknowledges those fears, but adds: "Part of the reason why these countries are getting their due is because they are really coming into their own."

In fact, rising inflation is already leading to concerns that central banks in many of these markets will tighten policy in 2011, which could put a crimp on growth. Tightening was a dominant theme holding back Chinese stocks, though investors remain impressed with China's and other of the region's developing markets' ability to manage growth and expectations.

"What people have been most impressed with, in particular the Chinese, is how well they've managed the process, how they've matured into a financial system that understands how to move the levers in very thoughtful and market-sensitive ways," Mr. Harris said.

Market hiccups like the one China saw in 2010 are "a second-order consideration" in what is a strong growth story, said Putnam's Mr. Knight. "This is a real, secular, transformative global economic shift."

Latin America was also ebullient, with Chile, Mexico, Venezuela, Peru and Argentina all putting in some of the strongest performances from around the globe. 

Toronto, a commodity-driven market, surged 14% to highs last seen before the crisis. Both Mexico and Argentina finished out the year at record highs.

Only Brazil, a longtime favorite of global investors, showed signs of weakness, stumbling into the red for much of the year before clawing back to finish up by about 1%.

  Nicholas Smithie, global emerging-markets strategist at UBS, said Brazil is his favorite pick for 2011, thanks to lowered investor expectations, a strong banking sector and a burgeoning consumer class. 

While investors worry about a handover of power within Brazil's ruling center-left government and the likelihood of central banking tightening in the year ahead, Mr. Smithie argues that these concerns are overblown, and have been well-known for some time.

"Brazil is now one of the cheapest markets in the world," said Mr. Smithie, who worries that this year's run-up in stocks in smaller, less-liquid Latin American countries "is less likely to be repeated next year."

For emerging economies and their stock markets to continue outperforming, strategists agree that increasing domestic demand will be an important piece of that puzzle. The developed world, beset by debt and other fiscal problems, can no longer be counted on to drive global growth with consistency.

Ms. Moore of Bank of America expects three-quarters of global growth to come from emerging markets in 2011, a bigger proportion than in years past. "The only growth story in town right now is global emerging markets," Ms. Moore said. 

"We're expecting the majority of growth in emerging markets to come from domestic demand, and that's a marked change from where it's been in the past," she said, arguing that domestic demand will replace exports as the main driver of these economies. "These governments are making a huge effort to change the composition of their economies."

Mr. Knight of Putnam will also be watching for signs of the emerging world's economies loosening their reliance on Western consumers, a key aspect of the "decoupling" that many strategists and market-watchers have been waiting to see. "If you look at where China's exports go, a lot stays within the emerging markets," Mr. Knight said. "There's a tipping point that we reach where, as an engine of growth, it's not so much an after-effect of U.S. prosperity."

Not everyone is sanguine on emerging-market growth.  Barry Knapp, managing director of equity research at Barclays Capital, said he expects the growth gap between emerging and developed economies to narrow as some of the world's most spectacular growth economies begin to mature. 

"When you hit that inflection point where the gap isn't expanding, on a risk-adjusted basis, you'll get a lot more from the developed world," Mr. Knapp said.

The other big consideration is that any faltering in global growth will likely be met with a weaker policy response—in contrast to the forceful stimulus efforts that helped many countries pull out of the recession.

Over the past year, the world has seen a number of countries' legislative majorities lose some of their clout, making it more difficult to pass stimulus legislation in the event of a sudden deterioration in the economic picture.

"We're seeing a systematic weakening of political will in the developed world, and that means more dispersion and less coordination of government policy," Mr. Levanoni said. "We're in a slower-growth environment, so there's more risk and it doesn't take a lot to tap us back into recession."

 Write to  Jonathan Cheng at jonathan.cheng@wsj.com 