Everywhere Francisco Cervelli looks, there are bigger-name players trying to push him out of a job. 

He was the Yankees' backup catcher last season, and with Jorge Posada finally vacating the catcher's spot, Cervelli thought he might have a chance to start. But then the Yankees brought in former All-Star Russell Martin, and quickly named him the starter.

That was fine, Cervelli said. Only now even his backup position is not secure. Jesus Montero and Austin Romine, New York's top catching prospects, are fighting him for that spot.

Montero is the No. 3-rated prospect in all of baseball, and Cervelli is well aware how much the organization wants its top prospect to succeed. 

"I don't feel like I'm the No. 2 right now. I've got to play and I've got to do my thing. If they want me to show more, I'll show more. I've got to play my game, relax and have fun," Cervelli said. 

That will be easier said than done, given that no matter how well Cervelli plays this month, his fate will largely be decided based on factors other than his own performance.

 While the catcher can help his case with a good spring training, his fate is in Montero's hands. 

Montero, 21, is the heir apparent to Posada at catcher, and if the Yankees determine that Montero is ready to be the backup, the prospect would likely be handed the job.

 If he isn't, Montero would be sent to Triple-A Scranton to give him more at-bats and regular starts to work on his defense, manager Joe Girardi said. 

"If you're carrying [Cervelli] as your backup catcher, then maybe we're saying that Montero's not ready to be the backup catcher. You would want [Montero] to go play every day. If he's ready to play once or twice a week, then you'll think about him," Girardi said. 

For Cervelli it's a game of one step forward, two steps back: Even if he has a good game, it's what Montero does that matters more.

 Cervelli is 3-for-5 with a double in two spring games thus far, but Montero threw out two Pittsburgh Pirate runners Tuesday in Bradenton, Fla.—and Girardi was obviously thrilled. 

"Yeah, yeah, yeah, we've got a lot of talent here," Cervelli said. "But I've got confidence. I'm working on what I need, and they know what my game is. So I'm going to keep playing the same, and that's it." 

Actually, he may need to do more than just ''play the same'' in order to win the job. Cervelli is a decent defensive catcher— he has thrown out a respectable 22 percent of opposing base-stealers over his career—and calls a game well. He became AJ Burnett's personal catcher in 2010, surely a point in his favor. 

His bat, however, lacks thump.

Cervelli, 24, hit .298 in 94 at-bats in 2009, but drew hardly any walks and posted an ugly .309 on-base percentage. He improved his plate discipline in 2010, drawing 33 walks to post a .359 on-base percentage buoyed by a .271 batting average. 

But he was no power threat. In 266 at-bats, Cervelli did not hit a home run. A hollow .300 average, with no extra-base power, is of little use to a team. 

To fix that, Cervelli called his friend Robinson Cano, and asked about getting on his strength and hitting program. Cano told Cervelli to come down to the Dominican Republic and train with him. 

So Cervelli, a Venezuelan, spent January and February in the Dominican, and for the first time really invested himself in strength training. 

"It was the best decision, especially for my body," Cervelli said. "I worked with a trainer, with a plan.''

He also got a few hitting tips from Cano, who posted magnificent numbers in his breakout 2010. 

"He's one of the guys you want to follow, y'know? His career's really good, and he can hit. He's got good stuff there, they teach you—and we had fun, too," Cervelli said. 

Cervelli said he's seen extra pop from his bat early in spring training, and his early sense is that he could better withstand the pounding that comes with catching a full season. 

"I killed the gym. I changed my body, because I feel [it's time for me] to catch every day, so I want to be ready for 160 games. It's not just 50 games," Cervelli said. 