A network of international monitoring stations has begun to pick up the signatures of radioactive elements emitted by Japan's crippled Fukushima nuclear plant, a Swedish official said Thursday.

At high, sustained doses, these radioactive elements—including iodine and cesium—can be dangerous to human health. 

However, the amounts released from the plant so far are small, and are largely being dispersed over the Pacific.

Currently, "they don't pose a danger" to the U.S. or even other Asian countries, said  Lars-Erik De Geer, research director at the Swedish Defense Research Institute, who has seen the data from the monitoring stations.



The several dozen workers now attempting to cool the overheating nuclear fuel at the Fukushima plant face the gravest danger from radiation sickness. The closer people are to the source, the greater their risk. Residents of Tokyo and other populated centers south of the plant also face little immediate danger, since even the low level of radiation is being blown eastward across the ocean, scientists say. 

The radiation-detecting network is run by the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty Organization, a Vienna-based group that monitors any breaches of the test ban. It runs more than 60 such stations, including two in Japan. A unit in Kamchatka, Russia, more than 1,000 miles northeast of Fukushima, was the first to detect signs of the radiation.

Dr. De Geer said the terms of the treaty prevented him from divulging specific details, such as the exact readings of different radioactive isotopes picked up by the monitoring network.

Radioactive materials tend to be released from a damaged nuclear plant in a certain pattern. First, a range of less-dangerous gases are liberated, including tritium, krypton and xenon. They typically dissipate in the atmosphere and pose little threat.

Overheating fuel rods then discharge gaseous forms of certain volatile radioactive elements, including cesium, iodine, strontium and tellurium. As these rise, they latch on to dust in the air and become particulates, a quarter the size of a grain of sand.

These are the elements that post the most risk in case of a nuclear catastrophe, and were some of the most harmful after Chernobyl. Cesium 137, for example, emits high-energy gamma rays. Inhaling or ingesting cesium-137 distributes the radioactive material in the soft tissues, especially the muscles, and increases the risk of cancer.

Tokyo Electric Power Co., the Fukushima plant's owner and operator, has said cesium has been detected at the plant, but it was unclear what levels were found.

Radiation-emitting particles can then travel afar, depending on the speed and direction of the prevailing wind. If it rains or snows, the radioactive elements it can fall to earth more quickly. 

Many dangerous nonvolatile radioactive materials such as uranium tend to remain in the nuclear core. If a full meltdown occurs, they could liquefy, eat through containment structures and enter the close environment. It would take a major explosion to scatter nonvolatile elements beyond the immediate area. 

The radiation emitted by nonvolatile materials still poses a big danger to workers or cleanup crews close to the plant, along with the released volatile elements such as cesium and iodine. As a rule, doubling the distance from the source cuts exposure by a factor of four, says the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.

At Fukushima City, 60 miles from the plant, the recorded amount of radiation on Thursday was 20 microsieverts per hour, a level that is roughly 1,000 times higher than in Japanese cities far from the plant. Still, scientists say it isn't enough to cause long-term health effects.

Officials at Fukushima City also said that they found iodine, cesium-135 and cesium-137 in drinking water, at about one-quarter the levels that would make the water unfit to drink. 

 Write to  Gautam Naik at gautam.naik@wsj.com 