SAN'A, Yemen—Yemeni President Ali Abdullah Saleh accused the U.S. of conspiring to foment Arab unrest, as about 10,000 protesters, joined by a controversial cleric, called for his resignation.

Mr. Saleh told an audience of around 500 students and academics at San'a University that he would "reveal a secret" that there is an "operations room in Tel Aviv with the aim of destabilizing the Arab world." He said the White House ran the operations room. 

The comments were unexpected from a man the U.S. has viewed as a counterterrorism ally, and whose government has received millions of dollars in military aid. 

State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley, in a statement on Twitter, said the protests in Yemen "are not the product of external conspiracies," and that Mr. Saleh "knows better."

Antigovernment demonstrations have grown steadily for over a month, and turnout grew in the wake of violence by government loyalists and riot police. On Monday, Mr. Saleh offered to form a unity government, but the opposition coalition rejected the proposal outright and said they would join the protesters for demonstrations. Tens of thousands of antigovernment protesters demonstrated around the country Tuesday.

Outside San'a University, thousands of protesters, many with their faces painted with the red, white and black of the Yemeni flag, chanted, "We want the president to flee." 

Sheikh Abdel Majeed Zindani, an Islamic scholar, politician and spiritual leader who the U.S. has labeled a "specially designated global terrorist," led antigovernment demonstrators in the noon prayer, and then told them he was joining their cause.

"No matter how long it takes, no matter how many lives, the regime with fall," he told the crowd from a podium outside the university.

The address worried some students that Mr. Zindani would try to hijack the demonstrations to further his own political agenda. Mr. Zindani is a linked to Islah, Yemen's main opposition party. 

He also is alleged to have helped finance and recruit for al Qaeda. After the speech, some protesters complained that Mr. Zindani's comments on implementing an Islamic caliphate in Yemen would send conflicting messages to the international community that the republic was "full of terrorists."

Track events day by day.

See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

However, some said they were pleased Mr. Zindani and the religious opposition was joining demonstrators with the shared aim of ousting the president.

A similar-size pro-government protest was held about a mile away.

President Saleh, in his speech, railed against U.S. President Barack Obama. "Every day we hear a statement from Obama saying, 'Egypt you can't do this, Tunisia don't do that,' " Mr. Saleh said in the speech. "What do you have to do with Egypt? Or with Oman? Are you president of the United States, or president of the world?" 

Mr. Saleh's comments were unusual for the Yemeni president, though there are large portions of the Yemeni population who share the view that there is a U.S.-Israeli conspiracy against them. 

Mr. Saleh has been a close ally to the U.S. since the USS Cole, a Navy destroyer, was bombed in 2000 by al Qaeda while it was harbored in the Yemeni port of Aden, killing 17 American sailors and injuring 39. 

Since the bombing, the U.S. and Yemen have worked closely on counterterrorism, collaborating in the fight against the local al Qaeda affiliate, al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula.

Mr. Saleh also criticized U.S. Ambassador Gerald M. Feierstein, who he said was spending time with the opposition and giving them "instructions." 

A U.S. Embassy spokesman, calling the comments "unfortunate," said "the U.S. is actively engaged in promoting dialogue and a peaceful resolution of the issues in Yemen."

Mr. Saleh has ruled Yemen for over three decades. With 35% unemployment and prevalent corruption, discontent has been festering in the republic for years.

Mr. Saleh sought support from tribal and military leaders over the weekend, but lost some key allies because some protesters have been killed—27, according to Amnesty International—by government supporters or security forces.

U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has called on Mr. Saleh to pursue political and economic change, but has also reaffirmed U.S. military and developmental support—underscoring Washington's need for a cooperative leader in San'a. Mr. Saleh has offered some concessions, including a vow not to seek re-election in 2013. Mr. Saleh has ruled, first as president of North Yemen and then united Yemen, for 32 years.

Yemen has become a launching pad for attacks on the U.S. In December 2009, a Nigerian who admitted to have trained in Yemen tried to blow up a commercial jet flying to Detroit. In November 2010, two explosive packages were sent from Yemen with the apparent intent to detonate on cargo planes in U.S. territory.