"Crossover" is a popular buzzword that often suggests trading one kind of legitimacy for another. It can describe what happens when an artist ventures away from a core genre and toward a style with more widespread appeal.

But for the classical, rock, jazz and experimental musicians and composers who will perform in the forthcoming Ecstatic Music Festival, it's just what they do. The festival, which will bring together more than 150 musicians for 14 collaborative concerts at Merkin Hall, runs through March 28, beginning with a free music "marathon" on Monday.

"Most of us are classically trained musicians who have a deep love for rock and pop music," said Shara Worden, the New York-based songwriter who leads the band My Brightest Diamond. Ms. Wardon also vocalizes with the Clogs, a chamber quartet formed by Bryce Dessner of the indie-rock act the National and Australian violinist Padma Newsome. "The really beautiful thing is that it's really based on friendship. There's a crew of us, and it's a bit incestuous."

Ms. Worden, who will join the Clogs for a March 12 Ecstatic performance with the Brooklyn Youth Chorus, is a favored guest vocalist with friends such as Sufjan Stevens and the Decemberists—an eclectic social network that reflects the nature of the festival. 

Monday's seven-hour concert features a sprawl of hybrid-happy new-music acts, including So Percussion, the Nebraska-based Chiara String Quartet, violist Nadia Sirota, and Buke and Gass, a Brooklyn duo that plays homemade mutant string instruments. 

All the shows to follow will spotlight unique collaborations, such as a summit-meeting between So Percussion and the playful electronic composer Dan Deacon, and Ms. Sirota's exchange with Thomas Bartlett (Doveman) and indie singer/composer Owen Pallett.

"This is something that's been bubbling under the surface for many, many years, and now it's come to a boil," said John Schaefer, host of WNYC's "New Sounds Live," which is broadcasting four of the festival's concerts. "We used to talk about barriers being broken down between rock and classical, but with this it's all the same people. It's about who's in the neighborhood, who can I hang with, and what can I do with them?"

Though the festival includes acts such as Alarm Will Sound and the Bang On a Can All-Stars—the two best-known contemporary music supergroups to emerge in the past two decades—it also offers a platform for the next generation of composers just hitting their stride, regardless of what category their music is filed under on iTunes.

Judd Greenstein, a composer and co-director of the new-music label New Amsterdam, was hired by organizers at Merkin Hall to curate the festival, whose concept he described as a kind of playing outside the box. 

"What happens if you take people and put them in a context where it's not sure what's being asked of them?" said Mr. Greenstein, whose roster includes big-band leader Darcy James Argue, Ms. Sirota, and the Now Ensemble, which is devoted to playing works by young composers like himself, Nico Muhly and Missy Mazzoli.

"My introduction to writing music was using synthesizers to make hip-hop beats in junior high school," Mr. Greenstein, a Yale-trained composer. "This is all about the notion that music doesn't exist in a single, unbroken thread, but exists in a whole bunch of threads going in every direction."

Oddly enough, the festival takes its cue from locales rarely associated with the avant-garde. Mr. Dessner curated last year's second annual Big Ears festival in Knoxville, Tenn., a sonic mash-up that took note of everything from minimalism to freely improvised noise to lyrical string music. 

Other gatherings, such as the Sonar Festival in Krakow, Poland, go even further.

"This is a great curatorial gesture," said Nico Muhly, the highly collaborative composer who records for Mr. Dessner's Brooklyn-based Brassland label. "One of the things about Judd and Bryce, they're both people who have their fingers in many different pies, and who can very organically build something that looks like this. Just because you put things together doesn't mean they're the same."

Mr. Muhly, who will participate Sunday in a panel discussion at the 67th Street Apple Store, and will have a new commission, "Diacritical Marks," premiered Wednesday at the festival by the Chiara String Quartet, also is happy that he can travel to this show on the subway.

"One of the things that was great about Big Ears was you got to go to Knoxville. This random town has this fabulous thing. And you say to yourself, 'Why can't New York do this?'"