The owners of the New York Mets, who face a $1 billion lawsuit related to withdrawals they made from  Bernard Madoff's investment firm, are expected to face additional allegations from a court-appointed trustee about how they may have benefitted from the multibillion-dollar Ponzi scheme if they fail to reach a settlement, according to a person familiar with the situation.

  Irving Picard, the trustee seeking to recover money for Madoff investors, filed a lawsuit against the Mets' owners,  Fred Wilpon and  Saul Katz, and their associates in December, alleging they knew or should have known about the fraud at the firm over their decades-long relationship with Mr. Madoff. Mr. Picard is seeking nearly $300 million in false profits he says the team owners and their associates withdrew before Mr. Madoff's scheme collapsed, plus $700 million in principal.

The two sides have been mired in an acrimonious dispute. Lawyers for Mr. Picard have told the defendants that if they don't reach a settlement, they will add additional allegations by a March 18 legal deadline, people familiar with the situation said. The trustee's amended complaint would include new allegations about amounts of investments with Mr. Madoff by the Mets owners and associates at their real-estate firm, Sterling Equities Associates, according to one of the people familiar with the situation.

Messrs. Wilpon and Katz have denied Mr. Picard's allegations, saying the suit, by threatening to ruin their reputations, is a bid to "strong arm" a settlement. Both sides have submitted their positions to former New York Gov. Mario Cuomo, who was appointed by a judge as a mediator in the case last month, the person familiar with the situation said.

"What the judge has asked and what the judge asks of all mediators is that you seek to create a solution that saves time, saves money and shortens or does away with litigation," Mr. Cuomo said in an interview Wednesday. "That's what we'll try to do—that's the objective." Asked if he could see a road to settlement, Mr. Cuomo responded: "The job of the mediator is to either find the road or make the road."

Representatives for the Mets owners and for Mr. Picard declined to comment on mediation.

The behind-the-scenes tussles come as the owners of the Mets step up their efforts to sell a minority stake in their franchise. Within the next two weeks, Major League Baseball is expected to approve about 14 individuals and groups to bid for the franchise, according to two people with knowledge of the owners' plans. A spokesman for the Mets declined to comment on the sales process and financial matters. The process is gaining urgency because the proceeds from the sale will be used to cover losses that are expected to climb significantly this season, according to the two people familiar with the owners' plans. The proceeds would also be used to pay down some of the debts the team's operations can't support. The money won't be used to pay for a settlement with Mr. Picard in the Madoff case, these people said.

A person familiar with Messrs. Wilpon and Katz's thinking said as long as the price of the settlement isn't too steep, they believe they can borrow money against their business assets outside of baseball to pay back victims of the Ponzi scheme.

The owners of the Mets are nonetheless fighting a separate legal battle over Mr. Picard's approach to settlements. On Thursday, they will be among the investors facing off with the Mr. Picard over his refusal to honor the final statement balances of investors in the Ponzi scheme.

At the hearing Thursday, Mr. Picard's lawyers are expected to defend before an appeals court panel his decision, endorsed by a bankruptcy judge, to approve claims only to Madoff investors who were so-called net losers, who lost part of their principal investment in the Ponzi scheme.

Mr. Picard has rejected the claims of net winners, who withdrew more from Mr. Madoff's firm than they put in, and has sued many of them to recover what he calls false profits.

"Any other decision would only result in having those who did not get their money back get less, and those who got other people's money get more of it," Mr. Picard's counsel,  David Sheehan, said in a statement Wednesday. "That is neither right nor fair and is unsupported by the law."

Lawyers for the Sterling partners and other net winners, however, say in court papers that, under the law, Mr. Picard should honor their last statement balances with Mr. Madoff, which Mr. Picard says were fabricated.

Meanwhile, the Mets owners, who have previously said that they are seeking a single individual or partnership to purchase as much as 25% of the franchise, would also consider selling a series of minority stakes in the coming years, according to people who have discussed the matter with team owners.

That could significantly decrease the share of the team owned by the Wilpon and Katz families. The owners need to raise between $150 million and $250 million to finance the operations of the franchise for the next two years and lower its debt, these people say.

The possible sale, which is being led by investment banker  Steve Greenberg of Allen & Co, is the culmination of a year-long effort to recapitalize a team that is now carrying nearly $500 million in debt—far beyond Major League Baseball's limits—and is also responsible for an annual payment of $43 million to finance the publicly owned debt on its stadium, Citi Field, according to the New York City Industrial Development Agency.

The team lost millions last year, and losses for this year could be significantly higher. Messrs. Wilpon and Katz used to sustain such shortfalls using interest from their Madoff accounts, according to the Picard suit and a former Mets financial adviser, but that money is no longer available. The team borrowed $25 million from Major League Baseball in November to cover a short-term liquidity crisis, the team has acknowledged.

 Write to  Matthew Futterman at matthew.futterman@wsj.com and Michael Rothfeld at michael.rothfeld@wsj.com 