In the family of stories about doting mothers in crazy love with spoiled and horrid daughters, HBO's miniseries remake of "Mildred Pierce" comes with a gaudy pedigree. The original 1945 movie of that name was just one in a long line that includes Douglas Sirk's 1959 melodrama "Imitation of Life." Also related is the cult classic "The Bad Seed" (1956), in which a model housewife tries not to notice that her pigtailed darling is a homicidal maniac. And then in 1981 came "Mommie Dearest," where the mother-daughter-dysfunction theme reached its camp apogee.



The new "Mildred Pierce" tries not to go in a flamboyant direction. The basic story is necessarily the same, although HBO's series is most faithful to James M. Cain's novel: During the depression, a divorced housewife tries to maintain her family's middle-class status by building a successful restaurant business—until everything falls apart due to her obsessive attachment to a narcissistic, manipulative daughter. 

The HBO film is not only more quiet and languid than the original. Although it is set in the 1930s, today's version is a thoroughly modern enterprise, both artistically and because it, like we, are now so self aware. With the possible exception of its climatic scene, the series is not likely to provoke sustained ridicule.

Besides, it glitters with accomplished stars, including Kate Winslet (as Mildred) and Guy Pearce (as her playboy lover-husband, Monty); with other notables, e.g. Melissa Leo (Mildred's bootlegging neighbor with a heart of gold), in attendance. One of the sex scenes features a nearly full-frontal naked parade by Evan Rachel Wood (as Mildred's grown daughter Veda). Director Todd Haynes has created a hazy olden-days tone by shooting the series in more natural light than we are used to, giving it a palette of browns, soft greens, and maroons even in the glaring sunlight of California. Music of the era, streams of costumed extras and a fleet of period automobiles complete the yesteryear effect. 

What nothing can alter, or overcome, is the fact that the basic story of Mildred Pierce makes no sense. On any level. Over five-plus hours, the miniseries would have had time to explore every nuance. But there are so few that rise above artifice, and so little dramatic action driving the plot, that even an actor as talented as Ms. Winslet can hardly fill the dead spaces. In fact, Mildred is made to look forlorn and baffled for so long and so often that her most ardent admirers may lose focus and be reminded of the forlorn and baffled Nazi guard on trial in "The Reader."

This is not Ms. Winslet's fault. Mildred Pierce is one of the most vapid and intellectually inert central figures in fiction. An uninteresting dud. Some may yet strain to see her as a prefeminist who takes on a man's world. Mildred does figure out how to serve tasty food at a profit, and she sleeps around a bit along the way. In the end, though, she is a victim of her own stupidity and even willful ignorance. Only a ninny would ask the lawyer who tricked her ex-husband out of his company to manage her own business-affairs.

Many years after critics scoffed at the 1945 movie as a silly weepy, Marxists led the fight to restyle "Mildred Piece," most notably as a brilliant, ironic parody of the striving and delusional petit bourgeoisie. If only the tale held together that well as any kind of commentary. Yes, it is set in the Depression, but that barely affects any of the principals, and after a nod or two in its direction, the Depression is all but out of sight in the HBO film. 

The story also is packed with improbabilities that form another barrier to sympathy. For instance, who can believe that daughter Veda, having failed as a pianist, surfaces as an opera virtuoso a few months later? There is some demented fun in watching Veda taunt Mildred with an encore performance of mother's gooey favorite, "I'm Always Chasing Rainbows," especially since mother doesn't seem to register the slap. Even so, most of the actors get little meat for their stock roles. 

Why does Mr. Pearce seem to be channeling Howard Hughes? How else can you stretch while being put through predictable paces as a playboy mooch? The only character who seems like an real human here is Mildred's placid ex-husband, played by Brian F. O'Byrne. 

As for the mother-daughter pathology, perhaps TV shrink Dr. Drew can tackle that some day. It is hard to care when each of them is so annoying in her way. It may be worth noting that in his oeuvre, Cain tended to paint women as evil temptresses or control freaks. Who's to say that "Mildred Pierce" is not just an idiosyncratic working out of some bee in Cain's personal psychic bonnet, say, because a controlling mother stomped on his own operatic ambitions by telling him he had no talent. 

There are worse things for a miniseries than people arguing about its meaning. That all versions of "Mildred" may in fact signify nothing leaves them open to endless interpretation. HBO's ambitious rendition is no exception, although in time it may be remembered most warmly for its dramatic high point—a scene so full of banshee wailing, flailing, vomit and psycho histrionics that the only thing missing is a giant Wurlitzer organ, all pipes blasting, rising out of the floor. 





 "Coal" is a fascinating series filmed over a year in and around a West Virginia coal mine. Like the oil-drilling-roughneck series "Black Gold," also created by Thom Beers, "Coal" turns a sweaty and dangerous manly pursuit into educational entertainment. The series was filmed at a new company called Cobalt Coal, whose two owners seem always only a few precious loads from the brink of financial disaster. 

Cobalt is engaged in pillar mining, which involves making horizontal cuts deep into the side of a mountain to extract a winding seam of coal in a dark tunnel maybe 48 inches tall. It is perilous work and surely monotonous. Even so, something about the miners makes it seem highly exotic.

So what if teeth are missing, and we often need subtitles to understand what they're saying. Courage makes these men attractive. Even though in their part of the country, those who want to work don't have many job choices. "You either got coal miner or flippin' burgers," one says. "And I'm not no burger man." 