BEIJING—Japan's disaster has triggered an unusual outpouring of sympathy and even admiration from China that has, for now at least, largely blotted out the historical antipathy many here have felt toward their neighbor.

The devastation wrought by the March 11 earthquake and tsunami, and the uncertainty and fear created by the unfolding nuclear crisis at the Fukushima Daiichi power complex, has elicited expressions of support and concern from around the world. But China's strong response has been especially noteworthy, given the history of strained relations between the two countries and lingering resentment in China over Japan's brutal occupation of China before and during World War II.

"Between Japan and China, history is history; the current reality is the current reality—we should separate the two," said Woody Wang, 39, an editor at an online news portal, echoing a sentiment expressed widely in China. "As human beings, we should have empathy for each other."

Many people, glued to Internet coverage of the disaster, have reacted with a blend of admiration and humility to images showing Japanese people maintaining order—sitting calmly in traffic, lining up to buy groceries—amid the chaos.

"Faced with that kind of danger, I doubt I'd be able to behave so well. How is it the Japanese can do this?" asked one user of a Chinese Twitter-like microblogging service, writing under the name Linda_LingFei.

Just six months ago, China's Internet was filled with comments lambasting Japan over the arrest and detention of a Chinese fishing-boat captain for ramming Japanese Coast Guard vessels near a set of disputed islands in the East China Sea. Some of that bile resurfaced briefly on the Internet in the immediate aftermath of the earthquake, with some Chinese people posting messages that seemed to take satisfaction in Japan's misfortune. But other Chinese Internet users have been quick to criticize those messages as inappropriate.

The Chinese government likewise moved quickly to express its support for Japan and to send a rescue team and relief supplies and prominent expressions of support. Speaking at a press conference on the last day of China's annual legislative session on Monday, Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao went out of his way to offer "deep sympathy and solicitude to the Japanese government and the people" and pledged to provide whatever help Tokyo requested.

China initially provided 30 million yuan, or roughly $4.5 million, in aid and has since also shipped 10,000 tons both of gasoline and diesel fuel at the request of the Japanese government, said a Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Thursday.

It is unclear whether the positive feelings will last. But observers say extensive coverage of the disaster may have helped humanize the people of Japan in a country given in recent years to periodic anti-Japanese riots or calls for boycotts of Japanese goods.

"Personally it's a bit hard for me to show sympathy to Japanese due to historic problems," said Jin Fei, 36, an information safety consultant at a company in Beijing. "But still I don't agree with those people who said the Japan earthquake was a good thing. It's not right to say things like that."

In fact, the quake has brought to the forefront in some cases a significant affinity for Japanese culture—particularly among younger urban Chinese—that has thrived despite the frequent bouts of hostility.

Chinese cartoon fans were upset at reports that famous Japanese cartoonist Aoyama Gosho, whose Detective Conan series is popular in China, has been reported missing, according to a report by the state-run Xinhua news agency. "I hope he is OK," Xinhua quoted 29-year-old Liu Jia as saying. "Please, be safe and sound. He hasn't told us the ending of Conan yet."

—Yoli Zhang and Juliet Ye contributed to this article.