MUMBAI— Vodafone Group PLC said Sunday it continues to believe that material information has not been provided by Essar Group regarding the merger of its listed company with a privately held Essar holding unit, which in turn holds an indirect 11% stake in the British telecommunication firm's Indian unit. 

"In Essar's public statements they have not attempted to refute the points we have made but merely raised technical arguments about standing," a note from Vodafone to the press said. 



On Friday, Essar Group—led by the billionaire Ruia brothers—stepped up its war of words with Vodafone, accusing the U.K. company of trying to keep the value of Essar's holding in their India telecom joint venture "artificially depressed." 

Essar said its decision to merge two of its units—the issue at the center of the growing storm—is aimed at finding out the value of its total 33% stake in Vodafone-Essar Ltd. 

Vodafone owns about 67% of Vodafone-Essar, which was formed in 2007, while Essar Group company Essar Telecommunications Holdings Pvt. has 11% and Essar Communications Holdings Ltd. has 22%. 

Essar wants to merge Essar Telecommunications into listed India Securities Ltd., but Vodafone objects to the deal, saying that it is concerned that the value of India Securities after the merger could be misinterpreted as a fair market value of unlisted Vodafone-Essar. 

The Indian conglomerate added that it wanted to list Vodafone-Essar in 2010 but Vodafone didn't allow it to go through, and that "no market value could be established." 

It called Vodafone's objections to the merger "motivated and factually incorrect." 

But Vodafone has not blocked Essar from conducting an initial public offering of its interest in Vodafone Essar, the note said. "We have no objection if Essar wishes to IPO its stake," the note added. 

A decision to exercise either the put option on or before May 8 is entirely the choice of Essar, Vodafone said. 

"If Essar opted for the partial sale to Vodafone, in addition to the market-related payment, Vodafone would also have to pay Essar an additional $725 million sum under an agreement signed between the two groups in July last year," Essar said Friday. 

Vodafone unit Vodafone International Holdings B.V. Thursday approached the Securities and Exchange Board of India, asking the markets regulator to investigate the proposed merger, what it claims is inadequate disclosure and violations of insider trading of India Securities shares. 

Essar denies any wrongdoing. 

The U.K. company has a pact with Essar which gives the Indian diversified conglomerate a put option for its stake, which it can sell to Vodafone for $5 billion between the third and fourth years of the deal's completion, namely until May 2011. 

The alternative is that Essar could sell shares worth between $1 billion and $5 billion in the company to Vodafone at a market-determined price. 