It's that time of year, when the temperatures soar and daylight stretches, and those perky all-caps emails arrive in the office inbox: 

"WHO WANTS TO PLAY SOME COMPANY SOFTBALL!??!?" 

Put me in, coach! I love softball—I've played it unexceptionally for years. I've been in easygoing games in which the pitcher took to the mound in bare feet, and everyone else clung to a beer and a cigarette, including the batter. I've played the hard-core fast-pitch stuff with ex-baseball prospects who wore eye black and screamed at one another like it was a Game 7. Yes: that was as hideous as it sounds. 

Work softball can be a rewarding bonding experience, but it's not without its hazards. The usual boundaries become blurred, and office greatness doesn't mean softball acuity. That executive who just let a ground ball trickle through his legs might have the authority to fire you tomorrow. And that co-worker whose name you still don't know after six years WILL be the best player on the team, and you will feel ashamed.

Still, action is under way—I need to weasel my way onto the talented WSJ team for a game—and everyone should try at least once. Here are some helpful rules:

 WHO CAN PLAY? If you work at a company where they have a softball team, the roster is fixed and newcomers are discouraged, that's not a company softball team. That's an asylum for midlife crises. Anyone in the company should be able to play for the company team. Even the board members. OK, maybe not the board. 

 WHAT TO WEAR: It's softball, not a triathlon—leave the Spandex and Clif Bars at home. Shorts are fine. Jeans work. A company hat or T-shirt is good for spirit, but full uniforms make you look like a cult. And for the love of Joe Jackson, no stirrups over your socks. If you wear stirrups over your socks, your teammates can call in the National Guard. 

 THE BOSS : Yes: it's less scary if the boss doesn't play. And many bosses are turned off softball by the lack of helicopter parking. But if the boss does play, don't be spineless and let him or her bat cleanup and preside at shortstop for nine innings. Your co-workers will respect you more if you find a compromise. So bat the boss a face-saving sixth. Third base is a good boss position—some responsibility, but a reduced chance he or she will ruin the outcome. Also, remind the boss that each game is only two innings, costs $750 a person, and there is never, ever a post-game team trip to a bar. 

 DON'T BUNT: Ugh. What is your problem? 

 MESSING UP: Everyone does it. You will drop a fly ball. You will let a grounder scoot off your glove. You will forget to stop and buy that tequila for the bench. Laugh it off. This is supposed to be fun, or at least the work-related simulacrum of fun.

 THROW STRIKES: Nothing makes a slow-pitch softball game slower and worse than the pitcher who thinks he or she is Eddie Feigner or Jennie Finch and unleashes an obnoxious series of spins and trick pitches. Serve it up fat over the plate, pal. 

 DON'T JUDGE A TEAM BY ITS NAME: Just ask the Bonghitters of High Times magazine, one of New York's best and most legendary company softball teams. Well, ask them when they get out of the van. 

 THE RINGER RULE : Your 6-year-old who just joined a T-ball league is not a ringer. Keith Hernandez, now that's a ringer. 

 TRASH TALKING: No. You are old and slow, be quiet. 

 KEEPING STATISTICS: No. 

 SPECIAL BAT GUY: Special Bat Guy loves softball so much, he's purchased himself a state-of-the-art carbon fiber bat, which he firmly tells everyone that he— and only he—is allowed to use. If you have a Special Bat Guy, he should be taken to the nearest subway stop and abandoned, but not before stealing his Special Bat. 

 LITERARY ANALYSIS: Posting a write-up for your teammates is great, but not everyone in the office wants to read your 4,000-word Roger Kahn-style rumination on your 19-14, 11-error triumph. 

 THANK YOUR ORGANIZER: Ever try to get nine co-workers to show up to a meeting? Hold that: ever try to get two co-workers to respond to an email? Now imagine getting nine co-workers to play softball. Whoever runs your team should not have to pay for a drink. And can keep the Special Bat. 

 HOW SERIOUS TO TAKE  IT: The key question of all company softball. You want to be competitive, just out of respect for the game. Here's a good measure: If at the end of the game, seven or more of your players are nursing bloody injuries, and only one of these injuries is game-related, you are probably taking it too seriously. 

That's all. Batter up, and remember: leave the juice to the pros! 