 The Route: Maine midcoast and Penobscot Bay via coastal Rte. U.S. 1. 

 Distance: 94 miles 

The northernest bit of New England has a classic grace all its own. Ditch the big highways and take coastal Route 1 from the outlet town of Freeport up to Searsport, the "Antique Capital" of Maine, spinning through tidy port towns—stopping to scarf plenty of fresh seafood along the way. 



Start out by gearing up at the famed outdoor store L.L. Bean (open 24/7). Ask if you can check out the 1911-and-forward archives library, then get a head start on the local signature dish at Linda Bean's Perfect Maine Lobster Roll, a hole-in-the-wall next door to the main emporium. L.L. Bean, 95 Main St., Freeport, llbean.com; Linda Bean's, 57 Main St. 

Less than an hour north, in tiny and picturesque Damariscotta, fuel up on the freshest oysters around at  Glidden Point Oyster Co. 707 River Rd., Edgecomb, oysterfarm.com.  

If you prefer them cooked, go for a fried-oyster po'boy at the nearby Newcastle Publick House. 52 Main St., Newcastle, newcastlepublickhouse.com 

In Rockland, it's not hard to take a shine to the 159-year-old Owl's Head Lighthouse, perched on a dramatic rocky peninsula and still in use. The grounds—but not the lighthouse itself—are open to the public. Penobscot Bay at entrance to Rockland Harbor. 

It echoes the amazing collection of Andrew Wyeth paintings at the famed Farnsworth Art Museum nearby. 16 Museum St., Rockland, farnsworthmuseum.org  

In the well-heeled harbor retreat of Camden, stop by Cappy's for a cup of chowder or a lobster roll. 1 Main St., Camden, cappyschowderco.com. 

Browse the extensive selection of nautical tomes at Stone Soup Books just down the street. 35 Main St., Camden 

It's an understatement to call Salt Water Farm,situated on several acres overlooking Penobscot Bay, a cooking school. It offers everything from foraging excursions to rugged cooking classes, home brewing sessions and bespoke farm feasts. Book in advance for classes or the "Sunday Supper," beginning at 5 p.m. Salt Water Farm Rd. (Woodward Hill Road), Lincolnville, saltwaterfarm.com 

 Marshall Wharf Brewing Co. in Belfast features some of New England's best craft beer and has its own waterfront bar, Three Tides. 2 Pinchy Ln., Belfast, marshallwharf.com 

Call it a night at the Carriage House Inn in Searsport, a Victorian mansion built by a ship captain where Hemingway reportedly visited his artist pal Waldo Peirce. In the morning, hit the antique stores in town. 120 East Main St., Searsport, carriagehouseinmaine.com 



 The Route: From Astoria, where Highway 30 from Portland meets the sea, to the southwest corner of the state, by Highway 101.  

 Distance: 282 miles 

With wide sandy beaches, sea stacks that jut out of the Pacific and forests of Douglas Fir and Sitka Spruce trees, the 363-mile Oregon Coast is about as wild as the continent's edge gets. Highway 101 mostly hugs the water, passing classic northwest villages and quirky art galleries. 

Kick off the road trip in the beach town of Manzanita, where a night at Coast Cabins is the ticket. Set in a bamboo grove there's five modern cabins, three with outdoor spas. 635 Laneda Ave., coastcabins.com 

Sink into artisan brie at Blue Heron French Cheese Company here the creamy delectable comes in four varieties, from herb to hickory-smoked. Take the factory tour (free samples!) at Tillamook cheese.  2001 Blue Heron Dr., Tillamook, blueheronoregon.com, 4185 Highway 101, Tillamook, tillamook.com 

Beach meets beer at Pelican Pub & Brewery in Pacific City, where the sand ends at the patio's edge. Select microbrews and seasonal beers are on tap year-round; in summer, the hefeweizen-style Winema Wit refreshes. 33180 Cape Kiwanda Dr., Pacific City, yourlittlebeachtown.com/pelican 

The glass-blowing classes at the Jennifer Sears Glass Art Studio  in Lincoln City are taught by local artists. The studio's open to the public Wednesday through Sunday. 4821 Highway 101, Lincoln City, jennifersearsglassart.com 

The  Beaver Creek State Natural Area  outside of Newport invites road-trippers to pull off the highway for several hours. Paddle free kayaks (courtesy of nearby South Beach State Park) along the eponymous Beaver Creek. Watch for the Red-breasted Nuthatches in the marshland. Marvel at views of the Pacific from the top of Cougar Ridge Trail. oregonstateparks.org 

Sand-boarding—an extreme sport that combines surfing and snowboarding on sand—is the rage at the 40-acre Sand Master Park, near Florence. Zip down a variety of "slopes," or shred some bowls and rail slides. Dune buggy tours available. 87542 Highway 101, Florence, sandmasterpark.com  

Fresh rock cod fills the fish tacos at Tony's Crab Shack & Seafood Grill in Bandon. The local delicacy is fried lightly. Stroll off dinner past the adjacent boardwalk shops. 155 First St., Bandon, tonyscrabshack.com  

Conifers surround five cabin-suites at Port Orford's WildSpring Guest Habitat, an eco-friendly resort 60 minutes north of the California border. 92978 Cemetery Loop, wildspring.com  





 The Route: Drive through national forests and the Great Smoky Mountains from North Carolina to Tennessee.  

 The Distance: 250 miles 

Asheville and Chattanooga, two high-spirited mountain cities, anchor this roughly 10-hour expedition, while in between the points lies a vast dark forest laced with wildflowers and waterfalls...and Dolly Parton! The hills offer cool relief from the summer heat, so dress accordingly: hiking shoes and swimming gear. 

Give in to temptation at The Chocolate Fetish, a glittering shop that serves up gourmet truffles and such. Walk it off by touring downtown Asheville's Art Deco and Neo-Gothic architecture, or take the open-air LaZoom tour bus (lazoomtours.com). 36 Haywood St., Asheville, chocolatefetish.com 

Head west to Asheville's River Arts District, a sprawling atelier and industrial zone along the French Broad River. 12 Bones Smokehouse has the best ribs in town. Dine in or picnic across the street at the hidden garden at Curve Studios. Then join locals for a pint at Wedge Brewing Company across the tracks. Riverside Drive and Depot St., ashevillerad.com. 

About 30 miles southwest of Asheville, via NC 191 and NC 280, off Route 276, try the quick, bum-first ride down Sliding Rock, a sunny 60-foot natural water slide in Pisgah National Forest, to the cold plunge pool below. Follow 276 uphill to the Blue Ridge Parkway, then turn south for breathtaking vistas and hiking at Graveyard Fields or Black Balsam. nps.gov/blri/index.htm. 

Great Smoky Mountains National Park is wreathed in perpetual haze and home to a thousand or more black bears. U.S. 441 straddles the North Carolina-Tennessee line, 5,046 feet elevation and descends through pristine wilderness to kitschy, Alpine-inspired Gatlinburg, Tenn. Hit Ripley's Aquarium of the Smokies or the Tennessee moonshine-making Ole Smoky Distillery, both in the pedestrian-friendly downtown. gatlinburg.com 

For a yee-haw time, stop in nearby Pigeon Forge, where the Dollywood theme park serves up rides, country stage shows and Southern food. And there are convenient cabins. 

Swing southwest on U.S. highways for a leisurely drive to Chattanooga, an old industrial city enjoying a clean, green renaissance downtown and along the Tennessee River.  The Bluff View Art District  and  Hunter Museum of American Art  set high standards for glass, ceramics and more. 

Two important Civil War battlefields are reverently preserved near Chattanooga: Chickamauga and Lookout Mountain. After a day of history touring on foot or bike, stay at the elegant Chattanoogan Hotel , with a full-service spa. Finish with dinner at the posh Easy Bistro & Bar. 203 Broad St., Chattanooga, easybistro.com 



 The Route: I-94 to Milwaukee to I-43, then small roads along the coast of Lake Michigan. 

 The Distance: 328 miles 

Before setting off from Chicago, hit Xoco, Rick Bayless's magnificent Mexican sandwich shop early to beat the lines. The Ahogada pork carnitas sandwich, served in a bowl of tomato broth, is a road-tripper's jet fuel. Xoco, 449 North Clark St., Chicago, rickbayless.com 

You can't stop in Milwaukee without at least a brief brewery tour. Start at the historic Pabst Brewery, which closed in 1996 and is now a landmark. Eighteen of the original 28 buildings are still standing. Finish at the Lakefront Brewery, a microbrewery on the Milwaukee River. Don't drink too much; you've got more driving to do. 901 W. Juneau Ave to 1872 Commerce St.; milwaukeebrewerytours.com 

 Kopp's Frozen Custard in Greenfield is a Wisconsin tradition. The perfect refreshment for a warm day, located a stone's throw from the highway. 7631 W. Layton Ave., Greenfield, kopps.com 

 Whistling Straits in Sheboygan, Wis., is one of the most beautiful golf resorts in America. Perched on Lake Michigan, it resembles a seaside Irish coastal links course and hosted last year's PGA Championship. Book your tee-time in advance. N8501 County LS, Sheboygan, americanclubresort.com 

After traveling by car over smooth modern highways, check out Wade House in Greenbush, Wis.—a historic village from the 19th century, with its own carriage museum. W7824 Center St., Greenbush, wadehouse.wisconsinhistory.org 

One of the most iconic old-school automobile racetracks in the United States, Road America in Plymouth, Wis., hosts the Kohler International Challenge the weekend of July 14-17, the best vintage car racing event in the midwest. N7390 State Highway 67, Plymouth, roadamerica.com  

Check into the New Yardley Inn, located on 10 acres of woods and meadows in Door County, which was nicknamed "Death's Door" by French explorers centuries ago because of the dangers of the local waters. But there's nothing macabre about this shockingly beautiful country. Turn off the engine and cell phone (for once) and just admire.  3360 County E, Baileys Harbor, newyardleyinn.com 

"On road trips, I always bring a big Ziploc bag containing swim trunks and a towel. I have a rule when driving in the summer: If I come upon a body of freshwater that looks even halfway clean, I have to take a dip in it. This connects me with the geography at a deep level (I like to think) and it keeps me alert, too." 

—Walter Kirn, author of the novel 'Up in the Air'