TUCSON, Ariz.—The recovery of U.S. Rep. Gabrielle Giffords after brain surgery is proceeding without setbacks and the congresswoman is showing signs of awareness, although some damage will linger, a doctor said Wednesday.

The recovery of Ms. Giffords, who was shot in the head at point-blank range Saturday, is "going as anticipated," said Dr. Peter Rhee, the head of the University of Arizona Medical Center's trauma unit. 

At this stage, the pace of improvement can be very slow or even falter. However, he said, "I'm happy to state that none of the downward events have occurred at this time." 

By Friday, doctors will be able to determine whether she is "out of the woods."



The doctor's remarks show continued optimism about Ms. Giffords's chances of healing, but they were more muted than Tuesday's comment heralding a "101 percent chance of recovery."

A suspect, 22-year old Jared Lee Loughner, has been charged with two counts of murder, two counts of attempted murder and a count of attempted assassination of a member of Congress in connection with a mass shooting at a Tucson supermarket. Six people were killed and 14, including Ms. Gifford, were injured. 

Dr. Rhee, speaking at the daily news conference at the medical center, said caretakers have "really decreased" the amount of sedation Ms. Giffords is receiving, allowing her to become "more and more spontaneous all the time." The doctor said Ms. Giffords was able to feel her wounds with her own hands and fix her gown, prompting optimism among the medical staff.

But Dr. Rhee said there will likely be lasting consequences even if she manages to recover well. Some scars from the surgery, for example, will be permanent, and "without a doubt there's going to be some permanent damage from the bullet," the doctor said.

"Will she be functional, viable, normal? I can't say for sure, but I'm very hopeful she will be."

Dr. Rhee added that six patients remain at the hospital, one in critical condition, referring to Ms. Giffords; two in serious condition; and three in fair. 

There was more good news, as the family of Ms. Giffords's district director, Ronald Barber, said his condition was improving and that he was expected to make a full recovery.

"My dad is doing well after his second surgery," said his daughter, Jenny Douglas, with her mother, sister, husband and brother-in-law by her side. Mr. Barber was able to see his four grandchildren "which gave him great pleasure," Ms. Douglas said.

Mr. Barber, however, is saddened by the deaths, as well as the injury of Ms. Giffords. "His sole focus has been on the well-being of Gabby," Ms. Douglas said, adding that her father soon may be able to visit her. "Dad wants to see her. It will help him to see her."

Mr. Barber's family also thanked a woman they recently identified from a newspaper photo who stanched Mr. Barber's bleeding on the scene. The family said Mr. Barber remembers the shooting "very clearly."

The son of Pam Simon, Ms. Giffords's community-outreach coordinator and also a victim of the shooting, read a statement from his mother: "I'm tremendously grateful for the outpouring of love and support….the wounds inflicted are healing."

 Write to  Angel Gonzalez at angel.gonzalez@dowjones.com and Tamara Audi at tammy.audi@wsj.com 