The dollar managed to score a split decision against its two biggest rivals in 2010: The European debt crisis battered the euro, but the yen chugged higher despite Japan's own fiscal and economic woes.

Read the complete  Year-End Review report .

As traders peer into 2011, there are two overriding questions. The first is whether European governments will finally be able to put an end to the series of crises that started in Greece, swamped Ireland and now threatens Spain and Portugal. 

The second is whether the U.S. economy finally gains traction with the help of both monetary and fiscal stimulus. The Federal Reserve is pumping money into the economy via its low rates and its second round of so-called quantitative easing. Plus, an unexpected dollop of fiscal stimulus was delivered through tax cuts just before Christmas. 

Until clear answers emerge, expectations center on the kind of whipsaw markets seen in 2010 where the dollar is tossed up and down as investors move their focus between the regions' competing woes. 

Overall, the U.S. dollar index, which measures the dollar against a basket of currencies, was able to carve out a 1.5% gain to 79.028 in 2010 thanks in large part to greenback's move higher against the euro. At year-end, the euro was at $1.3370, a 6.6% decline.

The dollar also gained 3.6% against the British pound, which suffered at the hand of the U.K.'s own economic and fiscal woes.

Both the dollar and the euro lost ground against the Swiss franc, which ended the year at record highs against each of those rivals and gained favor among investors for its strong fiscal position. The Swiss central bank fought to stem the appreciation of its currency, using intervention efforts that analysts at J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. said potentially set a "world record" for its scale in relation to the small size of the Swiss economy. The greenback fell 9.8% against the Swiss franc and the euro lost 15.7%. 

The European Union's common currency was on the defensive for much of the year as so-called peripheral countries struggled under the weight of big budget deficits and devastated real-estate markets. In May, the EU and the International Monetary Fund had to come to the aid of Greece; Ireland, sunk by its crippled banking system, was rescued in November. 

As a result the euro, which had hit an all-time high against the dollar in April 2008 at 1.5981 and started 2010 at $1.4326, fell to $1.1917 on June 7 before recovering.

During 2011, efforts by European officials hammer to out a framework to handle the euro zone's fiscal problems are expected to proceed in the kind of two-steps-forward, one-step-back dynamic seen this past year. Throughout the crisis, European officials are seen by investors as having failed to get ahead of the problems, and when they have made progress, it has been interrupted by internal bickering and domestic political posturing that unnerves investors.

The pressure on the euro is widely seen as being heaviest in early 2011, when Spain and Portugal are expected to have to come to market with big bond deals. Spain's central and regional governments, for example, will need to raise roughly €200 billion in 2011 and the country's banks an additional €90 billion, according to Moody's Investors Service. 

"It's going to be a very erratic first four or five months of the year for euro, but [the euro] will end 2011 higher," said  John Normand, head of global currency strategy at J.P. Morgan Chase. 

Mr. Normand said the euro could slide to the "mid-to-low $1.20s" should euro-zone stress intensify significantly. But "the fiscal issues are closer to being addressed in Europe than they are in the U.S.," he said. For that reason, "the longer-term path of the dollar is down," Mr. Normand said. He expects the euro to hit $1.45 by late 2011.

However,  Gabriel Stein, a director at Lombard Street Research in London, sees much bigger trouble ahead for the euro. While most in the market have turned their attention away from Greece, he thinks the country's fiscal position will become untenable even with support from other European governments and the International Monetary Fund. As a result, he said, Greece stands a good chance of defaulting on its debts.

Still, the outlook for the euro will be complicated by sluggish growth in the U.S. and continued low interest rates. "The Fed still wants a weak dollar and will do whatever it can," Mr. Stein said.

"It will be a race to the bottom," he said. "It's a situation where everyone is trying to get their currencies down … and that implies a great deal of currency volatility."

If there was a surprise in 2010, it was the yen's strength in the face of a weak Japanese economy and a debt burden that, at nearly 200% of the country's gross domestic product, many investors see as a ticking time bomb. 

Still, the dollar lost 12.8% against the Japanese currency, finishing 2010 at 81.250 yen, down from 93.08 at the end of 2009. 

The dollar finished the year not far from levels where in mid-September the Bank of Japan intervened to push down the yen for the first time since 2004. Despite expectations of further intervention by Japan to protect its exporters, that move turned out to be a one-time event.

The yen's strength was more than just against the dollar. When measured against a trade-weighted basket of 35 currencies, the yen rose 6.5% in 2010, the best performance of any Group of 10 currencies, according to Barclays Capital.

  Jeff Young, head of North American foreign-exchange research at Barclays, notes that the yen's performance can often be tied to the difference between Japanese and U.S. short-term interest rates and the resulting buying of yen by Japanese investors to hedge their investments in U.S. and other foreign securities. 

Barring a big change in that relationship—such as a rise in short-term rates thanks to Fed tightening—that rate dynamic should support the yen, but in a relatively tight range.

"When we think about currencies that are likely to move meaningfully, the yen is not at the top of the list," Mr. Young said.

One big surprise for the markets could come is the U.S. economy proves stronger than expected, said  Jessica Hoversen, currency strategist at MF Global. 

To be sure, structural issues such as high long-term unemployment, a dead-in-the-water housing market and yawning federal and state budge deficits loom large and threaten the economy. 

In addition, many investors are betting that the dollar will ultimately weaken thanks to the Fed's quantitative-easing efforts. Through its purchases of U.S. Treasurys, the Fed is essentially printing money, diluting the value of existing dollars.

However, with the U.S. economy seeming to pick up steam and commodity prices heading higher in large part because of emerging-market demand, the risks could tilt toward to a pickup in inflation, she said.

Should that turn out to be the case, the Fed could actually cut short its quantitative easing, Ms. Hoversen said. 

"That's a risk that's not yet priced in the market," she said. 

 Write to  Tom Lauricella at tom.lauricella@wsj.com 