For the last 39 years, Yankee head trainer Gene Monahan has thought only of baseball. Of taping ankles and treating bruises, and keeping the Yankee players healthy. 

But after a frightening bout with throat cancer in 2009 and 2010, baseball's dean of trainers feels there needs to be more in his life. Monahan, 67, the Yankees' longest-tenured employee, will step down as head trainer after this season.

"I need to have a dog. I need to have a house. I need to have a yard and a garden. And to get me a pickup truck," Monahan said. "So I'm moving down south, and that's where I'm going to live. But the Yankees will always be my family. They have been since I've been 17." 

Monahan left his seven siblings and his Ft. Lauderdale home 49 years ago to join the Yankees, first as a bat boy, then in various jobs, becoming head trainer in 1973. 

These were the days of loud Yankee clubhouses, with droopy mustaches and players swapping wives. He walked in for the first time terrified, to a room filled with blaring boom-boxes, he recalled. Sparky Lyle's played Elton John. 

He wasn't the only new guy. It was George Steinbrenner's first year as well, and the two became close. 

When he started, players ''toughed out'' injuries, lived harder lives, and the training staff's job was to keep them on the field no matter what. They traveled with two small trunks and one bag. 

"Now we have six big trunks, a whole bunch of bags, and everything else we can carry. It's become so much more sophisticated," Monahan said. 

They rarely worked with the team doctors—the docs were in one caste, the trainers another. 

But as baseball players became highly paid commodities, that changed. Teams began to think long-term about injuries, and doctors and trainers began working together. 

"The teams of doctors have gotten together, and have taken us under their wing and made us equals," Monahan said.

Many of the old-time trainers fell by the wayside as athletic training evolved. But Monahan was always willing to adapt and learn, and he thrived, melding traditional medicine with training techniques.

Hundreds of players came and went while Monahan led the training staff—he fondly recalled the hayseed charm of Bobby Murcer, the fire of Catfish Hunter and the tough love of Thurman Munson, all deceased. But he never let himself get too close to the players. 

"It sounds crass, but familiarity breeds contempt," Monahan said. "You can't single guys out.''

Monahan returned too soon from his throat cancer and was weak and tired on the job. He got old faster than he expected, he said. 

So after this season, he's going, moving to North Carolina to buy a retriever he will name Schrader, whether it's male or female. 

"It sounds trite to say thank you. But I mean it," Monahan said. "Until that last pitch is thrown this year…I'll be there being the biggest fan these players ever had, each inning that I'm out there."