NEW YORK—Galleon Group founder  Raj Rajaratnam's lawyers on Tuesday meticulously took jurors through more than a dozen research reports and news articles they say back his trades in a stock at the center of his insider-trading case.

Federal prosecutors in Manhattan have alleged that the former hedge-fund manager was tipped by several sources ahead of the tie-up between ATI Technologies Inc. and  Advanced Micro Devices Inc.
AMD


-2.68
%




 in July 2006, making more than $22 million in illicit profits. In total, prosecutors have alleged that Mr. Rajaratnam reaped profits and avoided losses of $63.8 million from trades based on inside information in a variety of companies.

On Tuesday, his lawyers introduced dozens of research reports, including several by an internal Galleon analyst touting ATI's stock as a buying opportunity in the months ahead of the deal's announcement. They also introduced several research reports and news articles speculating on the potential of an AMD-ATI merger beginning in May 2006.

"It's fair to say he's consistently long," said  Rick Schutte, Galleon's former president for U.S. operations, referring to several weekly reports in 2006 in which Galleon analyst  Nadeem Janmohamed recommends ATI among his "top ideas."

Mr. Rajaratnam's trial on 14 counts of conspiracy and securities fraud is in its sixth week. He has denied wrongdoing. A key argument by his lawyers is that Mr. Rajaratnam made his trades based on disciplined research and publicly available information, not illegal tips.

  Adam Smith, a former Galleon analyst and portfolio manager, testified earlier in the trial that  Kamal Ahmed, a  Morgan Stanley
MS


-0.53
%




 investment banker, told him over lunch in California in May 2006 that the ATI-AMD deal was happening and he passed the information along to Mr. Rajaratnam. Mr. Smith, who is cooperating with prosecutors, pleaded guilty in January to conspiracy and securities fraud. He was one of several alleged sources to Mr. Rajaratnam on the deal, prosecutors said.

Mr. Ahmed, who was referred to by the government in court documents as an unindicted co-conspirator, hasn't been charged in the case. He has been put on leave by Morgan Stanley.

On Tuesday, Mr. Rajaratnam's lawyers showed jurors at least two emails from Mr. Smith touting ATI as "the cheapest stocks" in the sector and a buying opportunity.

In the first day of the defense case on Monday, Mr. Schutee testified that Galleon's research analysts arrived at work at 7 a.m. daily, just to be ready for Galleon's morning meeting. They were expected to be able to discuss any breaking news or changes in sell-side research views from overnight and defend their views on a company.

Analysts, or any one else who was late for the morning meeting, was fined $25 by Mr. Rajaratnam, Mr. Schutte said.

However, the most prepared was Mr. Rajaratnam, Mr. Schutte said.

On Monday, defense lawyers also showed jurors dozens of articles and research reports that they say separately drove Mr. Rajaratnam's trading regarding AMD in 2008.

Previously, prosecutors had played tapes of calls between Mr. Rajaratnam and  Anil Kumar, a former McKinsey & Co. consultant, in which Mr. Kumar appears to tell the hedge-fund manager that AMD planned to sell its fabrication facilities to an Abu Dhabi sovereign-wealth fund ahead of its public announcement in October 2008.

Mr. Kumar, who is cooperating with prosecutors and testified earlier in the trial, previously pleaded guilty to conspiracy and securities fraud.

Mr. Schutte testified that Mr. Rajaratnam sustained losses of about $60 million as result of his trading in AMD in 2008.

It remains unclear if Mr. Rajaratnam will take the stand in his own defense. His lawyers have remained mum on the possibility, saying they will tell prosecutors when the time is right.

Other witnesses who are expected to testify include:  Gregg A. Jarrell, a University of Rochester business professor; former Galleon analyst  Stephen Granoff; and  Geoffrey Canada, the president and chief executive of Harlem's Children's Zone, which focuses on education and other opportunities for children and families in Harlem.

  John Dowd, Mr. Rajaratnam's lawyer, wants to call Mr. Canada to testify about his "generosity" as a counter to arguments by prosecutors that the case is all about "greed."

 Write to  Chad Bray at chad.bray@dowjones.com 