 (Please see Corrections and Amplifications below.) 

EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. —Rich Seubert hopped around on crutches. Shaun O'Hara collected signatures on union paperwork. Danny Ware scurried to get phone numbers, and Tom Coughlin promised to take a little time off.

For an afternoon.

The Giants officially closed their 2010 season with "baggie day" Monday, holding one final meeting and clearing the personal detritus of their lockers into black plastic bags. This off-season promises to be potentially longer and more complex than any before for the Giants.

The looming labor strife, the absence of a new collective bargaining agreement to replace the one that expires in March and the uncertainty surrounding what rules that CBA will set means the Giants could have a whole lot of plotting but not a lot of doing ahead. Still, the hierarchy of the Giants organization made clear Monday it won't all be treading water ahead.

The biggest news after Sunday night's 17-14 victory over the Redskins was that the Giants would retain seventh-year coach Tom Coughlin. Monday, co-owner Steve Tisch seconded team president John Mara's strong words of faith in Mr. Coughlin and said the team will soon sign the coach to an extension beyond the end of his current deal (which expires at the end of the 2011 season) because "you can't let a guy like that get too far away."

The 64-year old Mr. Coughlin claimed he hasn't even considered what he'd want in an extension and wouldn't say how long of a deal he's looking for, but he did quip that he felt "27."

Good thing too, because he'll need all sorts of energy these next few months.

Despite finishing 10-6, the Giants didn't make the playoffs for a second consecutive year. The team's two owners both said this finish wasn't as disappointing as last year's 8-8 finish. But general manager Jerry Reese said it was more disappointing because he felt these Giants could do damage in the playoffs but "we just did not finish the job." 

So now begins the delicate dance of fixing—but not destroying—a 10-6 team, one that ranked fifth in total offense, seventh in total defense and if not for one eight-minute meltdown against the Eagles would've been the NFC East champions. 

"I don't know that we have to do a lot of wholesale changes, but there definitely will be changes," Mr. Reese said. 

First, to the coaching staff: A fiercely loyal man, Mr. Coughlin waved away any immediate questions about his staff, saying that he's not weighing any changes right now. But both Giants owners and Mr. Reese spoke without the same conviction.

Special teams play was visibly abhorrent all season, and there's little likelihood coordinator Tom Quinn will be retained. 

Considering all the offense's injury woes—the decimated line and receiving corps, the tight end forced to play fullback—it may not be likely the Giants would scapegoat offensive coordinator Kevin Gilbride, but if they were so inclined, they may not get the chance. Mr. Gilbride's name was being floated Monday as a possible candidate for the University of Connecticut head coaching job.

Defensive coordinator Perry Fewell, meanwhile, is set to again be a head coaching candidate. As the week waxes on, teams will almost certainly request permission to interview him.

There there are the free agents: The Giants have 22, a group that includes 10 players who started on offense or defense this year, and another half-dozen on special teams. 

Mr. Coughlin said "there are certainly people here that we want here, that's for sure," but at the same time, Mr. Reese said the Giants can't—and won't— negotiate with anyone until a new CBA is in place.

Offensive lineman Kevin Boothe and special teams captain Chase Blackburn, whose contracts are up, both said they'd like to return as Giants and both said they will try not to worry much about being without a contract come March.

"There's not much we can do but wait," Mr. Blackburn said. 

Then there is the medical condition of several players: Mr. Seubert played left guard and center this year and Mr. Reese unequivocally called him "our MVP." He came back from five surgeries after his leg was shattered in three places five years ago, and Tuesday he'll have surgery to repair his patellar tendon and a dislocated kneecap, suffered in Sunday's finale.

Mr. Reese was confident Mr. Seubert will return in full form, but he's not the only player going under—or to have gone under—the knife. Mr. O'Hara, the center, and placekicker Lawrence Tynes will have "maintenance" surgery. Receivers Steve Smith, Domenik Hixon and Ramses Barden will all be coming off surgery. Defensive end Mathias Kiwanuka (neck) could be signed to a new one-year contract, left tackle Shawn Andrews (back) said he won't know if the Giants will pick up the final five years of his contract and on the list goes—into a busy offseason.

 Corrections and Amplifications 

Giants player Rich Seubert shattered his leg in three places in October 2003. This article incorrectly says the injury occurred five years ago.

 Write to  Aditi Kinkhabwala at aditi.kinkhabwala@wsj.com 