BRUSSELS—European Union energy ministers failed to reach consensus on how and when to conduct stress tests on nuclear-power stations. 

Meanwhile, Germany moved ahead with measures that would allow it to speed phasing out atomic energy. 

Differences of opinion within the EU over nuclear energy mean it would be impossible to subject countries to binding, EU-mandated tests, German Economy Minister Rainer Bruederle said Monday at a news conference after special energy summit in Brussels. Responsibility for nuclear policy would remain at the national level, he said. 

The meeting was held at the request of EU Energy Commissioner Guenter Oettinger, to discuss the consequences of the nuclear accident at the Fukushima reactors in Japan, which have been rocked by explosions and fires following the March 11 earthquake.

The EU "should avoid any hasty decisions or hasty action," said Tamas Fellegi, head of the EU's council of energy ministers and Hungary's minister of national development. He called for the adoption of a common set of security standards and said the European Commission, the EU's executive arm, wants nuclear stress tests to begin by year-end. 

Public opinion is more skeptical of nuclear power in Germany than it is in most other European countries. German Chancellor Angela Merkel last week reacted to mass protests against nuclear power, announcing a three-month moratorium of a decision to extend the life-span of nuclear plants by 12 years on average. She also said some nuclear plants may have to be switched off faster than expected. 

Ms. Merkel on Monday said the measures weren't made to boost her party's chances in upcoming state elections. Amid voter concern about nuclear energy, Ms. Merkel's Christian Democrats could lose the key state of Baden-Wuerttemberg next Sunday to the Green party if opinion polls turn out to be right. Her party and its pro-nuclear allies from the Free Democrats shed votes in elections last Sunday in the less-important state of Saxonia-Anhalt. 

During the moratorium, the German government will subject all nuclear plants in the country to a security check and try to find ways to fasten the development of renewable energies. 

To that purpose, Mr. Bruederle announced a proposal to speed up the extension of high-voltage electricity grids needed to transport wind power from the North Sea and northern Germany to the south, where nuclear power plants may be switched off. 

The plan aims at reducing approval times for most projects by transferring authority to the federal government from regional governments. 

It also would set up financial compensation for municipalities and regions that are affected negatively by new transmission lines. 

French Energy Minister Eric Besson said his country supports the proposed EU-wide nuclear-plant stress tests. 

Spain's Industry Minister Miguel Sebastian reiterated his government's plan to close its Gorona plant in 2013. But he said Spain's nuclear facilities "are secure." Mr. Sebastian said his government supports the stress tests and acknowledged that in the case of the Cofrentes nuclear plant, a similar facility to Japan's Fukushima, there is some risk of flooding. 

Spain has commissioned a comprehensive review of the country's nuclear plants. 

—Laurence Norman and William Horobin contributed to this article.