HONG KONG—New regulations here on trade in China's currency could slow expansion in one of the foreign-exchange industry's most closely watched growth markets.

Under guidelines announced late last month, banks in Hong Kong face new restrictions on their ability to access yuan through China's foreign-exchange market.

They also have to limit their so-called net open positions in China's currency—that is, bets on the yuan's future movement—to 10% of their assets or liabilities denominated in the currency. Bankers and traders say the new rules will increase funding costs for local banks, and limit their ability to offer currency futures or other derivatives that many have viewed as a source of future revenue growth.

In announcing the new guidelines following discussions with the People's Bank of China, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority referred to them as "refinements" to existing arrangements.

However,  Frances Cheung, a senior strategist at Crédit Agricole, said, "The guidelines look more like restrictions as they limit the source of yuan flowing into Hong Kong, potentially squeezing yuan liquidity in the city's banking system."

Not long ago, use of the yuan, also called the renminbi, was largely confined within China's borders thanks to the country's strict capital controls. But in recent months, thanks to an experimental loosening of the restrictions, daily trading in the yuan outside mainland China, once nonexistent, has grown into a $400 million market centered largely in Hong Kong, a former British colony under Chinese sovereignty with its own laws and financial system. 

While this new trade in yuan is tiny by standards of the $4 trillion daily trading in global currency markets, the speed of its growth has become a source of excitement for many traders. Many have predicted that within a few years China's currency could become a major new force in global trade and a new source of business for banks that offer foreign-exchange services.

Bankers say the moves reflect China's interest in measured growth in yuan trading, not a desire to undo any past liberalizations aimed at promoting the currency's use outside the mainland. But they say the changes also underscore a desire among Chinese regulators to keep speculators from taking advantage of the new market to bet on the yuan's movement and potentially destabilize the economy.

Traders say the curb on a bank's net open position in yuan will have an especially big impact on banks' ability to offer currency forwards, swaps or other derivatives. For example, in order for a bank to offer a contract worth $50 million to buy yuan at a fixed rate in a year's time, under the new rules it would need to hold $500 million in yuan assets such as bonds, or $500 million worth of yuan deposits. 

While the market for yuan derivatives is still in its early stages and should continue to grow this year, the cap on a bank's net open yuan position limits the business's future potential, said  Gerrard Katz, head of foreign-exchange trading at Standard Chartered PLC. "It definitely will have some impact in terms of the overall market," he said. 

A spokeswoman for the HKMA said the new guidelines are aimed at promoting "two-way movement in the yuan," including movement of the currency back into mainland China, not just into Hong Kong. She also said the limit on net open positions is aimed at limiting risk for the banks, given that the yuan isn't a freely convertible currency, and that having too much exposure to its movements could pose problems if a bank needed to buy or sell a large amount of yuan at one time.

The People's Bank of China didn't respond to a faxed request for comment.

China has taken a number of steps to promote the use of yuan to settle trade normally conducted in dollars. That and the ability of Hong Kong residents to acquire yuan more readily than people overseas has led to a surge in yuan deposits in the city's banking system.

Those deposits totaled 280 billion yuan ($42.48 billion) at the end of November, up 29% from the previous month and up 246% since the end of last year.

Investment banks that don't collect retail deposits in yuan have a smaller pool of yuan liquidity at their disposal. That makes the cap on their net open positions especially challenging, traders and analysts say.

"You need to have strong yuan deposit or you need to buy a lot of yuan-denominated assets such as bonds to boost up yuan balance sheet," said a trader at a European bank. "The cost of trading will be much higher."

A trader at another European bank said the new cap "will be quite a big change in business compared with the past few months."

This trader believes one knock-on effect will be that deposit-taking banks may choose not to chase yuan deposits as aggressively as before, because their ability to make money with those deposits by offering foreign-exchange swaps or futures contracts will be constrained. "You really have to think twice about what you do with the money," he said.

In a research note Monday, Barclays said rising yuan deposits are "a near-term drag on Hong Kong bank margins and profitability" because lenders can't find ways to profitably invest the yuan they collect. While many eagerly subscribe to yuan-denominated bonds issued in Hong Kong, the amount of such debt is still limited and yields are low.

  Jian Chang, an economist at Barclays Capital in Hong Kong, believes some of the biggest proponents of the new yuan trade have been "too optimistic" about the market's potential. "From a business perspective," she noted, banks "want a lot more products, in all asset classes. All activities are possible."

"But from the government perspective," she asked in reference to the offshore yuan liberalizations, "what did they allow all this for? To use yuan in trade settlement."

In the past, banks in Hong Kong have been able to buy yuan in Shanghai through the official yuan clearing bank, BOC Hong Kong (Holdings) Ltd., whenever their clients needed to settle cross-border yuan trades. Under the new arrangements, they will be able to access the Shanghai market only when they have a shortfall in the currency. Banks will also be banned from buying yuan in Shanghai through the clearing bank if their customers don't need the yuan to settle trade within the next three months. 

 Write to  Peter Stein at peter.stein@wsj.com 