The Knicks' second six-game losing streak of this season is dramatically different than their first.

 Their mid-November swoon brought a sinking feeling and a ''here-we-go-again'' type of despair about a new team that was yet to prove itself. 

Their current stretch, which comes after the Knicks have already established themselves as playoff contenders, has not been pleasant but has not brought as deep a feeling of frustration and despair.

Heading into Monday's 7:30 p.m. game against the Washington Wizards at the Garden, coach Mike D'Antoni offered a simple explanation for the current slide, saying it was a combination of the "dog days" of January and some bad luck. 

"It's just too bad that sometimes players go through [struggles] and you hope that they don't all go through it at the same time,'' he said, noting that Amar'e Stoudemire is "shooting a little under 50% the last 10 games. The other guys are shooting lower. It's all happening at the same time." 

The Knicks' six losses in this streak have come with varying degrees of frustration. Among them are forgivable losses to the NBA-best San Antonio Spurs on the road last Friday and a last-second loss to the Oklahoma City Thunder on Saturday night. Also in there, however, are losses to the lowly Sacramento Kings and Houston Rockets. 

Mr. Stoudemire, point guard Raymond Felton and forward Wilson Chandler have all struggled during the streak.

 Mr. Felton has shot under 40% from the field in each of his past five games, and Mr. Chandler hasn't topped 10 points in four of his past five, despite averaging 17 points a game on the season. He also shot below 31% from the field in each of those games. 

"Pretty much everybody's in a slump," Mr. Felton said. "We're not hitting shots. We're not finishing shots like we normally do. That's all it is.''

Mr. Stoudemire has scored 18 points for two straight games—this after scoring at least 20 in 28 consecutive games. Mr. Stoudemire's recent off nights were at the hands of some unlikely stoppers: Thunder forward Serge Ibaka and Spurs forward DeJuan Blair.

While Mr. Stoudemire has been an impressive part of the offense this season, the lack of a second scorer has been costly lately. Mr. Stoudemire expressed frustration that teams can key on him so heavily. Of opposing teams, he said stopping him has become "pretty much their whole defensive strategy." 

"It's not fun," Mr. Stoudemire said. "I'm playing aggressive and really trying to apply some energy and I'm getting penalized for it. A lot of guys are playing very, very physical towards me. I'm starting to get injured a lot…my shoulders, arms and hands. I'm starting to get banged up a lot out there and it's a little frustrating." 

To make matters worse, Mr. Stoudemire was called for his 13th technical foul on Saturday night. He is three technicals away from an automatic one-game suspension. 

But Knicks team president Donnie Walsh and Mr. D'Antoni compared the loss to Oklahoma City on Saturday night to the Nov. 16 game against the Denver Nuggets, which the Knicks lost 120-118.

Like Saturday's game, the game against the Nuggets was the Knicks' sixth straight loss, but over the course of the loss, the Knicks solved many of their offensive problems, a development that triggered a five- game winning streak and a run of 13 wins in their next 14 games. 

The Knicks are fortunate that their losing streak has come with no serious candidates to overtake them in the playoff race. They are 22-21 and in sixth place in the Eastern Conference, four games ahead of the Philadelphia 76ers.

Mr. Walsh said he sees the Knicks playing better. He said they showed signs of life against San Antonio and looked especially good against the Thunder. He thinks the team may have been fatigued by the schedule, which included a West Coast road trip and two games against Mr. Stoudemire's old team, the Phoenix Suns.

After that, Mr. Walsh said, "[teams] just kind of play into that and you stop doing things that cause you to win. You have to go back to doing the things that cause you to win, and as you go through the season that gets a little harder."

Even with the struggles, Mr. Walsh said nothing has changed on the trade front and said that the proclamation last week by Nets owner Mikhail Prokhorov, announcing the end of the Nets' pursuit of Nuggets star Carmelo Anthony did not change anything. 

"I'm doing the same thing whether we're winning or losing. If we can do something to help the team I'm going to do it. I'm not going to do something just so guys write 'Oh, they did this,'" Mr. Walsh said. 

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 