Sorrow but little surprise greeted the announcement last week that the second issue of Party, the literary magazine founded by Chinese writer Han Han, was suspended indefinitely. Mr. Han explained vaguely on his blog, which is China's if not the world's most read, that the magazine's closure resulted from his own "limited resources." He clarified to The Wall Street Journal in a text message that Party could not find a publisher despite the first issue's commercial success, hinting at official interference.

Then again, the stodgy, state-controlled business of magazine publishing in China never seemed to fit the style of Mr. Han, the young iconoclast from Shanghai. Since 2000, when his literary debut, "The Third Way," became China's best-selling novel in 20 years, everything the high school dropout has done has been a giant raspberry blown at the country's establishment and social conventions. Mr. Han's disdain for the Chinese educational system in particular made him a hero for a generation of highly cosseted youths. He says what they think and does what they dream.

Party magazine was beset with problems from its inception in early 2009. The first issue was shopped to provincial-level state publishers before its backers found one that would provide a publishing license. Its release date was pushed back several times—officials at one point halted the printing process to censor several articles—before finally coming out in June of last year. A second issue was initially slated for an August 2010 release, and then delayed repeatedly due to publishing problems. By the time of last week's announcement, the debut issue had sold 1.5 million copies.

The magazine's Chinese title was Du Chang Tuan, or "one man band," and together with the English name it captured well the DIY spirit that the magazine sought to embody. In its first and only issue, fiction and criticism were interspersed with drawings, photo essays and graphic art. The quality of its content was inconsistent, sometimes amateurish. But it maintained the spirit of cultural community and communalism that was both its appeal and, to watchful Communist censors, its danger.

Fans lamented the institutional conservatism that killed Party, while detractors offered their own theories about what doomed it to failure. Shanghai Monthly, a snarky city cultural blog, posted a list of cynical possibilities, including that the announced closure was a publicity stunt to promote the second issue or a sponsor. Another guess was that the title had been sold, and the announcement was a ploy to get rid of existing staff.

Mr. Han himself claimed to be baffled by the shuttering. He wrote an appeal on his blog: "So I also do not know what happened, or which friend I perhaps offended. . . . If I could know, if we could meet, I do not bear grudges. But please tell me what the problem was."

Censorship in China is an opaque and amorphous thing. The actions for which one gets punished have only the haziest relationship to actual offenses. It's easy to see how Mr. Han tries to skirt close to but never over the line: He might, for example, call for greater freedom on the Internet but avoid mentioning the sources of the restrictions. But in China the limits of acceptability are deliberately kept opaque; it is nearly impossible to know when or whether they have been crossed.

During the 1980s, the government created a catch-all crime called liumang zui, or hooliganism, which was applied with deliberate unpredictability to deviations from the social norm. Hooliganism was removed the criminal code in 1997, but perhaps publishers' shunning of Party is Mr. Han's punishment for being this era's ultimate public hooligan.

Yet Han Han is a rapidly moving target who is clever enough to outmaneuver the system. He has published 15 best sellers in a decade, races rally cars and hops adroitly between other high-profile hobbies. In 2006 he released a rock album. His flippancy perplexes his fans and critics alike, and it prevents the latter from figuring out where to aim. 

And that boldness is just part of his appeal. Mr. Han has a Korean pop star's dashing good looks, offset by mussed hair and nerdy, oversized glasses. Add to that his sassy writing, his smart, sarcastic humor and his racer's swagger, and he is the perfect intellectual pin-up for a transitional generation with a dearth of heroes.

China's youth, known as the Post-80s and Post-90s, are the most pampered and yet pressurized generation in the nation's long history. They are the focus of "six adults," parents and grandparents, who live vicariously through these mostly only children. They are expected to realize the dashed dreams of their elders and pull the entire family along in China's brutally competitive socioeconomic rat race. The quest for academic achievement, that ticket to becoming white collar drudges and suburban mortgage slaves, starts in infancy, leaving them exhausted by the time they enter university. 

This generation yearns not just for a "Third Way," as presented in Mr. Han's novel and in his own life; they are itching for an identity. The Post-80s and Post-90s are dismissed by their elders as uncultured and too immersed in technology and international trends to be truly Chinese, their knowledge of history rarely exceeding test syllabi. They power the country's domestic consumption—having never encountered a rainy day they lack the instinct to save—but rebel against being considered merely crass consumers. 

Most dangerously of all, they are individualists: idealistic, expressive, experiential and increasingly confident. Mr. Han speaks to and for these malcontent Little Emperors, now growing up and chafing at their bonds. The party is just getting started.

 Ms. Movius is a Shanghai-based writer. 