Jim Abbott neither sought nor received a medical explanation for why he couldn't throw a baseball with as much speed and snap as he once did. 

During his 10-year major-league career, he never heard anyone use the term "dead-arm syndrome," and he never felt any pain when he pitched. There was just a gradual, inexorable decline in the velocity and effectiveness of his fastball, a development that Abbott chalked up to the intrinsic frailty of his left arm.

"I certainly beat my head against the wall sometimes, wondering, 'Did I do everything I possibly could?'" said Abbott, who pitched for four teams, including the Yankees. "In the end, I've just come to terms that that was the amount of pitches I had in my arm."

The questions of why a pitcher experiences a "dead arm" and how doctors and trainers should treat the condition remain about as mysterious now as they were when Abbott, while with the Yankees in 1993 and 1994, saw his fastball drop from the low 90s to the mid-to-high 80s.

The Yankees again have been searching for those elusive answers this season; their talented young right-hander Phil Hughes landed on the disabled list last month after his fastball was lifeless in three poor starts. And over the past two years, the Mets watched a $36million investment in left-hander Oliver Perez go to waste as Perez, Mets pitching coach Dan Warthen said, "just lost his arm," leaving a hole in the Mets' rotation that the team has yet to patch. It's hard to imagine, then, that another major-league team is more eager for doctors to find a solution to "dead-arm syndrome" than New York's two franchises are. 

In fact, since the start of the 2006 season, teams have placed pitchers on the disabled list 22 times with either "arm fatigue" or "shoulder fatigue," according to Stats Inc., and the Mets have done so three times, the most of any franchise. The Yankees have once—with Hughes.

Still, "dead-arm syndrome" varies so much in its degrees and its causes that even its name "has become sort of a bucket term," said Dr. Michael Hausman, the vice-chairman of orthopedics at Mount Sinai Hospital. "It's not a precise diagnosis."

Usually, Hausman said, a pitcher who has a "dead arm" has a slight injury to his labrum, the rim of cartilage that keeps the shoulder's ball-and-socket joint stable. The injury and the shoulder's resulting instability might be so subtle that the pitcher wouldn't sense any pain at all. "The brain is trying to protect your body," Hausman said, "and it basically lowers your fastball in order to prevent you from damaging your arm."

But there are no accurate figures, according to Hausman, that detail how often the condition can be attributed to labral damage. During Warthen's 10-plus seasons as a major-league pitching coach, most instances of "dead arm" have arisen for one of two reasons, he said: fatigue or soreness in the biceps.

The Yankees did administer a cortisone shot to Hughes to quell inflammation in his shoulder, but they also had him tested for thoracic outlet syndrome, a circulatory disorder. And the violent process of throwing a baseball requires the synchronization of so many muscles, tendons, joints, nerves and bones that the source of the "dead arm" often depends on a pitcher's physiology or even a seemingly unrelated injury.

Mets closer Francisco Rodriguez, for instance, sprained his right ankle in April 2008—this, while his left ankle remained sore from a previous sprain. On weakened legs, he couldn't push off the rubber with his customary force, and his velocity plummeted, even though his arm felt fine.

"My body was not the same," said Rodriguez, who has used a light weightlifting regimen to rebuild strength in his shoulder whenever his arm has grown tired. "I was lucky I didn't get an arm injury because I totally changed my mechanics."

Similarly, Perez underwent surgery in September 2009 to repair a tendon in his right knee, and the fastball he once threw at 95 mph disappeared and hasn't returned. (The Mets have since released him, and the Washington Nationals signed him to a minor-league contract.)

Of course, because Perez's injury was to his knee and the causes of "dead-arm syndrome" aren't easily defined, it's debatable whether one should classify him as a victim of the condition. Was his balky knee the cause of the problem? Or did he simply empty his arm's supply of fastballs?

At the moment, the Yankees don't know why Hughes has a "dead arm." They know only that he has one. General manager Brian Cashman recently told reporters that the team's medical staff planned to treat Hughes with a combination of rest and rehabilitation and expected him to miss six to eight weeks, though Hausman said: "Unless you know what you're treating, it's hard to know what the right treatment is." 

At least Hughes, 24, has a tentative diagnosis. Abbott never did.

After back-to-back seasons with the Angels in which his earned-run average was less than 2.90, Abbott was 25 when the Yankees traded three players for him. Over his two years in New York, he went 20-22 with a 4.45 ERA and noticed that batters were teeing off on his fastball with greater frequency.

 He tried to regain velocity by altering his windup. Born without a right hand, Abbott thought he might be cutting his delivery short, so he began paying more attention to finishing his follow-through and less to shifting his glove from his stump to his pitching hand.

"To hell with the consequences, so to speak," he said. "And I still got hit."

 Write to  Mike Sielski at mike.sielski@wsj.com 