ADDISON, Texas—A multibillion-dollar apartment-construction boom is under way in which developers are pulling out all the stops to cater to the new generation of renters who grew up in McMansions and vacationed with their parents at fancy resorts.

The garden-style apartments of yesteryear are out. To appeal to "echo boomers," roughly defined as those born in the 1980s and early 1990s, the new urban apartment buildings offer smaller living quarters along with grand common areas where renters can entertain and socialize.

At the Savoye, an apartment complex near Dallas that caters to younger renters, the amenities include a resort-style pool surrounded by high-end lounge chairs lined up under oversized umbrellas. There are stainless-steel barbecue grills and an outdoor table that features water streaming down the middle and ending in a waterfall. There's also a posh poker lounge, a private movie room and a banquet room. 

Echo boomers "want large communal spaces where they can gather with their friends and neighbors," said  Jerry Davis, a senior vice president at Denver-based  UDR Inc.,
UDR


0.09
%




 which developed the 392-unit Savoye last year and is now working on a second phase of the complex, which will have 347 units. In addition, UDR is building four other communities for echo boomers across the country.

Echo boomers are said to number about 80 million, according to Marcus & Millichap, a real-estate investment brokerage firm. By 2020, the 18-to-34-year-old age group, considered the prime renting age, will grow by an additional five million.

Developers are betting that instead of rushing to buy a condo, this group is willing to rent for several years.

According to the Census Bureau, the first-quarter homeownership rate for those under the age of 35 was 37.9%, down from 38.9% a year earlier and 43.3% in 2005's first quarter.

The Brooklyner in New York, owned by Chicago-based  Equity Residential,
EQR


-0.16
%




 offers a rooftop sundeck with sweeping city views and a lounge featuring a pool table and Skee ball. The Monterey by Windsor, a 371-unit building in Dallas's trendy West Village area owned by Windsor Communities, boasts an outdoor fireplace, kitchen and large flat-screen television in a space large enough to entertain 50 people.

"The style of the building was something that we really liked," said  Michelle Malpica-Hertsgaard, 30 years old, at the Monterey, which opened in early 2009. "It's not so stark like a normal apartment." 

During the housing boom, waves of renters left apartments to become home owners, including many young people. When the boom turned to bust, some homeowners became renters again.

But developers had a hard time finding financing to construct new buildings to meet the growing demand. In the first quarter, some 6,000 new units hit the market, the lowest quarterly figure since  Reis Inc.
REIS


-0.41
%




 began publishing quarterly data in 1999. 

As a result, occupancy and rent levels have been rising. Just 6.2% of apartment units were vacant in the first quarter of this year, down from 8% a year earlier, according to Reis. The first quarter's effective rent for one-bedroom apartments, or what's paid after special offers, came in at $983, up from $960 a year earlier.

Now that the credit freeze is thawing, builders are ramping up construction. But with more than 225,000 new apartments expected by 2013—more than double the number delivered in all of 2010—it isn't clear whether developers are bringing on too much supply in such areas as Austin, Houston and Atlanta, especially at the high end.

Too much competition could force landlords to chop rents. These pricey pads are also highly sensitive to the economy: If layoffs increase or job creation stalls, both existing and potential tenants could downgrade to cheaper units. 

At the Savoye, monthly rents for one-bedroom apartments start above $1,000—much higher than Dallas's $716 average for a one-bedroom apartment. 

"The risk is that the new product is more expensive than the typical first-time renter can afford," said  Hessam Nadji, a Marcus & Millichap managing director.

But developers aren't worried. Millions of young people moved home or sought roommates to cut costs following the financial crisis, and now they are moving out on their own again.

"The last generation thought of renting as a stopover," Mr. Nadji said. "Young renters want to be mobile, they want to be flexible in moving to chase a job, and they don't feel as much societal pressure toward ownership."

But while lots of attractive entertainment space in common areas is important, individual apartments are getting smaller. In the late 1990s, some one bedrooms measured about 900 square feet, compared with about 750 square feet today. 

Equity Residential, one of the nation's largest apartment owners, is considering one bedrooms measuring about 500 square feet.  Mark Humphreys, whose firm, Humphreys & Partners Architects LP, designed the Monterey, thinks he could shave another 50 square feet. 

"The fact that the unit is smaller is not really a big deal because they're not spending a lot of time in their apartment," he said. 

About a year ago,  Jordan Roberts looked at 15 apartments in the Dallas area, but she picked the Monterey, even though the units there were smaller than some of the apartments she had toured. Bedroom size didn't matter because "I'm in there to sleep and that's about it," the 21-year-old Southern Methodist University student said.

Ms. Roberts, who says she pays about $960 a month, said the Monterey's pool was a big selling point. 

While the cost for such extras as lounge areas and movie rooms is in the millions of dollars for developers, it is an investment they think will pay off.  Peter Donovan, senior managing director of CB Richard Ellis's multihousing group, said most developers are looking to get a 6.5% to 8% return on total construction costs. 

UDR said the spending is a small part of the overall development cost and money well spent to lure would-be renters from competitors. "It's about providing people with what they want," says  H. Andrew Cantor, UDR's vice president of investor relations.

Of course, given how fickle younger renters can be, today's hot amenity could quickly become uncool. "Ten years from now, today's brand-new product is going to be considered midmarket," Mr. Nadji said.

 Write to  Dawn Wotapka at dawn.wotapka@dowjones.com 