SHANGHAI—One of China's most prominent corruption probes in years widened to include a senior Ministry of Railways engineer directly involved in the country's $300 billion high-speed rail project.

Zhang Shuguang was removed from his position as deputy chief engineer of the ministry and placed under investigation within the Communist Party for alleged "severe violation of discipline," the state-run Xinhua news agency said Tuesday. In China, that terminology typically refers to allegations of corruption, and Mr. Zhang's firing follows last month's removal under similar circumstances of the railways minister, Liu Zhijun.

China's ambitious high-speed rail network—the world's largest—has been the envy of many in the global transportation industry, as well as a major point of pride for Beijing as a technological achievement. The World Bank estimated in a report last year that China spent $163 billion on the network from 2007 to 2009 and would spend another $100 billion in 2010, with the ultimate tab totalling some $300 billion.

The widening of the probe to target Mr. Zhang could be an indication Chinese authorities suspect corruption has played a part in the ongoing expansion. As one of the most public faces on the high-speed rail rollout, Mr. Zhang has frequently cheered the Chinese milestones in public as a representative of the ministry. For instance, when a new north China link opened in December hitting a top speed of 380 kilometers an hour, he said, "The CRH380A is the world's fastest and most technologically-advanced high-speed train." He spoke of future trains that run at 500 kilometers an hour.

Yet, such boasting has also made Mr. Zhang and other top Chinese railway engineers the targets of criticism from some foreign rail-equipment companies. Foreign companies including  Kawasaki Heavy Industries Ltd.
KWHIY


-0.89
%




,  Siemens AG, Alstom SA and  Bombardier Inc., provided technology and equipment to help build China's network.

A Kawasaki Heavy executive last year charged that the 380 train, slated to run between Beijing and Shanghai, is a version of Kawasaki's 250 kilometer-an-hour Hayate, whose technology Kawasaki agreed to transfer in 2004.

China's government has offered no information on what exactly the Railway Ministry officials are suspected of. The removal of Mr. Liu was a particularly significant strike. A lifelong railways official, he had taken over in 2003 as the country was planning a railway connection to Tibet and embarking on the 13,000-kilometer high-speed railway project.

China's ruling Communist Party frequently targets officials for corruption, but the railways minister was one of the most senior officials ever to fall. 

In 2007, authorities executed Zheng Xiaoyu, the former head of China's food and drug watchdog, for taking bribes from pharmaceutical companies. That came a year after Shanghai Party Secretary Chen Liangyu was dismissed for graft. He was later sentenced to 18 years in prison.

At least one question about the probe was put to Premier Wen Jiabao during an online chat he held Sunday with Internet users ahead of the annual legislative session beginning this week. 

Mr. Wen said dealing with abuse of authority would be a primary task in 2011, adding that some officials have too much unchecked power.

—Norihiko Shirouzu contributed to this article.

 Write to  James T. Areddy at james.areddy@wsj.com 