The Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association urged the Securities and Exchange Commission on Wednesday to recommend the appointment a self-regulatory organization to bolster oversight of certain registered investment advisers.

Sifma filed the comments in anticipation of a study the agency is conducting, as required by the Dodd-Frank financial-regulatory overhaul, examining whether the SEC should outsource oversight of investment advisers to an industry body. Dodd-Frank requires the study to be completed next week.

"Putting into place a regulatory regime that puts clients' best interests first must also ensure there is comparable examination and enforcement of those providing personalized investment advice to individual retail investors," said  Ira Hammerman, Sifma's senior managing director and general counsel, in a statement.

Sifma supports developing a uniform federal fiduciary standard of care for certain brokers and registered investment advisers. "Now, we are supporting the commission's efforts to develop an examination and enforcement structure that will oversee investment advisers for individual investors in a comparable manner to the current regulatory oversight of brokers," Mr. Hammerman said in the statement.

The letter doesn't mention or recommend the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, Wall Street's self-policing organization, as a possible self-regulatory organization for investment advisers. It suggests, however, that a possible self-regulator for investment advisers be tailored to their specific practices and business models.

Supporters of a self-regulatory organization for investment advisers, which include Finra, have long argued that the SEC lacks resources to regularly examine advisers. The SEC currently examines registered investment advisers about once every 10 years. Some advisers, however, have never been examined by the agency, compliance professionals say. Finra examines broker-dealers roughly every three to four years, a spokesman said.

The Investment Adviser Association, a Washington, D.C.-based trade group, says it agrees with Sifma's statements that broker-dealers and investment advisers have very different business models. Investment advisers, however, are already subject to an extensive and comprehensive regulatory structure, the IAA said. 

Institutional advisers and their processes for developing certain institutional products, such as "wrap fee" investment programs, are already subject to adequate oversight and shouldn't be examined by self-regulatory organizations, according to Sifma's letter. 

 Write to  Suzanne Barlyn at suzanne.barlyn@wsj.com 