(See Correction & Amplification below .)

Here are some things you'll never find in a Mary Higgins Clark novel: an unmarried couple living together, a curse word, a body hacked to pieces. By today's standards, Ms. Clark's thrillers are quaint throwbacks, more in the Agatha Christie mold than the blood-curdling, titillating fare produced by best-selling writers such as James Patterson and Stieg Larsson.

Yet Ms. Clark—who at 83 still churns out at least one book a year—remains as lucrative a brand as ever. Her books have sold 100 million copies in the U.S. alone. All 42 of her books have been best sellers. Ms. Clark is the top-selling author across the seven imprints of her publisher, Simon & Schuster. Each year, her novels, which are published in 34 countries, sell 3.7 million copies globally. Simon & Schuster Chief Executive Carolyn Reidy says that Ms. Clark's sales are so consistent that they factor into the company's annual budgets.



Industry insiders credit Ms. Clark's longevity to sheer drive—she collected 40 rejection slips before her first short story was published in 1956—and to her marketing savvy and careful brand management. 

Ms. Clark knows and caters to her sales demographic. She holds book signings not just in bookstores but in big-box stores, club warehouses and grocery stores, where she regularly draws 500 people. To mark the coming April 5 release of her 43rd book, "I'll Walk Alone," a suspense novel about a woman whose identity is stolen and who stands accused of kidnapping her own son, she'll meet fans at a Wegmans grocery store in Collegeville, Pa. She'll hold signings in seven more states and in France, where her books have sold 24 million copies.

"I do get around," she says in an interview at her 16th-floor apartment on New York's Central Park South, one of her four homes. "Want to buy a book?"

Sitting in front of a gauzy oil portrait of her younger self, Ms. Clark, who worked as a secretary and Pan Am flight attendant before breaking into publishing, says she's not close to contemplating retirement. She and her editor of 36 years, Michael Korda, are already discussing her next novel, and she's hammering out the terms of another book contract, she says. 

 Ms. Clark and her publisher now face the question of how to maintain her brand in the twilight of her career and, eventually, after she is gone. Ms. Clark has entered a standoff with her children over the question of whether she will appoint a successor, a strategy that proved profitable for the estates of late thriller writers such as Robert Ludlum and Ian Fleming. Ms. Clark is open to extending her line, but her children, wary of diluting her legacy, are opposed. 

Linda de Roche, an English professor at Wesley College, will publish her third critical study of Ms. Clark's work, "Mary Higgins Clark: Life and Letters," this month. Ms. de Roche, who says her colleagues are good-natured about her side gig as the leading Clark expert, provided the following guide to Ms. Clark's oeuvre.

 6: Number of serial killers

 25: Number of titles based on popular songs

 21: Number of TV and film adaptations of Ms. Clark's fiction

 8: Number of kidnappings

 5: Number of evil doctors

 4: "The husband did it"

"They don't want 'From the Mary Higgins Clark tradition,' " Ms. Clark says. "I say, 'I think you're foolish.' " 

Her children say they would rather pass up the potential windfall than see her brand degraded. "Either she wrote it, or she didn't," says her son Warren Clark, a lawyer and municipal court judge.

Her daughter Carol Higgins Clark, a mystery writer who co-writes Christmas books with her mother, says she would be wary of trying to fill her mother's shoes, or hiring someone else to do it. "Her readers have a certain kind of attachment to her," she says. "You couldn't have someone else writing them."

Ms. Reidy, the Simon & Schuster CEO, declines to weigh in on the matter, saying, "We don't even want to think about a time when we're not publishing Mary."

"When you have an author like Mary who publishes regularly at a regular time of year, has a very large audience that is predictable, and you know you're going to have that large sales infusion every year at that time, it gives you the profitability to keep your company running, to keep the lights on and keep people employed," Ms. Reidy says.

Ms. Clark has held her ground even as a new generation of best-selling thriller writers—among them Michael Connelly, Janet Evanovich, Harlan Coben and Lee Child—has flooded the market and pushed the genre in new directions. She has remained dominant through the rise and fall of medical thrillers, legal thrillers, historical-conspiracy thrillers, serial-killer thrillers. Her books have spent a collective 355 weeks on the New York Times best-seller list. 

Louise Burke of Pocket Books, a Simon & Schuster imprint that sells one million paperback copies of Ms. Clark's books every year, says Ms. Clark has an unerring radar for what her readers want, and keeps delivering. "A lot of authors switch genres or want to try something different, but she continues to write the book her readers expect," she says.

Ms. Clark has perfected a formula that appeals to a broad swath of mystery readers, 70% of whom are women. Her novels feature beautiful, intelligent women in danger, who often orchestrate their own escapes. Her heroines tend to be ambitious, self-made professionals—doctors, lawyers, journalists, interior designers. All of them, like Ms. Clark, are proud Irish-American Catholics. "She's always been an Irish-American girl because I know what her grandmother told her," says Ms. Clark of her characters. "I know her genetic thinking." 

Ms. Clark's novels always hit stores the first week of April, positioned before Mother's Day, the biggest book-buying holiday of the year after Father's Day and Christmas. The G-rated nature of her mysteries has made Ms. Clark a favorite of mother-daughter book clubs (the crimes can be gruesome but are never directly depicted). The strategy ensures front-of-the-store placement during a heavy book-buying season. Her new book will appear prominently on Mother's Day display tables at the front of each of Barnes & Noble's 705 outlets.

"She has owned that holiday now for at least 20 years," says Ms. Reidy.

In 1995, she added a lucrative brand extension—a Christmas-themed mystery novel—that allowed her to capitalize on the holiday retail rush. When Simon & Schuster released her first holiday mystery in a bid to expand her audience, it had to rush several hundred thousand copies into print when the book became an instant hit, eventually printing 3.2 million copies. Ms. Clark's holiday books, which lately she has co-written with Carol, can be undeniably hokey—one centers on a plot to steal the Rockefeller Center Christmas tree—but they contain flashes of her signature style. (Her holiday-book titles, like "He Sees You When You're Sleeping," manage to be both jolly and creepy.)

A tireless self-promoter, Ms. Clark rarely misses an opportunity to mingle with fans. Moments before her horse-drawn carriage pulled onto Fifth Avenue for the St. Patrick's Day parade last week, Ms. Clark, the parade's grand marshal, greeted admirers who had staked out a spot on 45th Street behind the police barricades. People snapped cellphone pictures of her seated in a black carriage behind a white stallion. "I've read every one of them, thank you!" an older woman in a bright-green knit hat yelled to her.

The previous day, a drizzly spring morning, Ms. Clark was about to ring the opening bell at the New York Stock Exchange when a woman shyly approached her with a copy of "Moonlight Becomes You," her 1996 book. 

"I wanted to tell you what a wonderful writer you are," said Joann Silk, an administrative assistant at the exchange, opening the book and holding out a pen.

"The front page is better," Ms. Clark said, signing the book, "Top of the morning to you."

While making her way through the maze of trading booths, Ms. Clark was stopped by Della Dettling, a retired secretary from New Jersey who was visiting the stock exchange that day. "I've read every one of your books," she said. Resuming her course, Ms. Clark was stopped again, by a stock trader in a blue jacket, who darted up with a pink Post-it pad and requested an autograph for his wife. Ms. Clark asked the woman's name and addressed the note to her, signing it, "Happy reading."

"I don't want to just scrawl my name," Ms. Clark said afterward. "That's kind of tacky." 

A Bronx-born daughter of an Irish pub owner, Ms. Clark regularly signs multimillion-dollar book contracts with Simon & Schuster. In 2000, she got an advance of $64 million for five books—$15 million apiece for four novels, and $4 million for a memoir. Since then, she has delivered on several other multi-book deals. Ms. Clark wouldn't give exact figures for her recent advances but said she gets "more than several million" per book, and close to $4 million for the Christmas books she writes with her daughter. 

Ms. Clark's publisher also profits from her substantial body of older work. When Ms. Clark signs new books at Wegmans, the grocery store brings in dozens of her backlist titles. Once or twice a year, Simon & Schuster rereleases an older book with a new cover in hopes of grabbing new readers and getting prominent store placement. Her very first novel, a historical romance about George and Martha Washington, sold poorly when it was released in 1969 but went on to be a best seller, with more than one million copies in print, when it was rereleased in 2002 as "A Mary Higgins Clark novel." 




‘
                    For long minutes he sat alone. When the woman exited, the green light over the Reconciliation Room door had automatically gone on, which meant that anyone waiting outside would have been free to enter. He found himself praying fervently that the young woman might return, but she did not.
                ’


Her backlist likely will yield even bigger profits as more readers turn to digital books. Digital copies made up 20% of sales for her 2010 novel "The Shadow of Your Smile." New releases typically boost backlist sales, and with e-books, which can be purchased instantly, the sales spike is even more dramatic, while the production costs are essentially zero. For Ms. Clark's last four new releases, Kindle sales of her backlisted books rose an average of 80% in the six weeks after publication. In print Amazon sales, the backlist sales increased by an average of 40% in the same period.

Ms. Clark owns a 14-room mansion in Saddle River, N.J., as well as a Victorian mansion in Spring Lake, N.J., the Central Park South apartment and a house in Cape Cod. She has conscripted a small army to manage her business and social life, including the powerful Washington lawyer Robert Barnett, who handles book contracts, an accountant, a bookkeeper and a business manager. She also has two full-time assistants—one to answer fan mail, handle social engagements and household bills and coordinate events with her publicist, and another to schedule hair and doctor's appointments, suit fittings and the like. For each hardcover release, Ms. Clark rewards herself with a new piece of jewelry to wear in her author photo.

Ahead of her new book's release, Ms. Clark has been tweaking ad copy for the marketing campaign. She nixed an ad that read, "The Queen of Suspense Is Back." "I said, 'I never went anywhere,' " says Ms. Clark, who wrote ad and catalog copy for the office-equipment manufacturer Remington Rand when she was 18. "That's not a selling ad." The new version reads, "New From the No. 1 New York Times Bestselling Author Mary Higgins Clark."

Ms. Clark writes every day, unless she's promoting a book. She takes an elevator to her third-floor home office in Saddle River and writes from 9:30 a.m. until the late afternoon, breaking for lunch. She and Mr. Korda, her editor, talk or fax each other pages at least once a day when she's hatching a plot. (Mr. Korda, formerly the editor in chief of Simon & Schuster, is officially retired but still edits the books of David McCullough, Larry McMurtry and Ms. Clark.)

Most mornings, she scans the newspapers for crimes and tragedies that could be spun into her novels. Her books, largely set in New York and New Jersey, are littered with local landmarks such as Neary's, an Irish pub Ms. Clark frequents on East 57th Street.

For the last 12 years, a retired New York Police Department detective and sergeant have consulted on her books, weighing in on police procedure and culture. In her forthcoming novel, Ms. Clark had two detectives walking two blocks during an investigation, said Steven Marron, the retired sergeant. "We said, 'Mary, detectives don't walk anywhere,' " Mr. Marron recalled, noting that detectives always drive. The opening line of the chapter now reads, "On the short drive over from Hunter College to the Aldrich town house on East Sixty-Ninth Street, detectives Billy Collins and Jennifer Dean admitted to each other that never for one minute had either of them suspected that Zan Moreland had abducted her own child."

Though she's praised by other top-selling mystery authors—Nelson DeMille calls her "a legend in the business"—Ms. Clark's books are routinely ignored by mainstream literary critics, or slammed as formulaic and hackneyed. She says her popularity has biased critics against her. "I firmly believe the more popular you are, the less chance you have to have decent literary criticism," she says.

Ms. Clark wasn't immediately drawn to the mystery genre. She says that if her first novel about George Washington had sold well, she would have written historical fiction. When it didn't, she decided to try commercial thrillers. Ms. Clark's youngest daughter, Patty Clark, says her mother had a darker narrative streak that came out in bedtime stories. 

"We didn't get 'Mary had a little lamb,' we got, 'There's a creep hiding in the closet,' " says Patty, who was named for her mother's literary agent because the woman sold one of Ms. Clark's stories for $500 on the day Patty was born. 

Ms. Clark wrote her first few books while raising five children on her own. Her first husband, Warren Clark, died of heart disease when she was in her mid-30s, and Ms. Clark supported the family by writing radio scripts and getting modeling and acting jobs for her children. She got up to write at 5 a.m.

For several years after the George Washington novel, she worked on a psychological suspense tale about a young mother whose two children go missing seven years after she was accused of murdering her children from a previous marriage. Simon & Schuster bought the novel, "Where Are the Children?" for $3,000 in 1974. It was not an immediate best seller, but in 1976 it hit the paperback best-seller list. The publisher bought her second book for half a million dollars, and the paperback rights sold for $1 million. Ms. Clark bought a Cadillac and was able to quit her day job.

"Where Are the Children?," which has gone into 75 printings, stands as Ms. Clark's most iconic book. Mr. Coben recalls getting a letter about it from his college friend at Amherst, the late novelist David Foster Wallace. "He loved these kinds of books and talked about being scared out of his wits by 'Where Are the Children?,' " says Mr. Coben, who described Ms. Clark as having "a huge influence" on his writing. 

It also established Ms. Clark as the master of a new, and profitable, thriller genre: the tale of an ordinary woman in jeopardy who unravels some sinister plot on her own.

The rise of a new breed of blockbuster author has in some ways changed the model for success. To be a top seller these days often requires publishing multiple titles in different genres every year, getting a Hollywood tie-in, or both. Even with two best sellers a year, Ms. Clark, who has never had a successful film adaptation of her books, lags well behind some of today's top-selling authors. James Patterson's books have sold 220 million copies world-wide, in part because he releases nine books a year. Romance writer Nora Roberts, who publishes four to six original books a year, has 400 million copies in print.

Meanwhile, Ms. Clark has no plans to slow down. Later this year, she'll release a children's book and a Christmas mystery. "People say, 'Are you still writing?' and I think, 'Why not?' " she says. "I have no hobbies other than friends and the theater. I'm impatient with long lunches. I'll always be writing. But the day I stop publishing is the day I stop telling a good story."

She has devised a fittingly macabre way to continue her legacy beyond the grave.

"I have instructions to put a big spiral notebook, a couple of pens and a glass of wine in the casket," she says. "And they'll do it."



 Correction & Amplification:  A previous version of this article gave the wrong college for Harlan Coben and David Foster Wallace. They went to Amherst a year apart. 

 Write to  Alexandra Alter at alexandra.alter@wsj.com 

Six female authors who transformed the field of crime fiction and thrillers

 Signature character: Ebenezer Gryce, New York Metropolitan Police Force

The Brooklyn-born author was one of the first mystery writers in America. She published 40 books in the late 1800s and early 1900s and helped usher in some of the enduring tropes of classic detective fiction.

 Signature characters: Hercule Poirot, Belgian-born detective; Miss Marple, amateur sleuth 

The total collective sales of today's top 10 crime writers don't come close to Ms. Christie's, who ranks behind only the Bible and Shakespeare in sales volume (according to the Guinness Book of World Records, she has sold two billion copies).

 Signature characters: Lord Peter Wimsey, aristocratic amateur detective; Harriet Vane, mystery writer who falls in love with Wimsey.

Ms. Sayers wrote poetry, plays, essays and, most famously, detective fiction, but she was most proud of her translation of Dante's "Divine Comedy."

 Signature character: Tom Ripley, murderer, con artist 

In the game Six Degrees of Separation, this author of psychological thrillers provides the one degree separating Alfred Hitchcock, who adapted her novel "Strangers on a Train," and Matt Damon, star of "The Talented Mr. Ripley."

 Signature character: Inspector Adam Dalgliesh, handsome, poetry-writing London detective

When asked why women make good crime novelists, Ms. James replied: "Women have an eye for detail and clue-making demands attention to the minutiae of everyday living."

 Correction & Amplification 

The authors Harlan Coben and David Foster Wallace attended Amherst College in classes a year apart. A previous version of this article incorrectly said Messrs. Coben and Wallace were classmates at Dartmouth College.