BEIJING—A Chinese court handed a relatively light sentence to a police official's son whose hit-and-run killing of a college student sparked nationwide anger over the excesses of government officials and their families.

Wangdu County People's Court in Hebei province on Sunday sentenced 23-year-old Li Qiming to six years in prison for "crimes causing traffic casualties," Chinese state media reported, immediately sparking complaints on the Internet of leniency.

The state-run Xinhua news agency said Mr. Li pleaded guilty to prosecutors' charges. Neither Mr. Li's lawyer nor the court could be reached for comment.

Mr. Li was driving while intoxicated in October on the campus of Hebei University in Baoding, a city 150 kilometers southwest of Beijing, when his Volkswagen sedan struck two students, according to a government report on the incident. He left the scene, but was eventually detained by university guards. Xinhua reported that one of the students he hit, 20-year-old Chen Xiaofeng, later died in the hospital from her injuries. The other was injured.

Mr. Li's father, Li Gang, was at the time deputy chief of a district police bureau in Baoding. Witnesses to the incident said that when the guards detained Mr. Li, he dared them to charge him, shouting "My dad is Li Gang." The phrase quickly became a widely known catchphrase in China used to vent frustration at corruption among Chinese officials and their families, who often abuse their status to gain wealth and special treatment.

The six-year sentence is shorter than the seven-year maximum for the relatively minor charge of traffic crimes that Mr. Li faced. Some defendants in China found guilty in similar hit-and-run deaths involving drunk driving have been charged with more serious offenses and received much longer prison sentences—and even death sentences.

China Central Television, the state broadcaster, said the court lightened Mr. Li's punishment because his family had compensated the victims' families, and because he admitted to the charges and had a "penitent attitude."

The ruling drew immediate criticism online.

"Penitent attitude?' My dad is Li Gang!" wrote a user named Shi ZhiBu Yu on Sina Corp.'s microblogging service.

"What world is this, \[where\] just like that a life vanished, the perpetrator was so arrogant, and only got six years," wrote another user, Wei Yang.

Zhang Kai, an attorney who initially represented the family of Ms. Chen, the victim, said Mr. Li should have been charged with endangering public safety instead of traffic crimes.

"The criminal charge was wrong in the first place, so the ruling by no means can be right itself," he said. 

—Yoli Zhang contributed to this article. 