MUMBAI –Indian consumers are slowly beginning to buy gold jewelry again after a fall in prices from record levels in December, but the majority are holding back purchases as they expect prices to decline further. 

Spot gold prices have fallen by around 9% in India since prices hit an all-time high of 20,975 rupees ($460) per 10 grams in early December. 

"Prices are expected to bottom out in the next couple of months and then move higher as global economic concerns still persist," said  Girish Choksi, proprietor of  Girish Kumar Ramanlal Choksi and Brothers, an Ahmedabad-based bullion trader. 

He said there has been a spurt in jewelry buying since prices started declining, but investors are buying only small quantities in anticipation of further price falls. 

In the Mumbai spot market, spot pure gold prices are trading at 20,025 rupees per 10 grams. 

Gold prices surged nearly 30% in 2010 and analysts expect prices to correct for some time, before staging a recovery later. 

Prices could bottom out at levels between 19,300 rupees and 19,500 rupees Mr. Choksi added.

"Initially people who stepped aside because gold prices were too high are now coming into the market. Buyers will wait and watch if prices continue to decline," said  Daman Prakash, director with bullion trading house MNC Bullion. 

He expects prices to correct by up to 15% and expects a level of buoyancy in demand because of the price fall and better farm income. 

"Right now, 70%-75% of the demand for gold is mostly investment-driven. They [investors] buy at every fall, but this time investors are expecting prices to fall...so they are waiting," said  Prithviraj Kothari, president of the Bombay Bullion Association. 

India, the world's largest gold consumer, imported around 700 tons in 2010, up from 480 tons the previous year. 

Purchases picked up as farmers' incomes increased on a better harvest as well as more money in the hands of urban consumers, with equity markets recovering from a slowdown. Analysts expect gold purchases in 2011 to be around last year's level. 

 Write to  Swansy Afonso at swansy.afonso@dowjones.com 