City Council Speaker  Christine Quinn plans to submit testimony on Friday opposing Mayor  Michael Bloomberg's plan to charge motorists involved in accidents that require emergency-response services, a move that could doom the initiative.

According to a draft copy of the testimony, Ms. Quinn called the mayor's proposal "unworkable," "unfair" and "unsafe." The Fire Department is holding a public hearing on the plan at its Brooklyn headquarters Friday.

"Emergency response is a basic government function for which individuals...should not be billed," Ms. Quinn, the second most powerful official in city government, said in the draft testimony. 

"The Fire Department doesn't charge for its response to structural fires, and the Police Department doesn't charge for patrolling a block," she said. "Charging for responding to the scene of an accident is a slippery slope, and I don't want to see us begin to go down that road out of a desperate desire to find sources of revenue."

While FDNY officials promised to consider the public's input at Friday's hearing, the policy change doesn't need City Council approval, FDNY officials said. But Council Member  Peter Vallone Jr., chairman of the Public Safety Committee, is drafting a bill that would bar the administration from charging the fee.

At a hearing last month, a handful of council members voiced strong opposition to the fee idea. A number of states have banned this type of fee. 

Under the mayor's proposal, a vehicle fire or any other incident with injuries would cost $490. A vehicle fire without injuries would cost $415. Incidents without fire or injuries would cost $365. The charges apply to every vehicle involved in an incident.

In her draft testimony, Ms. Quinn said she's unsure insurance companies would cover the fee, and, if they did, she said, she's concerned insurance premiums would increase. 

Ms. Quinn said she is most concerned about the unintended consequences of the proposal. "Drivers involved in accidents will be less likely to call for police to crash scenes if they fear they may face a multi-hundred dollar charge," she said. "Drunk or uninsured drivers, or those with suspended licenses, are less likely to be caught—and the dangers for everyone else on the roads will increase."

Mr. Bloomberg and FDNY officials have defended the proposal as a way to cut costs at a time when the city faces a multibillion-dollar budget deficit.

Others plan to submit testimony in favor of the initiative.

Paul Steely White, executive director of Transportation Alternatives, a transit advocacy group, wrote that his group "supports holding drivers financially accountable for their actions, while easing the financial burden on the Fire Department."

 Write to  Michael Howard Saul at michael.saul@wsj.com 