On Sunday, 19 years, 10 months and 20 days after his last game as manager of Liverpool, "King" Kenny Dalglish was back on the Reds' bench in their 1-0 road loss to Manchester United in the FA Cup.

New England Sports Ventures, the company that owns Liverpool and the Boston Red Sox, appointed Mr. Dalglish as Liverpool's interim manager Saturday, following the dismissal of Roy Hodgson. Mr. Dalglish was a hero to Liverpool fans both as a player, winning three European Cups, and as a manager, leading Liverpool to three league titles and two FA Cups between 1985 and 1991. He resigned abruptly in 1991, citing health reasons linked to the trauma of witnessing the Hillsborough tragedy, when 96 Liverpool supporters were crushed to death at a soccer game.

Having lived through both Liverpool's greatest triumphs and its darkest day, Mr. Dalglish has a unique bond with supporters, one that few men in the club's history can match, but he hasn't been a manager since leaving Celtic in 2000. The issue is whether the short-term enthusiasm and inspiration he is sure to bring to the club outweigh the question marks related to his inactivity and the fact that legends can be difficult to shift, should the owners—as many predict—look to make a permanent appointment in the summer.

Still, it was clear that Mr. Hodgson's tenure had run its course. While he was feted by the English media for taking Fulham to the final of the Europa League last season, he never seemed to click with the passionate Liverpool fans—partly because he was hired by the highly unpopular previous owners, George Gillett and Tom Hicks, and partly because Liverpool slid down to 12th in the Premier League. 

After a 1-0 loss to lowly Wolverhampton Wanderers, he complained about a lack of fan support for him. It was the last straw. "I am getting used to it. That is the way it is," Mr. Hodgson said of the lack of faith from Liverpool fans. "We've had to live with that for quite a long time now, as ever. Since I came here, the famous Anfield support has not really been there."

Mr. Hodgson may have intended his comments to be a way of rallying the troops, but they backfired badly. His words were seen as a criticism of the fans, as if he had a right to their support simply by virtue of being the Liverpool manager. Despite a "clarification" from Mr. Hodgson a few days later, the writing was on the wall, literally, as "Hodgson Out" graffiti sprang up around Anfield. On Saturday, he was given his marching orders. At the very least, given his history, Mr. Dalglish will have no such misunderstandings with the fans.

The challenge now for the club is to navigate the rest of the season without incident and to rebuild in the summer under the guidance of Damien Comolli, the club's director of strategy. Appointing Mr. Comolli was among New England Sports Ventures' first moves after acquiring the club. It signaled that Liverpool would be run along the lines of what is known in England as a "continental model," in which a general manager is charged with personnel recruiting and long-term strategy, leaving the manager to focus on the playing side. While this setup is common around the world, it runs counter to the traditional English model, where a manager like Mr. Hodgson has total control over a club.

It's difficult to see an old-school figure, let alone a club legend, like Mr. Dalglish operating within that structure, which is why it seems likely that he will make way for a hand-picked successor in the summer. 

The one concern for the owners? They could become victims of their own success. If Mr. Dalglish wins the Europa League or somehow rallies the Reds to storm back up the Premier League table—perhaps achieving a top-four finish, which would qualify the club for the Champions League next year—it might be difficult to replace him, especially if the popular Mr. Dalglish decides he wants to stay. 

Yet given the club's precarious position—and distinct lack of future prospects—under Mr. Hodgson, hiring Mr. Dalglish was a risk worth taking, even if it might mean scrapping Mr. Comolli's blueprint. 

Giant-killing, the term for upsets of top-flight clubs by teams farther down the English soccer food chain, is part of the allure of the FA Cup's third round, the first involving Premier League sides. Much like a No. 14 seed winning its NCAA Tournament opener, a victory instantly becomes part of FA Cup lore. 

Thirteen years ago, Stevenage, a semi-professional club, nearly pulled off such a feat, holding mighty Newcastle United to a 1-1 draw and then losing a hard-fought replay, 2-1. So when the draw pitted these two teams against each other this year, the romantics came out in force. To be fair, circumstances have changed since 1998. Stevenage has grown, achieving promotion to League 2, the fourth tier of the English game, last season. And Newcastle, eighth in the Premier League, is no longer the juggernaut it once was. Still, there were no fewer than 74 places separating these two teams in the English soccer pyramid. 

Yet Saturday afternoon served up the kind of game supporters will be talking about for a long time in Stevenage, a rapidly growing town in the Hertfordshire countryside north of London. Newcastle fell, 3-1, prompting wild celebrations, with several hundred fans running onto the pitch after the final whistle. 

Alas, not all were joyous. One Stevenage fan approached fullback Scott Laird and punched him in the head, knocking him unconscious, before he disappeared into the crowd. One unconfirmed theory is that Mr. Laird rebuffed the supporter's request for his game jersey, and either way, the club issued a statement saying it intended to prosecute the individual to the full extent of the law. It was an ugly incident, which, sadly and unfairly, took some of the gloss from what may have been the greatest day in the history of Stevenage.

The Asian Cup, the continental equivalent of the European Championships or Copa America, is taking place in Qatar, in what some see as an early benchmark of the nation's ability to organize the 2022 World Cup. In particular, many observers question the host nation's soccer credentials, given that it has never qualified for a World Cup.

Qatar's first outing did little to convince its skeptics, as it crashed to a 2-0 loss to Uzbekistan on Friday. More than half of Qatar's starting lineup consisted of naturalized players: two born in Kuwait, one each from Ghana, Senegal, Uruguay and Brazil. There is only so much you can do, after all, with a population of some 840,000. 

China is up next for the Qataris on Tuesday. A defeat could spell an early exit from the Asian Cup, which is always embarrassing for a host nation. If that happens—or even if it doesn't—it might not be unreasonable to expect a flurry of naturalizations between now and 2022.

— Gabriele Marcotti is the world soccer columnist for The Times of London and a regular broadcaster for the BBC. 