Worries about supply-chain disruptions from Japan's earthquake continued, with some Asian businesses saying they were slowing production to preserve stockpiles of crucial components. 

A semiconductor industry group in the Philippines flagged its concern about access to important raw materials.

But some Japanese factories reported progress Wednesday in restarting operations, raising hopes that long-term disruptions might be avoided.

Japanese-made equipment and materials play a key production role in many of the region's main industries, from automobiles in Thailand to semiconductors in the Philippines. While many businesses said they have adequate inventories of materials for the time being, some said they were cutting output as they attempted to gauge the impact of the earthquake and disruptions caused by continuing problems at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant.

In Thailand,  Toyota Motor Corp., Thailand's single biggest auto maker, is slowing production until March 25 to preserve stockpiles of Japan-made components, such as the transmission for Camry and Prius hybrid models. 

"Slowing production now is better than maintaining full output and having a problem later," a Toyota executive said. He declined to say how much production would be reduced. 

He said Toyota's Thai-based operations had enough inventory of Japan-made components to last until the end of the month and anticipates resuming normal output by then. Other Toyota models face less of a problem because they use a higher percentage of Thailand-made parts. Some 90% of the components used to make Toyota's Thailand-made pick-up trucks are made in the country, compared with 60% for its passenger cars.

In Japan, Toyota said it would resume production of replacement auto parts for the domestic market on Thursday and for overseas on Monday and planned to restart car assembly by Tuesday. 

  Nissan Motor Co. said it will resume output at two plants in Japan on Thursday and Friday but keep operations at three other vehicle assembly plants in Japan closed until Sunday. Some other factories in Japan have reopened but  Suzuki Motor Corp.,  Honda Motor Co. and some other auto makers said production would remain suspended at least through Sunday.

Production problems continued in other industries. In a possible blow to global production of consumer gadgets such as smartphones,  Mitsubishi Gas Chemical Co. said the building and equipment at a plant in Fukushima prefecture had been damaged by the earthquake and that operations were suspended. The plant produces materials for printed wiring boards for use in smartphones and other consumer electronics and makes up to 60% of the global market for wiring-board materials.

The Philippines semiconductor industry association said it was concerned that the disaster in Japan could disrupt the supply of raw materials from the country and affect the export of Philippine-made components back. "A prolonged abnormalcy in Japan will certainly affect the material supplies in the Philippine electronics industry," said  Ernie Santiago, president of the Semiconductor and Electronics Industries in the Philippines.

Some of those raw materials include substances such as bismaleimide-triazine, or BT, resin, which is used in making printed circuit boards. Japan provides around 90% of the world's supply of BT resin, Credit Suisse Group AG said. 

The supply of BT resins and other key materials "is definitely a concern," said  Julian Huang, senior sales and marketing manager at Innergie, a unit of  Delta Electronics (Thailand) PLC, which makes computer adapters and chargers. "But we buy from agents and there's still plenty of stock in the pipeline for the time being." Some electronics companies said they had diversified their supply of specialty materials away from Japan in recent years as less-expensive competitors arrived in the market.

For operators of the complex chip-manufacturing plants, known as fabs, power outages continued to be a problem. Japan-based chip maker  Renesas Electronics Corp. said seven of its 22 factories in Japan remained shut down because of power disruptions.

In some cases, manufacturers will be able to shift to chip suppliers outside Japan. But that can be difficult if product specifications call for a particular brand, said  Paul Romano, chief operating officer of Fusion Trade, an Andover, Mass., company that helps manufacturers find sources of scarce components. He said the company has been retained to find components by more than 15 clients. He said they don't allow his firm to disclose their names. 

In Taiwan, shares for makers of semiconductor packaging materials fell on news of production shutdowns in Japan. Shares of  Kinsus Interconnect Technology Corp. closed 3.9% lower. But shares of alternative suppliers rose. Taiwan-based  Nan Ya Plastics, which provides some of the same raw materials as Japanese companies, saw its share price rise 3%.

  Richard Han, chief executive at Thailand-based  Hana Microelectronics Group, said the company obtains most of its compounds from producers in Malaysia or South Korea.

"We have one Japanese supplier which has had a minor impact due to power shortages, but we are advised they will be back to normal shortly," he said. "And, besides, we have over two months of inventory."

—Aries Poon, Don Clark and Hiroyuki Kachi contributed to this article.

 Write to  James Hookway at james.hookway@wsj.com 