With 10 minutes remaining in Sunday night's game in Atlanta, Carmelo Anthony, the Knicks' new star, took a seat on the bench to begin what was supposed to be a two-minute rest. 

Shortly thereafter, Roger Mason Jr. hit a shot, then it became a three-minute rest. Then Shawne Williams hit 3-pointer and all of the sudden, the Knicks were up 10, then 15. Anthony never re-entered the game and the suddenly deep Knicks bench carried them to the win.

The display was encouraging, but in reality, contributions from end-of-the-bench players like Mason have only confused matters. As the Knicks enter the final stretch of the season, they've spent the past few weeks playing what amounts to playing-time roulette. In Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni's normally small rotation of players, little has been decided since seven new players arrived at the trade deadline. 

"You go back and forth. You just can't play everybody and you have to give guys a little bit of a leash,'' D'Antoni said. "You earn your minutes. Then if you contribute, you keep earning them."

Mason, Renaldo Balkman, Shelden Williams and Anthony Carter have all taken turns on the playing time carousel. Every Knick but Derrick Brown, acquired from Charlotte last week, has auditioned for a spot with meaningful minutes. 

After scoring five points on Sunday, D'Antoni said that Mason will continue to play—even though he hadn't played significant minutes since Jan. 12. Mason said that his playing situation was something he's "never experienced in his life at any level. It's uncharted territory, but you just have to stay positive." 

Playing time has been thrown for a loop by a slew of injuries. Chauncey Billups has been out since last week with bruised quadriceps, and Bill Walker and Ronny Turiaf missed Sunday's game with knee injuries. 

Toney Douglas and Carter have received the bulk of the playing time since Billups went down, and Jared Jeffries has started at center instead of Turiaf.

Jeffries is likely a rotation staple after he was praised by D'Antoni as a key defensive presense despite being held scoreless in 27 minutes on Sunday. He is averaging just 1.3 points per game in his three games with the Knicks.

If Mason indeed enters the rotation, it could mean the temporary benching of Walker or Carter once Billups returns. Carter said the constant shifting of playing time won't make a huge impact.

 He said that players rarely go "cold" in the NBA, even if they are out of the rotation for long stretches. 

That playing time is up for grabs so long after the trade is a bit of a surprise. In fact, last week the team bought out the contract of forward Corey Brewer, who was acquired from Minnesota in the Anthony trade, because D'Antoni could not guarantee him playing time. After his buyout, Brewer signed a multi-year deal with the Dallas Mavericks. 

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 