WASHINGTON—The Obama administration on Monday lifted its freeze on new military trials at Guantanamo Bay and for the first time laid out its legal strategy to indefinitely detain prisoners who the government says can't be tried but are too dangerous to be freed.

With the policy shifts, Mr. Obama is acknowledging the difficulty he has faced in trying to close the prison at the Guantanamo Bay Naval Base in Cuba, which he had ordered on his second day in office. He is also responding to a congressional ban of moving detainees to the U.S. for trial or detention, which undercut administration plans for civilian trials for some now held at Guantanamo.

Mr. Obama has tried for two years to set policies on terrorism detainees distinct from those of his predecessor, George W. Bush, who established military tribunals, in part, as a way to prevent the release of classified information. Mr. Bush also ordered prisoners held indefinitely as enemy combatants until they no longer posed a threat to the U.S.

See a timeline of key events since the first detainees arrived in 2002 and track the number of inmates over time.

Administration officials say the executive order Mr. Obama issued on Monday adds due-process rights absent under Mr. Bush. It calls for periodic reviews of detainees who the administration has determined should be detained indefinitely. The administration has said there are now 48 such detainees who can't be put on trial because, among other reasons, evidence might be tainted by their treatment during questioning and might be deemed by judges to have been coerced.

Administration officials said the reviews would answer constitutional concerns that people held by the government have the right to contest their detention.

Another 124 prisoners remaining at Guantanamo are slated to be tried in military or civilian court, now that Mr. Obama rescinded a freeze on new military trials at Guantanamo Bay put in place in January 2009, or they could be resettled outside the U.S. The president said he remains committed to closing the prison. 

In a May 2009 speech on national security at the National Archives, Mr. Obama first raised the prospect of indefinite detentions and called it "the toughest single issue that we will face." Administration officials initially discussed with lawmakers passing a law to permit indefinite detention, but the president's human rights allies objected to making the policy permanent through legislation. 

Under the order, the reviews of detainees to be held indefinitely will begin within the next year and will be conducted by a committee of officials from the Defense, Justice and State departments, as well as intelligence agencies. Detainees will be allowed to contest the government's case with the help of attorneys. Full reviews would take place every three years, with additional interim reviews taking place every six months to determine whether new information exists regarding each detainee.

The administration also said it planned to seek Senate ratification for two provisions of the Geneva Conventions related to detainee treatment and trials.

Among the likely new trials expected is that of Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri, the accused plotter of the 2000 bombing of the USS Cole in Yemen, U.S. officials say. The administration remained silent on the most prominent prisoners at Guantanamo, those accused of plotting the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. 

The administration's efforts to demonstrate that civilian courts should be the preferred venue to handle terrorism trials was called into question last November, when a New York jury rejected more than 200 counts against a Tanzanian man charged in the 1998 U.S. embassy bombings in Africa. The man was convicted on a single count and sentenced to life in prison.

At the same time, Congress has blocked Mr. Obama's ability to bring Guantanamo prisoners to the U.S. for trial or detention. The Obama administration has transferred or resettled nearly 70 detainees, mostly to Europe.

The administration's Monday announcement came under attack from civil liberties groups and from some family members of the victims of the Sept. 11, 2001, terror attacks, who were unhappy that military trials weren't announced for the alleged plotters of the Sept. 11 attacks. 

"Today's executive order institutionalizes indefinite detention, which is unlawful, unwise and un-American," said Anthony Romero, executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union.

In a conference call with reporters, senior administration officials said the new, periodic review system differed from the Bush administration-era military board that annually reviewed the cases of detainees to determine whether they should still be detained. The Obama administration officials said the Bush system was military-based and provided fewer rights for detainees to contest their detention. 

The new system provides "oversight" of the government's detention of each detainee, the senior Obama officials said, though that oversight comes from within the government, not from the judiciary.

Some family members of victims of the Sept. 11 attacks criticized the administration announcement in a conference call with White House officials Monday, complaining that no decision was announced where to try the accused 9/11 plotters. Officials said a final decision remains pending.

Choosing a site for such a trial has proved complicated. In November 2009, Attorney General Eric Holder had announced civilian criminal trials in New York City for Khalid Sheikh Mohammed and other alleged plotters of the Sept. 11 attacks. But the plans for civilian trials ground to a halt in early 2010 after a backlash from New Yorkers and members of Congress over security concerns and other issues. 

In Monday's announcement, Mr. Obama reaffirmed his stance that the government should be able to use both military and civilian courts to put terrorism detainees on trial.

—Julian E. Barnes contributed to this article.

 Write to  Evan Perez at evan.perez@wsj.com 