HONG KONG—Hong Kong property prices have exceeded the peak seen in 1997 before the property bubble burst, Financial Secretary John Tsang said Wednesday, adding the government may introduce further measures to curb exuberance in the market. 

Hong Kong is one of the costliest--or most lucrative--real-estate markets in the world. Here's a district-by-district look at changes in property prices.

"I am deeply concerned that overall property prices in February have surpassed the peak in 1997. I shall pay close attention to developments in the property market," Mr. Tsang told lawmakers, noting that property prices have increased 7.2% in the first two months of this year. 

The city's average home price rose about 24% in 2010, following a 30% jump in 2009, as low interest rates help stoke demand. 

Mr. Tsang warned an interest-rate rise may come sooner than expected after other countries have increased policy rates. "The current abundant liquidity and low interest rates will not last forever. Neither will rising property prices," Mr. Tsang said. 

In a bid to anchor rising prices and boost housing supply, Mr. Tsang said the government will sell a total of nine residential sites through auction or tender between April and June. The nine sites will provide 2,650 units in total. 

Mr. Tsang said the government also is considering the announcement of its land sales plan on a quarterly basis in advance. The government doesn't now have a regular schedule for releasing sites for sale. 

In November, the Hong Kong government took its toughest steps yet to cool the property market by imposing an additional stamp duty, or transaction levy, of up to 15% on properties that are resold within two years and requiring higher down payments for high-end home purchases. 

However, transaction volumes and prices have rebounded sharply since January after a brief lull in the market, raising concerns over the government's capability to contain the property boom. In his budget speech late February, Mr. Tsang pledged to increase the city's land supply.

 Write to  Chester Yung at chester.yung@dowjones.com 