A Swedish coming-of-age drama about sex, power and a psychological tug-of-war between two adolescent friends and rivals won the prize for best narrative feature at the 10th annual Tribeca Film Festival. "She Monkeys," the debut feature by Lisa Aschan, took the top award in the international category, as honors were announced at a Thursday-evening ceremony at the W Union Square.

The narrative feature jury, which included directors David Gordon Green and Souleymane Cisse and actors Dianne Wiest and Scott Glenn, praised the film as "haunting, resonant, but never posed."

"Bombay Beach," by Israeli director Alma Har'el, won the award for best documentary feature. The film, which mixes nonfiction storytelling with choreographed musical interludes, explores the lives of several individuals living near the desolate Salton Sea in the Southern California desert. Jurors, who included Whoopi Goldberg and actor Michael Cera, were unanimous in applauding the film's "beauty, lyricism, empathy and invention."

Top awards also went to Park Jungbum, the director of the South Korean "Journals of Musan," for best new narrative director, and Pablo Croce, director of "Like Water," for best new documentary director. Each award comes with a $25,000 cash prize and an original work of art, with an additional $50,000 of in-kind post-production services in the best new director categories.

Other winners in the narrative feature categories included: 

Best actor, Ramadhan Bizimana ("Grey Matter," Rwanda); best actress, Carice van Houten ("Black Butterflies," Germany, Netherlands, South Africa), best cinematography, Luisa Tillinger ("Artificial Paradises," Mexico), best screenplay, Jannicke Systad Jacobsen ("Turn Me On, Goddammit," Norway), and a special jury mention for writer-director Kivu Ruhorahoza ("Grey Matter").

Other documentary winners included: best editing, Purcell Carson ("Semper Fi: Always Faithful," USA), and a special jury mention for director Michael Collins ("Give Up Tomorrow," Britain, USA).

The Short film winners were: best narrative short, "Man and Boy" (Britain), directed by David Leon and Marcus McSweeney; special jury mention, "The Terms" (Britain), written and directed by Jason LaMotte; best documentary short, "Incident in New Baghdad" (USA), written and directed by James Spione; special jury mention, "Guru" (USA), written and directed by Jonathan VanBallenberghe.

Winners in other categories included: student visionary award, "Rooms" (USA), written and directed by Joanna Jurewicz; special jury mention, "Eva—Working Title" (Israel), written and directed by Dor Fadlon. 

The Tribeca (Online) Film Festival best feature film award went to "Donor Unknown" (USA), directed and written by Jerry Rothwell. The best short film was "Dungeon Master" (USA), directed by Shiloh and Rider Strong.

Winning films will be screened throughout Sunday, the festival's closing day. The winner of the Heineken Audience Prize, which is voted on by festival attendees, will be announced Saturday.