 Austin, Texas 

As an independent filmmaker, Ti West swears by South by Southwest. The annual film, music and interactive media conference, which began here Friday is like an unofficial spring break for artists and professionals in those industries. It's a big street party, fueled by free alcohol and social networking, but it's also a place to launch careers.

"South by Southwest validated me as a filmmaker," said Mr. West, a New York director, who was rushing to complete edits on his new film, a New England ghost story called "The Innkeepers," before its world premiere here Saturday. He first exhibited at the festival in 2005, with his debut feature "The Roost." "They were the first people to take a chance on me and say 'We like your movie.' "

Mr. West is loyal but not exclusive. His 2009 horror film "House of the Devil" premiered at the Tribeca Film Festival, which celebrates its 10th edition from April 20 to May 1. "They're totally different," he said, noting that while Austin looms as a business-expensed getaway for many attendees, Tribeca is an easier place to get wider exposure. New York is a media capital. "And the marketing budget is gigantic. Even my grandma knows about it, because of  Robert De Niro."

After the media frenzy of Sundance, the two events are the two large-scale American film festivals—SXSW boasts 120-plus narrative and documentary features, Tribeca 88—and are a mere five weeks apart on the calendar. Comparisons are inevitable.

The SXSW film festival launched in 1994, evolving out of a DIY music festival co-founded in 1986 by  Louis Black, editor of the alternative weekly newspaper, the Austin Chronicle. The Tribeca festival—co-founded by the celebrated actor, producer  Jane Rosenthal, and philanthropist  Craig Hatkoff in 2001—arose in the wake of the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center, aiming to boost the economic and cultural revitalization of lower Manhattan. One festival bubbled up from independent roots, the other arrived with major industry connections built-in.

The first decade of the Austin festival was overseen by  Nancy Schafer, who marks her fourth year as executive director of the Tribeca festival. Former New Yorker  Janet Pierson is producing her third SXSW festival this year. 

"Tribeca is a high-profile festival that enables us to get the film and the story out there in a big way,"  Rachel Libert said. The New York filmmaker will premiere "Semper Fi: Always Faithful," a documentary about a former Marine who helped expose toxic contamination of the water supply at North Carolina's Camp Lejeune military base. "This film makes people angry, so I'm really excited for it to be seen in front of a New York audience."

  Todd Rohal, whose sophomore effort, the philosophical buddy drama, "The Catechism Cataclysm," plays SXSW after a solid premiere at Sundance, is likewise eager to show his movie to the right kind of audience. "There was a lot of pressure at my premiere," he said, "because there's a lot riding on it. In Austin, I know what those crowds are like," he said. "They're so relaxed and they don't care what critics like. They're really rooting for you." 

Mr. Rohal enjoys the sense of community that has developed at the festival. It's credited with fostering the so-called mumblecore movement in micro-budget filmmaking in 2005. "I saw Greta Gerwig walking down the street," he said, referring to the star of many such films, who soon will co-star in the "Arthur" remake with Helen Mirren and Russell Brand, "and it was like passing by Audrey Hepburn."

Tribeca devotes half its roster to works by less-known filmmakers, with a wide spectrum of international titles that haven't been a significant part of SXSW's mission. But it also boasts high-wattage star power, with a healthy portion of its schedule devoted to marquee names and genre entertainments. "They really filled a void in New York," said  Bill Morrison, a New York avant-garde filmmaker who will premiere "The Miners' Hymn," his first feature-length film at Tribeca, after four previous visits with short efforts. "They had a lot of corporate sponsorship and were able to make it a destination festival in a hurry." 

Underneath the gloss, the festival has long championed experimental work like Mr. Morrison's, through one of its programmers,  John Gartenberg. "If you can find someone like that in any festival, it's a great boon to bringing in different types of work," says Mr. Morrison.

Mr. Morrison, an East Village resident whose investigations into the nature of cinema have shown world-wide, also is happy to avoid JFK airport. When his movie premieres next month, "I can just ride my bike."