LONDON—Industrial-production data in the euro zone published Thursday suggest the region's largest economies are recovering at different paces, a divide that may prove a major headache for the European Central Bank. 

In France, the currency bloc's second-largest economy, industrial production jumped 1% in January from December, doubling analysts' expectations. Finance Minister Christine Lagarde said the figures confirm that economic growth will accelerate in the first quarter. 

On the other side of the Alps, Italian industrial production slumped. Output fell 1.5% month-to-month, and annual growth was its weakest in a year. 

The readings, alongside strong production figures from euro-zone powerhouse Germany this week, add to concerns that the currency area's economies are following sharply divergent paths. 

That is a problem for the European Central Bank, which has to set a single benchmark interest rate for all 17 nations. 

The ECB, which has kept rates at an all-time low of 1% since May 2009, is now openly considering tighter policy as inflation climbs, powered by high food and fuel prices. 

Euro-zone consumer prices rose 2.4% in January, above the ECB's target rate of close to, but just below 2% on a medium-term horizon. ECB President  Jean-Claude Trichet indicated last week that it is seriously considering a rate increase to contain price growth, maybe as early as April. 

Some economies appear to be better placed to withstand higher borrowing costs than others. While France and Germany grew further in the fourth quarter of 2010, benefiting from low rates, Greece's output continued to shrink rapidly and Portugal's economy returned to contraction. 

Low interest rates, necessary to prevent such peripheral nations from sinking further, have been a gift for exporters in Germany and other strong nations because they result in a relatively weak euro. 

Thursday's production figures from Italy, the euro zone's third-largest economy, suggest that country's fortunes may be closer to those of the periphery than the "core" nations. 

There are signs Italy's slump in production may be temporary. Confindustria, a business lobby, said surveys for January pointed to stronger output than the official data. It predicted a 1.7% production rise in February, essentially reversing January's fall. However, it acknowledged that output trends in early 2011 "are turning out to be slower than expected." 

Outside the single-currency area, the U.K.'s manufacturing sector also rebounded in January, thanks to a weakened pound and strong foreign demand. Manufacturing output jumped 1% in January from December. 

The U.K.'s strong figures, alongside data from Germany Thursday, suggest these countries are beginning the slow process of shifting their economies to a more balanced base of growth. 

Germany's current-account surplus shrank in January, suggesting that internal demand—long a weak spot in Europe's largest economy—is starting to recover. 

Although the figures show a decline in exports—Germany's main source of economic growth—the economic forecast is bright, said  Ulrike Rondorf, economist at  Commerzbank AG
CRZBY


0.78
%




. 

"This setback at the start of the year is unlikely to change the fact that exports will...remain the major driver of the German upswing this year. But strengthening domestic demand too will increasingly support the German economy," she said. 

—Tom Fairless in Frankfurt, Geraldine Amiel in Paris, and Christopher Emsden and Sofia Celeste in Rome contributed to this article.