MADRID—A U.S. citizen of Algerian origin has been cleared due to lack of evidence of Spanish allegations that he transferred funds to an al Qaeda cell. 

A judge also unfroze assets of the accused man, Mohamed Omar Dehbi, saying that there was no evidence linking Mr. Dehbi's business activities to terrorism funding. 

Mr. Dehbi, who was detained in September at his house near Barcelona on suspicion of money-laundering and funneling money to al Qaeda, is now demanding a public apology from the Spanish government. 

The antiterrorist investigation was properly conducted by Spanish judicial authorities, but Mr. Dehbi said his reputation and his family's well being was hurt by the Interior Ministry's release of photographs and what he said were inaccurate allegations that led to his arrest. 

"I'm not ready to go to court right now, but I'm publicly asking the government to apologize to me," Mr. Dehbi said in a telephone interview. "I was completed knocked out and destroyed by the information." 

Interior Ministry officials declined to immediately comment. A National Police spokesman declined to comment.

According to a statement issued by the Interior Ministry in September, Mr. Dehbi allegedly funneled to Algeria more than €60,000 ($84,000) in funds disguised as business transactions to purchase "materials used for terrorist activities." 

The police also seized laptops, hard disks, bank records and business-incorporation documents of companies allegedly used as fronts to transfer the funds to Algeria. A luxury car and a boat were also seized as part of the investigation.

National Court investigative judge Santiago Pedraz, whose job is similar to that of a U.S. district attorney, released Mr. Dehbi shortly after his arrest on grounds that there was also insufficient evidence of criminal intent to keep him in custody.

Mr. Dehbi said the probe centered on a loan of €1,600 made to Toufik Mizi, a friend who has a currency-exchange businesses in Algeria and who is wanted by Spain on terrorism charges by the National Court, which handles high-profile cases linked to terrorism and organized crime. 

Mr. Mizi denies any wrongdoing, and said in a telephone interview that Algerian authorities have cleared him of any charges following extensive questioning. 

Mr. Dehbi obtained U.S. citizenship after residing in Houston and Boston during the 1990s. He relocated to Spain in 2004 and now works as exporter of U.S. and European machinery to North Africa. 