PITTSBURGH—David Harris hears voices. As the Jets' defensive signal caller, Mr. Harris wears a helmet outfitted with speakers in the ear flaps. And from his position at inside linebacker, he processes what he hears and relays the information to his teammates before each snap.

Coach Rex Ryan referred to him last week as "the quiet storm." If it seems odd that one of the team's more reserved players occupies a role as the defense's nerve center, Mr. Harris was relishing his responsibilities heading into Sunday night's AFC Championship Game against the Steelers at Heinz Field. 

There was a revealing moment last week when Mr. Ryan was asked about how much power he delegates to defensive coordinator Mike Pettine. Who calls the schemes during games? "David Harris," Mr. Ryan said, deadpan. It was a joke, though perhaps not that much of an exaggeration.

Mr. Harris's teammates and coaches praised his football IQ throughout the season, his fourth in the NFL, even as he toiled in the shadow cast by some of his more voluble teammates—linebacker Bart Scott, to name one.

"I think everybody has an image of how Bart's playing—this guy who's really intense, really into the game," linebackers coach Bob Sutton said. "But that's how David plays the game, too. They're more similar on the field than people might think."

As far as their personalities go, Mr. Harris and Mr. Scott are the Jets' version of "The Odd Couple." Mr. Harris is as quiet as Mr. Scott is loud. Mr. Harris is deliberate with his words, dispensing them only when necessary. Mr. Scott tends to talk to anyone with ears. And in the absence of an audience, he has been known to talk to himself. "Bart has his moments," cornerback Drew Coleman said.

Mr. Scott became something of an Internet sensation in the wake of the Jets' win over the Patriots when he castigated the team's critics—real or imagined—during an on-field interview with ESPN. He seemed to speak in capital letters, channeling his inner Hulk Hogan. Then he punctuated the proceedings by barking, "CAN'T WAIT!" It was in reference to the team's upcoming game against the Steelers, and those two words became both a mantra and a catchphrase for the Jets—and their rabid fan base—all week.

Mr. Harris, meantime, quietly went about his business, as usual. Unlike Mr. Scott and several other more quotable players who were summoned to press conferences, Mr. Harris avoided the spotlight and did what he could to sidestep reporters. He had no interest in creating headlines or drawing attention. He's never one to criticize an opponent or spew straight fire into ESPN reporter Sal Paolantonio's microphone.

"Certain guys are vocal, and certain guys lead by example," offensive lineman Rob Turner said. "And I think Dave speaks more with his actions than he does verbally, whether it's to the media or the public. I have nothing but the utmost respect for him."

Heading into Sunday's game, that feeling was universal within the locker room. For all the team's bold declarations and candid chatter, Mr. Harris was one of the Jets' stabilizing influences. If there was a perception of this team as a bunch of squawking agitators, then Mr. Harris, along with such veterans as fullback Tony Richardson and running back LaDainian Tomlinson, helped provide the substance and focus to back up the talk.

"He's a very reserved guy," Mr. Coleman said, "but he's the ultimate competitor."

Mr. Harris had 99 tackles and three sacks during the regular season, and his teammates voted him their MVP. Against the Patriots, he collected 12 tackles and a 58-yard interception return, all while calling the signals for a defense that flummoxed the Patriots and quarterback Tom Brady.

The interception was Mr. Harris at his finest, four years of diligent study distilled into one play. At the snap, Mr. Brady tried to disguise the fact that he was going to throw a screen pass not just once, but twice—first by faking a handoff, and then by faking a reverse. The sequence played out in quick succession, but Mr. Harris never budged from his spot on the left side, about three yards off the line of scrimmage. He could sense that Mr. Brady had something else in mind because the offensive linemen were moving as a unit to the left.

"He could feel them going to the outside," Mr. Sutton said.

This "feel" was not innate. It was born from years of film review, Mr. Sutton said. So when Mr. Brady made a rare mistake, overthrowing running back BenJarvus Green-Ellis on the screen pass, Mr. Harris was there to capitalize. It was Mr. Brady's first interception in 340 pass attempts and set the tone for the Jets' 28-21 victory. 

The league's best defensive players, Mr. Sutton said, go through a three-phase process in their development. Phase one: figuring out their own responsibilities and taking care of them from play to play. Phase two: understanding the larger philosophy of the defense and teammates' roles, which enhances their ability to make adjustments. Phase three: decoding offensive concepts from tendencies and formations.

"Offenses are trying to prevent you from knowing that third element by building in things like shifts and motions," Mr. Sutton said. "So what you really need is a pre-awareness of what can happen. It's almost a process of elimination, based on where players are lined up and where they're moving. And I think David is getting to the point know where he can analyze these things instantaneously and know what's coming."

Mr. Sutton said Mr. Harris, from the start of his professional career, took it as a "personal challenge" to learn every intricacy of the Jets' defense, which those around the team consider the football equivalent of studying physics at M.I.T. And on a team known as much for talking as tackling, Mr. Harris helped deliver the Jets to Pittsburgh with his own brand of quiet commitment.

 Write to  Scott Cacciola at scott.cacciola@wsj.com 