LONDON—The U.K. narrowed its trade deficit significantly in January, with exports rising to the highest level since records began in 1980, but experts said the improvement may be temporary and questioned whether trade will drive an economic recovery.

Data from the Office for National Statistics Wednesday showed the goods-trade deficit with the rest of the world fell to £7.1 billion ($11.47 billion) in January, from a deficit of £9.7 billion in December. 

January's goods-trade deficit was the smallest since February 2010. Economists had expected January's deficit would decline to £8.6 billion. 

The data are a boost for Prime Minister David Cameron's coalition government, which has put exports and investment at the center of its economic-recovery plan. 

With domestic demand for goods and services likely to remain suppressed owing to the public-sector spending cuts and tax increases, the government is banking on an increase in the goods and services it sells to other countries. 

But analysts said the sharp improvement in the trade deficit mainly reflects temporary factors, in particular a rebound following the freezing weather at the end of 2010, which caused December's trade gap to swell to the biggest on record. 

"We continue to doubt that net trade will be able to compensate for the intensifying fiscal squeeze," said  Vicky Redwood, senior U.K. economist at Capital Economics. 

  Ross Walker, an economist at Royal Bank of Scotland Group, said the trade figures were highly volatile at all times, but the figures from December and January had been particularly erratic. 

"You can't treat them with a huge amount of confidence," Mr. Walker said. "Trade is still only likely to make a relatively modest contribution to economic growth." 

Sterling strengthened against the dollar following the figures, rising to the day's high of $1.62, up from Tuesday's close of $1.6157. 

Exports increased by £1.3 billion, or 5.4%, in January from a month earlier to reach £25.1 billion, and imports fell by £1.3 billion, or 4.0%, to reach £32.2 billion. 

An ONS official said the record exports were driven by an increase in the sale of oil, capital goods, components and parts, and food, drink and tobacco. 

The non-European Union goods-trade deficit fell to £4.2 billion from a deficit of £5.8 billion in December. Economists were expecting a non-EU deficit of £5.0 billion in January. 