Nearly 30% of U.S. nuclear-power plants fail to report equipment defects that could pose substantial safety risks, a flaw in federal oversight that could make it harder for regulators to spot troublesome trends across the industry, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission's inspector general said Thursday.

The Office of Inspector General said nuclear-plant operators were confused about what they were required to report to regulators about manufacturing defects. One section of federal law, known as Part 21, requires them to report defective equipment that could cause a safety risk, while another section calls for them to report only defects that compromise safety. 

If the issue isn't resolved, "the margin of safety for operating reactors could be reduced," the inspector general said. That's because many nuclear plants use similar hardware, and a failure to report defects at one plant could mean that others aren't alerted to a potential problem, the report said.

The NRC will look at the inspector general's report "to see if our reporting systems can be further strengthened," spokesman Scott Burnell said. In the meantime, "the NRC continues to conclude plants are operating safely."

The report's findings come amid concern about the safety of U.S. nuclear facilities in the wake of the crisis at Japan's Fukushima Daiichi plant. The damage caused by the March 11 earthquake and tsunami, and the difficulty Japanese authorities have faced quelling fires and radiation leaks, led the NRC on Wednesday to vote to conduct an unusual, 90-day safety review of the 104 nuclear reactors operating in the U.S.

Federal regulators are coming under pressure from state and local officials, and anti-nuclear activists, to take a harder line on power-plant safety. On Thursday, Rep. Lois Capps (D., Calif.) asked the NRC to suspend the license renewal for the Diablo Canyon Nuclear Power Plant in her earthquake-prone state until federal and state officials review studies on fault lines along the California coast.

  PG&E Co.
PCG


0.78
%




, which owns Diablo Canyon, filed an application in 2009 to renew the licences for the plant's two reactors, which expire in 2024 and 2025. PG&E is seeking 20-year extensions beyond that.

The company is conducting its own seismic studies, PG&E spokesman  Paul Flake said. "The NRC is the one that reviews our application, and our seismic studies here are also being independently reviewed by the NRC," Mr. Flake said.

Also on Thursday, federal prosecutors in Knoxville, Tenn., charged a subcontractor employee at the Tennessee Valley Authority's Watts Bar Nuclear Plant with making false statements about work he performed on safety systems there. The U.S. attorney said 31-year-old  Matthew David Correll lied about cables that were supposed to supply energy to safety systems to be constructed at the plant. The U.S. attorney said he also falsely completed forms required by the TVA.

"Cutting corners on the construction of our nuclear-power plants is a serious matter," U.S. Attorney Bill Killian said. A trial has been scheduled for May 23.

The NRC has been aware of the reporting lapses identified by the inspector general since at least 2009. The commission identified 24 instances, between December 2009 and September 2010, in which nuclear plants didn't report the emerging defects under Part 21.

Such an incident could occur, for example, if a pump or valve that ensures the safety of the reactor malfunctions, said Stephen D. Dingbaum, the NRC's assistant inspector general for audits. The question is "how many other plants have the same part that may have the identical manufacturing defect on it."

The NRC inspector general's report on problems with defect reporting was launched well before the Japanese nuclear crisis. The report indicates the NRC staff reviewed its findings last month. 

Nuclear-plant operators say the reporting requirements are just part "of a much broader safety regimen that the NRC has in place," according to Steven Kerekes, spokesman for the Nuclear Energy Institute, an industry trade group.

Because U.S. plants are failing to report defects as a result of confusion over the law, the NRC hasn't imposed violations or civil penalties. It hasn't imposed any civil penalties or significant enforcement actions for the reporting failures in at least eight years, the inspector said.

 Write to  Tennille Tracy at tennille.tracy@dowjones.com 