A new round of high-level budget negotiations opened Thursday, shadowed by vanishing expectations that Washington would rally around a broad budget bargain or an overhaul of entitlement programs this year.

Republicans had hoped changes to Medicare could be part of a sweeping deficit-cutting deal. But just a few weeks after nearly all House Republicans cast politically risky votes for a plan to transform the popular health program, GOP leaders say such a far-reaching proposal isn't likely to advance.

The chairman of the House committee that oversees Medicare said Thursday that he had little enthusiasm for taking action in the face of stiff opposition from Democrats. The GOP proposal would end Medicare's benefit guarantees for people under 55, replacing them with a system of government-subsidized, private insurance plans when they reach retirement age.

"Frankly, I'm not interested in talking about whether the House is going to pass a bill that the Senate shows no interest in," House Ways and Means Chairman Dave Camp (R., Mich.) said Thursday. "I'm not interested in laying down more markers. I'm interested in solutions."

House Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio) acknowledged that Mr. Camp had grounds for skepticism, calling his comments a "recognition of the political reality that we face."

Democrats had welcomed the recent focus on the GOP Medicare proposal, which they fervently opposed and believed is unpopular with voters.

"The Republicans are slowly realizing their plan to privatize Medicare is a political disaster. But until they renounce their vote for it, they are still going to own it," said Sen. Charles E. Schumer (D., N.Y.).

Those comments came as a high-level group of party leaders met for the first time with Vice President Joseph Biden Thursday to craft a compromise on deficit reduction aimed at clearing the way for raising the federal debt ceiling.

Mr. Biden met at Blair House for two hours Thursday morning with six senators and House members appointed by party leaders to break the looming impasse over raising the debt limit. Without congressional action, the federal government will hit its borrowing limit by May 16, though Treasury actions could defer a possible default until Aug. 2, administration officials have said.

Republicans have said repeatedly that they would not support a debt-limit increase unless it is accompanied by a plan to reduce deficits. But House Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan (R., Wis.) had begun scaling back expectations, saying this week that Congress is unlikely to achieve a budget deal "grand slam" that would include curbs on the major entitlement programs. 

That has led other Republicans to complain that such an approach concedes too much ground too quickly. "I don't know how you can continue to exclude entitlement spending," said Rep. Jeff Flake (R., Ariz.), who said he was "surprised to hear the talk of pulling back" GOP expectations.

Another effort to draw up a broad deficit-cutting agreement may be flagging, as a bipartisan band of six senators has stalled in its effort to propose a plan advancing the recommendations of the president's deficit-reduction commission. If the so-called Gang of Six does not release a proposal by next week, some participants acknowledged, it may lose its opportunity to be part of the conversation.

In the inaugural meeting of the Biden budget group, the White House made the case for placing a deficit cap on the federal budget, according to an official with knowledge of the session. Mr. Obama's proposal would mandate revenue increases—not just spending cuts, as Republicans want—in the event that the budget deficit exceeded a specified target.

Republicans are adamantly opposed to any process that would facilitate or force tax increases. Instead, they want a debt-limit deal to focus on immediate spending cuts. "Nothing is off the table except raising taxes," Mr. Boehner said.

Rep. Jim Clyburn (D.S.C.,) a member of the group, said the tone of Thursday's meeting was more positive than might be expected. "Nobody has been digging in," he said. "We're open to everything."

The Biden group is scheduled to meet again Tuesday and then six more times in May, according to a tentative schedule given to members of Congress. The group included Mr. Clyburn, House Majority Leader Eric Cantor (R., Va.), Rep. Chris Van Hollen (D., Md.), and Sens. Jon Kyl (R., Ariz.), Daniel Inouye (D., Hawaii), Max Baucus (D., Mont.).

Administration members included Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner, budget director Jacob Lew and economic advisor Gene Sperling.

—Naftali Bendavid contributed to this article. 