An eight-man British delegation was arrested and later released after it landed by helicopter outside of the Libyan port of Benghazi, rebel officials said Sunday.

The diplomatic team had arrived to establish contacts with the rebels, British officials said. 

Abdel Hafeez Goga, deputy chairman and spokesman for the National Libyan Council, the rebels' provisional government, said the British visit was unauthorized and unannounced. He said the party landed near the Libyan village of Suluk, a desert hamlet about 40 kilometers outside of Benghazi. He said the group was treated well and had left Libya aboard the HMS Cumberland, a British warship. 

The incident will likely embarrass the British government, which has been criticized at home for its response to the crisis, which some have called slow and confused. 

Those arrested identified themselves as British diplomats with a security detail, but refused to elaborate further on their identities or their mission. A person familiar with the matter said the security was British special forces. The team had restrictions placed on where it could go, the person said, playing down reports the group had been imprisoned.

"They experienced difficulties, which have now been satisfactorily resolved," U.K. Foreign Secretary William Hague said. 

The U.K. has been reaching out to rebel groups. On Wednesday, Mr. Hague spoke by phone to opposition leader General. Abdul Fattah Younis al Obidi. He said the U.K. will be sending more diplomats to talk with the opposition.

Earlier Sunday, Defense Secretary Liam Fox said it was difficult to understand the rebellion against Col. Moammar Gadhafi in detail. "There are a number of different opposition groups to Col. Gadhafi in Libya who do seem relatively disparate," he said in an interview with the British Broadcasting Corp.

Meanwhile, Libyan state television broadcast on Sunday what it said were recordings of intercepted telephone conversations between leaders of the Benghazi-based council and the British ambassador to Libya, Richard Northern, who is now in London.

"I hope to ask Mr. Jalil if he might be able to intervene to help us clear this misunderstanding," said a man purported to be Mr. Northern referring to the council's chairman Mustafa Abdel-Jalil. 

He was speaking to a man who identified himself as Mr. Goga.

The station said this conversation, along with another one between Mr. Abdel-Jalil and an alleged member of the Libyan opposition liaising with the British government, proved the current standoff between the government and the rebels was part of a conspiracy orchestrated by the West.

"Do you need anything?" asks the purported opposition member.

"We need light weapons; we are trying to buy it via Egypt," answered a man identified as Mr. Abdel-Jalil.

The authenticity of the recordings could not be independently verified. Wiretapping conversations is routine in Libya.

 Sam Dagher contributed to this article. 

