LONDON—Inflation in the euro zone reached a 30-month high of 2.8% in April, driven by rising prices for fuels and electricity, housing and alcohol and tobacco, official data showed Monday. 

Separately, the euro zone's trade account returned to surplus in March as exports continued to rise. 

The inflation figures from European Union agency EuroStat will strengthen the European Central Bank's case for tighter monetary policy in the 17-nation currency union despite the weakness of heavily-indebted countries like Greece, Ireland and Portugal. 

The ECB raised interest rates by a quarter of a percentage point to 1.25% on April 7, the first increase since mid-2008, to prevent rising consumer prices from leading to broad-based inflation. 

EuroStat said inflation in the euro zone was 2.8% in the 12 months to April, up from 2.7% in March and compared with 1.6% a year earlier. That's the highest reading since October 2008, EuroStat said. Monthly inflation increased 0.6%, EuroStat said. 

Across the whole E.U., annual inflation was 3.2% in April, up from 3.1% in March. The agency said the lowest inflation rates were observed in Ireland, the Czech Republic and Sweden. Romania had the highest rate; prices there rose 8.4% in the year to April. Overall, annual inflation rose in 16 member states, declined in eight and remained the same in two, EuroStat said. 

The euro-zone countries had a combined surplus in their trade in goods with the rest of the word of €2.8 billion ($3.99 billion), having had a deficit of €3 billion in February, a figure that was widened from the previous estimate of €1.5 billion. 

The euro zone had a trade surplus of €2.7 billion in March 2010. Exports in March rose to €157.9 billion from €134.8 billion in February, while imports rose to €155.1 billion from €137.8 billion. 

The euro zone usually posts a trade surplus in March as energy imports decline following the arrival of warmer weather. But even allowing for that, there was an encouraging pickup in exports, which rose 1.1% in March on a seasonally adjusted basis, following a 1.6% increase in February and a 4.1% rise in January. 

 Write to  Paul Hannon at paul.hannon@dowjones.com 