TOKYO— Honda Motor Co. said Monday that improper transactions recently discovered at a trading business subsidiary will cause a loss of about 15 billion yen ($181 million), highlighting one of the reasons Japanese companies have tried to focus their operations in recent years.

The Japanese auto maker said an internal probe found that the consolidated trading company's fishery product section had repeated transactions since about 2004 in which some products were priced well above their market price, or were bought and sold in circular transactions. 

The transactions were reported to Honda on Dec. 20 by an investigative committee of the subsidiary, Honda Trading Corp., the auto maker said in a statement. 

A Honda spokesman said the internal investigation led by a Honda Trading executive and outside experts is ongoing, and other details weren't yet available. 

The trouble at the unit shows that compliance risks aren't things of the past for Japan's corporate giants, which have focused on streamlining corporate family trees in recent years following several examples of loose controls. Honda, Japan's third largest auto maker by volume, has close to 400 subsidiaries. 

Last year,  Kirin Holdings Co.
KNBWY


2.56
%




 discovered 6.5 billion yen of bogus and circular transactions at a fishery feed division of the beverage business group's wine unit. 

Honda Trading's main operations include trading of auto and motorcycle parts, raw materials and finished vehicles. It also trades food products. In the fiscal year ended March 2010, it had 588.6 billion yen in sales. By contrast, parent Honda Motor in the same period reported a net profit of 268.4 billion yen on revenue of 8.579 trillion yen. 

Honda Motor will book the loss at the pretax level in the current fiscal year ending March. 

Honda Trading started as an importer and exporter of various merchandise in 1972. The company began its food-related businesses as it diversified.

 Write to  Kazuhiro Shimamura at kazuhiro.shimamura@dowjones.com 