WASHINGTON—The House voted 228-192 largely along party lines to block public-radio stations from spending federal funds on programming, the latest fallout from a secretly recorded video tape released last week that forced National Public Radio's chief executive to resign.

The measure would ban NPR's local affiliates from spending any federal money on radio programming, limiting them to using taxpayer dollars only for administrative costs. The proposal, advanced by Rep. Doug Lamborn (R., Colo.), does not cut government expenditures, since public radio is funded through the Corporation for Public Broadcasting.

No Democrats voted for the bill Thursday, and seven Republicans opposed it. Rep. Justin Amash, a newly elected Republican from Michigan, voted "present." The bill faces dim prospects in the Senate and is opposed by the White House.

The GOP wants to defund public radio as a show of "belt-tightening," said Majority Leader Eric Cantor of Virginia. Mr. Cantor, the House's No. 2 Republican, also said NPR's syndicated programs don't deserve taxpayer funding.

"We've seen NPR and its programming often veer far from what most Americans would like to see," Mr. Cantor said on the House floor. "We've seen how they spend their money."

Conservatives have long said that if the programming is popular, it should pay for itself. They also say the content tilts to the left. Public-radio supporters say the funds keep radio stations on the air in remote and rural areas, such as Alaska.

The Obama administration said Thursday it "strongly opposes" the bill, but stopped short of a veto threat. "We aren't going to get ahead of the process, and our position on this legislation is clear," a White House official said.

The long-running tensions burst into the open last week when a secretly recorded videotape showed NPR fund-raiser Ron Schiller describing the tea party as "xenophobic" and suggesting NPR may be better off without government funding. The tape was heavily edited, a review of the unaltered footage shows. The sound bites still prompted the resignations of Mr. Schiller and NPR President Vivian Schiller, who aren't related. Mr. Schiller already planned to take another job this spring.

Mr. Lamborn released his bill Tuesday, and House GOP leadership fast-tracked it to the House floor.

 Write to  Danny Yadron at danny.yadron@wsj.com 