MELBOURNE— Lachlan Murdoch named a successor for himself just a week after he took over as interim chief executive of Ten Network Holdings Ltd., owner of Australia's third-largest broadcast network. 

Ten Network said Wednesday it was appointing  James Warburton, a senior executive from rival company Seven Media Group, as chief executive officer, while separately announcing that major shareholder and Australian casino magnate  James Packer had resigned as a director of Ten Network.

The company didn't give a reason for Mr. Packer's departure from the board, four months after he took part in share purchases that sparked a shake-up in the broadcaster's ownership, with Mr. Murdoch and Australian mining magnate  Gina Rinehart also taking stakes.

A representative for Mr. Packer didn't return calls for comment. 

Mr. Murdoch, the eldest son of  News Corp. CEO  Rupert Murdoch, said in a written statement he was "delighted" to welcome Mr. Warburton to Ten Network. "I know James well and I also know that he will lead this business with great success," he said. 

A person familiar with the matter said Mr. Warburton had wanted to become a CEO but didn't expect that to occur at Seven Media Group.

Ten Network said Mr. Warburton is expected to join the company's board and that he would start as CEO on July 14. 

Seven Media Group CEO  David Leckie wished Mr. Warburton well on his new role at Ten Network. "We're sorry to lose him," Mr. Leckie said in a written statement. 

A spokesman for Mr. Murdoch declined to comment. 

The latest changes come after the contract of former Ten Network CEO  Grant Blackley was terminated Feb. 23. He had been in the job only since mid-December. Ten Network's board said at the time that it expected first-half earnings in the six months ended in February to be about 103 million Australian dollars, or US$104.4 million, before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization, down from A$117 million last year, and it would conduct a strategic review of the company's operations. 

Efforts to reach Mr. Blackley for comment were unsuccessful. 

Mr. Murdoch and Mr. Packer, a son of the late Kerry Packer, are both heirs of Australia's dominant media executives of recent decades, while Ms. Rinehart is the daughter of late mining magnate Lang Hancock. 

Lachlan Murdoch stepped down as News Corp.'s deputy chief operating officer in 2005, remaining at the company only as a nonexecutive director and a voting stakeholder. Subsequently, he founded Illyria Pty. Ltd., a private investment firm based in Australia. 

Messrs. Murdoch and Packer together own 17.88% of Ten Network, while longstanding shareholder  Bruce Gordon has 14.02% and Ms. Rinehart has 10.01%. 

News Corp. owns Dow Jones & Co., publisher of The Wall Street Journal.

 Write to  Gavin Lower at gavin.lower@dowjones.com 