BENGHAZI, Libya—The current rebellion's roots can be traced to eastern Libya, which has a history of resistance to outsiders who try to rule it. 

A rebellion by Islamist students against current Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi in the 1990s was savagely repressed by Col. Gadhafi's security forces, particularly an army brigade commanded by his son Khamis. 

Many of those who were arrested in the crackdown were tossed into Tripoli's Abu Salim Prison. In 1996, prisoners at Abu Salim, many of whom were from Benghazi, launched an uprising to demand better treatment. The regime took no mercy. In their assault on the prison, at least 1,200 prisoners died, according to Human Rights Watch. 

Ever since, the "Abu Salim massacre," as it is known to many Libyans, has been a rallying cry for activists and opposition in Libya, and a thorn in the regime's side. 

The uprising that has brought Mr. Gadhafi's rule to the brink first flared outside Benghazi's courthouse on Feb. 15 after security forces arrested two outspoken members of the families of victims of the Abu Salim incident in 1996, according to human-rights activists. They also arrested the human-rights lawyer pushing the family's demands for compensation from the government.

Under Ottoman rule until 1911, the eastern Libya region was known as Cyrenaica, named for a mythological Greek maiden whose favorite sport, according to lore, was killing lions barehanded. 

The Senussi dynasty ruled a broad swath of territory that included eastern Libya for nearly 200 years from its base in eastern Libya. That has imbued the region's residents with a sense of pride. 

Under the last Libyan monarch Idris Senussi, Benghazi was seen as a sort of shared capital with Tripoli. The royal family lived in the eastern city of Baida, just east of Benghazi, and even built a Libyan parliament building there.Col. Gadhafi, who was born in the north Libyan city of Sirte, overthrew the last Senussi king in a coup in 1969, and has long viewed eastern Libya with suspicion ever since. The region's residents and analysts say Mr. Gadhafi neglected eastern Libya, depriving it of investment and infrastructure, even though most of the country's oil wealth is concentrated there. 

"The region has always been distrusted by Gadhafi," said Dartmouth College Professor Dirk Vandewalle, an expert on Libyan history and politics. "This was always the area where the most concerted opposition to the regime was centered."

 Write to  Charles Levinson at charles.levinson@wsj.com 