The Chubu decision means its two operating reactors will go into a planned shutdown at a date not yet set, while a third reactor won't be brought back online from its current scheduled maintenance period. 

The reactors won't be restarted until additional safety measures against massive earthquakes and tsunami are in place. That is expected to take two or more years, according to estimates by the company.

As part of the decision, the utility won't be able to help the struggling operator of the Fukushima Daiichi plant, said Chubu Electric President  Akihisa Mizuno. 

"We understand the request is based on the rising anxiety of the general public," Mr. Mizuno said at a news conference. "This will create considerable problems for local communities, customers and shareholders in the short term. But we believe, in the long term, this will lead to stable and safe operations, which will be beneficial for all of our stakeholders."

In all, the facility accounts for about 3,600 megawatts of power, about 1.5% of Japan's total capacity.

Mr. Mizuno disclosed the decision after the company held its second emergency board meeting since Prime Minister Naoto Kan went on live television Friday evening to "urge" shutting the plant. Since the plant complied with all existing laws and regulations, the government could only recommend the temporary shutdown, not officially order it. 

Minister of Economy, Trade and Industry Banri Kaieda said the government appreciated the decision. "I want to show my deep respect to Chubu Electric for responding swiftly to the government request," he said.

Meanwhile, at the Fukushima Daiichi plant, where the crisis began, workers and a nuclear inspector entered the No. 1 reactor building early Monday, the first onsite inspection of the worst-affected unit. 

  Tokyo Electric Power Co.
9501


0.14
%




, or Tepco, the operator of the plant, estimates that 55% of its fuel rods were likely damaged from severe overheating in the early days of the crisis, when pumps couldn't provide coolant because of a lack of power.

"No noticeable damage or leakage was found in the area surveyed," said Hidehiko Nishiyama, spokesman for Japan's Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency, after the inspection. But he added the 30-minute survey wasn't sufficient to assess the condition of the vital pressure vessel, a thick steel cylinder that houses the nuclear fuel. 

"There is a long way ahead to fully stabilizing all three reactors. It is too early to rejoice," another official said. 

The vulnerability of Japan's 54 nuclear-power reactors came into sharp focus after the March 11 earthquake that sparked the crisis at the Fukushima Daiichi plant in northern Japan. 

In asking for the shutdown at Chubu Electric, Mr. Kan had noted government projections that there was an 87% chance of a magnitude-8 earthquake in that region sometime over the next 30 years. Local media dubbed it "the world's most dangerous" nuclear facility because it is located near an active fault zone.

Tepco has been working to prevent widespread power outages this summer, taking a variety of measures to close a gap originally put at 15% of estimated peak summer demand. Chubu had previously agreed to sell Tepco about 750 megawatts of production capacity, an amount that would have replaced the lost output from Daiichi's No. 2 or No. 3 reactors. 

The problems also provide a fresh headache for Japan's manufacturers, many of which are based in central Japan and already struggling with uncertainties over planning summer production schedules.

  Toshiba Corp.
TOSYY


-2.09
%




, which operates a memory-chip plant served by Chubu Electric, said it was too soon to know the full impact. "Nothing has been decided on when or how the reactors will be shut down, so it's not possible to measure its impact," said Toshiba Senior Executive Vice President  Fumio Muraoka.

Other companies have delayed issuing earnings projections for the fiscal year started April 1, partly because of the uncertainties over electricity availability.

For Tepco and Chubu Electric, the solutions will come at a high price, with expensive imported oil and natural-gas-powered plants to be brought back online. While nuclear plants are highly expensive to build and to shut down, the ongoing fuel costs are much lower than for fossil-fuel plants.

Mr. Mizuno said the government was unlikely to allow the utility to pass on all of the extra costs to users, "therefore we need some help from the government on this issue."

Energy Minister Kaieda said the government would look to provide financial assistance to help deal with the extra power-generation costs. He didn't provide figures.

The eight Tepco workers and one senior inspector from NISA entered the No. 1 reactor building with protective gear and face masks to check radiation levels. Workers plan to set up a heat exchanger as part of a plan to retrofit an air-based cooling system by the end of the month.

During the half-hour survey, the nine members of the group received cumulative radiation ranging from 2.7 millisieverts to 10.56 millisieverts, Mr. Nishiyama said. Radiation levels in some places reached 600 to 700 millisieverts per hour, compared with an annual dosage limit of 250 millisieverts allowed for a male worker engaged in disaster relief work at the complex, Mr. Nishiayma said. 

In addition to setting up the heat exchanger, workers plan to put up a new water gauge to measure the effort to flood the reactor with thousands of tons of water. The aim is to submerge the fuel and pressure vessel by filling the whole steel containment vessel surrounding the pressure vessel.

But the installation of such equipment is likely to be hampered by high radiation, as the group found several radiation hot-spots, especially around pipes suspected to be clogged with highly radioactive material. 

The cooling system has become necessary for reactors No. 1, 2 and 3 because the regular water-based cooling system was disabled by the tsunami that followed the magnitude-9 earthquake.

 Write to  Mari Iwata at mari.iwata@dowjones.com 