EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J.—Giants general manager Jerry Reese used "surprised." Marc Ross, the team's director of college scouting, went with "shock."

Giants coach Tom Coughlin, well, he just grinned.

Nebraska cornerback Prince Amukamara fell into the Giants' lap Thursday night, and not a soul was complaining. With the 19th pick in the NFL Draft's first round, the Giants got a shutdown corner rated uniformly as one of this class's top 10 players—and a member of royalty, too.

"You have realistic scenarios and unrealistic scenarios," Ross said. "This one was completely out of left field."

Amukamara is the reigning Big 12 Defensive Player of the Year and a unanimous All-American. At 6-foot, 206 pounds, he's a big corner who runs what Ross said was a 4.4 40-yard dash and who Coughlin said "was clearly the highest rated player we could pick on the board."

That he fell was not of any concern, Ross said, but more a function of an unexpected run on quarterbacks. Four signal-callers were chosen high, premier defensive players kept falling and although the conventional wisdom before the draft had been that the Giants would zero in on an offensive lineman to buttress an aging corps, Reese said Amukamara was too high value a player to let pass.

"Our entire room is really excited about it. Height, weight, speed, this guy's big, he's fast," Reese said, listing the variables the Giants' war room rolled through in the minutes before their pick.

The Giants did take what seemed to be about seven or eight of their allotted 10 minutes, and Reese said he did field some trade-seeking phone calls in that spell. But nothing was enough, he said, and Coughlin said the internal debate—either to trade or to weigh other picks—was never that fiery.

The Giants are, of course, stocked at cornerback and young there, too, with starters Corey Webster and Terrell Thomas, and Aaron Ross—Reese's first ever first-round pick as the Giants' general manager. Reese, Ross and Coughlin all echoed each other in saying the Giants could never have enough pass-rushers or corners. Ultimately, Reese said, "anytime you can get a corner, it's a need pick."

Physical, aggressive and a stout tackler, Amukamara has the special-teams mindset, the Giants brass said. He can play the run, Coughlin said, and he will also be expected to compete right away as a nickelback and even at the two corners. Coughlin cited "versatility" and "flexibility," and teams' penchants for running three- and four-wideout sets more frequently.

Amukamara, whose grandfather was a regional king in Nigeria, did see a dip in his on-the-ball production this past season, as he followed his five interceptions as a junior with none as a senior. Reese dismissed that as a factor of both his reputation, leading teams to throw away from him, and the departure of current Lion Ndamakong Suh.

"When you have a guy wreaking havoc up front like Ndamakong Suh, you get interceptions back there," Reese said.

Amukamara himself sounded a bit shocked when he got on the phone to the Giants' complex last Thursday night. He said he never worked out for the Giants or talked to the Giants and sweetly said, "Oh yeah," when reminded former Nebraska linebacker Phillip Dillard became a Giant last April.