Hours before the house lights spark to life and the curtain goes up at the Majestic Theater, Matt Mezick crosses the dark floorboards into the stairwell at stage left. Running shoes on, he pounds up the 94 steps past narrow dressing rooms, exposed pipes and ballerina costumes.

When he gets to the top, he turns around, heads to the bottom and takes a breath. Then he starts again. 

Step follows step. Flight follows flight. One hundred stairs. Two hundred stairs. A thousand. Each repetition slowly turns his quadriceps to jelly. Every step fans the fire in his lungs. This is practice.

By now Mr. Mezick—the head of props for Phantom of the Opera—has squeezed his routine in before shows every few days for more than two months. He needs the stairwell training to prepare for the unique ordeal that awaits him on Feb. 1, when he and about 400 other people will race to the Observation Deck of New York's tallest skyscraper. The hard way.

The 34th annual Empire State Building Run-up turns what is normally a less than one-minute elevator ride to the 86th floor into a 1,576-step test of mettle. Even Mr. Mezick—a veteran of countless triathlons, four New York City marathons and an Iron Man—is a little apprehensive.

"I know that physically, I'm really good," said Mr. Mezick, who has never attempted the race before. "But I know that there's going to be a lot of pain involved."

That much is certain. The anaerobic nature of climbing stairs means that the lactic acid builds up in the runners' legs almost immediately. And the burn that comes with it does not subside until after the finish line.

It makes tailoring a specific training regimen absolutely essential—Mr. Mezick said that he felt his usual distance running and triathlon preparations would only get him halfway ready for the Empire State Building. So most competitors combine cardio work with training on any set of stairs they can find.

Roy Lamendola, for instance, mixes daily runs with spin classes, 40-minute sessions on a step mill and the 16 stories of the New York Design Center on Lexington Avenue. When he ventures into the stairwell for a couple of quick repetitions through the 16 flights, he begins with a long warm-up, going up one floor and then down two. Then he tackles the whole set, smiling at anyone he passes.

At the age of 73, Mr. Lamendola will be among the oldest runners in the field when he takes on the stairs for a fifth time, running in memory of his brother. Though he came to endurance events late in life, he is now an avid triathlete and has run nine marathons. He first took on the Empire State Building five years ago and has returned every year since.

"It was grueling," he said, recalling his first run-up. "Actually, probably harder than a marathon, even though it's a short distance. It's so intense that you reach a point where your muscles are craving oxygen and you can barely breathe."

Mr. Lamendola, like most of the field, will be happy enough to just complete the race without taking a break. But at the head of the pack, there will be small clutch of professional "tower climbers," for whom the stakes will be much higher.

And it is probably a decent bet that Thomas Dold of Germany will be leading the way. He has won the last five run-ups, consistently bounding through the 86 floors in around 10 minutes. (The men's course record is 9 minutes 33 seconds; the women's mark is 11:23.)

Without a moment to spare, most of the professionals take the steps two at a time. The rest, though, are equally divided between one-steppers and two-steppers. Each philosophy has its own merits.

Mr. Lamendola goes two at a time to get the most progress out of every push forward. Shelby Siegel, who has completed three run-ups, prefers the quicker rhythm of churning her legs with slightly less intensity and pumps through the floors one step at a time. She said that it makes it more bearable when the going gets tough. Like a flagging distance runner, she can just keep putting one foot in front of the other and block out the pain.

She had plenty of time to think about that choice during her arduous training, until a nagging hip injury forced her to pull out of Tuesday's race. In addition to her running regimen and daily dose of 86 flights on a gym stair mill, she took to the steps of Central Park's Bethesda Terrace. Still, she knew that no matter how many steps she bounced off, even if she had remained healthy, there was no such thing as being totally prepared.

"You think you're ready, you think you're strong," she said, "but you're never ready for all the elements that you encounter."

One that the runners can do little about is the quality of the air inside the Empire State Building's stairwell. It is dry, dusty and stuffy. Ms. Siegel said that in years past she has coughed for hours after the race.

Scott Siverling, 34, has taken what he calls the "biomechanical perspective" to his first run-up. He admitted that he honestly did not know what to expect. All he could do was put his training as a physical therapist to use. So he broke down the individual elements of climbing stairs and targeted his workouts to those.

He has relied on biometric exercises like jumping up and down from high and low boxes. He has strengthened his core. And he has worked hills into his regular running regimen. The only thing he chose to neglect was specifically training on steps. For that practice, he was content to run up and down the stairs between patients in the hospital where he works.

"Usually, you can give me a distance and I'll tell you how quick I can run it," said Mr. Siverling, who has 12 marathons under his belt. "But this, I have no idea. I have a feeling it's going to be much harder than I can imagine."

Even though the run-up is over in a tiny fraction of the time it takes to run a marathon, those who have completed it before said it packed all the same emotional ups and downs. 

The jitters are there at the crowded start, as the crush of runners has to funnel from the building's lobby into the stairwell through a doorway no wider than a single person. The first few flights are a mess of knees, sneakers, and elbows until the field spreads out. Full-blown doubt can set in around the 30th or 40th floor—when their legs feel like they are on fire and, worse still, more than half the course lies ahead.

"You start to wonder, because now you're really hurting, 'Am I going to finish?'" Mr. Lamendola said.

By the 60th floor, confidence starts to return. The worst part, the runners hope, is behind them. They count off the floors, tugging on the banisters and swinging around the corners. Into the 70s. Then the 80s. Finally, they hit the last steps and emerge onto the 86th floor Observation Deck, where they suddenly meet the Manhattan skyline and a blast of fresh, February air.

After all the dust and heat of the stairwell, they gulp it down, forgetting for a moment that it is freezing outside and they are wearing shorts.

"The glory is when you come out on that observation deck," Mr. Lamendola said, remembering his first run-up. "The city never looked more beautiful than that morning. That's what brings you back the next year."