Bankers at last year's World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, played the roles of bogeymen. French President Nicolas Sarkozy lashed out at their "indecent behavior" and "morally indefensible" pay packages.

The bankers aren't likely to win any popularity contests at this year's gathering at the Swiss ski resort. But they are hoping some of the stigma of having helped plunge the world into a financial crisis has faded.

Bankers are showing up emboldened by their resurgent profits and eager to mingle with politicians and regulators in the hopes of fending off onerous new restrictions on how they run their businesses and pay their employees.

"There was a period of remorse and apology for banks,"  Barclays
BCS


0.20
%




 PLC Chief Executive  Bob Diamond testified to a parliamentary panel in London this month. "I think that period needs to be over."

In 2009, as the global financial crisis was raging, some big-shot bankers—including top executives from Barclays, Citigroup Inc.
C


0.92
%




 and  Bank of America Corp.
BAC


2.86
%




—skipped Davos. Many ventured back last year, but kept low profiles, keenly aware of their radioactive reputations.

This year, most giant U.S. and European banks are sending their chairmen or CEOs to Davos. One exception is  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.,
GS


0.31
%




 which is sending its No. 2 executive. 

Bankers and their lobbyists say they will be jetting into the Alps armed with long lists of proposed and pending rules that they would like to water down or kill altogether. The lobbying is more likely to take place in private meetings than on stage in full view of hundreds of reporters and television cameras. 

"I expect that regulatory issues will be on the agenda this year in Davos, but perhaps less in the center of attention," said  Charles Dallara, managing director of the Institute of International Finance, the banking industry's global trade group.

Much of the lobbying is likely to revolve around an international accord that bank regulators hammered out last year in another Swiss city, Basel. The so-called Basel III rules will force banks to hold thicker capital cushions to guard against potential losses and deeper pools of liquidity to protect against potentially crippling bank runs. 

But the rules don't fully kick in until 2018, and some key details still need to be ironed out.

At a pre-Davos news conference in Paris on Monday,  Frédéric Oudéa, chairman and chief executive of giant French bank  Société Générale SA, said the industry was hoping to discourage individual countries from imposing requirements that are tougher, or take effect sooner, than the Basel rules. 

Already, Switzerland has ordered its banks to meet much higher capital and liquidity requirements than faced by other banks—an approach known in industry circles as the "Swiss Finish" because it is the country's supplement to international rules. U.K. authorities are looking into so-called gold-plated standards that would exceed international norms.

To be sure, it is too late for the banks to derail momentum toward tougher regulations. In addition to the Basel accord, the U.S. last year enacted the Dodd-Frank law that will overhaul and toughen oversight of financial institutions. European lawmakers have imposed restrictions on the bonuses that banks can award to their top performers.

"In terms of regulation, the heavy lifting has been done," said Thomas Huertas, head of banking-sector regulation at the U.K.'s Financial Services Authority. But, he added, the regulatory to-do list remains long—and features plenty of controversial issues that are becoming battlegrounds with the banking industry.

U.S. officials are crafting the rules that will determine the sharpness of Dodd-Frank's teeth. In Europe, regulators are preparing a new round of "stress tests" of top banks. 

In the U.K., a government-appointed commission is studying potentially vast structural changes to the banking industry, and bankers and government officials are locked in talks over restrictions on pay and potential lending requirements—talks that are likely to continue behind the scenes at Davos.

  Harald Benink, a professor of banking and finance at Tilburg University in the Netherlands, said there are an "enormous" number of regulatory issues still up in the air. "There will be a lot of lobbying," he said.

One item in many banks' crosshairs: a provision of the Basel accord that calls for regulators to impose higher capital requirements on "systemically important financial institutions." 

Bankers and regulators are haggling over how to define that. Most banks want the list of such banks to be as small as possible. But the industry also is warning that leveling a capital "surcharge" on one big bank but not another could create an uneven playing field. Some banks are simply trying to kill the proposal. 

"Imposing simple capital surcharges isn't the right way to improve stability," Société Générale's Mr. Oudéa said. He said regulators are wrong to focus solely on big banks, noting many small ones also collapsed during the recent crisis.

That argument isn't likely to sway many policy makers. Bailouts of giant banks, not small ones, have been costly and deeply unpopular for many Western countries.

 Write to  David Enrich at david.enrich@wsj.com 