  General Motors Co.
GM


-1.16
%




 will stop some work at two European factories and is mulling production cuts in South Korea, amid growing uncertainty over how its plants around the world will be affected by the crisis in Japan.

A shortage of Japanese-built electronic parts will force GM to close a plant in Zaragoza, Spain, on Monday and cancel shifts at a factory in Eisenach, Germany, on Monday and Tuesday, the company said Friday. 

Both factories build the Corsa small car. Meanwhile, the company's South Korean unit said it is considering cutting production to deal with a potential shortage.

The moves, a day after GM said it would shut a plant in Louisiana due to part supplies, came as GM Chief Executive  Dan Akerson acknowledged uncertainty over the extent the impact the disaster in Japan could have on GM's global operations.

GM is "working carefully to ascertain the level of impact on our supply chain and over the next week or two we will have a better sense of what happened in Japan as well as globally," Mr. Akerson said at a press conference Friday during a trip to Brazil.

The auto maker is in communication with Obama administration officials over the potential impact of supply problems in Japan. GM has been unable to size up the scope of the problem in large part because it will mostly be felt through shortages that affect a complex network of hundreds of smaller parts suppliers, a person familiar with the situation said.

Japanese auto makers  Toyota Motor Corp.,  Honda Motor Co.
HMC


0.79
%




 and Nissan Motor Co. have halted production in Japan in the way of last week's earthquake and tsunami.

Honda said Friday it will suspend automobile and motorcycle assembly operations in Japan through Wednesday, as some of its suppliers need more time to restore damaged production facilities. 

A Honda spokesman said about 30% of the company's 110 suppliers for its four- and two-wheeled vehicles based in the quake-hit area are finding it hard to resume operations any time soon.

The statement followed a warning from Honda to U.S. dealers that it isn't sure if it will be able to resume full production at certain Japanese plants before May, a sign the auto industry may face greater disruption due to the earthquake and tsunami than previously feared.

"While we plan to resume automobile production in Japan as quickly as possible, we cannot say with certainty when those production plants will return to their full capacity,"  John Mendel, executive vice president of American Honda, said in an email to dealers that was reviewed by the Journal.

U.S. auto makers have downplayed the effect that the freeze on Japan's industrial output will have on the U.S. and global industry. That could change soon as shortages become more prominent, said  Craig Fitzgerald, a partner with Plante & Moran, an accounting and consulting firm in Southfield, Mich.

Also Friday, France's Renault SA said it is trimming production of high-end sedans at a plant at Busan, South Korea, operated by a subsidiary due a shortage of parts caused by the quake. A spokesman for Renault said production of the SM7 sedan is being reduced by between 15% and 20% because the plant is running low on stocks of engines and gearboxes. 

—Yoshio Takahashi and Paulo Winterstein contributed to this article.

 Write to  Sharon Terlep at sharon.terlep@wsj.com and Mike Ramsey at michael.ramsey@wsj.com 