SAKANAMACHI, Japan—As fat wet snowflakes started to fall Tuesday on Sakanamachi, Japanese for Fish Town, one of the few sounds in the area was the cackling of crows converging to feast on the thousands of fish spread along miles of its muddy streets. 

Sakanamachi, once a long line of sea-facing houses, factories and warehouses, is now a tangle of steel, boats and nets. Friday's tsunami waves destroyed thousands of homes and swept away hundreds of cars full of people trying to flee. Waves chewed up the buildings of the area's main industries, fishing and shipbuilding, leaving most beyond recognition or repair. 

The reminder of all that has gone bad here is ever-present and visceral: Rotting tuna, squid, bonito and bream—some whole or cleaned, some filleted and wrapped in plastic by the town's plants—dot the landscape. Freezing temperatures have slowed but haven't quelled the rising stench.

The devastation in Sakanamachi, a neighborhood of the city of Ishinomaki, offers a window into the broader problems Japan will face in rebuilding. Though the economic impact of suspended production at big outfits like Honda Motor Co., Toyota Motor Corp. and Sony Corp. gets the bulk of attention, much of the destruction was borne by smaller businesses, including this community's fish traders and processors. While they aren't Japan's greatest concern today, in the long run the government will be judged on whether it can help these companies bounce back.



Analysts at Barclays Capital say the towns and cities damaged by the earthquake and tsunami account for about 6% to 7% of the overall Japanese economy and about 7% of its businesses. An early estimate by National Australia Bank put the total damage cost as high as $200 billion—compared with about $10 billion in economic damage from the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami that killed more than 200,000 people across 13 countries.

Back in the Sakanamachi for the first time since the tsunami, Yoshi Kameya, 43 years old, stood next to his cherry-red station wagon and stared down a lumpy lane of industrial rubble, seemingly stretching to the horizon, beneath which once ran the road to the frozen-food processor where he worked. 

Japan's emergency-warning system sounded tsunami alarms in many locations, but with power knocked out in areas such as this, residents didn't recall hearing it. The 30 employees in Mr. Kameya's office, knowing a tsunami was likely to follow such a massive earthquake, all left to move inland immediately after the shaking stopped. 

Their cars joined hundreds of others fleeing the factories of other small and midsize companies here, all headed for the same tunnel about a mile from shore. Traffic stopped. 

Mr. Kameya tried to find his way around it. When he realized his escape time could be running short, he drove up a hill and pulled his car into a parking lot. At that elevation he was safe, and had a front-row seat to the churning carnage below. 

"When the first wave hit, it lifted all the cars up and dragged them out," he said, before pulling out his iPhone to show photos of the sludge, stones and lumber the waves left as they retreated. "The waves kept coming until there were no more cars." 

It took two days for the water to recede and the military to clear the tunnel. During that time, Mr. Kameya and more than 100 others lived in the parking lot, eating food they took from a convenience store he said they had broken into. Of his firm's 30 employees, he said, five still haven't been heard from.

Halfway between the industry row and the tunnel is the home of Sadayuki Abe, 32. He sleeps in a small upstairs room with his nephew, niece and sister, because there is a truck in his living room.

Mr. Abe had run home from his job at a nearby shipbuilding company after the earthquake hit. He watched from his balcony as a massive refrigerated truck floated toward him, sheared off much of the front of his house and came to rest against the ground floor.

He has been drinking water from bags of ice from fish-packing facilities, but he is struggling to feed his family. The fish that have washed out of local plants have been exposed to gasoline and oil, he says. Tuesday he tried to make rice, but the wood fire didn't generate enough heat to boil water.

The factory that employed Mr. Abe has been destroyed and he doubts it can be rebuilt. "I'm not thinking about the future yet," he said. "I am just trying to survive right now."

Nearby is a lane of crooked old pine trees that survived the wave and now form a break of plastic boxes, fishing buoys, a small car. Walking past with his girlfriend, Hokuto Suzuka, 21, toted home bags of groceries—soft drinks and snacks, all they could find at the last functioning store in the area.

Mr. Suzuka said the shipbuilder where he was working at the time of the quake and tsunami was destroyed. He said he had been working on a high floor when waves rushed beneath. The big container ship that was under construction at the company's drydock washed out to sea, he said, along with what he said were 100 people working on it. 

"I don't know whether we can rebuild," he said. "Without government help, it will be impossible."

Back at Mr. Kameya's car, some colleagues who had made the long trek to their former office returned, shaking their heads. They had found no evidence that the five missing employees were alive. 

"This has taught me to feel happy to be alive," said Mr. Kameya, whose family all survived. He looked toward a big fishing boat balanced on the manmade sea wall that was supposed to protect the harbor. "It has also taught me that life is painful." 

 Write to  Eric Bellman at eric.bellman@wsj.com 