TORONTO— Bank of Montreal agreed to buy Hong Kong portfolio manager Lloyd George Management to expand its wealth-management business in Asia. Terms weren't disclosed. 

Lloyd George, which specializes in Asia and global emerging markets, has about $6 billion in assets under management. 

The acquisition "is highly complementary to our global asset management business," Bank of Montreal Chief Executive  Bill Downe said at a RBC Canadian Bank CEO conference in Toronto on Tuesday. 

Toronto-based Bank of Montreal, Canada's fourth-largest in terms of assets, said the purchase allows it to meet its institutional, private banking, BMO Nesbitt Burns and retail clients' growing demand for global investment strategies. It said wealth management is a key part of its Greater China strategy. 

Founded in 1991, Lloyd George, which is 72%-owned by current and former employees, has about 80 employees across operations in Hong Kong, London, Singapore, Mumbai and Florida. The entire team will be offered employment by BMO, and  Robert Lloyd George will remain chairman of the new division, which will keep the Lloyd George name. 

The firm has three external shareholders, including Boston-based  Eaton Vance Corp.
EV


0.05
%




 The other shareholders weren't disclosed. The deal is expected to close early in the third quarter of fiscal 2011. 

The acquisition is "relatively immaterial" to Bank of Montreal's overall operations, Barclays Capital analyst  John Aiken said in a note. 

But, it "underscores the importance that the Canadian banks are placing on wealth management, particularly in the global context," he said. 

Wealth-management acquisitions provide lower-risk geographic expansion with reasonably stable earnings streams that don't require similar capital levels as traditional banking, Mr. Aiken said. He expects Canadian banks will continue to buy asset managers abroad. 

Mr. Downe said in early December that he expects China, where Bank of Montreal (China) Co. Ltd. opened last October, to be a "material contributor in the next five years." The bank also has an investment in Fullgoal Fund management, another China-based fund-management company. 

Last month, Bank of Montreal agreed to buy Milwaukee, Wis.-based  Marshall & Ilsley Corp. in a share swap valued at $4.1 billion. The transaction is expected to close prior to July 31. 

—Judy McKinnon in Toronto contributed to this article.

 Write to  Caroline Van Hasselt at Caroline.Vanhasselt@dowjones.com 