Federal agents arrested a suspect Wednesday in connection with the attempted bombing of a Martin Luther King Day memorial march in Spokane, Wash.

Authorities said 36-year-old Kevin William Harpham was taken into custody before noon after dozens of agents converged on his Colville home in a heavily wooded area northwest of Spokane, between the Kaniksu National Forest and Columbia River.

Mr. Harpham was charged with one count of attempting to use a weapon of mass destruction and one count of knowingly possessing an improvised explosive device. He was due to appear late Wednesday in U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Washington.

The arrest follows an investigation by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and local law enforcement, after a backpack stuffed with explosives was discovered near a downtown parade route on the morning of Jan. 17. At the time, officials said thousands of marchers could have been injured in what was later described as a thwarted example of "domestic terrorism."

The Southern Poverty Law Center, a nonprofit civil-rights group that tracks hate groups and has won numerous lawsuits on behalf of victims of hate crimes, discrimination and prison abuse, said Mr. Harpham had been on its radar for some time.

The SPLC said it files indicate Mr. Harpham served in an artillery regiment at Fort Lewis, Wash., which it said in 2006 had become a haven for soldiers affiliated with the neo-Nazi National Alliance. That organization was one of the most prominent hate groups in the U.S. for decades, but has been in decline since the early 2000s.

Army officials said Mr. Harpham served at Fort Lewis from June 1996 to February 1999.

Paul Mullet, who heads The Aryan Nations Socialist Party of Athol, Idaho, said he met Mr. Harpham and spoke to him many times after he had inquired about the group. "He seemed like a real nice guy," Mr. Mullet said, adding that he sent Mr. Harpham literature but he never joined the movement.

Mr. Harpham wasn't available for comment. He was assigned a public defender, Roger Peven, who couldn't be reached Wednesday.

—James Oberman contributed to this article.

 Write to  Joel Millman at joel.millman@wsj.com and Evan Perez at evan.perez@wsj.com 