NEW DELHI —BlackBerry maker  Research In Motion Ltd. Thursday reiterated that it can't give Indian security agencies access to its corporate smartphone email service. While talks will continue, the issue casts uncertainty over the popular service in the world's fastest-growing telecom market. 

The Indian government fears the heavy encryption on BlackBerry smartphones makes them easy for terrorists to use undetected. The government has been holding talks with the company to find ways of monitoring RIM's corporate email services. It hasn't, however, set a target date for resolving the matter. 

RIM has argued that what the Indian government wants is physically impossible for it to accomplish. On Thursday, a company official reiterated that there is no technology available that will allow monitoring of the email service, because it's controlled by the servers at the companies that use the service. 

"We can't give a solution for enterprise services [corporate email]. It's not possible to do so, because the keys of that service are with the corporate enterprises and corporate entity that owns the server,"  Robert Crow, RIM's vice president for industry, government and university relations, told reporters. 

Mr. Crow, who is in India, will meet government officials over the next few days to discuss the issue.

Onkar Kedia, a spokesman for the federal Ministry of Home Affairs, said the ministry didn't have any immediate comment. 

Earlier this month, RIM provided tools giving Indian security agencies access to its messenger services, another feature that had been facing government scrutiny. Mr. Crow's meeting with government officials will also get India's feedback on the solutions provided for the messenger services.

BlackBerry devices use an advanced encrypted email system, making them popular with corporate users. RIM has been under pressure from several governments—especially in the Middle East and Asia—to provide access to the secure networks. The company averted a ban on key services in the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia after the countries said regulatory requirements had been satisfied. Details of those arrangements haven't been disclosed.

India's smartphone market is expected to grow to about 40 million by the end of 2015 from about 10 million now, according to a forecast by Informa Telecoms & Media. 

Thursday's remarks on corporate email are a reiteration of RIM's long-held position that neither it nor the wireless carriers on whose networks RIM's services run can decipher the encrypted corporate emails. 

"No changes can be made to the security architecture for BlackBerry Enterprise Server [corporate email] customers since, contrary to any rumors, the security architecture is the same around the world and RIM truly has no ability to provide its customers' encryption keys," RIM had said in a customer update Jan. 14. 

Mr. Crow Thursday said the government's requirements about access to corporate emails isn't unique to RIM, as there are other service providers offering such services on secure networks. 

In December, Nokia Corp. said it had set up servers in India to let local security agencies monitor its enterprise email services. In September, India said it would seek access to Google Inc.'s Gmail email service and Skype's Internet phone services. Google and Skype said they haven't received any communication from Indian authorities on the matter. 

 Write to  R. Jai Krishna at krishna.jai@dowjones.com and Romit Guha at romit.guha@dowjones.com 