The sports movie is the Happy Meal of American cinema, its main attraction being predictability: Unlikely heroes win, lose, win, lose big, make a comeback, leave the field triumphant. Everybody feels good.

There's no guarantee that everyone will be feeling good at the end of "Win Win," the not-quite-a-sports-movie from writer/director Tom McCarthy ("The Station Agent," "The Visitor"). High-school wrestling plays a big part in the film, but athletics are a means, not an end, to a story that's elegantly directed, expertly acted, laugh-out-loud funny, but very much "in the moment," as they say in sports: A hobbled economy has the characters in a half-nelson; money haunts the proceedings the way Dick Vitale haunts the Final Four; characters make as many questionable decisions as the umpires in the 2009 playoffs. 

And yet, as the movie unfolds, you realize that what passes for naturalism in so much independent and indie-leaning cinema has become as ritualized as sumo: "Quirky" characters are very often clichés; relationships are marriages of narrative convenience; situations are preposterous. The principal joy of "Win Win" is how often it fails to meet one's programmed expectations. The effect is oddly exhilarating.

Chief among the surprises is Paul Giamatti, an actor we think we know: He looks shlubby, so he must be shlubby; he has, admittedly, played some shlubs. But most of us know more people who look like Mr. Giamatti than ones who look like George Clooney, and know some people exactly like Mike Flaherty, the small-town lawyer/wrestling coach Mr. Giamatti plays: A guy who leads a decent life that hasn't paid off. His practice is about to go belly-up; jogging gives him anxiety attacks; he's smoking on the sly; his team never wins, and he's starting to get existentially angry about it. "All he cares about is money," Mike growls, about a rival attorney. "Yeah, but that's why he makes it," says his pal Terry (the hilarious Bobby Cannavale), dropping the p-bomb (philosophy) into the earthy conversation of "Win Win."

Mike hasn't cared about money before: His clientele consists of old people, the indigent, the occasional wacko. But he also has a mortgage. The office he shares with his assistant coach, Vig (Jeffrey Tambor), needs a new boiler. And when the opportunity arrives for a payday, he fights off his better angel and takes it. A client, Leo Poplar (Burt Young), is in the early stages of dementia, but wants to live at home; the state of New Jersey wants him in a facility. Mike offers to be Leo's guardian, ostensibly to make the man happy. But what he really wants is the accompanying $1,500-a-month fee. Mike then puts Leo in the home anyway. It's a concession to corruption that will come back to bite him in his saggy gym shorts.

Once upon a time, Hollywood publicists promoted Myrna Loy as "The Perfect Wife," owing to her onscreen marriages to Fredric March, Cary Grant and William Powell. Despite being less overtly glamorous, or maybe because of it, Amy Ryan makes a pretty good case for succession in "Win Win." Her Jackie Flaherty may be a "Jersey girl" (she has a tattoo that reads "JBJ," for Jon Bon Jovi, on her ankle) and her voice has the lilt of Little Ferry about it, but she exudes a fierce sense of right and wrong and, like Ms. Loy, exalts the men around her: Mike might be, in several ways, a shmoe. But if he's good enough for her, he's good enough for us.

Ms. Ryan's scenes with Kyle—Leo's grandson (Alex Shaffer), who arrives just in time to throw Mike's already disorganized life into a state of total chaos—deliver some of the better acting we're likely to see this year, which is saying quite a bit about Mr. McCarthy's instincts. Ms. Ryan is magnificent, but she's a known quantity: Oscar-nominated for 2007's "Gone Baby Gone" she's also blessed "The Wire," "The Office" and "In Treatment." Mr. Shaffer, however, was a crap shoot. A New Jersey state champ at the time filming started, he wasn't hired as an actor but as a wrestler. Mr. McCarthy rolled, and won.

Oh, yes, wrestling: It isn't the movie's reason for being, quite, but it provides some of the film's more satisfying moments. Kyle, who arrives from Ohio sporting a black eye, courtesy of his mother's boyfriend, and a head full of resentments—courtesy of mom (Melanie Lynskey)—turns out to be what Coach Mike doesn't have: Real talent. "How good are you?" Mike asks the boy, after seeing him perform for the first time. Pretty good, it turns out. And Kyle's ability on the mat alters our perceptions, both of him and the film: What we'd assumed was sullenness is actually confidence; Kyle does his talking on the mat. He's polite. He harbors real affection for his grandfather. There are teenagers like him out there, behind their iPods and Facebook accounts. They just very seldom make it into the movies. But that's another reason to love "Win Win," which champions a reality that's taken a beating on screen, and not only from boy wizards, pubescent vampires or machines that turn into other machines.

Viewed from space, the Earth is a big blue watery jewel, with what appears to be a flaw—a distinct, brownish scar where its appendix might have been. This is the Atacama Desert, the huge Chilean tract that was the site of 19th-century mining camps, Pinochet concentration camps and which, despite being devoid of humidity, is the wellspring of Patricio Guzmán's profound and lovely "Nostalgia for the Light." As a work of nonfiction, it deserves its own nomenclature. "Docu-poem" is too inelegant; "masterpiece" works, although it's been used before.

Mr. Guzmán, now 69, has devoted a career to making filmed indictments of the Pinochet regime ("The Battle of Chile," "Salvador Allende," "The Pinochet Case") so the opening moments of "Nostalgia" are surprising, even puzzling. We see the various working parts of the enormous German-made telescope in the observatory at Atacama. We learn that, because of the transparency of its air and its position to the stars, this desert is Earth's natural observatory. We learn of what a gift the place is to archaeologists, with its preserving atmosphere and Mars-like surface, beneath which lie meteors and traces of vanished civilizations. 

We learn too that since the 1970s, Chilean women have combed the dust of Atacama for the remains of their loved ones disappeared by Augusto Pinochet, and whose bodies were strewn about its vast, arid, lifeless expanse. They search for any fragment, these women, by which a lost relative can be identified, and thus provide some kind of closure, some end to the story. And it's in this scouring of both space and time that the brilliance of Mr. Guzmán's extended metaphor becomes as vivid as Katell Djian's photography. The past, which astronomers are exploring in the sky over Atacama, is precisely what most modern Chileans have neglected, "as if this history might accuse us," as Mr. Guzmán says. The visual qualities of "Nostalgia for the Light"—from the celestial confetti that floats through it to the abstract expressionism of space and its Kandinsky-like, egg-yolk-colored galaxies—are awe-inspiring. The same can be said about Mr. Guzmán's reflections on memory and its responsibilities.

("Nostalgia for the Light" opens in New York today, followed by a national roll-out; a major Guzmán retrospective will open at the BAMcinématek and Pacific Film Archive in April, and at the Gene Siskel Film Center in Chicago, and the UCLA Film and Television Archive this summer.)

On the subject of reimagined history, there's a vicious little claque at the center of the period piece "Cracks," the curiosity from Jordan Scott (daughter of Ridley, niece of Tony), which brings to mind both "The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie" and "Lord of the Flies." Its premise is a familiar one, even to those of us who attended American public schools. A charismatic teacher at an English boarding school, in this case Miss G (Eva Green), surrounds herself with a fawning coterie of hand-picked young women who, thus anointed, become the school's head girls and chief torturers. Miss G runs the schools diving team, although she never dons a suit herself, or demonstrates a dive. Her personal anecdotes are suspect. Still, she has the girls in thrall, particularly the vicious Di (Juno Temple) who maintains discipline and "sets the standard." That is, until an aristocratic Spaniard named Fiamma (María Valverde) arrives to upset the social order and Miss G's delicate sanity.

Several essential story elements in "Cracks" are not, or cannot, be explained—the girls can't go home, for some reason, although it's 1934 and, except for Fiamma, war doesn't seem a factor. There's no explanation either for why Miss G would necessarily fall quite so insanely in love with Fiamma, toss off her previous favorite, Di, and bring down upon her new pet the wrath of unhinged adolescent womanhood. Unless, of course, she was insane, and there is indeed a strong strain of madness running through "Cracks"—which, if for no other reason, is worth seeing just to watch Ms. Green ride that teacher right off the rails.

—Mr. Anderson contributes film criticism and coverage to a variety of publications. Joe Morgenstern returns April 1.

Paul Giamatti often plays characters we oughtn't like, and yet do, possibly because they embody enough self-loathing for all of us. Take Miles, for example, the ostensible hero of "Sideways": A failing writer, English teacher, dissatisfied middle-age American male, and a guy who'd probably steal money from his own mother (which, in fact, he does). Could he be a wine snob as well? Yes, and in writer-director Alexander Payne's picaresque comedic romp through California wine country, Miles and his friend Jack (Thomas Haden Church) commit romantic misdemeanors, consume copious quantities of pinot and still have us rooting from the sidelines.

This magical hybrid of documentary, fiction and comic books provided Mr. Giamatti with another unnaturally lovable character—the eccentric, cranky, pessimistic and misanthropic Harvey Pekar, underground-comix phenom, regular guest of David Letterman and employee of the Veterans Administration. The film, directed by Shari Springer Berman and Robert Pulcini, won the Sundance Film Festival, numerous critics prizes and got an Oscar nomination for its screenplay. And it delivered particular attention to the performance by Mr. Giamatti, who imbued Pekar with a kind of delightful woe.

Director Michael Hoffman's account of Leo Tolstoy's last days was a departure, providing Mr. Giamatti with perhaps the least sympathetic character of his career (with the exception, perhaps, of Kenny, in the Howard Stern movie "Private Parts"). Mr. Giamatti's Chertkov is the engine of discord between Tolstoy (Christopher Plummer) and his wife, Sofya, who would prefer that the Count not disinherit her and leave all his money to the religious foundation for which Chertkov is lobbying. Given that Sonya is played by Helen Mirren, Chertkov doesn't stand a chance in the wintry campaign for audience sympathies. But Mr. Giamatti is terrific, nonetheless. 

—John Anderson