Business schools are seeing an increase in on-campus recruiting, internship opportunities and job postings, according to a newly released survey from the M.B.A. Career Services Council, an industry group for b-schools' career-services associates.

The CSC surveyed 79 graduate schools during fall 2010: 63% of schools that responded said on-campus recruiting increased in 2010 from the previous year when 79% of schools reported a decrease in recruiting.

Full-time job postings also rose, with 70% of schools reporting an increase; only 34% saw an increase in 2009. Eighty-one percent of schools expect that internship placements would be up this summer.



Consulting, financial services and technology had the biggest increase in full-time recruiting, according to the survey. The real estate, manufacturing and nonprofit sectors didn't have as strong a presence on campus.

At American University's Kogod School of Business, employers who typically only had two full-time positions available during the downturn now have six available openings, says  Arlene Hill, director of the school's careers center. "Not only are companies rebounding, they are also accelerating their hiring to make up for lost time," Ms. Hill says.

Last year at this time, fewer than 10% of the class of 2010 had job offers. Now, it's 25% for the class of 2011, Ms. Hill says. A large factor in the uptick was government consulting.

  Damian Zikakis, director of career development at the University of Michigan's Ross School of Business, says 65% of the 2011 graduating class has at least one job offer, up from 52% last year. Half of those job offers came from boosted fall recruiting on-campus, he says.

Deloitte LLP plans to increase hiring by 50% in 2011 from 2010, bringing on 200 summer interns and 370 M.B.A.s, predominately in consulting, although some will be placed within the tax and audit businesses, says Angela Cherry, the consulting firm's national M.B.A. recruiting lead. Deloitte expects to 

The survey found that schools significantly increased their outreach to employers last year.  Chris Carlson, senior associate for university recruiting at  Booz Allen Hamilton, says schools have been clamoring for feedback on their curriculum and students. He expects that Booz will be seeking more M.B.A.'s in 2011.

"When the hiring for M.B.A.s went down, I got more calls from business schools than I ever had before," Mr. Carlson says. "They have definitely been more receptive to our suggestions."

 Write to  Diana Middleton at Diana.Middleton@wsj.com 



