In the 13 years since he suffered a string of political setbacks and quit the third most powerful job in Washington, Newt Gingrich has been busily laying the foundation for a comeback to an even grander perch.

On any given day, the former Speaker of the House can be found on a chartered jet headed to Iowa to train future GOP candidates through his American Solutions group, or in Phoenix discussing ways to lower health-care costs with drug makers through his for-profit Center for Health Transformation. He might also be in Philadelphia, narrating a film produced by Gingrich Productions, or in Texas, reaching out to conservative Latino leaders through his bilingual news and commentary website, the Americano.

Now, as Mr. Gingrich prepares to launch a run for president as early as this week, this network of advocacy and for-profit groups is providing a publicity and policy machine without parallel among his likely Republican rivals, few of whom have stirred excitement among donors and activists.

His network has amassed more than 1.7 million voter and donor contacts and raised $32 million between 2009 and 2010—more than all his potential 2012 rivals combined.

Far less clear is whether these efforts, and the extent of his organizational infrastructure, will be enough to put him out front, should Mr. Gingrich decide to seek the presidential nomination. 

"No question Newt is an ideas machine, and he'll add intellectual heft to the debate," said Mark McKinnon, a former adviser to President George W. Bush. But "he's just been around the track one too many times. At a time when people are hungry for something different, new and refreshing, Newt just feels stale."

Few can rival Mr. Gingrich's name recognition among Republicans, party leaders say, but he can also be a polarizing figure. Even his supporters cite a long list of challenges peculiar to the former speaker.

Mr. Gingrich hasn't run a truly competitive campaign in 21 years. He is given to public gaffes, most recently criticizing President Barack Obama for failing to back the rebels fighting Col. Moammar Gadhafi, only to reverse himself after Mr. Obama ordered U.S. planes into Libya. He resigned from Congress in 1998 under an ethics cloud, after his party suffered a historic midterm loss. It was later revealed that he was having an affair with a congressional aide.

Even groups that have allied with him, such as the conservative American Family Association, aren't poised to back him, citing his two messy divorces and three marriages. "He is brilliant, and has much to offer. But he isn't what we need in the Oval Office," said the AFA's director of issue analysis, Bryan Fischer.

Mr. Gingrich himself appears convinced, after mulling a White House run for years, that the 2012 election is his moment. As antecedents for his own likely candidacy, the always-confident Mr. Gingrich cites Thomas Jefferson, Abraham Lincoln and Ronald Reagan.

Newt Gingrich has used his array of organizations to promote himself and his ideas, and to build ties with donors, all of which could help him in a presidential campaign.

"If we weren't in a period like this, facing incredible dangers across the board, I wouldn't make much sense as a candidate," he said in an interview. "But we are in such a period."

Nowhere have Mr. Gingrich and his groups invested more heavily than in the key state of Iowa, figuring a win in February's first-in-the-nation caucuses could catapult him to the top ranks in the Republican nomination fight.

Wearing an array of organizational hats, he has met repeatedly with pastors, trained local candidates, consulted with doctors on his proposed health-care innovations and met with local refiners to tout ethanol. After raising money through one of his groups, Mr. Gingrich funneled $150,000 in seed money to a successful campaign last fall to oust three Iowa Supreme Court judges who supported gay marriage.

"Newt's role was quiet and very low key, but it was pivotal," said Bob Vander Plaats, a well-known Iowa conservative who led the anti-judges campaign.

Mr. Gingrich began building his network of advocacy and for-profit groups after he left Congress. He will have to sever his ties to the groups if he jumps into the presidential race, but can still tap into their broad network of active supporters and donors.

Read about the potential Republican presidential contenders.

A longtime domestic-policy entrepreneur, he founded his Center for Health Transformation in 2003. The group now includes big drug makers such as  AstraZeneca PLC and top insurers, such as BlueCross BlueShield Association, who pay as much as $200,000 in membership fees. In return, they get access to Mr. Gingrich, interaction with other group members, and marketing and research support.

In 2006, Mr. Gingrich started the group American Solutions for Winning the Future, with a $1 million donation from Las Vegas casino magnate Sheldon Adelson. The group allowed Mr. Gingrich to broaden his ambitions. It was billed as a centrist policy shop that would train local candidates and promote an array of pet causes, among them Social Security privatization and what Mr. Gingrich called "patriotic education," including mandatory annual public-school instruction on the Declaration of Independence. 

In early 2007, along with his third wife, Callista, he launched Gingrich Productions to publish books and movies. In March 2009, just weeks before converting to Catholicism, he formed Renewing American Leadership, a nonprofit group designed "to bring moral leadership back to our nation." Six months later he created the Americano to target conservative Hispanics.

But it took nearly two years for his flagship group, American Solutions, to find a rallying cry—and hit fund-raising pay dirt. Both happened almost by fluke.

With oil prices soaring in the spring of 2008 and Democrats opposing expanded offshore drilling, Mr. Gingrich tossed off a line in a paid speech that May in Las Vegas. "Someone in this room ought to simply have a bumper sticker that says, 'Drill more, pay less,'" he told the Money Show conference, to a smattering of applause. 

Backstage afterward, Mr. Gingrich decided to run with the idea himself, aides say. American Solutions launched an online petition campaign under the title, "Drill Here, Drill Now, Pay Less." It got 100,000 signatures in a week, and more than a million in a month. Sen. John McCain made the slogan a core plank of his presidential campaign, and at the Republican nominating convention that September, it morphed into "Drill, Baby, Drill."

But more important for Mr. Gingrich were the cash and supporters the effort netted. His group ended up with email contacts for more than 1.3 million people. Contributions poured in from energy companies and private donors. 

In the last election cycle, American Solutions raised $28.7 million, putting it third among all advocacy groups that are allowed to take unlimited donations. It was surpassed only by the Republican and Democratic governors' associations.

But the cash came at a cost. According to tax data filed with the Federal Election Commission and the Internal Revenue Service, American Solutions invested far more than any similar group to build its donor list. It spent more than $15.6 million in the last election—or 55% of the money it raised—on telemarketing and direct-mail appeals, according to federal campaign records.

By comparison, Mitt Romney, the former Massachusetts governor and presumptive frontrunner for the Republican nomination, spent $1.3 million on fundraising for his political action committee over the past two years, or 14% of his net of nearly $9 million from 34,219 donors. No other potential 2012 candidate spent more than $1 million on fundraising during the last election period.

R.C. Hammond, a spokesman for Mr. Gingrich, said nothing the group has done is out of the ordinary. "Finding new donors costs money," he said.

The investment has clearly paid off.

The group now claims an active donor file of more than 300,000 names, in addition to the 80,000-name list at Renewing American Leadership. All told, with American Solution's 1.3 million email contacts, Mr. Gingrich has a total of 1.7 million potential voters he can reach. While the dollar amounts come from official records, Mr. Gingrich's volume of donor contacts can't be independently verified. 

American Solutions has hauled in hundreds of its hefty donors by offering recognition awards to doctors, bankers and small-town businessmen, who in turn make donations.

On election night last November, Mr. Gingrich hosted a dinner at Washington's Capitol Hill Club to honor about 50 doctors and other health-care professionals who each received signed plaques designating them "Champions of Medicine." The price for most of those in attendance: a $5,000 donation to American Solutions. 

Duane Randleman Jr., a Birmingham, Ala., surgeon, attended the dinner and said he was glad to contribute $5,000 to the cause. "He's a visionary," Dr. Randleman said of Mr. Gingrich.

American Solutions helps pay Mr. Gingrich's travel expenses, including the at least 80 trips he took last year to more than 30 states, often at great expense. Campaign-finance records show the group spent more than $3.6 million on travel between 2009 and 2010, nearly all of it chartering private jets to take Mr. Gingrich from city to city.

Mr. Romney, too, crisscrossed the country, visiting 32 states on behalf of various candidates. But records show that he and his staff generally flew commercial and spent $273,110 on airfare and other travel expenses during the same period. 

Mr. Hammond, Mr. Gingrich's spokesman, said it wasn't appropriate to compare his boss to other likely 2012 candidates, since Mr. Gingrich spent his time pushing so many different causes. "Compare him to the CEO of Pepsi…not other candidates," Mr. Hammond said.

Mr. Gingrich sees nothing unusual in the sweep of his many endeavors over the past several years. "This is just an institutional variation on what I have been doing since 1978, which is trying to build a permanent Republican majority," he said in an interview. "Except now, I am reaching out to people on a huge scale."

In the past four years, Gingrich Productions has produced three films on religion and one each on energy, Ronald Reagan and the threat of radical Islam—all done as joint projects with the conservative activist group, Citizens United. The latest project: A film on American exceptionalism, another likely campaign theme.

All of the films dovetail with themes his aides say will loom large in any Gingrich presidential bid. While traveling the country, often for events featuring his books or films, the former speaker talks constantly of the need to reclaim the country's Judeo-Christian heritage, expand oil drilling, rebuff secularism and protect against Islamic extremism.

The heavy emphasis on religion is part of his long push to atone for his multiple divorces, according to people who know him. "He was very direct about this," said Rev. Brad Sherman, a prominent Iowa evangelical leader, recounting a session Mr. Gingrich had last year with a small group of Iowa religious leaders. "He said he had deep regrets, and asked our forgiveness."

While building ties with the Christian right, Mr. Gingrich and his organizations have also gone aggressively after two other constituencies: Latinos and tea-party groups.

Mr. Gingrich spends Sunday afternoons with a Spanish tutor, and occasionally gives speeches in Spanish. Through his Americano group, he hosted a two-day conference in Washington in December for conservative Latinos, flying up the Miami Symphony Orchestra for entertainment. Cost of the gala dinner and reception, excluding hotel: $1,149 per head.

The intermingling of these strands came together neatly during a three-day swing in late March to Iowa and Texas. In the span of 72 hours, Mr. Gingrich warned of "the radical secular left" before conservative pastors in West Des Moines, then signed hundreds of his books and films in a downtown hotel after screening his 2007 film, "Rediscovering God in America." 

Later, he told hundreds of Iowa conservatives that the country's sense of exceptionalism was under siege. Then he flew to San Antonio to warn evangelicals at the massive CornerStone church of "radical Islamists." Afterward, he met with Hispanic and Jewish leaders. 

Pastors, Latino leaders, small businessmen and tea-party activists recount private sessions in which Mr. Gingrich has tested ideas that would figure in a future campaign. In February, he met with a group of business owners and conservative activists in a Cincinnati hotel suite. Mr. Gingrich tossed out ideas for revamping the Environmental Protection Agency, replacing it with a joint venture between business and government that would make sure environmental regulations don't stifle job creation. He also proposed getting the private sector to help slash regulations across other federal departments.

"It was very much, 'Do these ideas work or not work?' " said Chris Littleton, who attended the session as head of the Ohio Liberty Council, a conservative activist group. "He was clearly trying to formulate a platform."

Whether all this translates into a solid base of support for Mr. Gingrich remains unclear.

"Newt's challenge is there are a lot of tea partiers who love him in principle but just don't see him as president," said Iowa Tea Party founder Ryan Rhodes, citing Mr. Gingrich's lack of political freshness and conflicted record on issues like climate change.

Mr. Gingrich continues to come in a solid fourth in almost all the national polls, behind former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, Mr. Romney and former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin. With both Mr. Huckabee and Ms. Palin hesitating over whether to jump in, Mr. Gingrich would enter the race as a serious contender.

His chances after that, Mr. Gingrich asserts, will hinge in large part on the level of unrest facing the country. "With $4 gas, a future of crushing debt, the rise of the secular left and chaos in the Middle East, it's just possible we might be able to put this together," he said.

 Write to  Neil King Jr. at neil.king@wsj.com 