A caution as we begin the year 2011 in music: Be wary of sentimental members of Generation X who will try to abuse their growing sway.

With the aid of promoters willing to indulge their biases, these fans, critics and bloggers who came to identify with rock in the 1980s and early '90s may finally push baby boomers from their throne of inordinate influence. This could be very good for all of us: Soon we may no longer have to suffer claims of how spectacularly gifted was every artist who played the Monterey Pop Festival, Woodstock and other late '60s and early '70s pop-culture landmark events.

We all know boomers who have bludgeoned us with opinions formed in some part by major-label marketing departments. They confuse their affection for a much-hyped album or band with evidence of artistic merit. Much like those blowhard boomers, some Gen X music tastemakers are beginning to muscle up behind a similar chauvinism, as if any sloppy, out-of-the-mainstream rock band that failed to win approval from MTV in its glory days is worthy of rediscovery. It's an attitude fed by the increasing number of bands from the '80s and early '90s willing to pay tribute to themselves.

In an era when album sales continue to plummet and concert attendance is down, sometimes it's a wise strategy to revisit the past. On Friday and Saturday, Weezer's "Memories" tour arrives in Chicago, featuring the band's debut album and "Pinkerton," released in 1994 and 1996 respectively. A soft spot for the old stuff isn't the only factor driving Rivers Cuomo and his band mates: An expanded edition of "Pinkerton" was released in November, and they're still hawking "Hurley," their September 2010 disc.

In October, My Morning Jacket played five dates in New York City, performing one of its first five albums per night. During that engagement, Jim James and the group proved they're not only one of rock's best live bands, but also that they tinker with their signature sound from disc to disc.

Neither short-term visit to the past by these bands can be seen in the same light as Roger Waters's recent note-for-note revival of Pink Floyd's "The Wall," Mr. Waters's de facto admission that he'll have nothing new to say.

The past seems a particular passion among some fans of what was once known as alternative rock, and a market has developed to meet that demand. In 2005, the promoters All Tomorrow's Parties (ATP) began its annual "Don't Look Back" series, in which alt-rock bands are asked to look back and perform one of their earlier albums in its entirety. In its first season, in London, the series saw, among others, Dinosaur Jr., the Lemonheads, Melvins and Mudhoney revive their alt-rock acts.

In 2007, the influential online media company Pitchfork, collaborating with ATP, turned over a segment of its annual summer festival in Chicago to the past, inviting GZA, Slint and Sonic Youth to each perform one of their old albums.

In addition to its annual series in the U.K., and showcases in Spain and Australia, ATP now runs an annual three-day festival in Monticello, N.Y. Last year, the stoner-metal band Sleep revisited its "Sleep's Holy Mountain" (released 17 years ago) and the Scientists played their 1983 disc "Blood Red River." Mudhoney played "Superfuzz Bigmuff Plus Early Singles," the same 1990 album it revisited at the promoters' 2005 event in London.

In its way, ATP and other similar festivals that emphasize music from the recent past aren't much different from those '50s and early-'60s-minded doo-wop and oldies rock shows—the kind that turn up with troubling regularity on PBS. It's a trip down memory lane.

"Nostalgia is a death move," said the Smashing Pumpkins' Billy Corgan in the Journal last week. He asked, "When Sonic Youth and Pavement are out there playing those old records, isn't that throwing up the white flag?" Yes it is, though one might suggest Sonic Youth did, and can still do, great new work, while Pavement hasn't done anything for about 20 years despite last year's reunion tour.

For every reappearance of an intriguing mid-'80s band like Robert Pollard's Guided By Voices (which did a brief tour late last year) or a new project by the likes of Dinosaur Jr.'s J Mascis (whose band Sweet Apple issued two discs in 2010 and who will release his first solo studio album in March), there will be other bands who may have said something once or twice decades ago and are doing nothing of merit now. Better to remember them fondly and seek out the next generation of musicians they influenced, or demand from them new music that's as challenging as their classics. That's a more appropriate tribute than encouraging them to give up and run in place. An obsession with the past keeps us from enjoying the present.

 Mr. Fusilli is the Journal's rock and pop music critic. Email him at jfusilli@wsj.com or follow him on Twitter: @wsjrock. 