The European Central Bank is working on a plan to keep struggling Irish banks afloat in the medium term, a euro-zone central-banking official said Sunday. 

The new facility would aim to replace the use of so-called Emergency Liquidity Assistance, the official said. The program offers a form of central-bank lending that is meant to tide banks over when they are faced with short-term emergencies, but which has become an essential form of funding for Irish banks since last summer. 

As of February, the Irish central bank had Emergency Liquidity Assistance estimated at more than €60 billion ($84.5 billion) outstanding to Irish banks, in addition to another €117 billion lent through the ECB's traditional monetary operations. That is roughly a third of all the ECB's outstanding loans to euro-zone banks. The ECB declined to comment. 

The move comes as Ireland prepares to announce the results of a new round of "stress tests" on its banks, designed to put an exact figure on the amount of capital needed by four of the country's largest banks to keep operating. 

The results are due to be published Thursday, and the Sunday Business Post newspaper reported over the weekend that the tests will expose a capital shortfall of €18 billion to €23 billion. That is more than the €10 billion earmarked by the European Union, International Monetary Fund and European Central Bank in Ireland's November bailout deal, but less than the €35 billion many analysts had estimated the banks would require. 

The official suggested that the ECB could soon announce the creation of a "Facility for Banks Under Restructuring," which would regularize the current situation and buy time for an orderly cleanup of the Irish banking system. It would likely be open-ended and tied to strict conditions, and subject to regular review by the ECB's governing council. Under Emergency Liquidity Assistance, a national central bank such as Ireland's automatically creates money and notifies the rest of the council of its actions. The new facility would be subject to much more centralized control.

It is unclear how long it will take to finalize the program. Ireland's new prime minister, Enda Kenny, has been agitating for a relaxation of the terms of the country's bailout package and the ECB is unlikely to want to be seen as reacting to political pressure. 

Mr. Kenny told state television Friday: "What we've been saying for some time is that the package needs to be adjusted—in terms of the interest rate, and in respect of the costs of the banking structure that's associated with it, and that's where the focus of discussion will be when the outcome of the stress tests become known." 

A two-day summit of EU leaders ended Friday without any resolution on Ireland. 

—Eamon Quinn contributed to this article.

 Write to  Geoffrey T. Smith at geoffrey.smith@dowjones.com 