MUMBAI--India's Viom Networks Ltd. has scaled down the size of its initial public offering to 45 billion rupees, a person familiar with the matter said Thursday. 

The telecom tower company wants to launch the share sale over the April-September period, subject to market conditions, the person, who asked not to be named, told Dow Jones Newswires. 

Viom earlier had plans to raise 50 billion to 60 billion rupees through the offering, the person said. 

"It's entirely dependant on market conditions and sentiment," the person said. "Right now it's just wait and watch, but the process of documentations are on." 

Viom has mandated  Citigroup,
C


1.39
%




 Credit Suisse, Goldman Sachs,  Morgan Stanley,
MS


0.04
%




 and IDFC Capital for the planned deal, according to people familiar with the matter.

The cut in size for Viom's planned initial share sale follows a 30% reduction in size by mobile handset maker Micromax Informatics Ltd. recently, as issuers either sweeten the terms of their offerings, or scale down their equity fund raising plans in tune with sluggish local stock markets. 

Others in this club include Indian Oil Corp. and L&T Finance Holdings Ltd., which have deferred their share sale plans due to adverse market conditions. 

L&T Finance was initially targeting a launch of its up to 15 billion rupees IPO in February, but is now considering a listing by June. State-run Indian Oil deferred its follow-on offering, initially planned for earlier this year.

Viom's plan to list itself, if executed ahead of other companies such as Reliance Infratel Ltd. with similar ambitions, could make it the second listed Indian telecom tower operator after GTL Infrastructure Ltd. It would offer investors a new way to buy into the telecom infrastructure underpinning the world's fastest growing markets for mobile phone services. 

Viom plans to use the IPO proceeds to fund its expansion, and cater to India's rising demand for telecom infrastructure, a person familiar with the matter told Dow Jones Newswires last August. 

Viom Networks, formerly known as Quippo-WTTIL, was formed in January 2009. Quippo Telecom Infrastructure Ltd., initially, held about 46% of the company and Tata Teleservices Ltd. owned the rest. Then, the shareholding pattern changed, and the portion held by Quippo Telecom was divided among its major holders, including founders SREI Group and the Kanoria family, and GIC Singapore, IDFC Private Equity and Oman Investment Fund. 

A consortium led by India-focused Macquarie-SBI Infrastructure Fund, including State Bank of India and an unnamed investor, bought a significant part of Quippo Telecom's stake.

