 The U.K. economy, battered by snow, shrank in the fourth quarter of 2010 for the first time in more than a year, a surprise hit that will trigger debate about the country's aggressive fiscal tightening and the direction of interest rates amid high inflation.  

 The IMF said the uneven global recovery continues, but sovereign-debt and financial-sector risks, particularly in Europe, could threaten global stability.  

 India raised key interest rates, suggesting policy makers have been caught off-guard by a recent surge in inflation, which has been driven mainly by food prices.  

 Foreign direct investment into India fell by more than a third from April to September 2010, hurt in part by problems with land acquisition and poor infrastructure, the central bank said.  

 U.S. stocks fell, with investors trading cautiously as the Fed kicked off a two-day policy meeting. In Japan, technology stocks helped the Nikkei gain 1.2%.  

 Japan kept its easy monetary policy unchanged and maintained its view that the nation's economy will gradually return to a moderate recovery path.  

 Garuda Indonesia will cut the value of its IPO roughly in half to $500 million, reducing the size and price amid investor concerns about the state-owned airline.  

 A move by Japan's financial watchdog to urge some banks to support customers who bought foreign-exchange derivatives has been met with controversy.  

 Chinese Internet company Tencent Holdings plans to launch a $759.5 million investment fund to target online game companies and other funds.  

 U.S. steelmakers blamed slow economic recovery for larger-than-expected quarterly losses as high raw material and labor costs and lukewarm demand offset the positive impact of rising prices.  

 Yahoo Japan's profit rose 19% in the latest quarter from a year earlier amid solid growth in advertising revenue, and it said its planned search-technology tie-up with Google is going smoothly. 

 India's largest mutual-fund company is struggling with poor performance and plans changes to try to boost investor returns.  

 Hindustan Unilever said its net profit in the October-December period slipped 1.7% because of high raw material costs.  

 Chinese military experts rejected claims that China obtained secret U.S. technology to develop its new stealth fighter, saying it used homegrown innovation.  

 Obama will call for a five-year freeze on nonsecurity discretionary spending "as a down payment toward reducing" the U.S. deficit, a White House official said.  

A blast from a suspected bomb ripped through a bus in the Philippine capital's financial district, killing four people and injuring 14.

 Russia's Medvedev said terrorism is "the main threat" the country faces and vowed to find and punish those responsible for the suicide bombing at the country's busiest international airport.  

A roadside bomb killed nine people in southern Thailand, where an Islamic separatist insurgency has entered its eighth year.

Suicide bombers attacked police protecting marches by minority Shiite Muslims in Pakistan's two largest cities, killing 12 people and wounding dozens.

Australian police charged three Indonesians with people-smuggling offenses over the December shipwreck of a boat of asylum seekers that killed dozens.