WASHINGTON—French President Nicolas Sarkozy said he recognized the importance of the dollar, but vowed after meeting President Barack Obama "to propose new ideas" that could affect the international currency system—suggesting a divergence in economic priorities.

Mr. Sarkozy, who will host the November summit of the Group of 20 leading industrialized nations, has pushed his foreign counterparts to consider reducing the role of the dollar as part of an overhaul of the international monetary system.

French officials have said an overreliance on the dollar exacerbated the financial crisis by shifting capital from low-interest-rate rich countries to higher-yield emerging-market nations. But French officials haven't specified another proposal for a new monetary system. 

Many economists and analysts say replacing the dollar or reducing its dominance as the primary global currency is unlikely because of the economic strength of the U.S. A senior administration official said Mr. Sarkozy made clear to Mr. Obama at the White House Monday that reducing the value of the dollar wouldn't be in Europe's interest.

The Obama administration views the most pressing economic issue as the European sovereign-debt crisis that continues to unnerve investors around the world, a senior administration official said. The administration hopes Mr. Sarkozy's championing of an overhaul of the international monetary system doesn't distract attention from the more immediate problems in Europe.

U.S. officials want Europeans to act more aggressively to arrest the problems that have already led to bailouts of Greece and Ireland. Markets are speculating Portugal might need emergency assistance as well, with some speculating that problems in Spain could trigger another global recession. 

U.S. officials want Europeans to create a "firewall" that stanches fear of a broader contagion in Europe and calms investors. European officials are debating a new package of programs that could help to cordon off contagion, but the U.S. is concerned markets will sell sovereign debt before the EU acts, U.S. officials have said. 

The administration is also fearful Europe's actions may be retroactive—lending cash after a financial disaster—rather than stem problems before they occur. One option would be for Europe to restructure its emergency package, which currently allows for countries to apply for loans only after they have hit dire straits. An idea under consideration in Brussels is to allow the bailout package to buy the sovereign debt of countries before they reach crisis stage.

Mr. Obama said he and Mr. Sarkozy "discussed how we can coordinate our agendas to make sure that we are as productive as possible in delivering the kinds of reforms and follow-through that will result in prosperity for peoples around the globe."

Mr. Sarkozy said he would push proposals this year focused on currencies, commodity prices, and "all that needs to be done in order to reduce the current and present imbalances."

French officials have looked at giving the International Monetary Fund greater oversight of capital accounts and controls and giving greater prevalence for other currencies in the IMF's currency, known as Special Drawing Rights.

U.S. officials have also pushed for a strategy to reduce trade imbalances, but their proposals have met resistance from export-heavy countries such as China and Germany.

At the November G-20 summit in South Korea, world leaders agreed to spend the next year developing and applying a set of "indicative guidelines" that measure economic imbalances. In order to win an agreement at the meeting, the definitions of these guidelines were left vague. 

G-20 officials said they would use the first half of 2011 to identify guidelines and the second half applying them to different countries. U.S. officials had hoped this exercise could pressure countries to allow their exchange rates to reflect market fundamentals.

Officials are hoping to make progress on this issue at a meeting of G-20 finance ministers in Paris next month. 

 Write to  Ian Talley at ian.talley@dowjones.com 