NEW DELHI -- India's crucial monsoon rains are progressing well, according to early signs, and are likely to reach the country's Andaman and Nicobar Islands by their usual date of May 20, two weather officials said Friday.

"As of now, everything seems to be normal, including the arrival date," an official at the government's India Meteorological Department said.

Another official at the department confirmed that "so far, there are no abnormal signs."

But both officials--who didn't want to be named--warned that, despite the positive signs so far, weather conditions over the next few days and the development of weather pulses would be crucial to the timely arrival and amount of rain.

From the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the monsoon rains usually enter India's mainland through the southern state of Kerala by the end of May or the first week of June, gradually progressing to cover most of central and northern India by July, before retreating in September.

The timing and spread of the rains are as important as the amount of rain, which has been forecast at 98% of the 50-year average this year.

The rains are crucial to the majority of India's rain-dependent farmlands.

Rainfall which comes within 96% to 104% of the long-term average is considered a normal monsoon season. Late last month, weather officials said that a repeat of the last season, when rains carried on beyond the normal end in September, would happen again this year because of a receding La Nina.

During the La Nina phenomenon, surface sea temperatures remain lower than normal across the equatorial eastern and central Pacific Ocean.

India produced a record food grain output of 235.9 million tons in the crop year through June, after last year's monsoon rainfall came in at 102% of the long-term average.

One of the weather officials said that pre-monsoon showers are normal and lashing the country's northeastern, eastern and southern regions. Some scattered rainfall is expected also over the northwestern region within a day or two.

 Write to  Biman Mukherji at biman.mukherji@dowjones.com 