JUPITER, Fla.—It was only a year ago that R.A. Dickey was one of the first players the Mets cut during spring training. As he remembers it, he was the first pitcher called into then-manager Jerry Manuel's office to receive the bad news.

Dickey has no such concerns now, and lest anyone forget why that is the case, the knuckleballer provided a reminder in his first Grapefruit League outing. 

He gave up only one run in three innings Wednesday in a 3-2 exhibition loss to the Cardinals. He allowed three hits, did not walk a batter and punctuated his day by striking out Albert Pujols to end the third inning.

For most any other established pitcher, it would have been a routine spring start. But for Dickey, who signed a two-year contract extension in January, it was unfamiliar territory. 

Never before had he pitched in spring training without having to worry about securing a spot on a major-league roster.

"I really didn't know how the contract or the security of having a spot in the rotation would affect me between the lines," Dickey said. "When I got out there today, I was pleasantly surprised that it was very competitive."

More than two weeks after pitchers and catchers reported to camp, one Mets catcher is still missing. Ronny Paulino remains in the Dominican Republic awaiting approval of his visa application from the U.S. consulate.

Mets general manager Sandy Alderson said the team is hopeful Paulino will be cleared to enter the U.S. by this weekend, but couldn't be certain that will happen.

The delay stems from Paulino testing positive for a banned, performance-enhancing drug last season while playing for the Florida Marlins. Alderson said Paulino had to submit to another drug test and a panel interview to convince the consulate that he is clean.

Paulino has eight games left on his 50-game suspension from last season, so he'll have an extra week of spring training to prepare for the season. But if his absence drags on into next week, Alderson said it will take away time Paulino needs to familiarize himself with the Mets' pitching staff.

Learning how to catch Dickey's knuckleball figures to be among the biggest challenges for Paulino. who is expected to back up starter Josh Thole at catcher. "I don't think we're in any serious jeopardy at the moment," Alderson said.

Oliver Perez's status with the Mets could become even more tenuous when he starts Thursday against the Cardinals. But the team doesn't appear inclined to release him just yet. Collins said he was "quite sure" Perez will make at least one more appearance after Thursday.