FRANKFURT—Latest economic indicators point to a slowing in Germany's economic recovery this year but strong manufacturing orders have raised the prospects for German industry, the Bundesbank said in its monthly report published Monday. 

German industrial production expanded strongly in the fourth quarter, the Bundesbank said, criticizing the lack of reliable data on German retail sales during that period. The latest retail-sales numbers probably underestimate actual turnover, it said. 

"Latest short-term indicators ... point to some slowdown in the pace of the overall economic recovery after the turn of the year 2010/2011," the Bundesbank said. 

German gross domestic product increased 3.6% last year in price-adjusted terms, after slumping 4.7% in 2009, according to preliminary data. That was the strongest increase since pan-German records began in 1992. 

Separately, the German central bank said the extraordinary rally in German government bonds last year saved the country around €3 billion ($4.01 billion) in interest costs. 

The Bundesbank said that the federal government profited greatly from being able to refinance maturing medium- and long-dated bonds with new ones at interest rates that were between one and 2.5 percentage points lower. 

It said the average coupon of long-term bonds maturing last year had been 5.3%, while the average rate of new, non-inflation-linked bonds had been a record low of 2.8%. 

The Bundesbank said that further windfalls could be expected if capital market rates stay at their current levels, which are still depressed by historical standards, even though they have risen steadily in the past three months. 

In a previous report last year, the Bundesbank had warned that German government bond yields had been depressed substantially by "safe-haven" capital flows as investors fled the sovereign-debt markets of countries in the euro zone with the most pronounced credit risks, notably Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Spain. 

As reported, the German government intends to borrow a gross €302 billion this year, along with up to €12 billion in inflation-linked bonds. It has to refinance €271 billion of maturing debt. 



 Write to  Nina Koeppen at nina.koeppen@dowjones.com and Geoffrey T. Smith at geoffrey.smith@dowjones.com 