Having spent much of last year holding deposit rates down, India's banks are about to start paying. 

Facing a shortage of cash in the banking system, and under pressure from the central bank, banks have been forced to increase deposit rates. For one-year term deposits, for example, State Bank of India is offering customers a rate of 7.75%, up from 6.5% in August. 

The contest for funds also has banks increasing the proportion of long-term deposits in the mix. Rates on term deposits are currently five percentage points higher than low-cost demand deposits. Over the past year, term deposits comprised just 32% of banks' deposit base on average, Credit Suisse estimates, but it predicts their share will rise to 65% this year. The problem isn't just that term deposits are expensive; because they're long-term, the high deposit rates continue to affect profits longer, too. 

This isn't all. Because they've lent heavily in the past year, loan-to-deposit ratios for several banks are now close to or above a historical high of 75%. State Bank of India's loan-to-deposit ratio was 80% at the end of September, so additional rupees it takes in deposits will more likely wind up invested in government bonds and other assets that are considered safer by regulators, but also earn less than new loans. 

The resulting pressure on margins could become evident as early as this month, when the banks start to report earnings for the December quarter. It'll be small at first, but over the six months ending in September, net interest margins will have narrowed by about 10% from the previous year, says Credit Suisse, which has lowered next fiscal year's earnings per share expectations for six of the eight major banks it tracks by an average of 8.3%. 

Not all will suffer equally, of course. Private banks like HDFC Bank and ICICI Bank, for example, already have strong deposit bases and will be able to maintain margins, says Citi Investment Research. State Bank of India, for the reasons above, and other government banks could take a harder hit. 

To be sure, some things are comforting. Overall credit growth is robust at 23% from a year earlier, and lenders will be able to pass on some of their costs to customers. 

Indian banking is just starting to become an expensive business. 

 Write to  Harsh Joshi at harsh.joshi@dowjones.com 