Time has stopped at the Finca Los Nietos. Located just seven kilometers outside the colonial city of La Antigua in the central mountainous highlands of Guatemala, this tiny coffee plantation caters to those looking for a more intimate experience than a big coffee factory tour.

A strong cup of coffee produced on this boutique farm and good company from the Keilts, the Cuban-American family who bought this piece of land a couple of years ago, delights visitors from abroad. As tourists sip their brew, the sun glows brightly over the green highland valley and the volcanoes in the distance. This is perhaps the closest to heaven coffee lovers might ever be.

On this crisp morning, Grace Keilt-Freyre, the daughter of owners Raúl and Christina, introduces guests to the farm, which boasts 200 different types of flowers and plants, ranging from cacti to tropical fruits, on less than a hectare of land. The farm grows Arabica coffee, which usually produces its best quality bean in higher altitudes, Ms. Keilt-Freyre explains. "We are at about [1,500 meters] above sea level, just right for our Arabica coffee plants," which take seven years to fully mature, are sensitive to low temperatures and prefer a little shade.

Finca Los Nietos harvests four different types of Arabica coffee plants, mostly distinguishable by the leaves. One, for example, is called the Cobán. "With this particular plant, it is a little easier to distinguish the bean itself, which is about two sizes bigger than the rest of the beans that we have on the farm," Ms. Keilt-Freyre tells her guests. "The particular types of Arabica coffee plants that we have on the farm produce coffee for up to 10 years."

As guests walk through the farm, their attention turns to two-liter red plastic Coca-Cola bottles hanging on some of the trees. The bottles have been painted red to lure a specific pest known among the farm employees as el borracho, or the drunk, an insect that proves a nightmare for coffee growers. "It will eat the bean and leaves, basically taking over and turning the plant black," she says. 

Inside the Coca-Cola bottle hangs a smaller bottle that is filled with rubbing alcohol to attract the insects with its smell. "The bottom of the Coca-Cola bottle is filled with a little soapy water. The pest simply gets in and cannot get out. The plastic bottles that we hang here and there on the farm are simple, yet super effective in keeping our coffee plants healthy," Ms. Keilt-Freyre explains to bemused tourists. 

Thanks, in part, to these bottles, Finca Los Nietos has been able to produce up to 360 kilograms of roasted coffee in the past year. "[This] would mean we have roughly 1,000 plants," she says.

Due to the farm's small size, each ripe red bean is picked individually. For roughly every two kilograms of red beans they pick, Los Nietos makes nearly a fifth of a kilo of Mayan roast, which it sells for about €5. 

Ms. Keilt-Freyre now shows off the farm's tiny despulpadora, or pulp-remover machine. A big metal wheel on the inside spins so fast it pops the slimy green beans out of the pulp. The pulp then falls into small orange bins at the bottom of the machine and the beans fall onto a separate table. "At the end of the day, we have to spend a couple of hours going through and picking the red of the slimy beans," she says. "This is one of the many times we have to clean the beans. We also pick beans that are stuck to the pulp. Those are no good either, as they have been probably infected."

The beans will then sit in water to get rid of their slimy outer layer for approximately two days. They are then washed thoroughly and when they are clean, the beans are put up on the roof where they will dry for about 20 days. Once dry, the beans are called café con camisa because they have a paper-thin outer layer, or T-shirt, that needs to come off the beans before they are finally roasted. 

The farm has come a long way. At the start of the 1990s, a couple from the U.S. purchased the land, which at the time was used as a dump, and turned it into a community project that gradually developed into the property seen today. 

The new owners of Finca Los Nietos, which translates as "farm of the grandchildren," have made it their priority to use and reuse every single bit of what the farm produces—including its worms. 

Tourists are now standing before a huge pile of what locals call the red flirt. The worms live, eat and reproduce in coffee pulp, a result of the waste of the coffee beans. Every eight days the worms are fed with new pulp. This is then turned into fertilizer that feeds the trees. It takes about two months for the tank to fill up and that is when half of the fertilizer is taken out to dry. The worms are then moved to the other side to keep them in the tank. "It's all done by hand," Ms. Keilt-Freyre tells slightly nauseated onlookers. 

The tank was ingeniously built on an incline so that "worm tea," the black liquid produced by the worms, falls into a hole. The liquid is then used to spray on the trees' leaves to keep bugs away. "It's fabulous for the plants," she says. "The point is to use everything."

Java junkies can also visit other farms in the vicinity. Some of them have a longer history in making coffee, such as the 140-year-old Finca Filadelfia, which offers weekday tours and is located 150 meters north of San Felipe de Jesús church in San Lorenzo el Cubo. Another, Finca La Azotea, which is located just outside La Antigua, hosts the Coffee Museum, which takes visitors through the process of growing coffee with an interactive tour, while seeking to preserve the dying lifestyles of indigenous populations in Guatemala. 

To explore the highlands and the plantations, visitors should choose nearby Antigua as their base and plan to rent a car to get around. The former Guatemalan capital is a colorful destination, filled with lively bars and beautiful antique shops. Once a great center of power in Central America, La Antigua, or Old Guatemala, is an ideal destination for church lovers (it has about 38). Period buildings, such as the former convent of Las Capuchinas, offer a great insight into the history of the country. A massive earthquake virtually destroyed the city in 1773 and many of the ruins, such as those at San José el Viejo, aren't to be missed. 

Susan Hirsch, who recently visited the city from Maine, says she instantly fell in love with the place. "Antigua is a vibrant warm city with the added charm of almost impossible to traverse cobblestone streets."

 Write to  Javier Espinoza at javier.espinoza@wsj.com 