It is hazardous to underestimate the hunger that golf fans have for golf on television. This goes back to at least 1953, when promoter George S. May offered a preposterously high $25,000 to the winner of the first nationally televised golf tournament at his Tam O'Shanter Country Club outside Chicago. Critics scoffed that golf on television wouldn't even be watchable.

But cameramen proved quite adept at capturing the tiny ball in the sky. Then along came Arnold Palmer and color TV. In 1995, they scoffed again that a 24-hour golf cable channel had no chance of succeeding. The Golf Channel, founded that year by Palmer (him again) and Alabama entrepreneur Joe Gibbs, now reaches 82 million households in the U.S. Comcast acquired control in 2001 and last year the channel enjoyed a cash-flow margin of 36% on $391 million in revenue, according to SNL Kagan Media.

Now Golf Channel (the "The" was dropped in 2008) is merging with NBC Sports as part of Comcast's deal to buy control of NBC Universal, which closed Jan. 28. We, the viewing public, might well scoff again at the notion that Golf Channel can drill any deeper. It already offers live coverage of the PGA, LPGA, Champions, Nationwide and European PGA Tours, plus umpteen hours of instruction and punditry and series that cater to every taste, from Rush Limbaugh suffering instruction at the hands of coach Hank Haney to "Golf's Amazing Videos," described as "wacky swings, side-splitting bloopers and hilarious mishaps." 

But we mock at our peril. Ratings for mostly early-round PGA Tour coverage on the newly designated "Golf Channel Powered by NBC Sports" are up 59% this year, even without much help from Tiger Woods. Weekend ratings for NBC's first Tour event of 2011, last week's Accenture Match Play Championship, were up 71% over 2010. NBC, which will also broadcast the next five Tour events, has deployed a dual Golf Channel-NBC logo. 

Executives credit the uptick to cross-promotion. "Golf Channel has the kind of marketing behind it now that it's never seen before. We're promoting it on 20 different NBC Universal networks and 40 websites," said Mike McCarley, the 37-year-old NBC strategic-marketing whiz dispatched to Orlando last month to run Golf Channel. McCarley was behind NBC's "Sunday Is Football Night" campaign. 

Promotion, in the world of McCarley's mentor, NBC Sports Group Chairman Dick Ebersol, is not just fluff, it's key to the master plan. Golf Channel is a kind of demonstration project, hinting at how the newly created sports juggernaut under Ebersol's command may aggressively cross-pollinate and colonize Comcast's other properties, including the NHL, Ultimate Fighting and college sports on the Versus channel. Not the NFL, maybe, but a potential all-sports rivalry with ESPN/ABC could be in the making.

"It's just the beginning. Remember we're only six weeks into this merger," said Lee Berke, chief executive of the LHB Sports, Entertainment & Media advisory firm. 

On the production side, McCarley said his mandate was to incorporate more of the NBC "sports sensibility" into Golf Channel's programming. "There's a lot of nuance to it, a lot of storytelling, which comes down from [pioneering producer] Roone Arledge at ABC Sports, where Ebersol used to work," he said. That style, occasionally melodramatic, also characterizes NBC's coverage of the Olympics. "We want viewers on their couch to feel as if they're right there at the event, in the front row," he said.

As one example, he liked the way Golf Channel last summer at the U.S. Open at Pebble Beach had its pregame commentators on the putting green. "I called Ebersol, I said, 'Are you watching this? It's great. You can feel the excitement, the anticipation.' We want to do more like that," he said. In its early years, Golf Channel productions resembled public-access cable more than network broadcasts, but it has raised the bar, and is now fully HD.

McCarley also wants to limit more commercial breaks to two minutes or less. "The average time between a drive and a second shot is two minutes and 15 seconds to two minutes and 30 seconds. So you want to get back from commercial to watch the second shot live. That's important to the feel and flow of the broadcast," he said.

The NBC golf team, he said, was envious of Golf Channel's ability to dig deeper and stay with stories. Now they'll get the chance, as NBC and Golf Channel talent will increasingly appear on both networks. A "State of the Game" special last Friday had rival anchors Johnny Miller from NBC and Golf Channel's Nick Faldo (who also, complicatedly, works as an anchor for CBS golf telecasts) on the same stage exchanging barbs. Faldo jokingly brandished shears to cut Miller's mike cord if he started talking too much.

McCarley was mostly mum about other future plans, such as when David Feherty's reality/talk show will debut on Golf Channel. "We've got lots of ideas, but they're not yet ready to be released into the wild," he said.

One thing seems likely: NBC Universal's hunger to fill the maw of its combined golf property won't hurt the PGA Tour's negotiating position later this year when it begins talks with the broadcast networks about new contracts for 2013 and beyond. The Tour's current 15-year deal with the Golf Channel ends in 2021.

 Write to John Paul at golfjournal@wsj.com 