

Tensions heightened between Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker and the state's 14 Senate Democrats Monday, as they traded attacks over efforts to end a three-week-old impasse over legislation that would strip public employees of most collective-bargaining rights.

The Republican governor accused Democrats of being divided about whether to return from Illinois to vote on his "budget-repair" bill, while Democrats said Mr. Walker overstated the progress of behind-the-scenes talks between the sides over the past week.

Mr. Walker said in a news conference Monday that negotiations to bring back the Democrats, who fled the state Feb. 17 to avoid a vote on his bill, had been blocked by their leader, Sen. Mark Miller.

Mr. Walker said his administration and Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald had been negotiating to persuade about five Democrats to return to Wisconsin. Republicans hold a 19-14 majority in the state Senate, but need at least one Democrat to have enough members present to vote on the bill.

"Time and again, the person standing in the way of making that possible is Sen. Mark Miller," Mr. Walker said.

Democrats fired back. Sen. Chris Larson told CNN the governor is "trying to divide and conquer" and was "basically lying, purposely misrepresenting what we were talking about." Mr. Larson said Democrats had requested a meeting with the governor not to negotiate a return, but to explain why they refused to go back.

Sen. Spencer Coggs said in a statement that the Democrats met after the governor's news conference and "reaffirmed their unity and backing of Sen. Miller." 

Mr. Miller didn't return calls seeking comment Monday, but issued a statement saying, "I have personally called Sen. Fitzgerald and the governor and his office on a regular basis but haven't received return calls." The Senate Democrats were expected to hold their own discussions Monday afternoon.

On Sunday, Mr. Miller told The Wall Street Journal that Senate Democrats were planning to return to allow a vote, without providing a timeline. On Monday morning, he sent the governor and Mr. Fitzgerald an open letter offering to meet in person "near the Wisconsin-Illinois border to formally resume serious discussions as soon as possible." It wasn't clear whether Mr. Miller had changed his mind about Democrats returning.

In his news conference, Gov. Walker called Mr. Miller's letter "ridiculous" and said the Democrat has blocked progress on talks between his administration and Democratic Sens. Tim Cullen and Robert Jauch.

Mr. Walker said negotiations continued Sunday, with two of his staff members traveling to Illinois to meet with several Democratic senators. The governor also said he had a phone conversation Monday with a Democrat.

Mr. Fitzgerald issued a letter calling Mr. Miller's written offer to meet "bizarre." He said Democrats had been meeting with the governor's staff and "trying to find a way back to Madison," noting that Mr. Miller attended one meeting. Mr. Fitzgerald addressed his letter to "Parts Unknown" in Illinois, and criticized Mr. Miller's "grasp of reality, and control of your caucus."

Several Democrats voiced support for Mr. Miller on Monday. Mr. Jauch said the governor's comments were "irresponsible" and have set back efforts to bring the Democrats back. While he and others have met with the governor's staff, he said, they're far from agreement. "I honestly don't know what the solution will be," he said.

Mr. Larson said the Democrats would return only when the governor removed curbs on public-employee collective bargaining from his budget-repair bill. "The idea that the union needs to die is what needs to be brought off the table," he said.

Mr. Walker wouldn't detail what he has offered in negotiations. He said his budget-repair bill, which would strip public employees of most collective-bargaining rights and require them to pay more out of their salaries toward pensions and health care, couldn't be changed. But he suggested his broader, two-year budget proposal could be amended to address Democratic concerns.

The governor said his staff woke him at 11:45 p.m. last Wednesday to tell him discussions with Mr. Miller and several other Democratic senators were progressing well. "I was excited about that," the governor said, but added that those talks faltered. "We need to find out who in this caucus can really deliver."

 Write to  Amy Merrick at amy.merrick@wsj.com and Kris Maher at kris.maher@wsj.com 