SINGAPORE—Singapore's first prime minister and founding father of the modern city-state, Minister Mentor Lee Kuan Yew, Saturday said he will leave the government cabinet to make way for a younger generation of leadership, having served 52 years as a key decision maker in the nation and following a decline in the ruling party's popular support in the island's recent general election. 

Former prime minister Goh Chok Tong, who served as the nation's leader from 1990 to 2004, also Saturday announced his decision to leave his cabinet post of senior minister, which he was appointed to after he stepped down as prime minister. 

The moves follow decades of service in influential positions by both men and last week's Singapore general election, in which the ruling People's Action Party was returned to government but lost a number of key members of parliament. 

"A younger generation, besides having a non-corrupt and meritocratic government and a high standard of living, wants to be more engaged in the decisions which affect them," both ministers said in a joint statement. 

"After a watershed general election, we have decided to leave the cabinet and have a completely younger team of ministers to connect to and engage with this young generation in shaping the future of our Singapore." 

While the governing People's Action Party won 81 of 87 parliamentary seats in last week's poll, it received its lowest share of the popular vote since Singapore became a nation—only 60.1%, compared with nearly 67% in the last poll in 2006—a setback for a political establishment that has dominated Singapore unrivaled since independence in 1965. 

Two cabinet ministers—Foreign Affairs Minister George Yeo and Lim Hwee Hua, minister in the prime minister's office and second minister for finance and transport—were knocked from their seats by Workers' Party candidates. 

The joint statement said the "the time has come for a younger generation to carry Singapore forward in a more difficult and complex situation" and that Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong, the son of the first prime minister, "and his team of younger leaders should have a fresh clean slate." 

However, it also noted "the younger team must always have in mind the interests of the older generation" and that "this generation who has contributed to Singapore must be well-looked after." 

The elder Lee, now 87, served as prime minister from 1959 until 1990. He was co-founder of the nation's ruling PAP and led the nation to its merger with the Federation of Malaysia in 1963 and its subsequent separation and formation as an independent republic in 1965. 

He is widely credited with advancing Singapore's economy and living standards to first-world status through a series of political, social and economic reforms over the course of his administration. 

After the end of his tenure as prime minister, he was given the political title senior minister and then minister mentor in 2004. Even after he retired as prime minister, Mr. Lee still played a highly significant role in the affairs of the nation. 

Both men will remain members of parliament, representing their respective constituencies. Mr. Lee was uncontested in his seat in the recent election—the only constituency not to be contested—while Goh saw his support fall in his own electorate. 

In the campaign leading up to the poll, Mr. Lee warned voters in one key district that they would have "five years to live and repent" before the next election if they chose an opposition slate over the PAP and that voters needed to expect "the PAP to look after PAP constituencies first." 

Analysts said those comments contributed to the PAP's loss in that area, which is now represented by the Workers' Party. 

Mr. Lee is chairman of Government of Singapore Investment Corp., one of the nation's two state investment firms, while Mr. Goh is chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore.

 Write to  Sam Holmes at samuel.holmes@dowjones.com 