Throughout her three-decade career, financial adviser Kathy Muldoon has found that grandparents often want to provide something for their grandchildren. So part of her work involves helping clients select 529 college-savings plans, and sometimes deciding between 529s and other vehicles, including trusts.

Read the complete Investing in Funds report. 

Grandparents concerned about the rising cost of higher education can consider helping through 529 saving plans, says Ms. Muldoon, a planner in Dallas. These are "very efficient in terms of controlling the destination for the money," she says. 

Named after a section of the Internal Revenue Code, 529 plans are tax-advantaged accounts that allow individuals to save money for higher education. There are 529 plans administered by states across the country and by Washington, D.C. 

Account holders (usually parents or grandparents) have several options for how the contributions can be invested. Typically, these include stock and bond mutual funds, money-market funds, and age-based funds that become more conservative as the date of withdrawal gets closer. Gains on these investments are exempt from federal taxes and sometimes state taxes, so long as the money is used for college tuition and some related expenses.

Ms. Muldoon advises using the age-weighted funds because they "do a nice job of adjusting the risk of the portfolio." She adds that investors need to do their homework on the funds they choose. They should understand the risks and the investment company's track record.

She notes that if the child's parent is made the owner of the 529 account, both sets of grandparents can contribute. "That's kind of a nice family unifying tool," says Ms. Muldoon.

Another advantage: If the original beneficiary doesn't use up all of the funds in the 529 plan, they can be used by another child or the parent for his or her higher education. "The change of beneficiary has no cost," she says.

In selecting 529s, Ms. Muldoon suggests looking for low-cost plans and weighing state-tax breaks that may be available only when using a plan in one's home state, among other personal considerations.

In this column, we feature model portfolios from prominent financial advisers who invest in mutual funds and exchange-traded funds. Ms. Muldoon, 62 years old, has been a financial adviser since 1979 and is a partner at Dallas-based Carter Financial Management. She has been named among the top 1,000 advisers by Barron's magazine, published by News Corp.'s Dow Jones & Co., publisher of The Wall Street Journal. Ms. Muldoon currently manages $220 million in assets, primarily for individuals, while Carter Financial manages $800 million.

Ms. Muldoon says grandparents need to start saving early, whether they want to provide education for their grandchildren or pay for their wedding or the first mortgage payment.

Depending on the objective and how much control the grandparents want to have on how the money is spent, Ms. Muldoon may advise savings vehicles other than 529 plans.

She may suggest setting up a custodial account under the Uniform Gift to Minors Act if the funds are not meant entirely for education. For instance, the money can be used for buying a car. And here, too, both sets of grandparents can contribute if the child's parent is custodian.

However, the use of these funds is entirely up to the child when he or she reaches the state-specified age of majority.

"You've got to be reasonably confident that at 18, your child has judgment and will use the money for school or as you intended it," says Ms. Muldoon.

If grandparents want to retain more control on how the funds are used, Ms. Muldoon advises setting up an irrevocable trust. This is a more costly route, and these trusts are usually set up by wealthy individuals or entrepreneurs. They can put cash or securities or property into these trusts, and can specify when the funds can be used.

Since these trusts are irrevocable, at the time of setting them up the grandparents "have to be pretty clear about what they want the purpose of the funds to be," says Ms. Muldoon. She advises never setting these up without the help of an estate lawyer.

Besides helping clients make financial-planning choices, Ms. Muldoon collaborates with her firm's investment committee to pick investments for client portfolios.

Here, she shares a portfolio that she would use for a client with a moderate risk appetite. An actual client portfolio would differ depending on client needs and other factors.

The annual investment-management fee is typically 1% of assets under management, but would be lower for clients with more assets or more bonds in their portfolio. Carter Financial's financial-planning arm, Carter Advisory Services Inc., charges a flat fee for financial-planning services—depending on time and complexity involved—of $3,000 or more in the first year, and less for subsequent annual reviews.



 U.S. STOCKS: The model portfolio has a 27% allocation to traditional U.S.-stock funds. Ms. Muldoon allocates 10% to two funds that buy stocks of large companies—6% to  Fidelity Advisor New Insights, which currently owns mostly stocks of fast-growing or "growth" companies, and 4% to  Davis New York Venture, which buys cheap or "value" stocks.

A 4% slice of the portfolio is in  Thornburg Investment Income Builder, which buys stocks of companies with histories of paying dividends, and can also buy bonds.

There is an 8% allocation to stocks of midsize companies through  Fidelity Advisor Mid Cap II, and 5% in small-company stocks through  Royce Total Return.



 FOREIGN STOCKS: A majority of the 18% allocation to foreign stocks is in funds that primarily buy stocks in developed countries abroad. Ms. Muldoon allocates 8% to  Oakmark International, which buys both large and midsize companies, and 7% to  Dodge & Cox International Stock. The portfolio has 3% in  T. Rowe Price Emerging Markets Stock.



 BONDS AND CASH: The allocation to U.S. and foreign bonds is 30%; 5% is kept in cash. 

Like many other advisers, Ms. Muldoon is concerned about a potential increase in interest rates, which would hurt bond prices. So she has lately been buying funds that own floating-rate debt.

She invests 6% in  Neuberger Berman Floating Rate Income and 3% in  RidgeWorth Seix Floating Rate High Income. "They are complementary," says Ms. Muldoon of the two funds.

Ms. Muldoon allocates 9% of the portfolio to  Loomis Sayles Strategic Income, which seeks to buy bonds with high yields and other income-producing securities including preferred stocks. She also uses a go-anywhere bond fund,  Loomis Sayles Absolute Strategies, at 5%.

For further diversification, Ms. Muldoon allocates 4% of the portfolio to a fund that buys junk bonds— Lord Abbett High Yield—and 3% to  Templeton Global Bond.



 ALTERNATIVES: The portfolio has a 20% allocation to alternative investments, a share that has grown in recent years. 

Ms. Muldoon invests 6% in  BlackRock Energy & Resources, as a way to get exposure to companies in the oil and related industries.

For very wealthy clients, Ms. Muldoon invests in some private equity funds. But for investors who don't meet the high minimum requirements for such funds, she instead buys B shares of Warren Buffett's  Berkshire Hathaway Inc.

The wide array of companies in Berkshire's portfolio—from insurance companies to a chocolate producer—makes it a "pretty good surrogate for private equity," says Ms. Muldoon. The model portfolio has 2% in Berkshire.

The remaining 12% of the portfolio is in privately managed funds that use nontraditional investment strategies. These include "managed futures," where managers buy futures contracts and derivatives to profit from rising or falling trends across commodities, foreign currencies and other markets. Ms. Muldoon also uses some "long-short" funds which aim to make money partly when stocks lose value.

She has used such funds for many years and says that during the 2008-09 market downturn, they provided "some protection on the downside."

 Ms. Anand is a personal-finance columnist for The Wall Street Journal, based in New Delhi. She can be reached at shefali.anand@wsj.com. 