For many people these days, making retirement work means working in retirement. Maintaining a stream of income helps them afford the lifestyle they want when (well, if) they stop working full time. But the idea of continuing to work raises all sorts of questions: What kind of work should I do? How will my income affect my Social Security benefits? What's the best way to manage my income from work, Social Security and my investments?

Read the complete  Next: Planning & Living the New Retirement report .

These were the issues discussed in the first of a series of Retirement Adviser panels being put together by MarketWatch, an online publisher of business news and market information that's part of Dow Jones & Co., which also owns The Wall Street Journal. Robert Powell, senior MarketWatch columnist, talked with  Michael Kitces, director of research at the wealth-management firm Pinnacle Advisory Group Inc. and publisher of the Kitces Report; and  Elaine Floyd, director of retirement and life planning for Horsesmouth LLC, a firm that offers guidance for financial advisers. Here are edited excerpts of their conversation. 

  MR. POWELL: What's your advice to folks who are contemplating retirement but plan to work? What do they need to think about, both from the earnings amount and the taxation of benefits?  

 MR. KITCES: I find there are a lot of misconceptions out there about what it means to have earned income still in retirement, and what the tax implications are. There are a lot of folks who have this idea of, "I can't work in retirement because it may make my taxes go up and I may have more of my Social Security taxed or something else, so maybe I won't work." 

The first thing we have to convey is you never get a net negative. If you work, there is more money there. You don't get to keep all of it—Uncle Sam will take a piece, and you may impact a couple of other parts of the retirement pie. But it's never a net negative. 

Because of that, the starting point that we usually take for anyone who wants to talk about still having some kind of employment or earned income in retirement is, what that would look like. What is it you want to do, what income would we generate from it? And we take the rest of the pieces of the pie—Social Security, pensions, IRAs, other portfolio assets—and we build them around that core.



  MR. POWELL: Michael, you've talked a bit about how folks who are in that preretirement stage need to think about what they will do, how much they'll earn, what skills, training, education they might need to stay employed.  

 MR. KITCES: It's a challenge for most folks because we spend 10, 20, 30, 40-plus years in a particular career and our brains just start to lock us into that—it's either this or I'm retired and not working, as though it's sort of a binary choice, and it's really not.

If we're looking at the average situation, we're talking about 25% of total income for people over age 65 is earned income. If we sit down and have a conversation that says, what kind of work would you do if you could do anything you want and you only have to earn 25% of what you're earning today, a very different set of jobs and possibilities suddenly opens up. A lot of people start having really creative, positive ideas about the different things they could be doing in retirement.



  MR. POWELL: So what kind of advice would you give folks who are trying to contemplate what that next step might be in terms of finding the ideal semi-retirement job?  

 MR. KITCES: It varies by the person. In some situations, we've sent folks in their 60s to a career counselor. For more folks, though, the conversation just gets back to what is it that you're good at. Just spend the time thinking, well, what are you good at, what do you like doing, how might you do that? Is there a place for that in your current job or with your current firm? For most people, their assumption is no, everybody fits in their little box in my office.

But have you ever talked to anyone there about doing it? Because you're talking to me about retiring, so the worst-case scenario is they expedite you from leaving the job you were already about to leave. You have no downside here, so have the conversation with them.

 MS. FLOYD: I also think self-employment is going to be huge among baby boomers. Sure, go out and look at the job market and see what might be out there. But also think about what can I create or what can I do, what services can I provide that I could maybe find some customers for, and work out of my home maybe 10, 20 hours a week. The possibilities are endless for self-employment.

 MR. KITCES: We've seen people go back and become writers. We've seen lots of people go back and teach. We've seen folks that become consultants back to their industry, either to their firm or to their industry at large. We've seen people go completely different directions altogether. We've seen folks that turned hobbies they always enjoyed into small businesses that they have fun with.

  MR. POWELL: Let's talk about some of the technical things around Social Security—should I take it at 62, or at full retirement age, or should I wait until age 70?  

 MS. FLOYD: I'm biased, and my bias arises from looking at the lifetime value and lifetime income stream of Social Security. It is a practically guaranteed, inflation-adjusted lifetime annuity. So to take it at 62, you're leaving a lot of money on the table.

I know a lot of people see it the other way. They say, what if I die? Well, you probably won't care then. But what if you live? That is really the biggest risk among baby boomers. If you're married, what if you die, but your spouse lives a long time? 

It's been traditional to look at the break-even age: If you start at 62 you get this income stream, versus starting at 70 and you get a higher amount but you've missed all those early years of checks. So when does the age 70 benefit, the cumulative total, begin to exceed the total from applying at 62? Typically it's around age 78. So advisers typically ask, do you think you'll make it past 78?

But the more important question is, what is your income going to be when you're 80, 85, 90? What if you are a high-earning husband and you die at, say, 71? How much income is your surviving spouse going to get?

We have these calculators that compare the amounts, and they are dramatic. They are hugely dramatic. And so I am trying to get people away from that break-even thinking.



  MR. POWELL: So if people are going to delay to age 70, what can they do to make up the difference in income that they might have had?  

 MS. FLOYD: We've created this retirement-spending calculator. You enter your spending needs and then you determine, should I draw that from Social Security or from my IRA? Let's say you're 62, you're retired, you have an IRA, you're debating should I start Social Security at 62 and take less from my IRA, or should I delay my Social Security and satisfy all of my spending needs from my IRA? And I'm using IRA to mean any personal resources. It could be investment accounts, whatever.

What we've determined is that it does make sense, if you live past about 78, to take more money out of that IRA. And it seems very counterintuitive because you're thinking, oh gosh, Social Security is right there. I could just take it and then I could take less from my IRA.



  MR. POWELL: Which is presumably growing at 8%.  

 MS. FLOYD: Exactly. And that's the other part of the calculator, is that you enter your presumed rate of return. And believe it or not, it does work to take more money out of the IRA and to delay that Social Security.

 MR. KITCES: We've seen scenarios where we were able to draw more money out of the IRA because we tapped it lightly through the 60s at low tax rates rather than pushing the entire IRA out until age 70, when not only does Social Security now begin, because it needs to if it hasn't already, but now we have a required minimum distribution from the IRA. We've seen situations where the IRA is pushing out more than we actually need in cash flow and we're getting these very large tax liabilities. We could have tapped it in our 60s at lower tax rates and then had lower required minimum distributions later and get cash flows that line up much more evenly to what we actually need.



  MR. POWELL: Some of the research I've read suggests people don't want to do that because they view their IRA as a rainy-day fund and say I'll take my Social Security because I can't tap into that as a lump sum should some shock come about.  

 MR. KITCES: If your rainy day is my roof might need a repair, yeah, we need someplace that we can go to fix the roof. But for a lot of folks, the really big rainy day is that we live to be 102 and there might not be enough money to make that work. If that's our greatest concern, there's no better rainy-day fund than Social Security that starts at age 70. There should always be a rainy-day fund around for the leaky roof and the other emergencies; the question is what are we doing with the rest of our retirement assets.