 Q: With oil prices soaring and prices of food and other items rising, how can an investor protect against inflation? 

Read the complete  Wealth Adviser report .

 A: Investors in the past often turned to gold and other precious metals when looking to bet on, or find protection from, inflation. But some analysts say that because these investments have jumped in price in recent years, their current levels already assume a surge in inflation, at least down the road. Other commodity-related investments also are expensive, making them dangerous inflation plays.

Treasury Inflation Protected Securities, or TIPS, are another standard anti-inflation strategy. These bonds are designed to provide a return indexed to inflation. But investors already have flooded into TIPS, too, driving prices up and inflation-adjusted yields down. Ten-year TIPS yield just over 1% after inflation is taken into consideration, compared with an average of 2% in recent years.

As an alternative,  Marilyn Cohen, president of Envision Capital in Los Angeles, recommends Corporate Inflation Protected Securities. The corporate twin of TIPS, CIPS are private-sector bonds that come with a specific interest rate adjusted periodically for inflation. They're better than TIPS, Ms. Cohen says, because they carry a higher yield. And they pay income monthly based on the consumer price index, or CPI, another advantage over TIPS.

"TIPS make you wait until maturity, or when sold, to capture the adjusted principal," Ms. Cohen notes.

She recommends two CIPS: from  Citigroup unit Citigroup Funding Inc., maturing March 24, 2021, currently yielding 5% for the next 12 months; and from  SLM Corp., the student-loan backer commonly known as Sallie Mae, maturing May 3, 2019, and yielding 3.75%.

The catch with CIPS: These bonds are not issued in large volume, so they can be harder to buy and sell without moving prices. Another problem is that some say CPI understates actual inflation rates, reducing the return on these investments.

Bolder investors might consider an exchange-traded fund that rises in value as Treasurys fall in price, something that could happen if inflation perks up. One example:  US ProShares UltraShort 20+ Year Treasury, a fund that buys derivative investments in the hope of achieving a return that's twice the inverse performance of Barclays Capital's benchmark index of 20-year Treasurys. Another:  Rydex Juno fund, which profits when yields on the 30-year Treasury bond rise. The  IndexIQ CPI Inflation Hedged ETF also tries to hedge against inflation.

  Bill Gross, founder of Pacific Investment Management Co., advises shying away from Treasury bonds and focusing on debt of emerging-market nations. Morgan Stanley notes that municipal bonds tend to do well when inflation picks up.

Farmland also does well during inflation, increasing the attraction of ETFs and exchange-traded notes that track returns of agriculture and livestock, like MOO, the trading symbol for  Market Vectors-Agribusiness, COW, for  iPath DJ-UBS Livestock TR Sub Index ETN, and  PowerShares DB Agriculture.

 A word of caution: Some dismiss recent price rises as a blip. Indeed, just a few months ago investors were fretting about deflation, not inflation. New price pressures could put a crimp on the economy, leading to lower inflation, these skeptics say.

Also, sustained inflation tends to occur when wages improve, something that we have yet to see. If unemployment continues to fall, wages could firm, creating new potential inflationary pressures.



 Q: What's the best gold investment from a tax perspective? 

 A: Investors and experts disagree on the best ways to profit from rising gold prices. Some like shares of miners or gold ETFs; others favor options, futures or coins.

Few consider the tax implications of these decisions, however. Gold is considered a "collectible" by the Internal Revenue Service when held as coins or bullion. As such, taxes on long-term gains are 28%, compared with 15% on long-term stock gains.

Even gold ETFs, like  SPDR Gold Shares, are taxed at the higher level because they're considered "grantor trusts," not mutual funds, notes  Robert Gordon, president of Twenty-First Securities, a New York brokerage firm. Long-term rates on these ETFs, or rates for investments held longer than a year, are 28%. Short-term rates are at ordinary income rates, just as with stocks.

Mr. Gordon favors gold options or futures contracts, which are taxed at a blended rate of 23%, no matter how long you hold them. He and other advisers say it's folly to base an investment decision on its tax treatment, however. A gold ETF might have upside that offsets its higher tax treatment.

Options on many gold ETFs are actively traded and easy to buy and exit, making them a better choice for many investors, argues Mr. Gordon. At the same time, an investor who has purchased an option on a gold ETF doesn't have to fork over more money to a broker if the investment falls in price, as with a futures contracts that turns sour.

"The instrument an investor uses can add an awful lot on after-tax basis," Mr. Gordon says.



 Mr. Zuckerman is a special writer for The Wall Street Journal in New York. He can be reached at gregory.zuckerman@wsj.com. Send questions about alternative investing to reports@wsj.com. 



