In the lounge at Café Kristall, surrounded by supporters, family and fans on Monday, opera singer Thomas Hampson was about to raise a toast when he realized he didn't have a drink in hand.

"Can I get a beer?" he asked the crowd.

A bottle showed up pronto—and it was well-deserved. Mr. Hampson had just finished an intense, intimate performance and interview at WQXR radio's Jerome L. Greene Performance Space on Charlton Street. The show capped off a string of performances the previous week with the New York Philharmonic. Mr. Hampson is also in the middle of a Mahler extravaganza: Last year was the 150th anniversary of the Austrian composer's birth, and this year is the 100th anniversary of his death. Mr. Hampson also just released a new recording of Mahler's "Des Knaben Wunderhorn."

Though his voice makes him sound European, Mr. Hampson is every bit the corn-fed American—born in Spokane, Wash., to parents from the Midwest. And when he sings "Oh, Shenandoah," you know it. Even so, he is internationally celebrated as an interpreter of Mahler and German lieder.

And there's something he wants everyone to know: Lieder is not depressing. Conveniently, he has distilled this argument to a few key points.

 "Song is the way we tell our stories," he said on WQXR. "Lieder is a world of metaphor."

Mr. Hampson brought his wife, Andrea Herberstein, who has grown comfortable with her husband's touring schedule. "I just have to wear the right shoes and have a half-way decent hairdo," she said. Sibylle Reyniak was also there with her son, Andrew. She and her late husband Victor could be described as Hampson Heads. They followed the singer to stages around the world, and Mr. Hampson's new recording is dedicated to the late Mr. Reyniak, whose support made the album possible.

Mr. Hampson lives both in New York and Zurich, and his attention to song is equally split between American and Austrian composers. His Hampsong Foundation is currently engaged in an effort with the Library of Congress to research and digitize manuscripts of American song.

But of all the songs this artist sings, there's one that New York-based supporter Robert Simon says is best of all. "He sang 'Happy Birthday' to me when I turned 60," said Mr. Simon, explaining that he and his partner had been on their way to a celebratory performance of "South Pacific" when they ran into Mr. Hampson going to the Philharmonic.

Not a bad birthday gift, coming from an international opera star.