LONDON—U.K. consumer confidence collapsed at the start of 2011, raising fresh doubts about the sustainability of the economic recovery.

Polling firm GfK NOP Friday said its main measure of consumer confidence fell to minus 29 in January from minus 21 in December to reach its lowest level in 22 months.

Consumers became far more pessimistic about the outlook for the economy in the coming 12 months and about their personal financial prospects, and more reluctant to make major purchases, the survey says.

That suggests consumers will tighten their belts further in response to the prospect of big job losses in the public sector, wages that fail to keep up with inflation and higher taxes.

The U.K. economy contracted in the final three months of last year, and the sharp fall in consumer confidence makes it unlikely that it will experience a strong rebound in the first quarter of this year.

"January's eight point drop represents an astonishing collapse in consumer confidence," said  Nick Moon, managing director of GfK NOP Social Research. "In the 35 years since the index began, confidence has only slumped this much on six occasions, the last being in the midst of the 1992 recession."

GfK carried out its survey between Jan. 7 and Jan. 16, before the Office for National Statistics delivered the surprising news that the economy shrank by 0.5% in the fourth quarter of 2010. 

That news is likely to further weaken confidence in February.

Separately, the Confederation of British Industry Thursday said retail sales growth slowed in January, and is expected to continue to decelerate. Its monthly measure of sales volume fell to 37 in January from 56 in December, the weakest reading in three months. 

The balance is the percentage of respondents reporting higher sales than in the corresponding period the previous year minus the percentage reporting weaker sales. 

"Consumer demand is expected to be weak in the coming months, as the spending power of households is hit by a combination of sharply rising prices and weak wage growth," said  Ian McCafferty, chief economic adviser to the CBI. "Retailers can expect a challenging period ahead."

The fall in consumer confidence will once again raise questions about the wisdom of the government's plans to cut its huge budget deficit, which involve tax increases and spending cuts of some £111 billion ($177 billion) over the next four years.

The opposition Labour Party has argued the government is moving too fast, and that its plans will backfire if the U.K. enters a double-dip recession, because weak growth reduces tax revenue and makes cutting the deficit more difficult.

However, the government Tuesday received backing from Bank of England Gov. Mervyn King, who said it must stay the course. The bank has left its key interest rate unchanged at a record low of 0.5% since March 2009, despite an inflation rate that has risen well above its 2.0% target. The fourth-quarter contraction alongside indications that consumer demand will weaken mean the bank is unlikely to raise its key interest rate soon.

 Write to  Paul Hannon at paul.hannon@dowjones.com 