For those who follow finance even half-heartedly,  Donald Trump's rise to the top of the polls as a possible presidential candidate is a bit baffling and bewildering.

  Charles Munger, speaking at the  Berkshire Hathaway Inc. annual meeting, had this to say of Mr. Trump. "Obviously, I think he's a jerk," Berkshire's vice chairman said.

If Mr. Trump ever was considered a serious Wall Street player, that isn't the case anymore. At best, his record was minor and mixed.

To many, Mr. Trump is a middling billionaire who inherited much of his wealth. How can a billionaire be middling?

Wall Street isn't a world populated by people with say, the average income of teachers. Wall Street is the 1% of Americans who own 42% of the nation's wealth. In that universe, Mr. Trump is middling.

Mr. Trump sees it differently. In an interview, he told me that some reporters have mischaracterized his accomplishments. They play up his failures, not his successes.

There might be some truth in this. He flipped a Florida home bought for $41 million—selling it for $100 million. My search of news clips found 40 articles about the deal. Search "Trump" and "bankruptcy," and you get 8,000 hits.

Those results might be skewed. After all, there has been more than one bankruptcy attached to the Trump brand.

Mr. Trump is irked by this. He made more than $50 million on his Florida real-estate deal, he said, and "people don't even report it. It's a nice deal and nobody cares. And if I do a bad one, they want to write about it. That's the sad part."

Mr. Trump also takes some of the blame. When I mentioned that on Wall Street he has a reputation as someone who oversells his record, he was downright modest.

"I do a poor job in selling my accomplishments," Mr. Trump said. "I'm not a salesman. The truth is I try to explain my accomplishments, but people can't believe them."

They don't believe them, Mr. Trump says, because his deals are so amazing.

Among Wall Street peers, Mr. Trump is more marketing than meat. He has done some deals, yes, but he is nothing special. He licensed his name to more buildings than he actually owns. In court proceedings, testimony shows that banks have been leery of lending to him given his record in Atlantic City, N.J., and his personal rescues.

They say his primary accomplishment when it comes to his fortune is that, for the most part, he hasn't screwed it up. Mr. Trump, of course, objects to all this.

If he decides to officially launch a bid for the presidency, he would have to disclose his private finances. The decision could happen in "a couple of weeks," he says.

Such a filing, he says, would bring three revelations: His net worth is higher than the $2.7 billion reported by Forbes, he has little debt and lots of free cash. Much of that value might in the form of intangible assets, meaning the value of the Trump brand.

"If I announce, the numbers will be far greater than anything you've heard," he told me. "I am much more successful than anybody wants to give me credit for."

Then there is the claim that Mr. Trump is too busy with his sideline projects: "The Apprentice," Trump brand ties, water and steak, not to mention politics, to focus on his business.

Mr. Trump concedes that he isn't as active as he used to be, though children Donald, Ivanka and Eric have taken over much of the work.

"It's not easy when you're doing this stuff and running a business, and by that I mean the interviews and the political stuff," he says.

Mr. Trump's biggest hurdle on Wall Street is his history in Atlantic City. Trump Entertainment and Resorts, formerly a public company, was forced in 2004 into Chapter 11. Mr. Trump's stake was cut in half, and he was ousted as chief executive. After emerging from bankruptcy, the company filed again. This time, Mr. Trump resigned from the board.

As Mr. Trump explains it, bankruptcy on Wall Street doesn't carry the same kind of shame that personal bankruptcy does. It is a distinction he hopes the public will make if he runs for president.

"I see people buy companies and throw them into bankruptcy the next day and use that to negotiate," Mr. Trump says. "And I could be accused of that, too. That's called being a good businessman. It's called using the laws of this nation to your benefit."

Others see it differently. Bankers accused Mr. Trump of failing to honor personal guarantees in a Chicago development. He failed in the airline business, sticking creditors with $380 million in mostly unpaid loans.

Then there was the Deutsche Bank report. In 2009, Mr. Trump's lawsuit against a journalist who estimated his net worth at less than $250 million included a report by his defense team that pegged Mr. Trump's net worth at $788 million. The case was thrown out.

Mr. Trump disputes all this, but it is clear that he isn't as renowned on Wall Street as he is on Main Street.

If you ask the average American, whose interest in Wall Street ebbs and flows depending on the value of a 401(k), Mr. Trump has all of the trappings of someone successful who knows what he is talking about.

He is a bully. He is tacky. He has had trophy wives. His values range from making money to admiring himself making money. He suggests he is better than not only you but President Barack Obama.

"I'm number one in the polls," Mr. Trump says. "I'm in a statistical dead heat with Obama. I'm the only one who can beat him."

In other words, to Joe Six Pack, Mr. Trump seems like the typical Wall Street guy. Writing for Salon this week, Steve Kornacki called him "a real-life version of Gordon Gekko."

This isn't an exaggeration. Consider a Wall Street police lineup. How many of us would recognize  Brian Moynihan, the CEO of Bank of America Corp., the nation's biggest bank?

How about  Donald Bren, Richard LeFrak, Leonard Stern or  John Sobrato, real-estate developers who rank higher than Mr. Trump on the Forbes richest Americans list?

Imagine Mr. Trump in that same lineup. Would anyone not recognize him?

Of course not. Fiction usually is more popular than the truth.

 Write to  David Weidner at david.weidner@dowjones.com 