Davis Love III is a natural on the golf course and a naturally nice guy. He was a rare example of a son of a PGA of America teaching pro winning the PGA Championship—in 1997 at Winged Foot, where a rainbow famously appeared as he was finishing his round. So he was the natural choice on Thursday to be named captain of the 2012 U.S. Ryder Cup team—by the PGA of America. 

He is not, however, a natural actor, and that's a good thing. His lack of self-aggrandizing guile is a major reason why his selection as captain (surely one of the worst kept secrets in golf history) has been so universally praised.

I had a chance last month to spend some time with Mr. Love as he filmed a series of television commercials in Florida for Bridgestone Golf, his new sponsor after playing with Titleist balls for most of his professional career. He could have used a stunt double just to walk across the practice range. Fred Couples, his pal and a longtime staff player for Bridgestone, wasn't making things any easier by deliberately botching his line while the two were rehearsing. "Welcome to another Titleist challenge," Mr. Couples brightly intoned.

"Don't mess me up, man," Mr. Love complained. 

During live takes of the scene, Mr. Love couldn't quite get his gesticulative timing down. He was supposed to point emphatically on the word "your" as he said, "Where we fit the right ball to your game." But he kept jumping the gun, pointing instead on the word "fit."

This broke up several other pros watching via live feed in a nearby shed. LPGA star Paula Creamer, in particular, couldn't stop laughing. Mr. Couples, guessing correctly what was going on inside, eventually turned to the camera to defend his friend. "Hey, you guys back in the hut, take a hike," he said. Or words to that effect.

Mr. Love, speaking at the PGA news conference Thursday, teared up when asked about the significance of his selection. "Now to be named Ryder Cup captain is a thrill I never thought I would have. I would love to share that with my father and I know, somehow, I am," he said. His father, Davis Love Jr., was killed in a plane crash in 1988. Mr. Love has said many times, including in his 1997 book, "Every Shot I Take," that the tragedy put his life and career firmly in perspective.

If Mr. Love as a player never quite lived up to the expectations that his well-honed natural skills and prodigious length off the tee created, it's probably because as he grew older his family and other interests, including recently a golf design business with his brother, Mark, took a higher priority. In addition to winning his one major at Winged Foot, he won 19 other PGA Tour events and played on every Ryder Cup and Presidents Cup team between 1993 and 2005. That's a great career, but since 2003 he's only won twice and, at 46, he's not yet a shoo-in for the Hall of Fame.

"Davis is still as talented as anybody out there on the regular Tour, but he enjoys doing so many other things now, I think that takes away a little bit from his golf," Mr. Couples said during a break in the filming last month.

At the news conference, however, Mr. Love made it clear he didn't want to be counted out as a player. "I'm never going to give up my goal of making Ryder Cup [teams], as long as I feel like I'm competitive," he said.

As the captain, he said, he wants the 12 best available players for the squad, the first eight selected through a points formula and the final four captain's picks. "If I'm healthy and I'm one of the best eight come the PGA Championship in 2012, then I'm going to want to play, because I don't want to leave a guy off the team that might help us win, and if that's me, great." He said he would not make himself a captain's pick.

Last week at the Sony Open in Hawaii, in his first event of the year, he shot four rounds in the 60s and tied for ninth. Perhaps the honor of being the Ryder Cup captain-designee will reinvigorate his game. Six years ago he told me that his most cherished desire was to win the Masters, not far from his family home in Sea Island, Ga. Come April, if he gets into contention at Augusta, keep an eye out for rainbows.