Singapore Airlines Ltd. on Wednesday became the latest air carrier to implement contingency plans in the midst of Japan's natural disasters and radiation fears, indefinitely postponing the start of new Airbus A380 service between Los Angeles and Tokyo.

Slated to launch a long-awaited daily flight between the two cities in less than two weeks—featuring an A380 superjumbo with enhanced cabin amenities—the carrier said a drop in traffic prompted it to delay those plans. 

Beginning on Thursday, Singapore Airlines said it also will end crew layovers in Tokyo on its current Boeing 747 flights from Singapore to Tokyo, and then continuing to Los Angeles. The aircraft will land in Tokyo in both directions, but then fly to Osaka to change crews before heading for Singapore or Los Angeles International Airport. The airline said the goal is to protect flight crews, and safeguard their rest, by minimizing the impact of continuing earthquakes.

In the days since last Friday's massive earthquake and tsunami created radiation hazards at the stricken facility, a few foreign carriers have established remote layover points for their crews or otherwise altered their flying schedules. Australia's  Qantas Airways
QAN


-0.28
%




 is routing its Tokyo flights via Hong Kong so that crews will not stay in Tokyo overnight. Austrian Airlines is making stopovers in Seoul on the way to Tokyo. Germany's  Deutsche Lufthansa
DLAKY


0.84
%




 is diverting flights away from Tokyo to Osaka and Nagoya via Seoul. Italy's Alitalia plans to divert all Tokyo flights to Osaka.

The idea is to give pilots and flight attendants less time on the ground near Tokyo, to ensure that they get adequate rest and aren't stressed by earthquake aftershocks and fears of a nuclear meltdown.

Union officials representing pilots at United Airlines and Continental Airlines said they have asked their employer,  United Continental Holdings Inc.,
UAL


0.56
%




 to allow pilots flying to Tokyo to spend their rest periods at a remote layover point, farther from the capital and the crippled nuclear power station roughly 150 miles to the north.

But many airlines that serve Japan's capital city are maintaining their normal schedules, and their crews are spending their rest periods at hotels in and around Tokyo. 

For Singapore Airlines, delaying launch of the planned A380 service also means losing the opportunity to showcase dressed-up premium and economy-class cabin furnishings and personal entertainment systems. 

The carrier planned a public relations campaign highlighting more spacious seats, improved reading lights and beefed-up entertainment systems with upgraded screens and expanded video options. 

A Singapore Airlines spokesman said the A380 upgrades were intended to be the biggest changes in the carrier's business-class and economy-class cabins in nearly a decade. 

With the carrier slated to expand service throughout the Pacific and take delivery of new aircraft over the next year, including several A380s, Singapore Airlines said it still plans this month to launch three-times-a-week service between Singapore and Sao Paulo. 

Meanwhile, the pilots unions at  AMR Corp.'s American Airlines and  Delta Air Lines Inc.
DAL


1.21
%




 haven't asked those carriers to create remote layover points, at least for now. 

Capt.  Sam Mayer, spokesman for the Allied Pilots Association union at American, said Wednesday that "we see no reason to recommend that we layover somewhere else, at least at this point." But the APA has suggested to American that pilots who want to be removed from their assigned trips to Tokyo be able to do so without penalty.

The Air Line Pilots Association, which represents the Continental and United aviators, has asked for new layover arrangements and pushed for pilots to be able to refuse Japan flights without repercussions. So far, United Continental has declined and continues to house the cockpit crews at a hotel near Tokyo's Narita International Airport. Immediately after the earthquake, the company sent managers to Japan to assist employees there. As part of its contingency planning, United parked a spare 747 jumbo jet at Narita in case an evacuation is necessary.

The pilots at Continental and United currently are in negotiations over a new joint labor agreement, following the merger last fall. 

  Jay Pierce, chairman of the Continental branch, said earthquake aftershocks are keeping pilots awake, along with the stress of worrying about radiation leaking from the crippled power plant and how they would fare in an evacuation. He said he has suggested the pilots fly as passengers to Continental's crew base in Guam, three hours away, after they land their planes in Tokyo, and overnight in Guam. He said other possibilities include overnights in Osaka, Taipei or Seoul.

"A lot of other airlines are doing this," Capt. Pierce said. "The only reason not to shift to another city is because of the cost. We want to do everything we can to protect the flights going into Narita. But let's not put the pilots in harm's way. It's an expense worth incurring."

He and Capt.  Garry Kravit, vice chairman of the United ALPA branch, said they believe some pilots have refused assignments to Japan. The union has asked United Continental to let those pilots withdraw from their assigned flights without discipline or financial penalty. "It's our hope the company will listen to our concerns," Capt. Kravit said.

A United spokeswoman confirmed that the pilots have asked for new layover arrangements. She said she can't comment on personnel matters such as missed trips. "The safety of our employees is always foremost," she said. The company is in close contract with the Federal Aviation Administration and other federal agencies, and is closely monitoring the situation to Japan. Aside from its transient flight crews, United has 1,000 employees in that country.

 Write to  Andy Pasztor at andy.pasztor@wsj.com and Susan Carey at susan.carey@wsj.com 