It's November 1766. France is reeling after the loss of its North American colonies in the French and Indian War. Louis XV, eager to bolster national prestige and expand his empire in the Pacific, launches Louis-Antoine de Bougainville on the first French circumnavigation of the world. The commander sets sail with two ships and a complement of 330 men. Or, rather, 329 men and one woman.

Her name was Jeanne Baret. Twenty-six years old, she was the daughter of poor day laborers in Autun, in the Loire Valley. And that's where she probably would have lived out her years had she not met a local physician named Philibert Commerson. A widower 12 years her senior, Commerson took Baret to Paris, where they shared an apartment. He was smart and ambitious, and in the capital he attracted the attention of such grandees as Voltaire and Linnaeus. When Bougainville was recruiting a chief naturalist for his world voyage, Commerson was offered the job.

Commerson brought along as his assistant one "Jean" Baret, and they both sailed on the Étoile, the expedition's supply ship. It wasn't long before the crew noticed something strange about the smooth-cheeked young man in baggy clothing. Jean was never seen using the head, and when the ship reached the equator, he alone didn't strip down during the ritual "baptism" of those crossing the line for the first time. When the captain of the Étoile finally summoned the youth to his cabin, Baret confessed—to being a eunuch.

This improbable explanation served for a while, but somewhere in the Pacific—the location depends on whose journal you believe—Baret was finally exposed. When informed that his assistant was none other than Jeanne Baret, his lover from Paris, Commerson was shocked, shocked.

 By Glynis Ridley  Crown, 288 pages, $25

The competing versions of Baret's moment of exposure underscore the dilemma that Glynis Ridley faced as she composed "The Discovery of Jeanne Baret." Baret left no account of her adventure, and Commerson kept a diary only fitfully. Seven other journals from the voyage survive, but the four that mention Baret are sketchy and contradictory. Confronted with this dearth of sources, Ms. Ridley chose a provocative, speculative course.

Ms. Ridley's 2005 book, "Clara's Grand Tour: Travels With a Rhinoceros in Eighteenth-Century Europe," required her to speculate as well. But Clara the celebrity rhino, displayed by its proud Dutch owner to admiring audiences in several countries, left a bigger paper trail, and its story was really a pretext for Ms. Ridley's wide-ranging digressions on European life at the time. "The Discovery of Jeanne Baret" includes its share of asides, on everything from foundling hospitals to celestial navigation. But Baret's escapade is front and center—and is driven by leaps of imagination more common to movies "based on a true story" than to books of nonfiction.

Whereas other writers have suggested that Baret was schooled in natural history by her accomplished lover-patron, Ms. Ridley argues that her heroine was already an expert plantswoman and that, "in this light, Baret was not Commerson's pupil, but his teacher." Her evidence is a notebook of medicinal plants, written in an unknown hand and found among Commerson's papers: Ms. Ridley supposes that the notebook was penned by Baret and presented to the naturalist as a lover's gift. The proof that Baret, the daughter of impoverished peasants, was even capable of writing? Her maternal grandparents' surnames were Huguenot, and French Protestants of the era "generally had higher levels of literacy than their Catholic counterparts."

Ms. Ridley also believes that it was Baret, not Commerson, who made the signature botanical discovery of the voyage, the showy bougainvillea, named for the expedition's commander. With Commerson's ulcerous leg leaving him "not in a fit state to wander any distance, to scramble down gullies, or to climb outcrops," who else but Baret could have found the vine, spurred by the hope that it would cure her lover's limb?

Throughout the book, actions, thoughts and moods of which no record survives are reported with authority. And so we're privy to the ebb and flow of the lovers' relationship, and we see Baret cowering in her hammock with a loaded pistol to protect herself from shipmates. Phrases such as "is tempting to imagine," "can be easily guessed at" and "is not incredible to suppose" appear often. And once such suppositions are planted, they have a habit of emerging later as demonstrated fact. Perhaps most troubling, there is no real evidence that the book's horrifying climactic scene, involving rape, occurred at all. But such provocation is a deliberate strategy: In an endnote, Ms. Ridley acknowledges that hers is "an unfamiliar version of history, one that [some other scholars] might wish to dispute."

As for Baret and Commerson, perhaps to avoid trouble (women were forbidden aboard French naval ships), they left the expedition on the island of Mauritius. But half a dozen years later, the plucky Baret made her way home, becoming the first woman in history to circumnavigate the Earth. In France, she fought for her rightful share of Commerson's estate, received a government pension for her services to science and quietly passed the rest of her life in the Dordogne.

Baret was an extraordinary woman, embarking on a journey no member of her sex had ever attempted, weathering life at sea and winning the admiration of her shipmates with her capacity for work. As Ms. Ridley says, Baret "lived to circle the globe, botanizing on the sides of the Strait of Magellan, traversing the Pacific, climbing on the slopes of an island volcano, and trekking through the rain forest of Madagascar, before finally finding her way back to France. Hers is, by any measure, a remarkable life." Unfortunately, the author's imaginings serve to diminish, rather than enhance, her heroine's accomplishments.

 Mr. Helferich is the author of "Humboldt's Cosmos: Alexander Von Humboldt and the Latin American Journey That Changed the Way We See the World."  