MUMBAI- Five bankers dealing with institutional equities at  Credit Suisse Securities (India) Pvt. have joined rival Jefferies India Pvt. 

The move, confirmed by two people familiar with the development, will help Jefferies build its equity-capital market team in India. Jefferies has been working on expanding its product suite for nearly two years, and recently advised Reliance Industries Ltd, India's largest company by market value, on the purchase of a 60% stake in the Marcellus shale gas assets owned by  Carrizo Oil and Gas Inc.
CRZO


-5.28
%






This is not the first time top Credit Suisse bankers have left for Jefferies. In July last year,  Nilesh Jasani left the Zurich-based investment bank's Indian unit to join Jefferies as managing director and head of Asia-Pacific research.

The bankers leaving this time include Govindarajan Chellappa, director, automotive;  Kunal Bajaj, director, equity sales;  Arya Sen, associate, consumer goods;  Piyush Nahar, equity analyst; and Rajasa K., an associate, have resigned to join Jefferies, according to a senior Credit Suisse executive and a headhunter. Two of the bankers confirmed they had quit, while two didn't answer calls. The fifth banker couldn't be reached for comment. Jefferies didn't return calls.

A Credit Suisse spokesperson declined to comment on the development. 

One Credit Suisse senior official said negotiations are on to retain Nahar and Rajasa K.

The defection will get the executives a 35% increase in compensation on a deferral basis—part of it will be paid over a period of time, a headhunter invovled in the deal said.

Credit Suisse, which was ranked 18 in the investment banking revenue league table by  Dealogic Plc in 2010, had 18 bankers on its rolls in the equity capital market team. The bank reported a revenue of $14 million in 2010 in India.

Credit Suisse, which advised  Patni Computer Systems Ltd.'s founders on the sale of shares to a consortium of Apax Partners and  iGate Corp. Inc. in January, hired Vedika Bhandarkar from  JPMorgan
JPM


0.18
%




 as head of its India investment banking business in April last year.

Most foreign investment banks have set up offices in India in the last two years, and have been trying to woo clients with equity, debt or merger and acquisition advisory services.

Jefferies India head  Probir Rao told Mint in an interview last August that he wanted to expand the team to 15 people by year end, and add more services. 

"We will hire across the board," he said at the time.

Other players including Barclays Capital, the investment banking business of Barclays Bank Plc, and NM Rothschild and Sons (India) Pvt Ltd. also plan to expand their equity advisory businesses.

Hiring and retaining key people are going to be priorities for investment banks, said  Saurabh Tripathi, partner with Boston Consulting Group.

"We expect investment banks to do very well over the next two years and thus retaining people is going to be the priority," Mr. Tripathi said. "Competition has sent the compensation offered to investment bankers through the roof, and this is hurting the profitability of investment banks in India. Unfortunately, there will be more such moves and one will have to deal with it."