  Durham, N.C. 

In 2000, John Bugg gave his wife, Sally, the go-ahead to design her dream home.

A decade later, they have finally moved in, settling into their 4,500-square-foot home of glass, cedar and concrete set on 10 densely wooded acres outside downtown Durham. 

It took John and Sally Bugg a decade to build their dream home in Durham, N.C.

Inside, the modern, three-bedroom ranch home is full of long lines and right angles. A low-ceilinged concrete entry opens up into a great room with a 52-foot-long wall of glass looking into the forest. Referencing the architect's love of the work of architect Louis Kahn, the home has white oak woodwork that contrasts with the rough gray of poured-concrete walls. Artworks by Marilyn Minter, Robert Motherwell and Ms. Bugg's brother, Steve Miller, hang from walls.

Ms. Bugg, 63, is reveling in her first kitchen island and the expansive views. "You just want to sit and look out the window," said Mr. Miller.

Mr. Bugg, a gruff, 66-year-old attorney who represents builders, calls the home "Sally's house." Still, he favors the sauna in the master bath, the fireplaces he requested and his separate work shed. He's still getting used to all the space—it's more than twice the size of their old home—and is still figuring out what lights go with an eight-switch control panel in the living area. He rides around the property on his open-air utility vehicle with his yellow lab, Paddy, racing nearby.

For nearly four decades, the Buggs lived in a ranch house in Durham, where they raised their two sons. But they fell in love with the property and closed on it for $180,000 in 1999, with the idea of building a home there someday. "I was ready for a change," said Ms. Bugg, who began interviewing architects soon after. 

Mr. Bugg wasn't quite as ready but gave the go-ahead. He figured designing the home would keep his wife busy—and banked on what he calls her high standards and her difficulty making decisions to prevent the home from becoming reality. Paying an architect is cheaper than construction, he likes to point out. 

For a long time, it looked like a winning strategy. A self-described fan of "process," Ms. Bugg and her architect, Kenneth Hobgood, spent years coming up with a plan.

The first set of plans Ms. Bugg and Mr. Hobgood brought to Mr. Bugg for approval took around four years. The pair met several times a month, working and reworking the floor plan to fit in details like closets and space for cookbooks before moving on to its exterior look. Those plans went through changes, too, with early elements such as a butterfly roof and a series of concrete fins under the living area falling by the wayside. "Kenneth is slow, I'm not fast, and John wasn't pushing," Ms. Bugg recalled. 

Mr. Hobgood said he never doubted the home would be completed—even if he wasn't around to see it. The eventual plan they took to Mr. Bugg called for several pods containing living areas and bedrooms, connected by long, glass hallways. 

But with the budget more than twice the $1 million cap Mr. Bugg had set, the pair went back to the drawing board. Other sets of plans followed, as did instructions from Mr. Bugg to continue cost-cutting. Out went the long, winding hallways, a bonus room over a garage and materials like travertine floors; in came shorter hallways and porcelain tile floors. By early 2008, the pair had created their final set of plans. (A friend once remarked that Ms. Bugg and Mr. Hobgood, the architect, should qualify for "common-law somethings" after working together for so long.)

Mr. Bugg blinked. "I decided we either needed to build this house or I needed to think about the possibility of divorce," he said. The couple broke ground in the summer of 2008.

The couple exceeded their $1 million budget; they declined to say by how much. According to the county's planning and inspections department, on average it costs $95 to $100 per square foot to build in the area. A four-bedroom house on six acres of land nearby is asking $695,000.

Completing the house more quickly would have had its benefits, Ms. Bugg said. Their old house has been on the market for 1½ years; selling during the boom would have been easier. But she's gone on to her new project: furnishing the home, some of whose rooms have placeholders from their old house or empty space where chairs or sofas should be. 

Her deadline, according to her husband? "Yesterday."

 Write to  Juliet Chung at juliet.chung@wsj.com 