Scammers already are trying to profit off the tragedy and devastation of the massive earthquake and tsunami in Japan.

That means if you're eager to donate to the victims in Japan, it's best to proceed carefully. Already, a scam email is circulating that purports to be from the British Red Cross, asking that donations be wired, says  Jenny Shearer, a spokeswoman for the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

"Look up whatever organization you like to give your money to, go to their website, find them in the phone book, or go to their office if they're near you," Ms. Shearer says. "If you respond to an email or you wire money, that money is not going to go where you intend it to go to."

Among other snares, scammers may create websites that look like legitimate charitable organizations so they can steal givers' credit-card numbers and other personal data. Fraudsters also send out "phishing" emails with links to those fake sites, or links to sites that drop malware or viruses to your machine. Or they'll attach photos of the disaster, but those attachments contain malware or viruses. Then there's "smishing," unsolicited text messages that try to prompt you to give up your personal information or credit-card number.

Whether you plan to text your donation or mail a check, make sure the charity is an established organization. You can vet charities on websites such as CharityNavigator.org and the Better Business Bureau's Wise Giving Alliance (bbb.org/us/charity).

Be wary of pleas for donations on Facebook and other social-media sites. They may be legitimate, but research the charitable organization before contributing. And don't click on links to a charitable site. Instead, type the charity's website address directly into your browser to avoid being led to scam sites that look real.

Never give money in response to an unsolicited email message or phone call. Instead, contact the charity yourself. Also be wary of groups that say they will forward donations.

If you text a donation, keep in mind that it may take as long as 90 days for the charity to receive your gift, according to Charity Navigator.

You can file any fraud complaints with the Internet Crime Complaint Center, a partnership of the FBI, the National White Collar Crime Center and the Bureau of Justice Assistance. You also can call the National Center for Disaster Fraud at 1-866-720-5721.

—Andrea Coombes  MarketWatch.com 

Some of the nation's biggest banks are imposing a variety of new fees on people who withdraw money from automated-teller machines. The move is the latest example of the burgeoning new fees that banks are imposing on customers accustomed to years of free services.

  J.P. Morgan Chase,
JPM


0.28
%




 TD Bank Financial and  PNC Financial Services
PNC


0.98
%




 already are changing their ATM policies to collect more fees.

J.P. Morgan's  Chase
CCF


-2.06
%




 retail division, for example, is going after noncustomers who withdraw money from the bank's ATMs, according to people familiar with the matter. Chase executives have grumbled about customers of rival banks using the company's machines even though it charges them $3, the standard in the banking industry. Chase is now testing fees of $5 and $4 in Illinois and Texas, respectively, for noncustomer withdrawals.

The banking industry justifies the higher fees on its machines by saying that the expense of maintaining and operating ATM networks is rising.

More bank consumers will also be facing charges from their own institutions. TD Bank last week dropped its policy of letting its customers use other ATMs for free. The bank is now charging the industry standard of $2 to most of its customers.

PNC recently announced that it will later this year give up its five-year-old program of reimbursing some customers for charges incurred when using a non-PNC ATM.

—Robin Sidel  The Wall Street Journal 

The earthquake and tsunami in Japan have prompted homeowners everywhere to double-check their coverage. But those who decide that more coverage will help them sleep better may find an unpleasant surprise: Premiums are expected to spike.

The costs of earthquake insurance and flood coverage were already climbing, even before the disaster in Japan (and that, analysts say, won't help pricing either).

Earthquake-insurance premiums jumped by as much as 58% in some regions, says  Mike Chaney, commissioner of insurance for Mississippi. They now cost anywhere from $100 to $3,000 annually depending on where you live. Flood coverage costs an average of $570 a year, up 4% from 2009.

Those costs are expecting to keep rising, says  Drew Woodbury, an equity analyst covering insurance at Morningstar.

What's driving the uptick? Premiums move up after more claims are filed, and over the past few years U.S. homeowners have filed thousands of claims related to a series of hurricanes, says Mr. Chaney. Another jump in claims is expected next year if more devastating hurricanes and other natural disasters occur.

Not every homeowner needs the extra coverage. But while basic homeowners insurance usually protects against fire and lightning, it often doesn't cover floods, earthquakes and other natural disasters. Consumers wanting coverage for those need to purchase additional policies.

—AnnaMaria Andriotis  SmartMoney.com 

—The Aggregator features news and commentary from The Wall Street Journal and other publications. Email: cristina.lourosa@wsj.com 