HONG KONG—Plans by  Hutchison Whampoa Ltd., the corporate flagship of Hong Kong billionaire  Li Ka-shing, to list its southern Chinese port assets in Singapore aim to capitalize on global interest in the China growth story.

The deal is a big win for Singapore's stock exchange, which normally struggles to attract major China-related IPOs but succeeded in this case because of the deal's unique structure.

People familiar with the situation said the Hong Kong-based conglomerate is seeking to raise between US$3 billion and US$6 billion in the initial public offering. That could easily make it the biggest-ever listing in Singapore, topping the four billion Singapore dollar (US$3.11 billion) IPO of Singapore Telecommunications Ltd. in 1993.

One person familiar with the situation said if all necessary approvals are obtained, Hutchison's IPO could hit the market in late February or early March, though another cautioned that a listing in late March or April might be more realistic.

The IPO announcement comes after an upturn in global trade since the financial crisis that has helped boost container traffic at Hutchison's ports. It also comes as shares of Hutchison—a blue-chip Hong Kong-listed congomerate with interests that also include telecommunications, retail, power and oil—are on a roll, having risen nearly 80% since the start of 2010.

Investors have cheered a turnaround in Hutchison's third-generation mobile-phone business that lost the company billions of dollars since it made a US$25 billion investment in the business in 2002.

Meanwhile, China's growth story remains a huge draw for global investors at a time when the economies of the U.S. and Europe remain weak.

The new company being listed will hold Hutchison's key deep-water port assets, which are located in Hong Kong, Shenzhen and Macau and together represent the most active port region in the world by volume. Hutchison, originally a British company later taken over by Mr. Li, first started running docks in Hong Kong and Guangdong province back in the mid-19th century.

These assets account for roughly half of the overall earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization at Hutchison's highly profitable ports unit, Hutchison Port Holdings, analysts said. Singapore's port operator, PSA International Pte. Ltd., is a major shareholder in HPH, with a 20% stake.

HPH competes with rivals like Dubai's  DP World Ltd. and  A.P. Moller-Maersk
AMKBY


0.98
%




 Group, and operates 51 ports in 25 countries. Hutchison owns an 80% stake in HPH.

Hutchison is choosing an unusual structure for the deal. It is creating a business trust that will use most of the company's cash flow to pay dividends, making the stock more attractive to long-term investors seeking steady income. It also allows Hutchison to raise more cash while maintaining control over the assets through its ownership of the company that manages the trust, Hutchison Group Financial Director  Frank Sixt explained in a briefing for analysts and reporters Tuesday afternoon. Hutchison said it would retain about 25% of the trust after the listing.

It was the use of that structure that was key in Hutchison's decision to list in Singapore, not Hong Kong. While Hong Kong listing rules allow real-estate investment trusts to list on the local exchange, they don't allow the listing of other types of business trusts, as Singapore's exchange does.

Even as Hutchison taps market interest in China, the assets it is listing may not offer quite the China growth story many investors seek. Analysts say the southern China assets, especially the Hong Kong ports, are mature businesses.

"The high-growth phase for China's port business is over," said  Christopher Lee, director of corporate rating at Standard & Poor's. The use of the business trust model reflects Hutchison's view that its southern China port business is "a much more stable growth trajectory," he said, in which cash can be more readily distributed to investors.

The new listing will reduce Hutchison's net debt, while also filling up its war chest for potential acquisitions, a priority for the company this year, analysts said. 

Mr. Sixt said the company hasn't made any decisions on the use of the listing proceeds but noted that Hutchison continues to search for new investment opportunities in sectors like ports and infrastructure.

Hutchison has also said it still aims to spin off  Husky Energy Inc.
HUSKF


-0.22
%




's Asia operations, which hold the region's largest offshore natural gas field. Husky is a Canadian integrated oil and gas firm 34.6%-owned by Hutchison.

—Kate O'Keeffe contributed to this article.

 Write to  P.R. Venkat at venkat.pr@dowjones.com and Peter Stein at peter.stein@wsj.com 