PHILADELPHIA—In his first start with the Mets, catcher Ronny Paulino set a career high with five hits, the last of which drove in the go-ahead run in their 2-1, 14-inning victory Sunday over the Philadelphia Phillies.

Paulino lined a double to left field in the top of the 14th inning to drive in David Wright from third base. Taylor Buchholz finished off the Phillies in the bottom of the inning. And the Mets avoided a series sweep.

The nationally-televised game was played against the backdrop of news of Osama bin Laden's death. Though there was no formal announcement of it during the game, the crowd began chanting "USA! USA!" during the ninth inning. The chants grew in intensity as the inning went on.

Chris Young tossed seven scoreless innings for the Mets, out-pitching Phillies starter Cliff Lee. The Mets finished 3-3 on the road trip, which began Tuesday in Washington.

—Brian Costa

Maybe Russell Martin's schedule will open up now. 

Francisco Cervelli returned to the Yankees' lineup for the first time since last October after spending the start of the season on the disabled list with a broken left foot. And manager Joe Girardi will certainly call on him more often than he called on Gustavo Molina—it won't take much.

Before he was optioned to Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre on Saturday, Molina had played fewer than 20 innings over three games for the Yankees, with Martin catching every other inning. 

Girardi said he appreciated Cervelli's familiarity with three of the Yankees' starters and, more importantly, favored him as a hitter. Cervelli, who split time with Jorge Posada last year, batted .271 with 38 RBIs in 93 games. 

On Sunday, Cervelli looked sharp as he caught nine innings, drove in a run and threw out the Toronto Blue Jays' speedy Rajai Davis at second base. 

——Joshua Robinson

PHILADELPHIA—With his team in the midst of facing three of the best pitchers in baseball, Terry Collins's thoughts drifted to his own ace.

Before Sunday's game against the Philadelphia Phillies, Collins said Johan Santana was playing catch at up to 150 feet and was expected to begin throwing off a mound within two weeks. 

"He feels great, which is great news," Collins said.

Of course, that is of little help to the Mets at the moment. They faced Roy Halladay on Saturday, Cliff Lee Sunday and are slated to face San Francisco Giants ace Tim Lincecum Wednesday at Citi Field. In the best-case scenario, Santana is still more than two months from pitching in the majors again.

Times like these remind Collins of what he and the Mets are missing. The idea of Santana tossing a ball in Port St. Lucie—and the hope that he may yet help the Mets in 2011—gives a manager comfort.

——Brian Costa