He sits a few rows back at important court hearings, quietly observing the army of lawyers at his disposal. He rarely speaks in public. Riding the train from the New York suburbs to his office high above Rockefeller Center, he attracts nary a glance.

Devoutly anonymous,  Irving Picard, the 69-year-old career bankruptcy attorney unraveling history's biggest Ponzi scheme, has nonetheless assumed a larger-than-life profile. He has attacked institutions from  J.P. Morgan Chase
JPM


-0.06
%




 & Co. to the New York Mets, and angered some victims of  Bernard Madoff in pursuit of the billions lost in the fraud.

His quest has produced successes: $10 billion, half the $20 billion he estimates investors lost in Mr. Madoff's scheme, some of the recovery with help from federal prosecutors. And Mr. Picard seems to be just getting started. Investors speculating on Madoff victims' claims are now offering to buy them at about 70 cents on the dollar, up from about 20 cents last summer.

A pale man with a receding hairline, Mr. Picard looks more the part of unassuming accountant than celebrity attorney. In public now, he often seems to wear the burden of his duty on his face: a convoy of lines encircling his eyes, mouth slanted seriously downward, only to turn upward on occasion into a shy grin.

"He's not a headline grabber," said  Denis Cronin, a lawyer at Vinson & Elkins LLP who has dealt with Mr. Picard in the past. "He's not a headline maker, either. He's a low-key kind of guy."

There is nothing unassuming about Mr. Picard's language. He has made big headlines of late, filing lawsuits that seek billions of dollars from powerful adversaries. He accuses J.P. Morgan Chase of being "thoroughly complicit" in the fraud, in one complaint unsealed last month. The owners of the New York Mets "made so much easy money from Madoff for so long," says another complaint, that they "chose to simply look the other way." Both J.P. Morgan and the Mets' owners have denied any knowledge of the scheme.



Almost anyone personally connected to Mr. Madoff, including his grandchildren, has been sued to recover money, as have people connected to Mr. Picard himself. In December, he went to court to "claw back," as such suits are known, $802,202 in "fictitious profits" withdrawn from the retirement account of 83-year-old  Marvin L. Olshan. He is a retired founding partner at Olshan, Grundman & Frome, a firm where Mr. Picard worked in the 1980s.

Mr. Picard has filed more than 1,000 lawsuits in the case, seeking in excess of $100 billion. If he recovers enough to pay all approved claims, additional funds would go toward repaying the cost of the trustee's work and other Madoff creditors. A lawyer for Mr. Picard has said those could include investors seeking to recover their final statement balances, which were based on trades that never took place, or people claiming that Mr. Madoff's scheme cost them other, legitimate investment opportunities. 

His legal fees also have been extraordinary. Billing at $742.50 an hour, his firm, Baker & Hostetler LLP, was paid nearly $3.3 million for his services by the end of last year. His fees are projected to reach about $16 million through 2014, according to a letter to Congress in January from the Securities Investor Protection Corp., or SIPC, the industry association he represents. The cost for dozens of lawyers and consultants under his sway is expected by then to approach $1.4 billion. The bills are footed by SIPC, unless Mr. Picard recovers more than enough to cover all valid investor claims.

Much of Mr. Picard's litigation strategy is designed by the contingent of lawyers working under him, led by  David Sheehan. But Mr. Picard is the public face of the effort, and has at times bristled at criticism from investors whose money he is clawing back.



Last year, Mr. Picard told The Wall Street Journal that his office had sent letters to many investors attempting to settle without litigation, and "virtually nobody responded except to stick their nose at us."

"We are not averse, and we have never been averse, to settling matters," Mr. Picard said then. Of his efforts to recover money for creditors, "the statute sets the tone," he said. "I don't."

The bulk of his recovery has come through a record $7.2 billion settlement—Mr. Picard called it a "business solution"—that he and federal prosecutors reached jointly in December with the estate of Mr. Madoff's associate, Jeffry Picower.

Mr. Picard was born and raised in Fall River, Mass., the son of a doctor and a homemaker. He walks for relaxation and enjoys the theater, checking in periodically on who is playing at Carnegie Hall. After stints on Wall Street, at the Securities and Exchange Commission and as a U.S. trustee, he went into private practice in 1982.

People who have long known him said that in the bruising world of bankruptcy, where creditors dive into the dirt for pennies, he is uncommonly composed, compassionate and fair, with a sharp sense of what, or who, is right and wrong. To wit: He created a hardship program for Madoff investors, who, for lack of employment prospects and assets, can't repay false profits they made, and approved 275 applications through December.

  Harvey Barr, an attorney who worked under Mr. Picard when he was the first U.S. trustee overseeing bankruptcy cases in New York from 1979 to 1982, recalled asking his advice after a bank sent Mr. Barr 10 silver dollars for opening a business account.

"The trustee is not supposed to take anything that doesn't belong to the estate," Mr. Picard told him, according to Mr. Barr. "He directed me to send them back to the bank. And that's what I did."

Mr. Picard has long displayed a toughness in his work, associates said. 

As a receiver in the late 1980s assisting investors scammed by then 23-year-old "Wall Street whiz kid"  David Bloom, Mr. Picard recovered about $6.7 million for investors who said they lost more than $15 million. Mr. Picard sold artwork purchased by Mr. Bloom with the money, luxury cars including an Aston Martin convertible and a home in East Hampton, N.Y. He also sued Mr. Bloom's parents.

"I remember Picard as being very hard-nosed, very aggressive in trying to gather assets," said  Robert Plotz, who prosecuted Mr. Bloom for the Justice Department. 

Mr. Picard also responded bluntly to criticism that Mr. Bloom's father had been able to scoop up his son's belongings in an asset sale at pennies on the dollar.

"It was a public auction that was advertised," he told a reporter. "One hundred and sixty people were there…Mr. Bloom was one of the people."

 Write to  Michael Rothfeld at michael.rothfeld@wsj.com 