BANGALORE – Indian retailer Shoppers Stop Ltd. Friday reported a nearly 39% drop in fourth-quarter consolidated net profit, as it included numbers from the loss-making Hypercity Retail (India) Ltd. unit, which skewed comparisons. 

Consolidated net profit for the quarter through March fell to 77.2 million rupees ($1.74 million) from 125.8 million rupees a year earlier, the company said in a statement. Shoppers Stop's consolidated retail sales jumped about 59% to 6.74 billion rupees from 4.24 billion rupees.

The average estimate in a poll of four analysts was for net profit of 156 million rupees on sales of 6.99 billion rupees.

The comparable quarter last year didn't include Hypercity Retail's numbers as the company started consolidating the unit's numbers as of June 30, 2010. 

On an unconsolidated basis, Shoppers Stop's net profit rose 21% from a year earlier to 199.2 million rupees.

Strong consumer demand in India is spurring sales at Shoppers Stop, which sells apparel, cosmetics and fashion accessories as its department stores. 

The company's core department store format recorded 14% sales growth at its stores open for at least a year, also called same-store sales. It currently operates 38 such department stores around the country. 

The company's Hypercity unit runs nine large stores, or hypermarkets, that sell products ranging from fresh groceries to consumer durables. 

The consolidation of Hypercity's numbers led to consolidated costs soaring nearly 63% from a year earlier to 6.05 billion rupees, driven primarily by a more than 66% rise in the cost of goods sold to 4.19 billion rupees.

Staff costs jumped more than 28% to 385.1 million rupees and administrative expenses climbed 85% to 790.8 million rupees.

"We are expanding steadily in metros as well as tier II cities, which is witnessing a consumption boom and has given us access to a growing number of customers," managing director  Govind Shrikhande said in the statement. 

 Write to  Dhanya Ann Thoppil at dhanya.thoppil@dowjones.com 