The darts once again beat the readers' picks in Sunday Journal's 40th Investment Dartboard Contest. But most readers saw gains, along with the stock market as a whole.

South Florida Sun Sentinel reader  Jack Newman's pick, solar-technology company ReneSola, surged 46% between June 30 and Dec. 31, 2010, making him the winner of the contest.

"It's rare that you hit a home run," says Mr. Newman, a retiree in Lake Worth, Fla., who owns shares of the stock. "I guess there are more people like myself who are believers in alternative energy."

WSJ.com reader Hydrick Harden, an accountant from Atlanta, wasn't so lucky with his pick of  Arena Pharmaceuticals, a biopharmaceutical company that plummeted 44%.

"I picked it because it was a very high-risk, high-reward" stock, Mr. Harden says, adding that, during the contest, one of the company's drugs failed to get approval from the Food and Drug Administration.

The darts and readers both bested the picks made by Sunday Journal contributor  Gregory Zuckerman -- though all of his selections saw gains, including food-service and packaging company Pactiv, which was taken private in November at a price up 19% from midyear.

As a group, the six readers' picks gained an average of 14%, compared with a 21% gain for the six stocks chosen by darts thrown randomly at stock pages and a 9% gain for Mr. Zuckerman's six picks. The Dow Jones Industrial Average was up 18% during the period.

The darts have won more often than the readers, with 26 dart wins out of 40 contests.

-- E.G.

Here are the new reader picks, and their prices as of the market close Dec. 31, 2010, for Sunday Journal's 42nd Investment Dartboard Contest, which runs through June 30.

  Medco Health Solutions (MHS, $61.27) With the health-care law, there could be an "awful lot of new insured people and they're going to have to have pharmacy benefits," says retired educator  Bill Mahaney of Spokane, Wash., where he reads WSJ Sunday in the Spokesman Review.

Northern Oil & Gas (NOG, $27.21)  Talia Mamola of  Cresco, Pa., says this oil company has room to grow. Ms. Mamola, a student majoring in finance, reads the Pocono Record.

  Parker Hannifin (PH, $86.30)  Leonard Kaisalahti of Cokato, Minn., says this metal-products maker seems "to have perfected this hydraulic system for heavy-duty trucks." And "given that fuel prices are going up almost daily...it's the right product at the right time," says the retired merchant seaman, who reads the Minneapolis Star Tribune.

  Salesforce.com (CRM, $132) Retired university housing director  Roger Frichette of Eugene, Ore., sees this as a stock of the future. Large companies, he says, will use cloud computing, where servers provide resources, software and data to computers. He reads the Eugene Register-Guard.

Sprint (S, $4.23) The company acquired prepaid-mobile firms, and that is the "fastest growing segment of the telecom industry," says  Justin Baca, a sales manager who reads the Albuquerque Journal.

Ziopharm (ZIOP, $4.66) "There are so many cures needed for cancer," and this is a promising oncology company, says  Susan Fleming, an administrative assistant in Delray Beach, Fla. She reads the South Florida Sun Sentinel.

And the darts...

The darts hit trucking and logistics firm  Con-way (CNW, $36.57); financial-services holding company  Cullen/Frost Bankers (CFR, $61.12); American depositary shares of Chinese technology manufacturer  Hollysys Automation Technologies (HOLI, $15.16); media and education company Pearson (PSO, $15.89); property-management software firm Realpage (RP, $30.93); and semiconductor maker  Entropic Communications (ENTR, $12.08).

-- E.G.

Here are Sunday Journal contributor  Jeff D. Opdyke's selections for the new contest:

Diamond Offshore (DO, $66.87) Oil is headed back well above $100 a barrel in 2011, and shares of oil drillers follow oil prices.

  Archer Daniels Midland (ADM, $30.08) and  Monsanto (MON, $69.64) This year will be about food prices and their impact on inflation that's already emerging around the world. Makers of grains like Archer will be big winners, as will seed companies such as Monsanto.

IQ Taiwan SmallCap ETF (TWON, $30.57) Taiwanese shares have historically soared in the 12 months preceding a presidential election in Taiwan. The next election: 2012.

  Honda Motor (HMC, $39.50) Monetary policies used by central banks to stimulate the global economy will work, for better or worse: U.S. interest rates go up; the yen weakens; shares of Japanese exporters surge.

  Walter Energy (WLT, $127.84) A high-grade metallurgical coal company that's a takeover candidate.