LONDON— Tesco
TSCDY


2.34
%




 PLC said it will make a complaint to the Advertising Standards Authority over  Wal-Mart Stores Inc
WMT


-0.46
%




-owned Asda's price guarantee claims. 

The U.K.'s two supermarket chains are at loggerheads over a promise by Asda to be 10% cheaper than its competitors or it will refund the difference to its customers. 

Asda's price guarantee kicked off the January price wars, which annually grips the grocery sector. 

Tesco said its January price cuts will save customers £340 million ($539 million),  J Sainsbury
JSAIY


2.21
%




 PLC said it has launched savings of over £300 million, and  Wm Morrison Supermarkets
MRWSY


2.38
%




 PLC pledged to cut average weekly grocery bills by almost £40 per week to help shoppers with post-Christmas empty wallets. 

Tesco called Asda's price guarantee "confusing and misleading" because it excludes around half of Tesco's range, and relies on a complicated process for customers to get their money back. 

Asda responded with a statement commenting that "clearly the truth on pricing hurts. Our simple promise to be 10% cheaper or give customers the difference has gone down very well with customers since we launched it last week." 

The fiercely competitive grocery industry is often in dispute over price comparisons, usually amid disagreements about the products being compared and method of comparison. 

All the major supermarkets have had adverts referred to the ASA. If a complaint is upheld the company usually removes or changes the advert on the ASA's recommendation. 

If they don't the ASA can impose sanctions including alerting media outlets to withhold advertising space, although it doesn't usually come to this. 

Asda's 10% cheaper price guarantee builds on a guarantee launched in April last year in which Asda said it would refund the difference, plus a penny, if consumers find they could have paid less for a shop at Tesco, Sainsbury's and Morrisons. 

Its rival supermarkets offer discounts across their ranges rather than a price guarantee. 

Tesco Thursday reported U.K. same-store Christmas sales down 0.4% excluding value added tax and fuel. Asda is yet to report on its Christmas trading period. 

According to the consumer research group Kantar Worldpanel, J Sainsbury overtook Asda in the four weeks to Christmas as the U.K.'s second most popular grocer. However, these figures only cover a short period of time. Tesco remains Britain's market leader.