MELBOURNE, Australia—Serbian Novak Djokovic defeated defending champion Roger Federer Thursday night, setting the stage for the first Grand Slam final in three years that won't feature either No. 2 Mr. Federer or No. 1 Rafael Nadal.

The dominance of Messrs. Federer and Nadal has become such that many thought the two would meet again in this year's Australian Open final. Those hopes were dashed when Mr. Nadal suffered a hamstring injury in his semifinals match and, playing with limited mobility, fell to fellow Spaniard David Ferrer.

Earlier Thursday, Li Na became the first Chinese woman to qualify for a Grand Slam final on Thursday by defeating No. 1-ranked Caroline Wozniacki in a gripping encounter that saw the 20-year-old Dane just one point away from victory.

Responding to remarks by a commentator that Mr. Federer's loss could mark the end of the Federer-Nadal duopoly, Mr. Federer said, "They say that very quickly. Let's talk in six months again."

No. 3-ranked Mr. Djokovic also said it was premature to call the end of the Federer-Nadal juggernaut, but he did say there was an upside to the field opening up to a larger pool of Grand Slam title contenders.

"On one side it's good for the sport to have more players being able to win against Federer and Nadal," Mr. Djokovic said. "All the credit to them what they have done in the last five, six years. They've been very dominant and just a great example of champions. It was really hard to challenge them, especially in the big events where they play their best tennis. Now these things are changing a little bit, so from that perspective it's good for the sport."

Mr. Djokovic's victory came after a tense, hard-fought match on center court Thursday night with both men playing aggressive, tireless tennis. With Mr. Federer missing his one chance to convert a break point in the first set, both held serve throughout a set full of long, suspenseful rallies. The set ended in a tiebreak, in which Mr. Djokovic took an early lead and clinched the tiebreak on an unforced error by Mr. Federer. The Swiss star would end the match with 44 unforced errors, to the Serb's 35.

The second set was even more suspenseful with Mr. Djokovic taking an early break in the third game, to which Mr. Federer responded by promptly breaking him back. When Mr. Federer broke him a second time and followed up by holding his serve to establish a 5-2 lead, it looked as though fans could be in for a five-setter. But Mr. Djokovic held his serve and then on Mr. Federer's serve, he broke back yet again with a forehand passing shot.

At 4-5, Mr. Djokovic followed that performance by holding serve and then breaking Mr. Federer one more time to establish a 6-5 lead. From there Mr. Djokovic didn't even concede a point in the following game to close out the second set 7-5.

By the third set, Mr. Federer started to show signs of fraying. In a protracted second game, Mr. Federer failed to convert three break points. In the third game, Mr. Federer committed four unforced errors, the last of which allowed Mr. Djokovic to convert a break point to take a 2-1 lead in the set. Bringing out some of his characteristic forehand winners, Mr. Federer managed to it tie it at 4-4, but Mr. Djokovic broke him in a critical ninth game to take the lead again and close out the match, 7-6 (3), 7-5, 6-4.

Mr. Djokovic now faces the winner of the semifinal match Friday between No. 7 Mr. Ferrer and No. 5 Andy Murray. 

Against Mr. Murray, Djokovic has won four of their seven matches. Against Mr. Ferrer, he has won five of nine. 

On the women's side, No. 11 Ms. Li will have to overcome a formidable opponent in No. 3 Kim Clijsters to bring China its first Grand Slam title on Saturday. Ms. Clijsters, who steamrolled through her semifinal match against Vera Zvonareva, and has yet to lose a set in the tournament.

The victories of the 28-year-old Chinese and the 27-year-old Belgian continued a recent trend of mature players prevailing over younger ones. Only one teenager currently ranks among the world's top 20 players, 19-year-old Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova of Russia.

Ms. Li's victory was sure to delight tennis executives who hope to generate enthusiasm for the sport in China. But Ms. Li sought to minimize the larger significance of her achievement.

The victory was "good for me, good for my team," Ms. Li said. "Maybe good for China. I'm not sure."

Ms. Wozniacki will remain No. 1 in the world despite her defeat, but she will also remain a top-ranked player without a Grand Slam victory, and will likely face questions over the legitimacy of her status as the world's best.

In Thursday's match, Ms. Li was in the form of her life. She has not lost a match so far this year, after capturing the biggest title of her career in Sydney this month. In this year's Australian Open she hadn't lost a set before conceding the first one to Ms. Wozniacki on Thursday.

Ms. Li's two victories over Ms. Wozniacki last year—including one in the fourth round of the Australian Open—indicated the Danish counterpuncher was a good match for Ms. Li's aggressive game.

And so it was. While Ms. Li dominated most exchanges from the start, Ms. Wozniacki's superior defensive skills allowed her to win most points. Ms. Wozniacki was doing what she does best: keeping the points going until her opponent overplays. Indeed, Ms. Li committed 51 unforced errors to Ms. Wozniacki's 24.

During the first set Ms. Li also showed signs of fragile nerves. She double faulted on crucial points and failed to put away easy volleys.

But these misses didn't derail her, and she kept pounding Ms. Wozniacki with flat strokes even after losing the first set 6-3. Even when Ms. Wozniacki was serving for the match at 5-4 in the second set, Ms. Li stuck to her game plan and saved one match point bravely before breaking Ms. Wozniacki's serve.

That determination appeared to rattle Ms. Wozniacki, and nervousness switched sides. Ms. Wozniacki gifted the second set to her opponent on a double fault.

The 28-year-old Ms. Li barely looked back from that moment, and Ms. Wozniacki's relentless cover of the court proved insufficient in the third set, where Ms. Li scored 15 winners and her opponent none. After more than two and a half hours, the small but vocal group of Chinese supporters leapt to their feet as Ms. Li won the match 3-6, 7-5, 6-3.

In Thursday's other semifinal, Ms. Clijsters never left much doubt over the match's outcome. She adopted the kind of focus she has displayed during the whole fortnight and finished with a comfortable 6-3,6-3 victory, spending half as much time on the court as Ms. Li.

Ms. Clijsters, who is expected to displace Ms. Zvonareva as No. 2 in the rankings Monday, will be heavily favored going into the final, having reached that stage a total of seven times and won three major titles.

But she will do well to remember the last time she faced Ms. Li. In the final of the Sydney tune-up event the week before the Australian Open, Ms. Li dispatched the Belgian star in straight sets despite trailing 5-0 in the first.

"We are a very similar type of players," Ms. Clijsters said. "It will be an interesting one."

A place in tennis history will surely rank high among Ms. Li's motivations to do well on Saturday, but when asked what got her through critical moments of her semifinal, Ms. Li didn't hesitate. "Prize money," she said jokingly.

The winner on Saturday is set to earn A$2.2 million ($2.19 million), the highest paycheck in Grand Slam history.

Back on the men's side, Mr. Djokovic remarked on the double faults he committed and said it's normal at this time in the tournament.

"I have been serving well under pressure, even though I got a little bit tight and made some double faults in the third set when I was up a break," Mr. Djokovic said. "That's normal under the circumstance in the late stages of the tournament against Roger. I knew that I had to use my chances." 

Mr. Djokovic and Mr. Federer have met 19 times before, with Mr. Federer having won 13 of those contests. The last time the two faced off in a Grand Slam was when Mr. Djokovic knocked him out of the semifinals of the U.S Open in 2010 in a five-setter.

Inside Rod Laver Arena, Mr. Djokovic had a spirited cheering section, at times behaving a bit more like soccer fans than tennis fans normally do. While Mr. Federer looked flustered at various points during the match, he did not attribute that to the Serbian's boisterous fans.

"I thought he played a great match. I didn't think I played bad myself," Mr. Federer said, insisting he could have played longer than the three hours the men spent on court. "It was intense. We had long, tough rallies and played at a very high speed and everything. So sure, you feel it a little bit, but obviously I was ready for another two sets easily. Pity I couldn't push him there."

Against Mr. Murray, Mr. Djokovic has won four of their seven matches. Against Ferrer, he has won five of nine. 

Mr. Murray, a finalist both here in 2010 and at the U.S. Open in 2008, is chasing his first Grand Slam title. Mr. Djokovic won the Australian Open in 2008, the last Grand Slam final in which neither Messrs. Federer nor Nadal competed.

 Write to  Cynthia Koons at cynthia.koons@dowjones.com 