NEW YORK—The euro climbed as traders embraced new measures adopted to contain the euro-zone debt crisis, helping to further widen the appeal of the higher-yielding single currency. 

Investors took the euro past the $1.40 mark and to its third-highest level all year after an endorsement of the euro zone officials' moves by a ratings agency in New York trading, currency analysts said. 

The expansion of the European Financial Stability Facility and the move to allow it and the European Stability Mechanism to buy government bonds, "materially enhance the European policy response" to the sovereign debt crisis, Fitch Ratings in part said. 

Meanwhile, the dollar moved lower against the yen based on repatriation flows into Japan even in the midst of calamity that has followed that country's strongest earthquake on record last week. 

Late Monday, the euro was at $1.3999 from $1.3903 late Friday. The dollar was at 81.69 yen from 81.89 yen, while the euro was at 114.36 yen from 113.86 yen. The U.K. pound was at $1.6184 from $1.6085. The dollar traded at 0.9243 Swiss franc from 0.9293 franc. 

The ICE Dollar Index, which tracks the U.S. dollar against a trade-weighted basket of currencies, was at 76.338 from 76.710. 

The yen was the center of market attention heading into the New York session after the Bank of Japan announced that it would inject a record 15 trillion yen ($183 billion) into money markets and a senior Finance Ministry official warned of the possibility of intervention to stem a strong yen rise. 

With at least 10,000 people feared dead and hundreds of thousands left homeless, Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan has called the 8.9-magnitude earthquake and its aftermath the biggest crisis in Japan's post-war history. 

But "the EFSF being permitted to buy bonds in the primary market is a big step," and clearly that was the trading focus of market participants Monday, said  Aroop Chatterjee, chief foreign exchange quantitative strategist at Barclays Capital in New York. "It alleviates a lot of this risk premium when it comes to euro-zone bond assets," he said. 

The decision to expand the EFSF to €440 billion ($611.9 billion) had a demonstrable effect in shoring up confidence in the euro zone's shakiest economies by Monday morning, he said. The cost to insure five-year Greek sovereign bonds against chance for default fell to roughly 9.6 percentage points from 10.5 percentage points late Friday, said Mr. Chatterjee. Portugal's bond default insurance, meanwhile, dropped to 4.95 percentage points from 5.23 percentage points, he said. 

Investors also have looked toward a possible euro zone key rate increase as early as April based on recent anti-inflation comments from European Central Bank officials. A higher rate would boost the appeal of the euro, and has helped lift the euro higher for weeks based on that premise alone. 

Late in the Monday session, the euro hit another session high above $1.40 when ECB board member  Lorenzo Bini Smaghi said inflation risks are prevailing over those of deflation. 

By contrast, investors very much expect the status quo when it comes to the Federal Reserve. "The [Federal Open Market Committee] statement [Tuesday] is likely to be little changed from the January statement," said  Marc Chandler, global head of foreign exchange at Brown Brothers Harriman in New York. The status quo means continued support for executing on the Fed's dollar-diluting $600 billion stimulus plan, said analysts. 

Japan's plight will likely be a market focus all week, but some analysts suggested that any massive reaction to the national tragedy may not be forthcoming. That is because the region that includes Tokyo accounts for nearly 40% of gross domestic product and so far seems largely unaffected by the earthquake itself. 