In an age of political correctness run amok, defenders of free speech can never let their guard down. The past couple of weeks, however, have seen a string of particularly egregious incidents:

• In Alabama, Alan Gribben, a professor of English at Montgomery's Auburn University, has edited a sanitized version of Mark Twain's "Adventures of Huckleberry Finn," the greatest of all American novels, in which the word "nigger" is replaced with "slave."

• In Canada, "Money for Nothing," a song by Dire Straits that was a hit single in 1985, has now been banned from the airwaves by the Canadian Broadcast Standards Council (CBSC) because Mark Knopfler's lyrics make ironic use of the word "faggot," putting it in the mouth of an envious working-class lout who uses it to refer to a rock star "with the earring and the make-up."

• In Connecticut, David Snead, Waterbury's superintendent of schools, tried to stop that city's Arts Magnet School from putting on a student production of August Wilson's "Joe Turner's Come and Gone" because the characters, all but one of whom are black, make repeated use of the word "nigger."

Since these three incidents were the work of cultural bureaucrats who not only believe in mincing words but want to force you to mince yours as well, I'll put it as bluntly as possible: Messrs. Snead and Gribben and the members of the CBSC are pusillanimous boobs who deserve to be fired. And while one expects such monstrosities these days, what happened in Waterbury is specifically deserving of your attention, embodying as it does a moral cowardice unworthy of anyone who claims to be a teacher. 

Mr. Snead argued that performing "Joe Turner" would encourage students to use a word that is rightly regarded as repellent by decent people. "The use of the N-word is something all civil-rights leaders around the country want us to stop using," he said. Fine. But August Wilson was not a foul-mouthed racist: He was, like Twain, a great artist, and "Joe Turner" is part of his masterpiece, the 10-play "Pittsburgh cycle" in which he chronicled the black experience in 20th-century America so compellingly that all 10 plays are now regularly performed by major theater companies throughout the country.

In each of these plays, Mr. Wilson turned the everyday speech of working-class blacks into dramatic poetry. "When I first started writing plays," he said in a 1999 interview with the Paris Review, "I couldn't write good dialogue because I didn't respect how black people talked. I thought that in order to make art out of their dialogue I had to change it, make it into something different. Once I learned to value and respect my characters, I could really hear them." An important part of that respect lay in Mr. Wilson's courageous willingness to allow his characters to use the word "nigger" in the ferociously ironic way that some blacks use it among themselves to refer to themselves.

The political commentator John O'Sullivan once made the wry suggestion that we need a new typeface in which all published statements not meant by their authors to be taken as literally true would henceforth be printed, thereby alerting humorless readers to the potentially dangerous presence of irony. In a nod to such famous typefaces as Helvetica and Corona, he proposed that it be called "Ironica." Mr. O'Sullivan was cracking a joke—sort of—but when it comes to PC, the "joke" is on everyone who believes in the life-changing power of art. For unlike Messrs. Snead and Gribben and the CBSC, the creators of the works of art that are now under assault were unafraid to acknowledge and confront the darkness that is an inextricable part of man's divided nature. By acting in and watching an unflinchingly truthful masterwork like "Joe Turner," the students of the Waterbury Arts Magnet School, black and white alike, would participate in the same process of self- discovery.

That's called "education," Mr. Snead. It will make your talented young charges stronger and wiser. It's what you were hired to do—and if you don't know that already, you're not fit to do your job.

This story has a happy ending: The Waterbury school board overruled Mr. Snead's decision on Wednesday night, and the show will go on. I hope the board's next move will be to ask for his resignation. But the fact that he felt free to try to ban the play in the first place is yet another sign of the grave damage that has already been done to a culture whose slack-willed leaders are inclined to look the other way when unpleasant truths come calling.

One last thing: President Obama and his wife made a special trip to Broadway in 2009 to see Lincoln Center Theater's revival of "Joe Turner's Come and Gone," which they loved. I guess that means they're racists, too.

—Mr. Teachout, the Journal's drama critic, writes "Sightings" every other Friday. He is the author of "Pops: A Life of Louis Armstrong." Write to him at tteachout@wsj.com.