TOKYO—Standing in a massive line at Haneda Airport in Tokyo, Christy Murphy, her eyes betraying signs of exhaustion, said she found a voluntary evacuation notice posted on her door on Yokosuka naval base Wednesday night, filled with detailed instructions on how to leave Japan.

Her husband is the director of radiological controls for the USS George Washington, a nuclear-powered aircraft carrier. "He came home last night [Wednesday] at about midnight and said, 'It's time to leave,' " said Ms. Murphy, who is flying to Seattle with her two teenage sons and her granddaughter to stay with her family until the crisis subsides.

Ms. Murphy is just one of many people who traveled to Haneda Airport on Thursday, after panic and fear levels reached a fever pitch that rippled through the foreign community in Tokyo. 

In a notice issued Thursday, the U.S. said it would fly U.S. citizens out of Japan to havens in Asia. Other governments were taking similar steps, and airlines such as Korean Air and Hong Kong's Cathay Pacific Airways added flights out of Japan. 

Having spent the week trying to calm British fears about Japan, the U.K. Wednesday night advised its citizens in Tokyo and north of Tokyo to leave the area and began hiring commercial flights to help them leave Japan. 

The South Korean government also has urged its citizens to leave Japan. Korean Air on Thursday said it is putting larger planes on its existing routes and adding flights to help Koreans return home. The carrier said it has cut fares by 50% for passengers purchasing one-way tickets from Japan.

Cathay Pacific said it operated one extra flight from Tokyo to Hong Kong Thursday and plans another extra flight on Friday to help meet the anticipated demand from people trying to return to Hong Kong. The two extra flights added more than 730 seats on the route. Normally, the airline operates five daily flights to Narita and two a day to Haneda. It said it will extend a special one-way fare of 5,755 Hong Kong dollars (US$738) from Japan to Hong Kong until March 27.

The French Air Force dispatched two planes to Japan on Wednesday. The first helped evacuate 250 people to South Korea. Belgium sent a government plane for evacuation purposes and Russia was also preparing planes. 

China is offering voluntary evacuations for its citizens and arranged for buses to take Chinese citizens stuck in northeastern Japan to airports so they can be flown home. The state-run Xinhua news agency reported on Thursday that more than 3,000 citizens had been evacuated from prefectures in northern Japan. 

U.S. colleges, including Temple University and the University of Kansas, also took steps for students studying in Japan to return to America. 

The mood at Haneda was calm and orderly Thursday, though many passengers were jittery due to the deluge of news on the escalating nuclear crisis. A long line at the Delta Airlines and Korean Air counter snaked around the departure terminal. Sitting in a row of benches near the line, Ruth Lopez said: "I came to take my baby back," pointing to her 27-year-old daughter who works on Yokosuka base. "Most of my coworkers are leaving," said the daughter. She started to cry, saying she didn't want to leave. "We're leaving now because by the time we're ordered to leave, it may not be possible," said Ms. Lopez.

The British Embassy in Tokyo as well as Hong Kong immigration authorities have set up tables at Haneda to field questions from their respective nationals who are trying to return home. Sam Ng, a Hong Kong immigration official, arrived Wednesday from Hong Kong and said 164 people had come by for assistance since the table was set up on Saturday. 

  Jackie Wu, chief operating officer of Hong Kong Jet, a new private jet charter company and subsidiary of China's HNH Group, said some multinational companies are moving employees out of Tokyo via private aviation. She said that on Thursday afternoon, after a U.S. State Department statement, she received more than 10 requests in two hours.

There was a perceptible gap in response among the foreign community in Tokyo and the Japanese, with a higher sense of calm among the latter.

The normal, orderly rhythm of life in Tokyo has been slightly disrupted—at many supermarkets, milk and toilet paper are still out of stock as people hoard supplies—but for the most part, many Japanese are going about their usual routines.

Some businesses are even getting a boost from the crisis. Daisuke Aoyama, 38, runs a food truck selling "ome-rice," a Japanese concoction of a hot omelette over rice.

"From Monday to Wednesday, business was down, but it starting picking up on Thursday," he said. "I suspect this is because eggs are in short supply in the supermarkets and people have a craving for eggs," adding that he had about 200 eggs left, but his supplier in Aomori, northern Japan, has told him that it won't be able to send out a new shipment.

"I'm not leaving Tokyo—I have a business to run and if I can't make a contribution to Tokyo's economy, the nation's economy will become precarious."

At Tokyo Station, however, some women and children were packing up and leaving Tokyo and their husbands behind. Hisamitsu Hoshi, 39, was chatting with his 2-year-old daughter by the train-ticket booking counter before he sent her off with his wife to Osaka.

"We're facing a risk of radiation leakage, which will certainly have impact on the human body. I have also heard that it particularly affects small children. All my colleagues sent their children and wives to places like Kansei area," said Mr. Hoshi, who works for a trading company. "I wish I could go along but I'm in the emergency task division of the company and just cannot go," he said.

Setsuko Suzuki, 65, who works in publishing, was at Tokyo station and headed to visit her sick daughter in Nagoya. "Japanese people are reacting calmly. We are worried but we are trying our best to cooperate and work together. But I can understand how the foreigners feel," she said regarding the miniexodus out of Japan's capital. "I might feel the same way if I were in a foreign country" [when something similar was happening]. Ms. Suzuki said she plans to return from Nagoya in two days. 

Miyuki, who declined to give her last name, was lining up for a bullet-train ticket to get out of Tokyo. As an English teacher who can read foreign media articles on the nuclear disaster, she says she is more scared than Japanese who don't read such articles.

"I can see a huge gap in the perception of this incident between Japan and the U.S. While foreigners are fleeing the country I heard from my friend that elementary-school teachers still tell their students to play outside. I was shocked to hear that," she said.

Many long-term Tokyo expatriates who have put their roots down in Japan have decided to stay. Deborah Hayden, a New Zealander who has lived in Japan for 24 years and is the managing partner of Kreab Gavin Anderson, a public-relations firm, says she isn't going anywhere. "I cannot turn my back on my staff. This is my home." 

—Yuka Hayashi, Miho Inada and Andrew Joyce  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Mariko Sanchanta at mariko.sanchanta@wsj.com 