BANGALORE -- MVS Efarm Pvt. Ltd., which operates warehouses and a Web site that matches demand from customers with farmers, has sold about 25% stake in the company to Mumbai Angels, the first such investment by the group of 120 early-stage investors in a farm-related venture.

MVS Efarm plans to use the funds to hire people as it expands into the southern Indian cities of Pondicherry, Coimbatore and Bangalore, and set up low-cost collection centers, said  Srivalli Krishnan, chief executive and co-founder of the company.

"We are looking at creating more collection centers and investments in logistics and information technology," said Ms. Krishnan, who declined to disclose how much the company has received from the stake sale.

Supply-chain problems and lack of infrastructure such as warehouses and refrigerated trucks to transport the produce results in as much as 40% wastage in farm products such as vegetables, grains and fruits.

"Getting funded by a conventional investment group signifies that social ventures and farm-related ventures are now being seen as not just being socially relevant but also financially viable," said  Anil Joshi of Mumbai Angels, who oversaw the transaction. He refused to divulge the amount invested in the company.

"With supply-chain management becoming more and more important for the survival of companies, investors are excited to back such businesses as they can bring huge additions to the top line and bottom-line," he said.

MVS Efarm was founded by  Venkata Subramanian and his wife Srivalli Krishnan in 2007. Currently, it collects produce from 3,000 farmers and serves bulk consumers of agri produce such as hotels, caterers, retail chains, food-processing industries and vegetable vendors, and also runs a retail outlet for the Indian army.

MVS Efarm, the supply-chain platform, ties in farmers, intermediaries, logistics providers, distributors, small-time retailers and local roadside vendors to deliver farm produce. Currently, at least 95% of agricultural produce reaches the end consumer through unorganised marketing channels like mandis, which many a times leads to price fluctuations, wastage and poor quality, according to MVS Efarm. Farmers often transport produce to markets using carts and tractor trolleys, which not only delays the delivery process but also leads to wastage.

Getting funds, however, wasn't easy for MVS Efarm.

"We talked to many investors, they would pat us on the back, but nothing more," Ms. Krishnan said. "Investors felt that as we were dealing with perishables in an unorganized market, the business could be risky."

  Sanjay Anandram, who has mentored start-ups such as Pilani Soft Labs Pvt. Ltd. (which runs bus ticketing service redBus.in), Insta Health Solutions Pvt. Ltd., Ozone Media Solutions Pvt. Ltd. – all of which have received venture capital funding -- said the agriculture sector, particularly logistics and supply chain management, are going to be attractive for investors as they realize that any initiative that can help curb agriculture wastage will find huge takers in the market.

There is, however, a caveat for small investors backing such firms.

"The issue is how can one make money in this businesses given the distribution bottlenecks and infrastructure issues," Mr. Anandram said. "Such companies need a lot more capital to overcome these hurdles. I am not sure if such businesses are ideal for small investors as they need a fair amount of capital intervention."