Two senators, a Republican and a Democrat, are pushing legislation to overturn a 1979 court injunction that bars the public from seeing what individual physicians earn from Medicare. 

That data, commonly known as the Medicare claims database, is widely considered one of the best tools for identifying fraud and abuse in the $500 billion federal health-insurance program for the elderly and disabled.

Soaring Medicare costs threaten to overwhelm the federal budget, yet American taxpayers are blocked from seeing exactly where their money goes. Under a three-decade-old court order, Medicare can't publish the billings of individual physicians who participate in the program. In this series, The Wall Street Journal explores Medicare's vast databases and shows how they can be used to expose potential fraud and waste.

Last year The Wall Street Journal, together with the nonprofit Center for Public Integrity, obtained from the government limited access to the database. Despite severe restrictions on the data, the paper was able to mine it and expose through a series of articles how doctors and other medical practitioners appear to be gaming Medicare to increase their profits. One physical therapist identified by the Journal as having suspicious billing patterns was indicted last month on charges of defrauding Medicare.

Through his lawyer, he maintained his innocence.

The judge who issued the injunction shielding the data ruled that physicians' privacy trumped the public's interest in knowing how tax dollars are spent.

Republican Sen. Chuck Grassley of Iowa said he was prompted in part by the Journal's stories to introduce legislation Wednesday. That legislation states that the government must "make available to the public" data on Medicare "payments made to any provider of services or supplier…." The bill also includes other provisions designed to fight Medicare and Medicaid fraud.

In an interview, Mr. Grassley said the intent of his legislation "is to change the court decision" that has barred public access to the claims data. "The intention is to make government transparent, because with transparency there comes accountability. And the fact of the matter is that there is billions of dollars of Medicare fraud, and we think it will help us get at the fraud," he said. 

Sen. Ron Wyden, a Democrat from Oregon, said he had also drafted legislation "designed to make [the Medicare claims] database public," an effort he described as "a taxpayer-rights issue." He said he planned to talk with Mr. Grassley to see if they could join forces, adding, "I believe we can have a bipartisan bill on this."

Both Mr. Grassley and Mr. Wyden said they weren't seeking the public release of data related to patients, and that they supported patient privacy protections.

In January, the publisher of The Wall Street Journal, Dow Jones & Co., filed legal papers to try to overturn the 1979 injunction in court and open the records fully to the public. The Journal didn't seek patient information.

Currently, the government is effectively barred from releasing how much money any individual doctor earns from Medicare by the 1979 injunction. That injunction stemmed from a lawsuit filed by the Florida Medical Association and the American Medical Association, the doctors' trade group.

The Carter administration had sought to publish a list of the annual Medicare reimbursements to all doctors. The AMA sued to block the move, and a Florida court ruled in favor of the physicians' privacy interest. That ruling remains in force.

In a written response to questions from the Journal, AMA President Cecil B. Wilson said, "The American Medical Association has zero tolerance for Medicare fraud, and studies have demonstrated that physicians are not a significant source of Medicare fraud." Noting that Medicare is policed by the Justice Department and others, he added, "Physicians, like all Americans, have the right to privacy regarding their personal financial information, and courts have repeatedly upheld this right."

A spokesman for the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, which administers Medicare, also issued a written statement in response to questions from the Journal. In part, it said, "While the agency has not yet had an opportunity to review the legislation, CMS is committed to openness and transparency." 

At a Senate Finance Committee Hearing Wednesday, Sens. Grassley and Wyden questioned officials from CMS and its parent, the Department of Health and Human Services, about opening Medicare billing data for public examination. 

The officials declined to offer their support at the hearing. 

Peter Budetti, who oversees the CMS's anti-fraud efforts, said, "The concept [of making the database public] has a lot of ramifications," and promised to report back on those ramifications.

HHS Inspector General Daniel Levinson said his "default position is transparency," but that it isn't always possible.

"I'll take that as a nonanswer," Mr. Grassley said.

 Write to  Maurice Tamman at maurice.tamman@wsj.com and Mark Schoofs at mark.schoofs@wsj.com 