  David Tepper is trying to make sure New Jersey's hungry have a place to go. 

The founder of hedge fund Appaloosa Management is this week kicking off a $15 million fund-raising campaign at the Community Food Bank of New Jersey with a $2 million donation to the Hillside, N.J., organization. 

The New Jersey food bank's capital campaign will go toward renovating the organization's facilities and increasing its ability to deliver and store food. The funds also will be used to purchase 10 vehicles and update an existing distribution fleet.

Mr. Tepper, who along with his company has given nearly $4 million to New Jersey food banks since 2006, is also making a $3 million donation to Feeding America, an umbrella organization of U.S. food banks. Part of that money will go toward creating a fleet of mobile pantries and refrigerated trucks. 

"Appaloosa has been involved with the recapitalization of the country's banks. Well, is there a more important bank to be involved in than these food banks?" says Mr. Tepper, whose hedge fund made billions during the financial crisis by betting that big banks would rebound from their lows after government intervention. 

In the last two years, he supported smaller food banks across his home state with the goal of "not letting any of them fail," he says. 

Last year, the Community Food Bank of New Jersey delivered 37 million pounds of groceries to more than 900,000 people. From 2008 to 2010, its food distribution has grown by more than 60% due to a 30% increase in demand. Starting this year, the food bank will receive two million more pounds of produce from local growers, nearly doubling its current annual distribution of fresh produce.

"Food is becoming expendable for people trying to hold on to their homes or keep their cars," says Kathleen DiChiara, president and CEO of the food bank. "We were like canaries in the mine. Not only were we serving the working poor, we were serving for the first time a new crop of middle-class men and women who had lost their jobs and couldn't feed their families." 

As a result of the expansion, the food bank says it will be able to increase its distribution by 20% over the next few years. 

"In the medium- and long-term we're going to have a hard time getting unemployment below 7%," Mr. Tepper says. "It doesn't take a genius in math to figure out that there's a real need to support this increased food distribution." 

Mr. Tepper, who lives in Livingston, N.J., also directs a large proportion of his philanthropy to causes in Pittsburgh, where he grew up and attended the University of Pittsburgh and Carnegie Mellon University's business school. In 2004 he donated $55 million to Carnegie Mellon business school, whose Tepper School of Business is now named after him. He continues to make gifts to food pantries throughout Pittsburgh. 

A part owner of the Pittsburgh Steelers, he says "you can't forget where you came from."

 Write to  Shelly Banjo at shelly.banjo@wsj.com 