  Yahoo's
YHOO


-0.65
%




 top leadership has a Chinese riddle to explain.

Dueling statements issued in the past 24 hours by Yahoo and Alibaba Group have only deepened uncertainty about how, and when, Yahoo lost its exposure to Chinese online-payments business Alipay. In particular, what did Yahoo's board know and when?

First, some background. Until this week, Alipay was seen as a key asset of Alibaba, which in turn is 40%-owned by Yahoo. Given challenges in Yahoo's U.S. operating business, its Asian investments, particularly Alibaba, had become the company's jewels. Alibaba gave Yahoo's investors exposure to fast-expanding Chinese e-commerce. CLSA analyst  James Lee had valued the Asian investments at about $12 a Yahoo share, including 80 cents for Alipay.

This week, Yahoo said that to expedite the grant of a license now necessary for Alipay to operate in China, Alibaba's ownership of Alipay was shifted to a domestic company majority-owned by Alibaba CEO  Jack Ma. Because Alibaba is a majority-foreign-owned company—aside from Yahoo,  Softbank
9984


0.09
%




 of Japan owns 30% of it—the license could have been delayed had Alipay remained an Alibaba unit.

The problem is, the sequence of events is not clear. On Thursday night, Yahoo stated that it was notified on March 31 of the transfer, which it said had happened last August "without the knowledge or approval" of Alibaba's board or shareholders. A few hours later, Alibaba rebutted this, saying the board was told in July 2009 that the "majority shareholding in Alipay had been transferred into Chinese ownership."

Whichever version is true, investors should have been told earlier. Yahoo may have felt it was protecting its interests more by negotiating with Alibaba quietly. But it is hard to justify keeping investors in the dark for six weeks or more.

Moreover, if it is true that Mr. Ma transferred control seven months before telling Yahoo and the Alibaba board, it seems almost impossible that Yahoo can continue to do business with him anyway. 

There is undoubtedly more to this story. No one disputes that Alibaba's board, on which Chief Yahoo  Jerry Yang sits, had discussed the possible foreign ownership problem facing Alipay for at least 18 months. 

It doubtless hasn't helped that, by some accounts, Mr. Ma and Yahoo Chief Executive  Carol Bartz don't have a good relationship. One issue: Alibaba had wanted Yahoo to reduce its stake in the company, ostensibly to avoid foreign ownership problems. Ms. Bartz didn't want to sell down.

If investors thought  Google had a problem in China with censorship, Yahoo just made it look trivial. China represents a huge chunk of Yahoo's value. Shareholders' hopes of realizing that are now in doubt.

 Write to  Martin Peers at martin.peers@wsj.com 