TOKYO—Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan called for cooperation across the political spectrum in tackling the nation's debt crisis as he opened this year's parliamentary session, while opposition lawmakers looked to sharpen their attacks on Japan's weakened and embattled leader. 

In his policy speech Monday at the opening of the session, the prime minister also emphasized his commitment to free trade and fiscal reconstruction. "I propose mutual consultation of ruling and opposition parties" in discussing the "burden the government will have to ask the Japanese people to shoulder," he said.

The priorities outlined in the speech illustrate the rough going Mr. Kan is likely to face. He said the government will take the unpopular step of presenting a proposal for a consumption-tax increase—currently at 5%—by June to fund growing social-security costs. 

As part of a tax overhaul, the government also is proposing a corporate-tax cut by five percentage points from the current 40% to keep Japanese companies from fleeing overseas. 

The premier also emphasized the need to make 2011 a year of "Open Japan," promising to decide by June whether the country will join the Trans-Pacific free-trade partnership. Powerful farm lobbies have resisted foreign pressure to open up Japan's heavily subsidized agricultural sector, and it isn't clear whether Mr. Kan can successfully negotiate with the sector in joining the free-trade agreement. 

Meanwhile, the opposition Liberal Democratic Party has hardened its resolve to return to power after nearly two years in opposition. "This is our battle year," LDP President Sadakazu Tanigaki told party members at its annual party convention Sunday. 

Independent political analyst Hirotada Asakawa said a cabinet resignation and a snap election this year "isn't out of the question," depending on how Mr. Kan's Democratic Party of Japan fares in the regional elections this spring. Mr. Kan currently has an approval rating of about 30%. 

The prime minister's plea for cooperation comes as his efforts to bring the opposition on board for timely passage of the 2011 budget have gone unanswered. The government faces the prospect of having to sit on its 92.4 trillion yen ($1.12 trillion) spending plan after the 2011 fiscal year starts in April. 

The expected parliamentary stalemate would be the result of a split legislature, where the opposition controls the upper house. Its control of the lower house means the ruling DPJ can push budget bills through even if the upper house refuses to deliberate, but there is a 30-day waiting period before the budget is returned to the lower house. And because the DPJ lacks the two-thirds majority needed to override upper-house rejection of nonbudget bills, the opposition can kill the government's proposed tax cuts, hampering the government's effort to spur economic growth. 

Mr. Kan moved up the opening day of parliament by a week to speed up passage of the country's budget. He also ousted two cabinet ministers censured by the opposition. He has hinted at a possible revision of the budget bill to avoid parliamentary deadlock at a crucial time when deflation and a strong yen plague the economy. 