PARIS—France said China's yuan should be included in the International Monetary Fund's basket of currencies that fund members use as a reserve asset, a proposal it says is aimed at edging the Chinese currency closer to its true market value.

French President Nicolas Sarkozy said he would ask the IMF to study how to make room for the yuan in its Special Drawing Rights basket, which already includes the euro, the yen, the pound sterling and the dollar.

Special Drawing Rights "were introduced 42 years ago," Mr. Sarkozy said at a news conference setting out the agenda for the French presidency of the Group of 20 nations. "Can't we agree on a calendar to widen the [basket] to new currencies such as the yuan?"

Mr. Sarkozy's proposal is part of an indirect campaign by France, which, like China's other trading partners, would like to see the yuan rise so its own exports would be more competitive in China's huge domestic market.

Chinese officials are resisting, worried that this could hurt its exports. The yuan has been appreciating, on average, about 0.5% a month against the dollar since mid-June when Beijing said it was adopting exchange-rate flexibility. The U.S. Treasury has signaled it is looking for appreciation at twice that rate.

Growing use of the yuan in international trade and financial transactions would generate higher demand for the Chinese currency—and possibly push up its value, French officials say. 

The proposal, which Mr. Sarkozy first introduced last year and which China has said it was studying with interest, is gaining momentum.

After Chinese President Hu Jintao met with U.S. President Barack Obama in Washington last week, the two leaders issued a joint statement in which the U.S. said it supported Beijing's efforts to promote the yuan's inclusion in the basket.

The IMF didn't immediately respond to requests to comment.

The proposal is one of several the French president has launched as France takes over the G-20 presidency this year—a platform from which Mr. Sarkozy hopes to take initiatives aimed at easing tensions on currency and commodity markets. 

Mr. Sarkozy said Monday he would recommend fostering a more "multipolar" currency system, in which the dollar retains a "prominent" role but which lets other currencies emerge. 

To that end, he has scheduled debates on currency matters, including a G-20 seminar on the topic in China in March. 

However, to spark dialogue and not discord, Mr. Sarkozy said, he would move slowly and refrain from making any recommendation to China on its monetary policy.

In a first step, Mr. Sarkozy said he would ask the IMF to spell out criteria for objectively measuring global financial and trade imbalances to make sure G-20 members share a common assessment of problems.

"We blame imbalances on each other but there is no common rule to define what is an imbalance, what is an excess," Mr. Sarkozy said. 

The IMF criteria should be ready as early as next month, he said. In a later step, G-20 members will be expected to propose remedies to fix at least their share of global imbalances, he said. Rejigging the IMF basket is part of that same gradual effort.

Although only a minuscule portion of international transactions is denominated in Special Drawing Rights, France hopes adding the yuan to the basket will help accelerate the pace at which China allows its currency to gain international status.

Since the IMF basket typically only includes currencies that are widely used internationally, China would have to allow more countries and companies to carry out transactions in yuan before its currency is allowed in. 

 Write to  David Gauthier-Villars at David.Gauthier-Villars@wsj.com 