 Bouilland, France 

Last month, a group of American investors assembled by former sommelier Robert Bohr purchased Domaine René Manuel, about 20 acres of prime Meursault vineyards for some €13 million ($18.5 million), sealing a trend whereby wealthy American oenophiles buy into the fabled vineyards of Burgundy. In 2002, long before Goldman Sachs Conspiracy Theory became a major interdisciplinary body of knowledge, a group of American investors led by Joe Wender and his wife, Ann Colgin, bought Camille Giroud, a small but venerable Burgundian negotiant. In the wine world, the headliner in this transaction was Ms. Colgin, the founder of Colgin Cellars, renowned for its small-production, big-ticket Napa Valley Cabernet Sauvignons. However, most of the 10 original investors were, like Mr. Wender, partners in Goldman Sachs. Was this just a friendly confederation of well-heeled Burghounds looking for bragging rights and first crack at some old bottles for their personal cellars? Was it part of an incredibly intricate scheme for wine-world domination, possibly some sort of prescient countermove against the nascent Chinese interest in the rival region of Bordeaux? Or was it yet another example of the influence of Becky Wasserman, the American-born Earth Mother of Burgundy, who acted as the matchmaker in this particular Franco-American union? I say the latter.

Ms. Wasserman grew up on East 77th Street in New York, the daughter of a Wall Street broker she describes as "an elegant alcoholic" and a Hungarian ex-prima ballerina. She attended the Rudolf Steiner School on East 79th Street and Hunter College High School, where her teacher Madame Brody introduced her to the French existentialists and she associated "with terrible girls with pretensions peering at Dylan Thomas drinking at the White Horse Tavern." After a year at Bryn Mawr and several years of marriage to "a Harvard fellow," she sailed for France with her second husband, "who had left Merrill Lynch to go to art school." 

 Bordeaux 2009: Expect Higher Prices 

 The Yankee Wine Cellar 

They found a crumbling barn in the town of Bouilland and restored it, in part with castoff materials from neighbors who were replacing their ancient flagstone floors with linoleum. Her husband, she says, "collected Burgundies and au pair girls." The couple had two children, Peter and Paul. Peter, who now works with his mother in sales, reports that his childhood was idyllic in many ways, growing up on a more or less self-sustaining farm, with ponies, "although there were some drawbacks to growing up in the family of an artist in the '60s," he says. "My parents didn't cut my hair and in rural Burgundy, they didn't get that; I was subject to some serious bullying, but my parents were oblivious." 

Foreseeing the end of her marriage, Becky took a job as a broker for a barrel maker; she sold French oak barrels to California winemakers, including Robert Mondavi. By the time her marriage had ended she'd fallen in love with the wines of Burgundy, and was desperate to make a living and keep the house in Bouilland. "I had to become rapidly self-supporting as I had no trust fund, no alimony, no amour-propre." After working for Kermit Lynch and the Troisgros brothers she started her own company, which specialized in the export of small domain wines from the Côtes d'Or and a few other regions of France. Her third husband, Russell Hone, a veteran of the English wine trade, joined the company in 1985; he holds the titles "company father" and "chef." He's a formidable cook, having co-authored a series of Time-Life cookbooks with the late Richard Olney. 

A couple of weeks ago, when I arrived unannounced at their office in the former Chancellery of the Ducs des Bourgogne, on a cobbled street in the town of Beaune, the couple were just siting down with their staff to a lamb-and-kidney-stew lunch prepared by Russell. Becky invited me and my companion, Beaver Truax, a veteran New York wine merchant who's known the couple for years, to join them. "Beaver," she said, "do I look like Aubrey Beardsley?" She cupped her halo of curly gray hair between her two hands. "Russell says I look like Aubrey Beardsley." 

"I thought I said you looked like Oscar Wilde," said Mr. Hone, as he poured me a glass of 2009 Michaud Morgon—a cru Beaujolais from their portfolio. 

Off Duty wine columnist Lettie Teague on stage at New York's Carnegie Hall at the JapanNYC festival, in an evening of Japanese culture and aesthetics, old and new. 

She'll lead a conversation about great wine and great Japanese sake, followed by a special sake tasting.

Also on the program: Off Duty car columnist Dan Neil, on what the hottest new Japanese cars have in common with medieval Japanese pottery, swords, theater and rice paper. 

Thursday, March 31, at 7:30 p.m.

For tickets call 212-247-7800 or go to carnegiehall.org.

Mr. Truax assured her she looked like neither, and I seconded the sentiment, like a polite guest, thinking however that she looked as if she'd been drawn by Edward Koren for the New Yorker, one of his hirsute sophisticate/eccentrics. I was as impressed with the level of marital banter as I was with the meal. The staff lunch is a daily ritual which serves as a tasting forum, and often draws guests who just happen to show up around 12:30. "We see these heads in the window," says Becky, "which is terrific, because Russell is incapable of cooking for less than 12." He is clearly a man of large appetites and enthusiasms; God gave him his towering height, but his Falstaffian girth is presumably his own accomplishment. He is widely reputed to have one of the best palates, and one of the best memories for older vintages, in Burgundy.

The couple began hosting Burgundy symposia for passionate amateurs in 1997, welcoming a dozen guests to Bouilland for an intensive week of tasting and touring, enlisting such experts as Clive Coates and Alan Meadows to assist. An early symposium guest was Mr. Wender of Goldman Sachs, who returned the following year with Ms. Colgin. Mr. Wender asked Ms. Wasserman to let him know if she ever spotted an investment opportunity, and not long afterward she enlisted him to help rescue the foundering negotiant firm of Camille Giroud, with whom she'd worked for years. In addition to its name, the firm had significant stores of older Burgundy vintages. Through her contacts, Ms. Wasserman found David Croix, a 23-year-old winemaker fresh out of oenology school, who has since become one of the most respected winemakers in the region, though his hiring must have been something of an act of faith. At Camille Giroud's winery in an unpretentious 19th-century warehouse in the center of Beaune, Mr. Croix is turning out 30 cuvées from Burgundy's humblest appellations to its grandest. 

When Ms. Wasserman heard whispers that the Domaine Duchet was for sale, she contacted another symposium alum, real-estate investor Richard Forbes, and again hired Mr. Croix to make the wine. (The estate, Domaine des Croix, is named for a stone cross in one of the estate's vineyards in Corton, as well as for the winemaker.) And while she had no part in the recent sale of Domaine René Manuel, her former employee Dominique Lafon, who now runs the family domain in Meursault, was one of the principals in the deal, one of many top Burgundian producers she continues to work with.

Over lunch at the old stone farmhouse in Bouilland, a few days after I met her in Beaune, Becky is eager to talk about the humble side of Burgundy. "There's so much emphasis on the famous domains and the grand crus," she says, "I'm afraid people are overlooking appellations like Monthélie and Savigny and Marsannay. Burgundy can be so expensive, but there are wonderful bottles for $30 or $40." Russell, who has prepared a roast lamb redolent of garlic over a white-bean purée, pours me a glass of 2002 Sylvain Pataille Marsannay, an inexpensive red which is one of the best things I've tasted during a week in Burgundy. "It's always the small things that have intrigued us the most," Becky says. "The handmade, the artisanal. That's really what Burgundy is about."

—Read the On Wine blog at blogs.wsj.com/wine. Email Jay at wine@wsj.com 

Peter's Picks

Peter Wasserman's business card says Anti Marketing and Sales Prevention, a reference to the fact that his job is more about allocating scarce wines than about flogging them. Keep that in mind as you look for these wines. 

A crisp, refreshing blanc from one of Volnay's masters, made from Burgundy's "other" white grape. 



The kind of wine that will make the skeptics reconsider the virtues of Beaujolais.

A delicious and uncharacteristically accessible red from a domain famed for long lived wines.



A rich, earthy, complex red from one of the less famous villages.





The largest production wine from this great cult producer, this is a complex, brooding young beauty.