What's a good teacher worth? The question is often answered sentimentally, but a recent study offers hard numbers.

Good teachers improve students' cognitive abilities, as measured on tests, and cognitive abilities correlate with earnings later in life. Using conservative assumptions, the study found that a teacher at the 84th percentile of performance raised the future annual earnings of a class of 20 children by $240,000 (in current dollars). By using more generous assumptions about a teacher's effect on students, that figure can go as high as $1 million. 

Unfortunately, it works both ways: Teachers at the 16th percentile of performance decrease future earnings of their students by the same amount, the study found.

Looking at the situation another way, the study concluded that removing the weakest 5% to 8% of teachers and replacing them with average ones would, over the long term, add $100 trillion to the U.S. economy.

 "The Economic Value of Higher Teacher Quality," Eric A. Hanushek, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper (December) 

The more unconventional the font—within reason—the better you'll remember what you're reading. So says a study that, at long last, offers a reason for the existence of Comic Sans.

The researchers tested whether a dollop of difficulty prompts deeper engagement with reading material. First, they had 28 college students try to memorize space aliens' characteristics, a kind of simulated biology lesson. Some of the students studied material printed with a conventional font (Arial), while others had to penetrate a more challenging typeface—normal Bodoni or Comic Sans, a popular, cartoonish font loathed by many designers. Those who read the more difficult font scored an average of 87% on the fictional-biology exam, compared with 73% for the others.

Then the researchers tested 222 high-school students in real classes. Where teachers taught two classes on the same subject, the researchers printed handouts in either a standard font or an odder one. (Sometimes, they made slightly smeared photocopies of printouts.) On real academic tests, students who were given harder-to-read handouts performed better by a small but significant amount.

 "Fortune Favors the Bold (and the Italic): Effects of Disfluency on Educational Outcomes," Connor Diemand-Yauman, Daniel M. Oppenheimer, Erikka B. Vaughan, Cognition (January) 

 If odd fonts aren't available to test takers, how about a rubber ball? In another study, Israeli researchers compared how 40 people performed on a 25-item test requiring considerable linguistic inventiveness. Before the test, some people squeezed rubber balls—hard—with their left hand, an activity known to stimulate the brain's right hemisphere, which, in turn, is associated with creative patterns of thought (though creativity is not confined to any single part of the brain, as the authors were quick to note). Others squeezed with their right hand, and there was also a control group.

The left-hand squeezers got an average of 12.5 questions correct on the test, compared to 8.4 for the right-hand squeezers. This led the authors to conclude that selective hand-clenching can "can greatly influence the outcome of the thought process."

 "Unilateral Muscle Contractions Enhance Creative Thinking," Abraham Goldstein, Ketty Revivo, Michal Kreitler and Nili Metuki, Psychonomic Bulletin & Review (December) 

Swimmers, on average, post better times when they're part of a group, researchers looking at 2008 Olympics races found.

The study included men and women who took part in both individual and group events, and focused on the 100- and 200-meter individual freestyle races and the corresponding relays (400 or 800 meters). 

Swimmers in the fourth and final relay position posted the biggest improvement in times, shaving about 0.8% off their individual times. The first swimmer in a relay, by contrast, tended to swim faster in the individual races.

The performances correlated with the perceived "indispensability" of various starting positions, researchers noted: Though each relay leg counts equally, the fourth swimmer is viewed as the team's last hope for a good finish. 

 "When the Whole is More Than the Sum of Its Parts: Motivation Gains in the Wild," Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, Joachim Hüffmeier and Guido Hertel (forthcoming) 

College students would rather have their self-esteem stroked than eat their favorite food, have sex or drink beer, a study found.

In one scenario, 130 subjects were asked to think of something they knew boosted self-esteem, such as getting a compliment or a good grade.

They were then asked to rate, on a 1-to-5 scale, how much pleasure the experience brought them and how much they "wanted" it (right now, in general, in good times, and in bad). In the same way, they rated the experience of having sex and eating their favorite food.

Overall, the students valued the self-esteem increase more than good food or sex. The ratio of "wanting" to "liking" was used to gauge the addictive qualities of each pleasure: Addicts can want a fix more than they like it. While students said that they liked all of these things more than they wanted them, the gap was narrowest in the case of self-esteem—which hints at the intoxicating effects of ego, the authors said.

 "Sweets, Sex, or Self-Esteem? Comparing the Value of Self-Esteem Boosts with Other Pleasant Rewards," Brad J. Bushman, Scott J. Moeller, and Jennifer Crocker, Journal of Personality (forthcoming) 