At the age of 5, Brooklyn-bred Alan Arkin told his father that he wanted to be an actor. Reading his new memoir, "An Improvised Life" (Da Capo Press), which functions more as a meditation on his craft, one gets the impression that Mr. Arkin went about the task with single-minded purpose. The book reveals little about his off-stage life, and, he said, for a long time there wasn't one. "For many years, I felt my only real solid identity was on stage. I was happy, I knew who I was, but the minute I got off stage I didn't feel like I had much use."

The work certainly paid off. After an early stint in folk music (in 1956 his group, the Tarriers, recorded a hit rendition of "The Banana Boat Song," better known as "Day-O"), he became an original member of the Second City comedy troupe, earned roles in classic films like "Catch-22" and "The In-Laws," and won an Oscar for his performance in "Little Miss Sunshine," Today Mr. Arkin is regarded as one of the great actors of his generation. He spoke with the Journal about his life and his job. 

 For an actor's memoir, your book is short on gossip and on-set anecdotes, focusing instead on acting. Where's the dish?  

That's what I wanted to write. It felt to me infinitely more pertinent than sitting around and telling anecdotes of drinking bouts and sexual exploits. I don't know what the value of that is. It may sell books and be good for cocktail parties, but it feels trivial to me. 

 Are there natural actors who don't need to train?  

Yeah, I want to murder half of them. I knock my brains out to get to whatever level of proficiency I've gotten to and people come and wipe me off the map. Abigail Breslin is a perfect example. She was 8 years old when I worked with her in "Little Miss Sunshine." She was as professional as any human being I've ever worked with. Some people have a better lock on it than others. My need to study and analyze was because it was very uncomfortable for me to be on stage for a long time. Which seems to go against my need to do it, but there you are. 

 Speaking of "Little Miss Sunshine," how did winning an Oscar affect you? 

I thought about that for a long time. I said, what do any of the awards mean to me? I finally realized the only real moment of happiness that any of the awards have ever given me is the moment when I've been nominated. It comes as a shockingly pleasant surprise and it puts one in the company of people who mostly one admires. The rest, to me, has not lived up to that moment because there's the anxiety of am I going to win, am I going to lose? And there's this sense that when you win, you have the illusion of thinking you're special. When you lose, you think you're a failure. And both of these things are insane. 

 In the book, you talk about how to lead a big life. What do you mean by that? 

What I mean by a big life is a life where you're aware of yourself all the time. You're present in the events that are taking place around you, no matter where you happen to be. We in the West identify ourselves with our careers so much that when we're not working, we don't know who we are anymore. I once asked a Japanese man if he was a painter and he looked at me like I was crazy. He said, "I paint but I'm not a painter." 

 I initially thought by "Big Life" you meant wealth and stardom.  

No. That, to me, is small life. That's defining yourself by something that you have no control over. You have no control over whether you're going to be a star. One of my pet hobbies is to ask people around my age, are they doing what they thought they would be doing, what they set out to be doing in their 20s. Almost anybody that has any sense of humor or character or excitement about them says, "I had no idea my life was going to end up like what it is now." But the only way that can happen successfully is if you leave yourself open to possibilities. 

 You lived in Brooklyn until age 11. How much New York attitude is still in you?  

How the hell do I know? 