TOKYO –  Nippon Steel Corp.
NSSMY


-0.45
%




 and Tata Steel Ltd. said Friday they have finalized an agreement on their auto-use steel joint venture in eastern India, aiming to lift sales in one of the fastest-growing markets in Asia. 

The two steel makers that are in the world's top-10 by output agreed to start production at their joint company by the autumn of 2013 to supply high-end steel sheet to various auto makers in India. 

The joint venture, with a total investment of 40 billion yen ($600 million) , is the latest advance into the Indian market by a Japanese steel maker after  JFE Holdings Inc.
5411


-0.74
%




 formed a capital alliance with JSW Steel Ltd. and  Kobe Steel Ltd.
KBSTY


1.15
%




 reached a basic accord for cooperation with Steel Authority of India Ltd. 

Tata will have a 51% stake in the joint company and Nippon Steel will hold the remaining 49%. 

Their joint operation will cut costs and bring new customers to Nippon Steel which is facing slack demand at home, while the technical and production support from its Japanese partner will give Tata expanded capacity to meet demand in the Indian auto market which is growing around 20% annually. 

The joint production deal also reflects the worsening business climate for Japanese steel companies as the stubbornly strong yen hurts profitability on exports and the domestic market offers very little room for growth. 

Nippon Steel has been shipping domestically produced steel plates abroad for local processing. 

"With the yen remaining strong, we have no choice but reexamine the validity of that business model," Nippon Steel executive vice president  Kozo Uchida said at a press conference. 

The partnership with Tata will also benefit Nippon Steel, Japan's largest steel producer by output, in raw materials procurement which has been a major headache for many steel mills after Australian and Brazilian suppliers sharply hiked their prices. 

Tata sources all of its iron ore and a half of its coal needs in its own mines. 

The planned annual capacity of 600,000 metric tons - enough for 1.2-1.5 million cars - at their joint venture to be set up at Tata's steel works in Jharkhand could give the companies a significant share in the Indian market of high-end auto steel. 

The current demand for such steel including galvanized sheet is 900,000-1 million tons a year in India and is expected to rise to at least 1.4 million tons by 2015, Uchida said. 

According to the Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers, India's annual car sales could rise to three million units by 2016. A total of 1.53 million cars were sold in the fiscal year ended March 31, 2010, up 25% from the previous year. 

"Demand for steel overall in India is about 65 million tons and this demand is growing at the rate of about 10%" annually, Tata Steel vice president Anand Sen told the press conference. 

Some 10% of that demand is from the automobile and motorcycle industries and that percentage will likely climb to 15% in the long term, he added. 

According to the World Steel Association, India is expected to become the third largest steel using country in the world this year after China and the U.S. 

 Write to  Kazuhiro Shimamura at kazuhiro.shimamura@dowjones.com 