Missouri's attorney general asked a U.S. appeals court for an injunction to prevent the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers from opening up an emergency floodway to ease near-record flooding on the Mississippi River.

Earlier Friday, a U.S. district court had rejected the state's motion for a temporary restraining order against the move, which would send a quarter of the Mississippi's flow coursing over 130,000 acres of prime farmland and homes of some 200 people.

"Given the devastation that these families may soon endure, we believe it is important to ask the Eighth Circuit to review the District Court's decision," Missouri Attorney General Chris Koster's office said in a statement. 

Major Gen. Michael Walsh, president of the Mississippi River Commission and a top officer with the Corps, has said he can't be sure whether he will activate the floodway to reduce pressure on levees and protect surrounding towns amid expected record flooding at the confluence of the Mississippi and Ohio rivers. Earlier this week, he ordered the Corps to bring barges with explosives and other materials to the area from Memphis, Tenn.

Those barges are now in place, but they have yet to set the explosives that would blow a 2,000-foot-wide hole in the levee at the top of the floodway, which measures 35 miles long and up to 12 miles wide.

Judge Stephen N. Limbaugh Jr. of the federal district court in Cape Girardeau, Mo., ruled Friday that the river commission, a combination of Army Corps and civilian engineers charged by Congress with flood- and navigation-control improvements, has the right to activate the decades-old Birds Point-New Madrid Floodway.

Missouri officials argued that activating the floodway would violate the state's clean-water laws by causing spills of harmful chemicals and fuel, and that the Corps hadn't done enough to explore other options.

See the latest data from flood gauges throughout the Midwest and South.

Judge Limbaugh said the river commission had the authority to override the state water law, and that there was no basis to find that the river commission was behaving capriciously in making the decision. 

The floodway, a combination of public and private lands with easements granting the government the right to let water pass through, has been activated only once, in the record flood of 1937. The floodway would act as a pressure valve, reducing flooding upstream by three to four feet, a Corps spokesman said.

Friday morning, the Ohio River was within inches of the 59.5-foot record set in the 1937 flood at Cairo, Ill. The river is expected to crest at record levels this weekend and remain there for several days, straining levees in places such as Cairo and Hickman, Ky.

In a court filing earlier this week, Illinois Attorney General Lisa Madigan said blasting the levees could save Cairo, a town of 3,000 people. She said Cairo would be inundated with 18 to 20 feet of water if its levees failed.

John Story, who farms 4,400 acres in the floodway, said the Army Corps' plan likely would cripple his farm operations and wipe out millions of dollars of buildings and equipment he owns.

Mr. Story, a fourth-generation farmer, said recent years of heavy rains or practically none at all, combined with the possible devastation from the Corps' plan have "just about beaten all of the optimism out of us." 

Further south, tornado-battered Mississippi was waiting for serious flooding to hit.

"Three weeks from now, we are going to have a tremendous amount of water in places that have never seen water in my lifetime," said Mississippi Gov. Haley Barbour, "and I am 63 years old."

—Miguel Bustillo contributed to this article.

 Write to  Joe Barrett at joseph.barrett@wsj.com and Ilan Brat at ilan.brat@wsj.com 