Shared sacrifice follows every disaster. It's only a matter of deciding who shares it.

"We're asking shared sacrifice from a lot of people," Michigan's Republican Gov. Rick Snyder said last week. "These are difficult times."

At least 3,000 protesters stormed Michigan's capitol to protest proposals to tax pensions and allow government managers facing financial emergencies to ditch union contracts.

Gov. Snyder had hoped to avoid the blowback that Gov. Scott Walker received in Wisconsin for stripping government workers of collective bargaining rights. But there it was.

State by state, the GOP and organized labor have been challenging each other's rights to exist like Hamas and Israel. Unions have long thrown most of their support to Democrats. And Republicans have never seen a better time to strike back.

States are broke. The nation borrows 43 cents of every dollar it spends. The Treasury and the Federal Reserve have made a high-stakes bet that the economy will recover before their supernatural powers to paper over the bad times disappear.

Few consider the hyperinflation that might ensue if this bet goes as awry as a nuclear reactor in Japan.

Better to keep pumping money into banks. Better to bash unions and demand shared sacrifice. The U.S. economic recovery remains fragile. Who knows how many more shocks it can take?

Japan's quake shook U.S. stocks last week. But the market did not topple thanks to zero interest rates and the Fed's ongoing quantitative easing.

Wasn't it beautiful, all those hundreds of billions of yen Japan's central bank injected into the global market, too? And G-7 nations manipulating currency markets so the yen wouldn't overheat?

So many pundits observed that the Japanese will get through this crisis because they believe individuals must sacrifice for the good of the group.

Relief workers trudge through incomprehensible miles of rubble. Nuclear power plant personnel accept radioactive suicide missions. Japanese bankers suck up newly minted yen.

Americans prize individualism. We worship the free-market ideal of every man for himself, at least until history's most successful union -- the chummy CEOs' and board directors' guild -- needs a bailout. Otherwise, collectivism is for wonky, union-loving liberals. And cops.

Notice Wisconsin's governor did not have the courage to strip police, fire and emergency workers of their collective bargaining rights. People still have the right to collectively bargain in the Dairy State unless they are those robber-baron teachers.

Then there's the National Football League. NFL team owners are demanding that players restore their union. NFL players decertified their union to circumvent organized-labor laws and file a class-action lawsuit.

"At a time when thousands of employees are fighting for their collective bargaining rights, this union has chosen to abandon collective bargaining in favor of a sham 'decertification' and antitrust litigation," the NFL said.

So now there's no union and the 2012 Super Bowl could be up to a judge.

Billionaire owners. Millionaire players. A frothy $9 billion in annual revenues to split. And the shared sacrifice of the fans.

—Al Lewis is a columnist for Dow Jones Newswires in Denver. He blogs at tellittoal.com; his email address is al.lewis@dowjones.com 