The political feud over the New Jersey Supreme Court became more tangled Monday, with a series of moves that could leave the court with two seats in limbo come September.

Associate Justice Roberto Rivera-Soto told Gov. Chris Christie in a letter Monday that he did not want to be renominated and would instead return to private practice. The justice had been assailed by critics for his decision to abstain from voting on cases amid a dispute between Mr. Christie and Democratic lawmakers over a nominee to the Supreme Court.

Mr. Christie, a Republican bent on remaking what he sees as an activist court, made the next move in the political chess match, saying he will not nominate a replacement for Judge Rivera-Soto, whose term is up in September, until the state Senate moves forward on the nomination of  Anne Patterson, a lawyer tapped by Mr. Christie for a seat on the Supreme Court.

"If that means we're going to have two vacancies on the Supreme Court, so be it," Mr. Christie said in a radio interview Monday. "The people of New Jersey voted for a Republican governor who made as part of his platform changing the Supreme Court."

Senate President  Stephen Sweeney, a Democrat, said he would not budge from protecting the court from what he describes as Mr. Christie's attack on judicial independence.

"It seems to be gridlock," said  Frank Askin, a professor at Rutgers Law School. "There's never a dull moment in New Jersey these days."

The fight stems from Mr. Christie's decision in May to break from tradition and toss a sitting Supreme Court justice from the bench. New Jersey Supreme Court justices are appointed for seven-year terms, after which the governor has the option to re-nominate the justice for a term with tenure.

But Mr. Christie broke with that tradition in May and nominated Ms. Patterson to replace Justice John Wallace, the court's only black member. Senate Democrats said they would refuse to hold a hearing for 22 months—the time it would have taken Judge Wallace to reach the mandatory retirement age of 70.

"It is completely irresponsible that while it took just 88 days for  Elana Kagan to become the 112th Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court, Anne Patterson is still without a hearing for no good reason," Mr. Christie said Monday in a statement.

Judge Rivera-Soto became involved when he protested a temporary replacement to the bench made by the chief justice. He said the constitution only gave the chief justice power to appoint a replacement when "necessary," and said he would refuse to vote in cases—even though a majority of the court promptly voted against his interpretation.

The judge's actions enraged Senate Democrats, who called for the Assembly to impeach him, though there has not been an appetite for impeachment.

Beyond the politics, the court continues to hear cases with a motley bench. The back-and-forth comes just days ahead of the return of one its most controversial cases. The court will hear oral arguments Wednesday related to Abbott v. Burke, a long-running fight over state education funding. The current motion challenges Mr. Christie's recent cuts to education, and previous decisions have affected state spending.

Court watchers say that by refusing to vote, Judge Rivera-Soto, who is considered conservative, gives more power to the other justices voting.

It was uncertain whether Mr. Christie would have re-nominated Judge Rivera-Soto anyway. He was critical of the judge during his campaign—though he did praise him Monday—and Mr. Sweeney said the Senate would have rejected him. 

Mr. Christie praised the judge's "distinguished career as a public servant" and said the court's first Hispanic-American used his "historic appointment to provide an intelligent and balanced voice in each decision."

Mr. Sweeney, a South Jersey Democrat, said he was surprised to hear Mr. Christie's praise.

"What state's he been living in for the last seven years?" Mr. Sweeney said. "How do you leave him on the bench for nine [more] months, collecting a check and not doing his job?"

A similar drama played out in 2003 when then-Justice Peter Verniero said he would not seek re-appointment and would return to private practice. Then, as now, Democrats pushed for impeachment, which was blocked by Republicans in charge of the Assembly. Judge Verniero had been criticized for his response to questions about racial profiling by New Jersey State Police, which he oversaw as a former attorney general.