IWANUMA, Japan—As the tsunami warnings subsided in the area near Sendai airport in Miyagi prefecture, one of the locations decimated by the giant waves that followed the devastating earthquake that struck Japan Friday, local residents started the recovery process.

The head of police in Miyagi said it is inevitable that the number of casualties in the prefecture alone would reach 10,000, according to unconfirmed local-media reports.

Hundreds of cars and large parts of the area surrounding Sendai Airport were submerged as the tsunami flooded nearby waterways. Stunned locals stared at the damage and consoled one another in the debris-covered streets.





The rushing water also swept up small planes. Sheds had floated away into the streets, blocking access to roads. A more than six-foot-high tunnel running underneath the airport's runways was entirely flooded. Employees for the prefecture – the Japanese equivalent of a state-- drained the tunnel, but they were not sure whether they would find any bodies in the water.

Along the four-lane road leading to the eastern Pacific Ocean coast, which is about two kilometers from the airport, there were also happy reunions. 

"You're alive. I was so worried," said one man, hugging another elderly man, before breaking down in tears. Slightly bemused, the older man —who was riding a bicycle and still wearing a one-piece mechanic's jacket from a nearby aviation company—said: "An old bastard like me doesn't die so easily."

Shinichi Hayasaka, a 34-year-old mechanic at an aviation maintenance company Jamco Corp., searched frantically for his station wagon, whicht had been washed away from his office parking lot when the tsunami stuck on Friday afternoon.



"I saw another person's car from Jamco around here, so I thought it may have carried all the way here," he said. "At the very least, I wanted to get my valuables out of the car."

He said once the earthquake struck, about 170 people at the company ran to the roof of the office building. There, they watched the waves of water rush toward them. Mr. Hayasaka and his co-workers spent Friday night sleeping on the top third floor of the office building. Women used the available blankets while the men wrapped themselves in cardboard boxes to stay warm. 

After the water subsided a little on Saturday afternoon, about 24 hours after the earthquake hit, Mr. Hayasaka and his co-workers took the inflatable boats found in airplanes and paddled to safety. 

Tadashi Sato, a 39-year-old employee at a construction materials company, was out surveying the damage at his office. He was at home just a few minutes away when the quake struck. 

About an hour after the quake, Mr. Sato said he went to see how the office had weathered the tsunami and the water level was already chest-high. Riding bicycles, Mr. Sato brought his six-year-old son, Haruto, to see the devastation. 

"It may sound strange, but I wanted him to see this. I want him to remember what happened to his country," said Mr. Sato. "He doesn't show that he was scared, but he's having nightmares when he is asleep." 