BERLIN—German Chancellor Angela Merkel's center-right coalition lost a key regional election on Sunday, according to preliminary results, an outcome that could weaken her authority and further hobble her government's agenda at a time when the country faces renewed tensions in the euro zone. 

Ms. Merkel's Christian Democratic Union, which has ruled Baden-Württemberg for nearly 60 years, was expected to lose power in the wealthy southwestern German region after winning only around 44% of the vote together with its smaller allies, according to preliminary results.

The center-left opposition, composed of the Greens and their Social Democratic Party allies, won over 47% of the vote, according to preliminary results—probably enough for a narrow majority in the state legislature, analysts said.

The Baden-Württemberg election may have been decisively influenced by Japan's nuclear problems, which fed German voters' anxiety about nuclear energy, officials from all parties said. 

The Fukushima reactor crisis following the earthquake and tsunami in Japan caught the pro-nuclear CDU off guard and benefited the anti-nuclear Greens, analysts say. 

Ms. Merkel's speedy reversal of her pro-nuclear stance in the past two weeks, including her decision to mothball Germany's oldest nuclear reactors, failed to convince voters, who widely saw it as an election-driven tactic, opinion polls last week suggested. 

The euro-zone crisis played little role in the Baden-Württemberg campaign, which was dominated by local issues. But the election result is likely to limit Ms. Merkel's room for maneuver in Europe: Her increasingly unhappy conservative colleagues are expected to fight to limit Germany's financial generosity toward indebted euro-zone nations such as Greece. 

If confirmed, the preliminary results would mean the Greens could lead a German state for the first time, an outcome that highlights the emergence of the party as a major opposition force. 

The CDU's likely defeat is traumatic for a party that has ruled Baden-Württemberg for decades. Political analysts say the result is likely to fuel criticism of Ms. Merkel's leadership within her own party. 

Although the chancellor is unlikely to lose her job—in part because of the lack of any obvious rival who could replace her—the chancellor's authority to push through major initiatives will almost certainly be diminished. 

"Only the lack of an alternative will save Merkel from pressure to resign," said  Tilman Meyer, a political scientist at Bonn University. A conservative defeat in Baden-Württemberg, for decades the Christian Democrats' heartland, is "a tectonic shift in the politics of the Federal Republic," Prof. Meyer said. 

The German state's complicated electoral system meant that the center-right still had a theoretical chance late on Sunday of clinging to a majority in the state legislature despite winning fewer votes than the center-left. 

However, Baden-Württemberg's CDU state premier, Stefan Mappus conceded defeat. "This is a bitter day for the CDU," Mr. Mappus said, adding that it was in his view "not a good day for Baden-Württemberg either."

In a separate election in the western state of Rhineland-Palatinate on Sunday, the SPD held on to power as expected, but lost its absolute majority in the legislature and will have to govern with support from the Greens. 

Many conservatives say Ms. Merkel has failed to define a clear vision for her government since winning national elections in 2009. 

She has faced criticism in the CDU for her frequent about-turns on issues ranging from tax cuts to the euro-zone debt crisis. 

In May 2010 the chancellor's decision to bail out Greece, despite earlier taking a tough stance on Athens' financial problems, contributed to the CDU's defeat that month in another important German state, North Rhine-Westphalia. That result cost Ms. Merkel's government its majority in Germany's upper house, where the 16 states are represented, making it harder to push through legislation. 

Although the CDU was on course to remain the biggest party in the Baden-Württemberg state legislature, its losses and those of its junior partner, the pro-business Free Democratic Party, left it short of the opposition's combined vote.

The Free Democrats won barely enough votes to get into the state legislature, a result that will add to pressure on the party's leader, Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle. 

The Greens were set to win more seats than their ally, the SPD, meaning that the Greens' lead candidate Winfried Kretschmann was expected to become the first Green premier of a German state. 

The Greens began as a fringe party in the 1980s with roots in Germany's anti-nuclear protest movement, and served as junior partner to the SPD in the national government of Chancellor Gerhard Schröder from 1998 to 2005. Since then, the Greens have mutated into a center-left party with widespread appeal among Germany's educated middle classes. 

Their growing popularity may put them in a position to mount a serious challenge, in alliance with the SPD, to Ms. Merkel's government in Germany's next national elections in 2013, political analysts say. 

Their apparent victory in Baden-Württemberg will test whether the Greens have thought through policies for areas other than the environment, analysts say. 