PARIS – Renault SA's chief operating officer said the company had been the victim of "an organized international network" in the corporate espionage case linked to its electric vehicle program. But he also said that no critical information had been leaked externally.

"We have arrived at the conclusion that we are facing an organized system to gather economic, technological and strategic information to serve overseas interests," COO  Patrick Pelata told French newspaper Le Monde, in comments confirmed by a Renault spokeswoman.



Renault suspended three senior managers earlier this week, saying at the time only that they had been involved in a serious breach of confidentiality that put important company assets at risk. On Friday a person familiar with the matter said that Chinese interests may be behind the case, and that the car maker was expected to file a criminal complaint against the three as early as Monday.

Mr. Pelata did not mention China. But he did mention electric vehicles in the context of the case: Renault had not previously confirmed that the case involved EVs.

"It's obvious that our technology can arouse keen interest, and that this is especially true as we are a pioneer in electric vehicles," he said.

Mr. Pelata indicated that the technology leaked was relatively minor.

"We have done a review with our technical teams," he said. "It is clear that no nugget of technology that is strategic for innovation could have leaked outside the company – including the more than 200 patents registered or in the process of being registered."

"Nothing critical seems to have leaked concerning the chemistry of the electrodes; the architecture of the batteries; the assembly of the different components; the charger; or of the motor itself."

Instead, he said, the leaked information was about the surrounding technology used to incorporate a battery and electric motor into a car. 

"In fact we think that information was leaked on vehicle architecture, and on the costs and economic model of our vehicle program," he said. 

"It's serious – but less so than if the damage had concerned technology," he said, adding that the affair would not change anything in Renault's electric vehicle program.

The core component of an electric vehicle is the battery. But electric vehicles require a host of surrounding technologies such as power management and battery cooling systems. 

Renault and its Japanese partner,  Nissan Motor Co., which share the same CEO,  Carlos Ghosn, have invested a combined 4 billion euros (about $5 billion) into electric vehicles. Mr. Ghosn has forecast that electric vehicles will represent 10% of global automobile sales in 10 years.

 Write to  Sebastian Moffett at sebastian.moffett@wsj.com 