FRANKFURT—German business confidence slipped only slightly in March, despite rising energy prices and the devastating earthquake and nuclear crisis in Japan, the Ifo measure of sentiment showed Friday. 

The Munich-based research institute Ifo said its business climate index fell to 111.1 in March from 111.3 in February owing to a deteriorating business outlook. That was the first decrease after nine months of successive increases. 

"On the whole, German firms remain very confident," Ifo president  Hans-Werner Sinn said. The outcome was above economists' expectations for a decrease to 110.5, but a drop in the Ifo business expectations index—to 106.5 in March from 107.9 in February—adds to evidence that the country's economic outlook is weakening. 

"The fall perhaps provides the first sign that the super-strong recovery in the German economy is starting to lose a little bit of steam," said  Jonathan Loynes, chief European economist at Capital Economics. Germany has been one of the main drivers of the euro zone's economic recovery as gross domestic product expanded 3.6% last year. 

The Ifo survey follows Thursday's retrenchment in the German manufacturing Purchasing Managers Index and a drop in the closely watched ZEW economic expectations index earlier this month. 

"Some might now argue that the best of the German recovery is behind as political unrest and the Japanese catastrophes should also take their toll on the German economy," said ING economist  Carsten Brzeski. "Not so fast," he said, "even if there is anecdotal evidence that some German car manufacturers are experiencing production problems due to delayed delivery of Japanese products, this could only delay but not stop production. Moreover, German imports from Japan amount to less than 3% of total imports." Ifo said that almost half of the responses were made after the Fukushima nuclear disaster. 

General optimism was also reflected in the Ifo index measuring businesses' mood about their current situation, which increased to 115.8 in March from 114.8 in February. Each month, Ifo polls roughly 7,000 manufacturing, construction, wholesale and retail companies. 

Confidence deteriorated in retail, wholesale and construction but improved slightly in manufacturing, although exporters assessed their trading outlook as being less favorable than in February, Ifo said. 

 Write to  Nina Koeppen at nina.koeppen@dowjones.com 