An agreement reached on Friday has given the National Football League and its players a seven-day reprieve from a lockout, but the possibility of an eventual shutdown still hangs over the NFL. From the outside, this dispute looks like billionaires vs. millionaires, and I'm sure that it seems annoying to fans. But from the inside, money disputes notwithstanding, a lockout would provide a unique opportunity for players to take back control of their lives.

From the moment an athlete enters the NFL, he is told what to do, when to do it, how to do it, how to talk about doing it and exactly what will happen to him if he doesn't do it. The relentless pursuit of football perfection is all that matters. The team provides food, clothing and transportation for players virtually all year long.

A "player development" employee takes care of any off-the-field issues a player may have. Legal disputes, child-support payments, speeding tickets, car insurance—everything can be taken care of in-house. If a player gets a letter for jury duty, no worries: You play in the NFL. A call is made.

But this bubble is unrealistic. It keeps the athlete in a perpetual state of adolescence and guarantees that he will be unprepared for life outside of it. There's a reason why a majority of former NFL players have gone bankrupt or are under financial stress within two years of retirement, a reason why their marriages fall apart, or they get arrested, depressed, addicted. Having never been given the opportunities to learn the lessons that most adults learn, NFL athletes often fall on their faces when there isn't anyone there to catch them.

A work stoppage would be a great opportunity for current players to feel what it will be like without that safety net, when their problems won't be solved for them. They could start asking themselves the difficult questions that every player dreads: Who am I without football? What am I going to do now?

I know it's probably wishful thinking, because the nature of these negotiations hasn't left much room for player-development issues. But in a fair world, reforms could be made to the way the NFL treats the players and their off-the-field issues. The NFL Players Association should find a way to soften the role of the in-house player-development guy. Players should handle their problems on their own.

An extended lockout could also have a positive effect on the long-term prospects of health care in the NFL. For a player, everything about the NFL is temporary except the damage being done to the body and brain. That's permanent. The union leadership would have time during a work stoppage to address these health concerns, which weigh heavily on the minds of players and their families. 

Every day, players are risking long-term injury by rushing themselves back on the field after being hurt, because the institutional pressure to perform now is too great. The average NFL career lasts only 3½ years, and the window of opportunity to carve out a roster spot is dangerously thin. Minimum salary goes up every season, so the trend is to push out the veterans and bring in younger, cheaper labor.

Also, without players having to report in March, their bodies would be given valuable time to rest, a concept that is undervalued in the NFL. The recent revelations regarding head trauma in the league suggest that it's not the diagnosed concussions that cause the long-term problems, it's the repeated, day-to-day banging, the subconcussive collisions that mince the brain. Excessive practice is contributing to the deterioration of the football player's brain. 

Coaches, for that matter, could also use the time off: They're overworked, sleep-deprived and rarely see their families. 

Ultimately, football would return. The fans will be able to watch the game they love, probably right on schedule. It's the wellness of the game that is in limbo. The health, mental and physical, of the players and coaches will either propel the league to new heights or run it off a cliff. Let's all hope it's the former. But either way, it'll be fun to watch.

—Mr. Jackson played with the Denver Broncos as a wide receiver and tight end for six seasons (2003-08).