Osso buco hasa pedestrian name if there ever was one—it translates literally to bone-with-a-hole. This is a bit like calling the finest caviar "fish eggs," for what is in that hole is sublime marrow and what surrounds it is a veal so tender you need at most a spoon to eat it. 

I first served osso buco at a dinner party about 15 years ago. I was in graduate film school at the time, and far more money was flowing out of my bank account than flowing in (a perplexing algebraic equation I have yet to entirely solve). In those days, I cooked so that my boyfriend and I could eat with a luxury we otherwise couldn't afford. The greasy dives befitting a grad student simply didn't appeal, nor did leftover Chinese and stale bagels eaten on the go. I knew something about cooking, but very little about economically managing our little household. And so it was that one day I invited ten friends over for dinner, called my favorite butcher (the one with the window displays that rival those of Bergdorf Goodman) and ordered 12 large shanks of veal, forgetting entirely to ask the price. That evening, we sat down to dinner and a fabulously gluttonous friend, swallowing his first bite, declared: "These are awesome." To which, in a sudden panic over the day's bill, I replied: "What they are is expensive." The words just tumbled out of my mouth. 

No one seemed to notice but my stunned boyfriend, who had apparently been under the illusion that he was dating a well-brought-up young lady, or at least a judicious one. His response, however, was one I'll never forget. He went to the closet and pulled out several excellent bottles of wine we'd been saving for some finer day and brought them to the table with a smile. Every day was a finer day, he meant me to understand, when the food tasted as good as this. I would have married him on the spot, had he asked, but I had to wait another year for that. 

These days, our wine is no longer housed in our coat closet and our local butcher has tossed aside flash for the equally expensive but altogether worthier pursuit of sustainability. Osso buco, however, remains in my repertoire as a reminder of that festive night. I now cook the veal in white wine for a lighter, fresher taste than the traditional choice of red. There's an exponential benefit to cooking the shanks a day prior to serving them. The flavors deepen and meld in something akin to a marriage. 

There is feasting, however, and then there is, well, excess. Somehow the traditional pairing of osso buco with risotto alla Milanese strikes me as the latter. I'm rarely one to suggest something is too rich but, in this case, I prefer fregola, a slightly chewy little pasta from Sardinia, as a simpler accompaniment. It gives just the right amount of texture to the falling-off-the-bone tender, succulent and ever-luxurious, shanks. Feast and remember the days just out of college, when to eat like this was to take a bite out of the world. 

For the osso buco:

8 shanks of veal, each about 12 ounces, ideally about 2 or 3 inches thick, marrow intact  Sea salt and pepper  Flour, for dredging  2 tablespoons butter  4 tablespoons olive oil  4 ounces pancetta, cut into lardons  2 carrots, peeled and chopped  2 stalks celery, chopped  2 yellow onions, chopped  3 cloves of garlic, minced  ¾ cup chopped canned tomatoes  3 bay leaves  3 cups dry white wine, preferably Italian, or more as needed  2 cups veal stock, or more as needed  Pinch of piment d'espelette (optional)  Fleur de sel

 For the gremolata:  Grated zest of 3 lemons  Grated zest of 1 orange  4 tablespoons flat-leaf parsley, very finely chopped  3 cloves garlic, finely minced 

1. Preheat oven to 300 degrees. Pat shanks dry with paper towels, then season liberally with salt and pepper. Spread flour in a wide pasta bowl or pie dish.

2. Melt butter with oil in a large skillet over low heat. Add pancetta and cook until it begins to render its fat. Add carrot, celery, onion and garlic and cook, stirring occasionally, until the vegetables are soft and the onion translucent. Remove with a slotted spoon and reserve. 

3. Increase heat to medium-high. Dredge shanks in the flour and give them a little shake to remove excess flour before transferring to the skillet and browning on all sides. You will either need to do this in two skillets or two batches. 

4. Place browned veal and vegetable-pancetta mixture into a Dutch oven. Add tomatoes, bay leaves, wine, stock and piment d'espelette. Depending on the saltiness of your stock, you may need to season shanks with additional salt. (I use a 6.75 quart wide round Le Creuset oven and am able to fit shanks in one layer. If shanks do not fit in one layer in your cooking vessel, increase amount of wine and stock so as to submerge meat.)

5. Bring to a simmer, cover and transfer to oven. Bake for 2½ hours. 

6. Bring osso buco to room temperature, then keep chilled in the refrigerator overnight. The day of serving, remove the osso buco from the fridge, skim the layer of fat that will have formed on the surface and discard. This will leave a more intense and less fatty sauce. 

7. Preheat the oven to 300 degrees. Bring the osso buco to a simmer over  medium heat. Transfer to the oven and reheat until ready to serve—at least 1 hour, can be longer. This  is a dish that rewards long, slow cooking.

8. At this point, check for seasoning. If you want to reduce sauce, remove shanks and boil sauce down until it thickens. If you are serving the osso buco at a formal dinner, you might want to strain the sauce and discard vegetables.

9. Right before serving, make the gremolata by grating the zest and mincing parsley and garlic. With your fingers, toss these ingredients together in a little bowl. Sprinkle this liberally on each shank once plated.

A grinding of fleur de sel and fresh pepper complete the dish.