ZURICH— Swiss Re said Wednesday it estimates that the insurance industry faces losses of up to $12 billion from the recent earthquake in Christchurch, New Zealand, saying its own share of the loss may amount to $800 million. 

Swiss Re, a Zurich-based reinsurer, said it estimates that the total loss from the recent New Zealand quake will amount to between $6 billion to $12 billion. Should the top end of this estimate emerge as the final figure, this would already amount to a third of the roughly $36 billion insured loss from catastrophes in all of 2010. 

Last year saw a high number of major natural catastrophes, which claimed more than 260,0000 lives. The deadliest event was the Haiti earthquake in January last year, but many people also died during the summer floods in China and Pakistan, and the summer heat wave in Russia. Most of these events were barely insured. 

The situation is very different in New Zealand, where property is well insured against earthquakes because of the government-run Earthquake Commission program. Property owners can purchase private insurance above the cover of 120,000 New Zealand dollars ($89,724) provided by the commission. In addition, commercial and industrial risks are insured by local and global insurance companies. 

The magnitude-6.3 earthquake which struck Christchurch on Feb. 22 caused at least 159 fatalities and widespread damage. The quake was smaller in magnitude than a September 2010 earthquake that shook the city, but the latest event was at a shallower depth and significantly closer to the central business district of Christchurch, New Zealand's second-largest city. 

"The latest earthquake in New Zealand took a heavy toll in terms of human fatalities, despite the advanced risk-prevention measures that are in place in New Zealand," said  Stefan Lippe, Chief Executive of Swiss Re. 

Based on preliminary estimates, Swiss Re expects its own claims for the earthquake to be around $800 million before tax. The company cautioned that uncertainties in estimating losses from such an event are significant, and that the preliminary estimate may change as new information becomes available. 

The loss is much higher than analysts expected. 

  Stefan Schuermann, analyst at Swiss private bank Vontobel, had expected losses from the quake of around $500 million. The figure now estimated by Swiss Re reflects 80% of the company's annual "budget" for natural catastrophes of $1 billion. "Including recent Australian floods in the order of $225 million, the natural-catastrophe budget is used up after only two months into 2011," he said. 

Swiss Re shares dropped on the gloomy loss estimate, shedding 2.2% by late morning in Europe, while the European insurance market as a whole was down 0.9%, as measured by the MSCI Europe Insurance index. 

Swiss Re is one of the first insurers to offer an estimate for the Christchurch earthquake. 

  Munich Re
MURGY


0.48
%




 and  Hannover Re,
HVRRY


-0.60
%




 two large reinsurers based in Germany, said it was too early to provide estimates. This was also the message from the U.K.'s  Amlin
APLCY


-2.12
%




 PLC. 

  Allianz
ALIZF


1.26
%




 SE, a German primary insurer, said it expects claims of around NZ$30 million to NZ$50 million. Italy's  Assicurazione Generali
G


1.19
%




 SpA doesn't have any operations in Australia or New Zealand. 

—Ulrike Dauer in Frankfurt, Vladimir Guevarra and Tommy Stubbington in London, and Sabrina Cohen in Milan contributed to this article.