Shortages of drugs for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder have sent patients and their families on a hunt for pharmacies with drugs in stock. 

Some families are paying more for pricey alternatives, or cutting back usage to stretch supplies. "It's a huge inconvenience," says  Erin Fox, manager of the drug-information service at the University of Utah Hospital & Clinics. "Parents and patients are running around and calling pharmacies to see who has their product." Recent shortages of Adderall XR and its generic equivalents, also known as amphetamine mixed salts, as well as of methylphenidate, a generic version of the brand-name drug Ritalin, have been reported in Pennsylvania, Maryland, Minnesota, Washington state and elsewhere. 

The shortages affect drugs that generated a combined 24.2 million prescriptions in 2010, according to data provided by IMS Health. 

  Matt Cabrey, spokesman for Shire PLC, the maker of Adderall and generic versions, said rising demand for the drugs due to increased diagnoses of ADHD, which in turn may be fueled by greater awareness of the disorder, can make it difficult to forecast ingredient needs. But the current shortage, Mr. Cabrey said, is due to a delay last year at the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration in releasing extra supplies of the drug's active ingredients. He said increased supplies are expected this month. 

Because of the potential for abuse, the DEA regulates the active ingredients of some ADHD drugs as controlled substances. DEA spokesman Lawrence Payne said the agency has approved enough supply to allow for uninterrupted distribution of the drugs and it's up to manufacturers to allocate the ingredients among their various products.

  UCB 
UCB


0.99
%




SA, a maker of generic methylphenidate, attributed its shortages to increased customer demand earlier this year.  Brenda Varney, director of UCB's established-brands unit, said the company lifted production but recently ran out of immediate- and extended-release Metadate products, although it has a combination type in stock. UCB expects the products to be available by about May 20.

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, known as ADHD, causes children and adults to have difficulty focusing, controlling their actions and remaining still or quiet. ADHD drugs generally act as a stimulant to alleviate symptoms but can be habit-forming and associated with side effects such as increased heart rate and loss of appetite.

  Rebecca Brown, diagnosed with ADHD as an adult nearly a decade ago, said the shortages have created "chaos" in her life. A 51-year-old retail worker, Ms. Brown was recently taking generic versions of Adderall. But earlier this year, she was unable to refill her prescription at pharmacies near her Media, Pa., home. 

She cut her dosage to stretch her supply, then went off the drug completely for about a week—which she said left her feeling "foggy" and unmotivated. Eventually, she switched to a branded version of Adderall. Her employer's health plan required her to increase her monthly co-pay to about $140, up from $60 for the generic version, she said. In April she was able to switch to a different generic prescription, but she finds the efficacy isn't as good as the generic she was taking previously. "My performance at work has been reduced," she says. 

The Food and Drug Administration learned about the shortage in March from patients reporting they couldn't get their ADHD medications, said  Valerie Jensen, associate director of the FDA's drug shortages program. The agency contacted ADHD drug makers, who reported problems obtaining the active pharmaceutical ingredients. Ms. Jensen said the problem has mostly affected generic versions of Ritalin, Concerta and Adderall.

  Novartis AG, whose Sandoz unit sells generic versions of methylphenidate, said it is manufacturing at capacity and trying to increase its supply. Spokesman  Eric Althoff said the marketplace shortage has led to higher demand for its products. 

Pharmacists say some customers have to pay the entire cost of a brand-name drug—which can exceed $200 a month—because their health plans cover only generics. The higher the price of a drug, the greater the likelihood a patient will not take a drug as prescribed, said  Timothy Davis, pharmacist at Beaver Health Mart Pharmacy in Beaver, Pa. Mr. Davis said he has become adept at helping patients request that drug-benefit plans cover branded alternatives to generics that are in short supply.

To keep costs down, some patients have switched from one generic to another generic of a different drug. Generics are supposed to be therapeutically equivalent to branded drugs, but some patients experience differences going from one to the other. Others may switch from formulations taken once or twice a day to those requiring more frequent dosing—a disruption for school children who must leave class to take their dose at the nurse's office.

"It's bad for patients, it's bad for pharmacies, it's bad for physicians," said  Peter Bjerke, a pharmacist at Smart Pharmacy in Byron, Minn., which has experienced shortages of methylphenidate.

 Write to  Peter Loftus at peter.loftus@dowjones.com and Jennifer Corbett Dooren at jennifer.corbett-dooren@dowjones.com 