

LONDON—The U.K. labor market unexpectedly improved in the three months to February, with the unemployment rate falling for the first time in five months, official data showed Wednesday. 

The fall in the jobless number is good news for Prime Minister David Cameron's coalition government, which is banking on the private sector creating enough jobs to counter its program of job cuts in the public sector. 

The Office of National Statistics said the official international measure of unemployment, formerly known as the International Labor Organization measure, fell by 17,000 in the three months to the end of February to 2.48 million. The unemployment rate fell to 7.8% from a rate of 8.0% in the three months to January. Economists last week forecast the rate would remain at 8.0%. 

Unemployment is now at its lowest level since the third quarter of 2010. The number of people in employment increased by 143,000 to 29.23 million—the highest number in two years. 

Employment Minister Chris Grayling said almost all the jobs had been created in the private sector. "If the progress that we have seen this month continues, then the private sector can create jobs sufficient to counterbalance the changes in the public sector," he said. 

Meanwhile, the number of Britons working a second job showed the biggest increase in more than a decade in the three months to February, illustrating how economically strained households are trying to supplement their incomes by taking on extra work. The number of people in the U.K. working a second job increased 5.6% to 1.17 million in the three months to the end of February, the Office for National Statistics said. The last time there was a bigger quarterly increase was in the three months to June 1999. 

In a separate data release, U.K. consumers became more optimistic about the economic outlook in the weeks ahead of the government's March 23 budget, leading to a rise in consumer confidence from its record low in February, according to a monthly survey commissioned by the Nationwide Building Society. 

The lender's overall measure of consumer confidence rose to 44 in March from 39 in February. Nationwide stressed that despite the recovery in March, confidence remains weak, and its measure well below the long-term average of 80.

Economists caution that unemployment is likely to increase in the coming months as the full brunt of the government's austerity measures is felt. 

"We suspect that likely below-trend growth will mean that the private sector will be unable to fully compensate for the increasing job losses in the public sector,"  Howard Archer, chief U.K. and European economist at IHS Global Insight, said. "We believe the private sector will become increasingly careful in their employment plans in the face of a struggling economy and elevated input costs," he added. 

The Office for Budget Responsibility estimates that around 330,000 public-sector jobs are expected to be lost by 2015. 

Figures on how public-sector employment levels compare with those in the private sector are published quarterly, so the most recent are from December.

Those figures showed 6.2 million people were employed in the public sector—45,000 fewer than in September—while 22.96 million were employed in the private sector—77,000 more than in September. 

The ONS also released the more timely claimant-count measure of unemployment Wednesday, which showed an increase of 700 in March, with the jobless rate at 4.5%. That compares with a revised decline of 8,500 in February. Economists had forecast the claimant count to fall by 5,000 in March. 

An ONS official said the increase in the claimant count was largely due to changes to benefit rules for lone-parent income support, which led to more women claiming a government allowance for job seekers. 

The number of women claiming the allowance increased by 5,100 to 462,300, while the number of men claiming the allowance fell by 4,400 to reach 988,200. 

The data also showed that average earnings, excluding bonuses, rose by 2.2% in the three months to February, down from a revised 2.3% in the three months to January. 

The lack of increase in wages indicates that high inflation isn't feeding through the economy and pushing up pay. 

"Today's labor market data, combined with the fall in inflation and weak retail indicators reinforce our view that the Bank of England will stay in wait-and-see mode with regard to interest rates," said  Hetal Mehta, U.K. economist at Daiwa Capital Markets. 