NEW YORK—Pegging the Hong Kong dollar to the Chinese yuan is currently "not an option," given the yuan's lack of full convertibility, a senior Hong Kong government official said Monday.

Julia Leung, Under Secretary for Financial Services and the Treasury, said in an interview that linking Hong Kong's currency—which is currently pegged to the U.S. dollar—to the yuan wasn't feasible. China's currency is also known as the renminbi.

A possible peg of the Hong Kong dollar to the yuan "is not an option, because the renminbi is not convertible," Ms. Leung said.

Her remarks come during a time when the currencies of both China and Hong Kong have been the subject of intense speculation. 

Beijing has taken withering international criticism about the yuan's rigid fixed exchange rate, which the Chinese government has pledged to reform—albeit at a deliberate pace. Meanwhile, Hong Kong has maintained its currency peg to the U.S. dollar since 1983, and has recently come under pressure to reform the narrow band in which it allows its dollar to float. Analysts widely consider both currencies to be dramatically overvalued.

Hong Kong is one of Asia's largest financial centers, and its status has become increasingly intertwined with Beijing's push to expand its global economic footprint. Some market observers have speculated that the Hong Kong government would either widen its currency band, or perhaps peg it to the yuan as a way of linking itself more closely to Beijing.

But in a wide-ranging interview during a brief stay in New York, Ms. Leung appeared to dismiss that idea out of hand. She added that completely severing the Hong Kong dollar's peg to the U.S. dollar was "not an option for us."

She added that she didn't see any pressure on Hong Kong's currency as part of speculative attempts to "break" its peg to the U.S. dollar. She added that the dollar peg "has served its purpose" in providing stability and credibility.

Some analysts expect Hong Kong's currency peg to disappear altogether in the coming years. Others—such as renowned hedge fund manager Paul Tudor Jones—think the U.S. government should correct the undervalued Chinese currency by intervening in the Hong Kong dollar. 

Bowing to global demand and international chiding, China has recently undertaken a push to internationalize the yuan. Hong Kong—long a draw for international global capital—is a linchpin in the Chinese government's strategy to eventually make the currency fully convertible. 

Since last year, Beijing has facilitated the offshore expansion of yuan-denominated instruments. Particularly in Hong Kong, demand for the currency surged as investors became eager to invest in China and use the increasingly high-profile currency.

In July 2010, China opened the currency to trading in Hong Kong, a former British colony that is a draw for international capital and sees daily yuan trading of about $400 million. Finally, in December, a surge in Hong Kong's yuan deposits was coupled with a technical change that allowed banks to make wider use of electronic settlement.

But investors, watching the U.S. dollar's weakness with increasing worry and not yet convinced of the euro's ability to replace the world's most dominant reserve currency, are clamoring for wider use of the yuan in international transactions. 

During the interview, however, Ms. Leung reiterated what many Chinese policymakers have long insisted: that getting to a fully convertible yuan was a slow process that could easily unfold over a period of years. 

China "has rapidly increased offshore liquidity," but internationalization of the yuan "is a long, long process," Ms. Leung said. "Internationalization will take decades, it won't happen overnight."

 Write to  Amy Or at amy.or@dowjones.com 