Longtime director  Julie Taymor and the producers of "Spider-Man: Turn Off the Dark" are at odds over the terms of her departure from the helm of the $70 million musical, despite the producers' announcement that she has been replaced as the show's driving force.

Ms. Taymor and the show's producers have been unable to strike a deal because of disagreements on several key elements of her pending departure, including royalties, a non-disclosure agreement and copyright ownership, according to a person familiar with the matter.

  'Spidey' Director's Role Is Cut  

A spokeswoman for Ms. Taymor,  Mara Buxbaum, declined to comment. 

A stalemate could lead to lawsuit, as the producers have already hired a creative team to replace Ms. Taymor, a Tony Award winner who has overseen the show for the last nine years. 

Although saying Ms. Taymor retained the title of director, producers  Michael Cohl and  Jeremiah Harris said Wednesday night that they had hired "The Boy From Oz" director  Philip William McKinley to oversee staging and "Spider-Man" comic writer  Roberto Aguirre-Sacasa to rework the book for a planned overhaul of the production.

The producers also said Ms. Taymor would cede control of the show after March 15. Noticeably absent from their announcement was a statement from her. The lack of agreement, however, does not appear to have forestalled producers, who have already begun advancing their grand revisions.

U2's Bono, who co-wrote the score with bandmate the Edge, is stepping into a more active role, writing new songs as well as tending to broader creative challenges, according to a person familiar with the matter. 

Mr. McKinley was expected in New York on Thursday, this person said, and the new artistic team will spend the next four or five days plotting a plan to revamp the show. The likely prospect of a several-week hiatus is just one of the potentially costly elements of an overhaul to a show that is already by far most expensive in Broadway history. 

Producers are determining whether they can pay for the changes with the money they have left or must try to raise more cash, according to a person familiar with the matter. 

  Rick Miramontez, a spokesman for the show, declined to comment on a possible hiatus.

Ms. Taymor has not been spotted inside the theater since early this week. She was not present when Bono, the Edge and Messrs. Cohl and Harris addressed the cast Wednesday night, according to a person familiar with the matter.

A person at that meeting said cast members are concerned about keeping their jobs. 

"If the show does not succeed and closes, it's not like working at Chipotle, where you're going to quit and go across the street and work at McDonald's," this person said. "Producers and the creative team are going to take another bite at the apple and try to preserve their jobs."

 Write to  Erica Orden at erica.orden@wsj.com and Ellen Gamerman at ellen.gamerman@wsj.com 