MUMBAI – India's Hindustan Construction Co. Ltd. Friday said unconsolidated net profit for the fiscal fourth quarter through March fell 47% due to higher interest costs. 

Net profit for the January-March period fell to 226 million rupees ($5.1 million) from 429.7 million rupees a year earlier. Unconsolidated net sales in this period rose 11% to 12.10 billion rupees from 10.92 billion rupees.

The company's interest costs in the fourth quarter more than doubled to 902.8 million rupees from 443.08 million rupees. 

"The higher interest costs resulted from a rise of around 10 billion rupees in the company's total debt as of March 31," said  Praveen Sood, the company's chief financial officer. 

The company's debt was 33.48 billion rupees as of March 31. 

However, HCC managed to increase its operating profit margin to 14.4% from 11.5% in the year-ago period. 

Speaking to reporters, chairman  Ajit Gulabchand said that in 2010-11 the company faced delays in completing projects, especially government projects, while new order inflows were also subdued due to an overall sluggish investment environment in the country. 

Mr. Gulabchand, however, said the company expected 2011-12 "to be a much better year" in terms of growth of turnover and new order inflows. 

The company's outstanding orders were at 181.27 billion rupees as of March 31. 

Expanding on the performance of its units, HCC said Lavasa Corporation--which is building a hill town near Mumbai--posted a lower net profit of 1.12 billion rupees in 2010-11, compared with 1.40 billion rupees in the year-ago period. 

"Lavasa Corporation's performance has been adversely impacted by the Ministry of Environment and Forest's order to stop work [at the site of the hill town]," HCC said in a statement. 

Mr. Gulabchand told reporters that the "Lavasa issue seems to be heading for a resolution." 

On Nov. 25, the Ministry of Environment asked Lavasa Corp. to stop work on the 5,000-acre luxury residential and commercial project near India's financial hub of Mumbai, citing environmental violations. Lavasa subsequently challenged the order in the Bombay High Court. 

Later, the ministry said that it would consider clearance for the project if HCC pays a penalty and sets up an environment restoration fund. While the case between the ministry and Lavasa is pending in court, the two sides are also discussing ways to resolve the issue. 

HCC said that its Swiss subsidiary Karl Steiner AG has outstanding orders of 49.58 billion rupees, excluding orders of 19.97 billion rupees, where it has won contracts but is yet to sign formal documents. 

 Write to  Raghavendra Upadhyaya at raghavendra.upadhyaya@dowjones.com and Prasenjit Bhattacharya at prasenjit.bhattacharya@dowjones.com 