Factory activity ratcheted up worldwide in December, providing a boost of momentum to the global economy as it entered a new year.

A closely watched index of U.S. manufacturing inventory —based on a survey of purchasing managers by the Institute for Supply Management.—rose to 57 in December from 56.6 the month before. A reading above 50 indicates expansion. A euro-zone index rose to 57.1 from 55.3 in November. In Asia, manufacturing remained strong, though the pace of growth slowed in China and India. 

"You're getting a pretty consistent message that output's accelerating," said David Hensley, a JPMorganChase analyst. Although growth in factory activity around the world slowed in the middle of 2010 amid Europe's sovereign debt crisis, it now appears to be reviving. For manufacturing, said Mr. Henlsey, "I think that the coast is pretty much clear." The firm's global aggregation of purchasing-manager surveys ended the year at a six-month high.

In the U.S., the purchasing-manager survey suggested that orders are growing faster than inventories, an indication that manufacturing will remain strong into the first quarter. 

 After dropping a precipitous 17.5% between the end of 2007 and mid-2009, output of U.S. factories has rebounded — but only to late 2008 levels, according to the Federal Reserve's measure of industrial production. 

At the same time, manufacturing employment has barely budged: the Labor Department says factory payrolls were up less than 1% over the 12 months ended in November, a measure that excludes some temporary workers. The purchasing managers said the pace of hiring was slower in December than the month before. Manufacturing currently employs about 11% of U.S. private-sector workers.

At Red Wing Shoe Co., a shoe manufacturer in Red Wing, Minn., the outlook is brighter than it was a year ago. At outset of 2010, the company planned to shut a factory in Danville, Ky., but growing orders prompted the company to keep the plant open and add modestly to its companywide headcount of about 2,100 workers. "We ended up with quite a strong year on all measures - on revenues and shipments and earnings," said President David Murphy.

Red Wing is something of a bellwether for U.S. manufacturing, because so many of the customers who buy its heavy shoes and boots work in factories. So far, it hasn't seen any sign of letup in demand from dealers, companies to which it sells directly and its 110 retail stores. Red Wing is experiencing similar strength in Japanese unit, where sales were up 30% last year.

Caterpillar Inc., a giant maker of construction and mining machinery, recently told investors it expects stronger orders from companies that rent equipment to builders and others because much of that rental gear is starting to wear out. Navistar International Corp., a maker of trucks, expects demand in North America to rebound this year after a lull caused by a transition to tougher emission standards.

The U.S. economy has been showing signs of accelerating growth in the past few months, and forecasters anticipate the government will report that it grew at better than a 3% annual rate in the fourth quarter. 

But it still has a lot of ground to make up to return to close to full employment. While manufacturing is showing signs of strength, housing and construction remain weak. The report from the Institute for Supply Management underscored the recent surge in commodity prices. Nearly half the respondents say they are paying more for raw materials and only 3% reported paying less.

The uptick in manufacturing activity hasn't put executives completely at ease. Business started to improve toward the end of last year at Middlefield Plastics Inc., a Middlefield, Ohio, maker of custom extruded plastic products for uses ranging from airport installations to toys. "It's not a really warm, fuzzy feeling, but I feel better than I did two months ago," said company owner John Fisher. 

He said that some recent demand reflects rush orders from customers who had been keeping inventories lean and didn't have material to meet customer demand. Still, he said, "I think 2011 is going to be better than 2010," said Mr. Fisher.

In Europe, the Markit Economics survey of purchasing managers suggested factory activity sector in Ireland, one of the euro zone's weaker economies, increased for the third month; manufacturing expanded in Spain as well. German manufacturing activity was once again the standout, with the index rising to 60.7 from 58.1 in November."Welcome signs of recoveries were also evident in the periphery, where export sales helped boost output growth in all cases except Greece, where the rate of decline at least moderated."said Chris Williamson, a Markit economist.

Rising consumer demand, particularly in the U.S., the world's largest market, has helped global manufacturers. Manufacturing activity in South Korea accelerated to the fastest level in seven months, according to the HSBC Holdings' purchasing managers index. A similar index for Taiwan rose to 54.7 in December from 51.7 the month before, helped by export demand.

Slower, though still robust, growth in China helped ease concerns of overheating. The official Purchasing Managers Index fell to 53.9 in December from 55.2 the prior month, the China Federation of Logistics and Purchasing, said statement Saturday. In India, the pace of expansion slowed; the HSBC index declined to 56.7 in December from 58.4 in November.