DOHA, Qatar—Portugal's prime minister, making his first visit to the Persian Gulf, said the purpose of his trip was to develop commercial relations with Qatar, adding that discussing Qatar's interest in buying Portugal's sovereign debt wasn't on the agenda. 

"We didn't come here with that intention [to discuss Portugal's sovereign debt], we came here to launch" a commercial relationship with Qatar, José Sócrates said after his economy and tourism ministers signed bilateral agreements with their Qatari counterparts. 

He noted that Portugal's debt is already "on the market" and added that discussions between his cabinet and Qatar's ministers were focused on commercial relations and nothing more. He acknowledged that Portuguese Finance Minister Fernando Teixeira dos Santos met with his Qatari counterpart, but didn't provide further details. 

Separately, Mr. Sócrates said that Qatar "is also looking at investment opportunities" in Portugal. The government has launched a privatization program aimed at selling its stakes in companies such as power grid operator REN, energy company Galp Energia SGPS SA and power utility Energias de Portugal SA. The proceeds are expected to be used help lower the government's budget deficit. 

The European Union is currently facing a sovereign-debt crisis that has already claimed Greece and Ireland as victims. Both countries accepted bailouts from the EU and the International Monetary Fund last year. Bond investors are worried that Portugal may be next, given its attempts to consolidate its budget deficit amid forecasts for a recession this year and the country's high borrowing costs. 

Portugal's government has put in place austerity measures that are starting to pay off and is now focused on boosting its exports and diversifying its bondholder investor base. 

So far this year, Portugal has raised more than €3.3 billion ($4.41 billion) in debt, of which €1.1 billion was through a private placement of medium-term notes with China, according to a person familiar with the matter. Observers expected Mr. Santos to strike a similar deal with Qatar, which has a sovereign wealth fund of about $100 billion. 

Mr. Sócrates didn't disclose the kind of investment opportunities that Qatar might be looking for in Portugal, but he noted that the purpose of his trip was to reinforce commercial relations between the two countries, as evidenced in the bilateral agreements signed on Sunday and Portugal's plan to open an embassy there. 

"I came here with the objective to promote the national economy. This is what we should do ... put [Portugal] in contact with the regions that are most interesting, strongest, most active" and financially sound, he said. 

The two countries signed accords that included a memorandum of understanding regarding renewable energy and energy efficiency as well as tourism. 

To be sure, any boost to Portugal's trade ties with Qatar would start from a low base. Portugal accounted for 0.06% of Qatar's imports in 2010, up from 0.03% in 2009.

Mr. Sócrates said he believes Portugal could strengthen commercial ties with Qatar, not only with regard to renewables but also in financing and construction. Qatar said a year ago that it planned to spend $20 billion on roads alone over the next five years.

—Alex Delmar-Morgan contributed to this article.

 Write to  Alex MacDonald at alex.macdonald@dowjones.com 