Manhattan Borough President  Scott Stringer appears to have raised more money than any other potential 2013 mayoral candidate last year, showing he's taking an early and aggressive stance in the battle for City Hall's top spot.

Mr. Stringer, who served 13 years in the Assembly before becoming the borough's 26th president in 2006, plans to file a report with the city's Campaign Finance Board next week showing he raised nearly $400,000 in the six-month fund-raising period that ended Tuesday.

In the first half of 2010, Mr. Stringer raised more than $650,000, far more than any of his potential competitors. Along with money he plans to transfer from his 2009 re-election campaign, Mr. Stringer has roughly $2 million in his coffers.

Unlike most of the people who are contemplating running for mayor, Mr. Stringer worked vigorously to get an early fundraising start last year. He's held upwards of 40 house parties in the past year, accruing roughly 1,500 donors.

As he's raised money, Mr. Stringer said he's been surprised by how many New Yorkers have expressed interest in what will happen with the city after Mayor  Michael Bloomberg leaves office.

"I thought people would want to talk about [President Barack] Obama and health care and the big national issues, but what I'm finding is the opposite," Mr. Stringer said. "People are bursting to talk about life in the post-Bloomberg era and what the city's looking like and what the priorities are going to be."

While Mr. Stringer appears to lead the pack in raising fresh money, Rep.  Anthony Weiner, another potential mayoral candidate, will continue to have the most money in his campaign account. Mr. Weiner planned to run for mayor in 2009, but didn't enter the race after Mr. Bloomberg announced his intention to seek a third term.

Mr. Weiner has roughly $4 million cash on hand. In the past six months, there has been no activity with his account, other than some minor bookkeeping, an aide said.

"Anthony is focused on stimulating job growth and preserving health care coverage for New Yorkers," the aide said.

City Council Speaker  Christine Quinn, who is expected to run for mayor, raised $121,000 in the past six months, an aide confirmed. Like Mr. Weiner, Ms. Quinn enters the 2013 campaign cycle with a tremendous advantage: she, too, raised a considerable sum of money preceding the 2009 race, but chose not to oppose Mr. Bloomberg.

Ms. Quinn is expected to report she has $2.8 million cash on hand, an aide said.

Former City Comptroller  William Thompson, the 2009 Democratic nominee, is the only one who has officially declared his intention to run in 2013. Mr. Thompson did not raise any money last year.

The former comptroller plans to create a fund-raising committee by the end of this month and "immediately start fund raising," a person familiar with the matter said.

Mr. Thompson's successor,  John Liu, and his aides refused repeated requests from The Wall Street Journal to discuss his fund raising during the past six months. In an interview with the Journal last month, he made clear he's contemplating a potential mayoral bid in 2013.

Public Advocate Bill de Blasio, another potential mayoral candidate, hit the fund-raising trail late last year. An aide declined to make public Mr. de Blasio's fund-raising numbers on Friday.

 Write to  Michael Howard Saul at michael.saul@wsj.com 