It's a rare musician who releases his first solo album at age 85. Late bloomer? 

Not Johnny Mandel, who played trumpet and trombone in big bands, arranged music for Count Basie, Frank Sinatra and Barbra Streisand, composed jazz standards (plus television hits like the "M*A*S*H" theme) and in January was named a Jazz Master by the National Endowment for the Arts.

"All these years, I never seemed to get time to make an album," Mr. Mandel said recently. "Just when I was getting ready to start, the record business collapsed."

Understandable. But times do change. On Monday at Dizzy's Club Coca-Cola, Mr. Mandel will conduct drummer Sherrie Maricle and the DIVA Jazz Orchestra to mark the release of "Johnny Mandel: The Man and His Music" (Arbors Records), the new album that includes 13 of his arrangements, 10 of which he composed.

It's a homecoming of sorts: The album was recorded live at Dizzy's last May. It features Mr. Mandel—a New York native who cut his teeth at the Manhattan School of Music and the Juilliard School—as well as guest singer Ann Hampton Callaway and the DIVA Jazz Orchestra, the all-female swing band led by Ms. Maricle and founded by Stanley Kay.

It's also a one-night-only affair—in two ways. For more than a month now, there's been someone missing from Dizzy's: programming director Todd Barkan. In the wee hours of Feb. 13, Mr. Barkan was driving home from the club when a black SUV rammed him into a tree along the West Side Highway and sped off. 

"A taxi driver saw the whole thing happen, and he had the presence of mind —after I bounced off the tree—to put out a couple of flairs and blinkers and call 911," said Mr. Barkan, who answers his hospital-room phone with the words "Bebop Central!" "Whatever angels of swing are out there, I feel like I was watched over by them."

Though Mr. Barkan, who suffered a broken tibia and collarbone in the accident, is not yet able to walk, on Monday he'll be at the club in a wheelchair to introduce the show. "Johnny Mandel is a giant of American music—these are melodies of American life," said Mr. Barkan, who is a producer of the album. "He writes more than beautiful melodies; he writes excellent arrangements. He's in his 80s and he's out in clubs checking out jazz people. He is in and of the jazz tradition, even though he wrote for Hollywood for many years."

The combination of Mr. Mandel's record release and his receipt of the NEA's top jazz honor was too important to miss. His resolve reflects the closeness of the jazz world, which is also illustrated by the parade of well-wishers checking in on the recovering impresario. Longtime fans Bill Cosby and Laurence Fishburne have called. Jazz at Lincoln Center's Wynton Marsalis, executive director Adrian Ellis, and Roland Chassagne (who has been announcing the acts in Mr. Barkan's absence) have dropped by the hospital. "The chairman of the board sent me an electric razor," said Mr. Barkan. "When you can't walk, it's a lifesaver."

Musicians (Benny Golson, Cedar Walton, Jimmy Heath, and more) and audience members have turned up, too. "People who are regular patrons, who just come all the time," said Mr. Barkan. In between visits, Mr. Barkan has been doing the work of physical therapy—and jazz programming. He's scheduling for the club, organizing future record dates and talking shop with artists, like Mr. Mandel.

The two sets on Monday will take cues from the new album, which starts off with "Low Life," a 1956 song Mr. Mandel composed while in Count Basie's band. "It's an excellent thing to warm up the audience," the trumpeter said. "It shows off the band."

Mr. Mandel, who settled in California in the mid-1950s, grew up on the Upper West Side playing both trumpet and trombone before switching his focus to composing and arranging. He became part of the early days of television, arranging for Sid Caesar's "Your Show of Shows," and won an Academy Award in 1966 for "The Shadow of Your Smile," his song for the film "The Sandpiper." One of his biggest hits came that same year with "Emily," the title song for 1964's "The Americanization of Emily," starring Julie Andrews. 

These songs, plus anecdotes and patter are very much a part of Mr. Mandel's recording—and are sure to be a part of Monday's lovefest at Dizzy's. The stories matter, for as Mr. Barkan put it: "Jazz is a living book, and we are all its pages."

 Write to  Pia Catton at Pia.Catton@wsj.com 