Injections of botulinum toxin, best known as a wrinkle treatment, are now being used increasingly to prevent chronic migraine sufferers. Scientific data are mixed, but two large recent studies show Botox can reduce the number of headache days in chronic sufferers.

Migraine headache is a debilitating neurological condition that manifests itself as an intense throbbing pain on one or both sides of the head, according to the Migraine Research Foundation, a New York nonprofit. Some 14 million people experience migraine attacks nearly every day, and attacks typically last from four to 72 hours, according to the foundation. The causes of migraines aren't fully understood, and oral medications—while helpful for some—leave others still suffering, doctors say. 

Botulinum toxin is a bacterial protein that scientists say blocks chemicals responsible for muscle contractions and pain. Botox—a form of the toxin sold by  Allergan Inc.
AGN


0.87
%




 of Irvine, Calif.—was approved this fall as a migraine treatment by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. It is approved to treat chronic migraine sufferers, defined as people who suffer from headaches on 15 or more days per month with headaches lasting four hours a day or longer.

Allergan, whose Botox drug is the only botulinum toxin FDA-approved to treat migraines, recommends an injection regime of 31 shots a session in seven separate locations on the head, neck and shoulders. Costs per session range from $1,000 to $1,500 or more, and are sometimes covered by insurance. The shots should be repeated every three months, Allergan says.

"What I tell my patients is that Botox is probably the most well-studied therapy for chronic migraine, and has the best evidence" of efficacy, says  Sheena K. Aurora, director of the Swedish Pain and Headache Center in Seattle and a principal investigator on two recent Allergan-funded studies. Chronic migraine sufferers are a poorly studied patient group, she adds, because their condition is so hard to treat that most pharmaceutical companies exclude them from migraine studies altogether. 

Other physicians, such as  Joel Saper, director of the Michigan Headache & Neurological Institute in Ann Arbor, who has participated in an Allergan-funded study, are more cautious. Botox "does not help everybody," Dr. Saper says. "It may not even help most everyone. But it does in my personal anecdotal experience help some people."

If patients are overusing other medications due to chronic headache pain, he adds, it is important to discontinue those medications before beginning Botox because the medication overuse can actually make the headaches worse. Other physicians say Botox treatments will help patients discontinue medication overuse on their own.

The best evidence so far for Botox's use for migraines comes from two Allergan-funded studies on a combined total of 1,384 patients at 122 study sites across North America and Europe. Compared with injections of salt water, the studies—published online in March in the journal Cephalagia—found that Botox injections reduced the number of days with headaches. In the second study, for example, those treated with Botox had the number of headache days in a 28-day period drop to 11 from 20. Those getting the salt-water treatment saw headache days drop to 13 from 20. 

But even those studies had mixed results, with the first study not showing a reduction in the number of headache episodes compared with placebo. Headache episodes are different from headache days because some people have single episodes that last for days, says Mitchell Brin, Allergan's senior vice president, global drug development and an author on both papers. Headache days is a better, more sensitive measure of effectiveness, he adds. 

The study subjects included only very severe chronic migraine sufferers. Doctors can legally use Botox to treat people who with less severe migraine history if they like, but "there is no good evidence" that it will work, says Dr. Brin. Earlier trials looked at patients who experienced fewer than 15 migraine days a month and didn't find a significant treatment effect, he adds.

It is also legal for doctors to use other forms of botulinum toxin to treat migraines. Other injections may work, scientists say, but "it's absolutely clear that the data exists for Botox and not the other drugs," says  David Simpson, a professor of neurology at Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York and a consultant to Allergan and several other makers of botulinum toxin.

Side effects from botulinium toxins can include temporary weakness in face muscles, where eyes may not close fully or eyelids droop. In very rare cases, botulinum toxins can weaken muscles throughout the body—causing a lack of bladder control, trouble speaking, swallowing and breathing. Those side effects—while potentially fatal—are very unlikely at the doses used for migraine treatment, Dr. Simpson says.

 Write to  Laura Johannes at aches@wsj.com 