It sounded like the deal of a lifetime: Buy a $50 raffle ticket for the chance to win a $1.6 million waterfront home on Long Island with a Mercedes-Benz thrown in.

The offer came from two men who had bought the house and poured $1 million worth of renovations into it with the hopes of reselling it. But the housing-market crash altered their plan and they came up with the raffle to repay the loan. They went on local television and radio news broadcasts to promote their scheme and thousands of people bought raffles through a Web site, fromrafflestoriches.com.

But when the raffle drawing date came and went with no word of a winner, the Nassau County District Attorney's office received 105 complaints, and an investigation followed. That led to the arrest Thursday of one of the partners in the Massapequa house on charges he stole more $100,000 and used it to finance a jet-setting lifestyle, authorities said.

According to District Attorney  Kathleen Rice, Scott Cicerone, 32 years old, funneled the money from raffle sales to a private bank account and used the money to buy airline tickets, hotel rooms and to rent cars on trips to Las Vegas, Miami, Atlantic City, California and Oregon. He also used some of the funds to make payments on the Mercedes-Benz that was purportedly part of the grand prize, Ms. Rice said.

"These victims thought they were buying a raffle ticket for the American Dream, but only ended up funding this defendant's jet-setting lifestyle," the district attorney said.

A spokesman for Ms. Rice said the co-owner of the house,  John Luongo, had no knowledge his partner had allegedly embezzled the money.

Mr. Cicerone appeared in First District Court in Hempstead Thursday and pleaded not guilty to scheme to defraud in the first degree and to 21 counts of petit larceny. Bail was set at $10,000 bond or $5,000 cash, authorities said. His attorney,  Scott Limmer, didn't respond to requests for comment.

According to Ms. Rice, Messrs. Cicerone and Luongo defaulted on a $1 million loan on the house and the lender began foreclosure proceedings in June 2008, prompting the men to advertise the raffle in August 2009. The offer was this: 30,000 tickets would be available at $50 apiece, with the winner being announced at a Dec. 15, 2009, drawing.

In the course of promoting their scheme, Mr. Cicerone advertised that the winner would receive the property lien free, "never mentioning the $1 million lien on the house from the previously defaulted loan," Ms. Rice said. "He did qualify, however, claiming if they did not sell 30,000 tickets, the ticket buyers' money would be 95% refunded." 

Investigators believe only 2,000 tickets were sold, Ms. Rice said.

When the drawing date came, Mr. Cicerone informed ticket buyers he had sold only 16,400 raffles and pushed the draw date to March 20, 2010. In April, he cancelled the contest and promised refunds. That same month, Ms. Rice began her investigation into Mr. Cicerone.