LISBON—Portugal can guarantee that it has reached its target to reduce the government budget deficit to 7.3% of gross domestic product in 2010 and is confident about achieving its 2011 debt program, Budget Secretary Emanuel dos Santos said Thursday. 

"We can guarantee that the 7.3% target was reached," Santos told reporters after a cabinet meeting at which the 2011 budget was approved. "The data that we have point to that and we have no [evidence] to the contrary," he added. 

Mr. Santos noted that the final budget results will be confirmed around the middle of February. 

The 2011 budget includes a series of measures aimed at improving the control and monitoring of government receipts and expenses on a quarterly basis, with a view to making sure the government is able to achieve its 2011 budget deficit target of 4.6% of GDP. 

Mr. Santos said departments will be required to report their costs and revenue on a quarterly basis, while funds would be made available to them on a similar basis. 

Government entities that aren't part of the central government but contribute to the government's budget deficit will also be monitored on a quarterly basis, Santos said. The government will set levels of indebtedness for those entities and has asked that all entities provide an outline of their obligations for the whole year. 

"It's not enough to just look at payments, one has to anticipate costs," he said. 

When asked what he thought about the results of Portugal's latest debt issuance, he noted that Portugal sold €500 million six-month treasury bills at much higher yields than Germany or other countries but noted that demand was healthy at more than 2.5 times the actual amount on offer. 

"Our message is that in the midst of higher prices, the demand we had [for our debt] gives us confidence that our deficit program for the first quarter is developing normally in these difficult times relative to sovereign debt." 

The Portuguese treasury paid an average yield of 3.686% on the six-month treasury bills—debt at the shortest end of the yield curve—compared with 2.045% at the previous tender Sept. 1, 2010 for the same maturity. 

The Minister of the Presidency Pedro Silva Pereira told reporters at the same press briefing that while the yield was high, it was about one percentage point lower than the headline 4.5% envisaged by analysts, as cited in Jornal de Negocios' front page article Wednesday. 

He said the government is doing its part to strengthen confidence in the Portuguese economy and demonstrate that it is committed to reaching its budget deficit targets. 

The government approved Thursday a law that gives the Finance Ministry power to help fend off any legal procedures that would prevent any part of the budget from coming into effect. 

The cabinet and the Finance Ministry now have the power to take "initiatives designed at defending the public interest in any legal procedures aimed at preventing the normal execution of the 2011 state budget law," said the cabinet in a statement. 

This week, a number of public sector unions took legal action to thwart public wage cuts announced as part of the government's austerity package. 



 Write to  Alex MacDonald at alex.macdonald@dowjones.com 