If you're like most Americans, you probably figure the news about  Steve Jobs and Apple doesn't affect you directly.

Sure, you're probably concerned for Mr. Jobs's well-being. (The Apple CEO, who has a history of medical problems, is taking an indefinite leave for unspecified health reasons.) And you may take a general interest in news about the leadership of one of America's most prominent and successful companies.

But you may nonetheless think, "This doesn't have anything to do with me. I don't work for Apple. It's not going to affect my iPhone, iPad or MacBook. I don't hold any Apple stock in my portfolio."

Think again.

You may not know it, but you are probably a secret Apple stockholder. Maybe a big one.

Few stocks are as widely held in regular mutual funds as well as in hedge funds. Few affect the performance of so many retirement portfolios. This is especially unusual because Apple is such a volatile growth stock. In recent years it has fallen by two-thirds and it has quadrupled.

According to a review of company filings I conducted using FactSet, a market data provider, an astonishing 4,100 mutual funds hold stock in Apple.

And many of the funds holding Apple are making very big bets on the stock on your behalf: More than 750 of them have invested at least 5% of their entire portfolio in this one stock.

They include some very well-known and widely held funds. The Fidelity Contrafund held more than $5.7 billion in Apple stock at the last count, 7.5% of the portfolio. Fidelity Growth Company fund held another $2.2 billion, or 5.7% of assets. T. Rowe Price Blue Chip Growth fund has 8% of investors' money in Apple. Janus Fund: 5.6%.

Apple makes up 10% of the iShares Morningstar Large Growth Index exchange-traded fund, 14% of the iShares Dow Jones US Technology Sector Index ETF. The  Janus Twenty fund had nearly 11% of its money in Apple at the end of last year.

Apple alone accounts for more than one-fifth of the widely followed Nasdaq 100 Index, which you can invest in through the widely-held PowerShares QQQ Trust fund.

So if your U.S. stock portfolio is up over the past few years, and especially last year, Apple's remarkable performance probably has something to do with it.

—Brett Arends  WSJ.com 

Under the health-care law, Medicare and new private-insurance policies will be required to cover the cost of 45 medical tests and services currently shown to be most effective in early detection and prevention of diseases, with no patient co-payments or deductibles.

Here are some of the tests and preventive measures, according to the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force:

 Diabetes: Adults with blood pressure above 135/80 should be screened for type 2 diabetes, even if there are no symptoms.

 Depression: All adolescents should be checked for major depressive disorders when resources are available to ensure accurate diagnosis and treatment.

 Aneurysm: Men ages 65 to 75 who have smoked should have a one-time ultrasound screening for a possible abdominal aortic aneurysm.

 Folic acid: Women planning to get pregnant should take a daily folic-acid supplement of 0.4 milligrams to 0.8 mg.

 Hearing: All newborn infants should be tested for hearing loss.

 Sexually transmitted infections: Sexually active adolescents and adults who are at increased risk for sexually transmitted infections should receive high-intensity behavioral counseling.

 Osteoporosis: Women 65 and older, and younger women at equal or greater risk, should be routinely screened.

—Laura Landro  The Wall Street Journal 

With housing prices still depressed and interest rates low, should you buy a retirement home even if you're years away from living in it?

For many people, the scenario works like this: Stop working, sell your current home, buy a retirement home. But these days, many older buyers are buying before they stop working.

In retiree hotspots Palm Beach, Fla., and Hilton Head, S.C., home sales jumped 39.3% and 13.6%, respectively, in 2009, according to Sotheby's and CharterOne Realty. Sales of vacation homes are also on the rise.

Many of these buyers are attracted to the low home prices and mortgage rates. The National Association of Realtors' Housing Affordability Index, which looks at home prices and interest rates to determine how cost-friendly homes are, shows that 2010 was the best year on record to buy a home since the NAR began compiling data in 1970. And 2011 is projected to be the third most affordable year.

A few points to consider:

 Timing matters. Experts say home prices in many vacation/retirement destinations will rise at some point during the year. Prices remain low in many areas because there's more supply -- as a result of both foreclosures and regular homes up for sale -- than demand from buyers, says  Stan Humphries, the chief economist for Zillow.com.

 Know your market. Retiree hotspots like Las Vegas, Phoenix and many cities in Florida experienced more foreclosures than average, so the glut of supply is likely to keep home prices in these areas depressed for longer than in other areas, says  David Stiff, the chief economist of Fiserv Case-Shiller. But markets like Hawaii and Cape Cod didn't have such extreme conditions, says Mr. Humphries, which means you may have a shorter time frame to get a steal.

—Catey Hill  SmartMoney.com 

—The Aggregator features news and commentary from The Wall Street Journal and other publications. Email: cristina.lourosa@wsj.com 