Istanbul bankers are betting that Turkey's Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan is set to appoint a new central-bank governor to oversee one of the world's most experimental monetary policies, one whose closeness to the government's powerful economy chief is raising questions about the bank's independence.

At stake is the future of an economy that last year expanded faster than any in the Group of 20 leading industrial and developing nations, bar China. Sustaining that growth will require a deft touch, and potentially a figure willing to stand up to the government, analysts said. Turkey's rapid recovery has been driven by consumption, and the government has so far relied on the central bank, rather than spending cuts, to minimize risk from a mushrooming current account.

The premier said in televised remarks Tuesday that his government was ready to appoint a new governor to succeed Durmus Yilmaz when his five-year term ends Monday, although he didn't name anyone. 

Erdem Basci, a deputy governor at the bank who was a high-school friend of Deputy Prime Minister Ali Babacan, the economy chief, is among three remaining candidates, said government officials.

Mr. Basci's rivals, fellow deputy governor Ibrahim Turhan and Treasury Undersecretary Ibrahim Canakci, are insiders, too—but Mr. Basci is seen as the candidate of continuity. In December, he flagged the bank's unorthodox policy of simultaneously cutting interest rates to deter short-term investment flows from abroad, while raising reserve requirements for Turkish commercial banks to squeeze runaway lending.

"Markets will be watching this really closely.…They're looking for stability as there's a lot of concern about the bank's experimental policies. But they'll also be watching to see if the bank can conduct policy independent of an increasingly vocal government," said Neil Shearing, senior emerging-markets economist at Capital Economics.

If Turkey's Islamic-leaning government were to pick Mr. Basci, it would be the second time it has proposed him to head the central bank. 

  The Source: Turkey Still Concerning Investors 

In 2006, Turkey's secularist president, Ahmet Sezer, blocked Mr. Basci and an Islamic banker the government proposed before agreeing to Mr. Yilmaz, a compromise candidate.

This time, however, President Abdullah Gul also hails from the AK party, making a veto unlikely.

Mr. Turhan, a member of the bank's monetary-policy committee, is regarded as an able monetary economist with international profile. Mr. Canakci has worked as the International Monetary Fund's point man at Treasury and overseen a sharp drop in Turkey's borrowing costs.

Mr. Basci's appointment is far from certain, but many analysts are tipping the 44-year-old for the job. Before becoming deputy central-bank governor eight years ago, he was an adviser to Mr. Babacan. The two men were also friends at the private high school they attended in Ankara, said a contemporary at the school. 

Mr. Basci hasn't commented on his relationship with Mr. Babacan.

The changeover at the top of the bank comes amid growing public tension between Turkey's commercial banks on one side, and the central bank and government on the other. Since the central bank launched its unorthodox monetary policy late last year, it has nearly doubled reserve requirements for deposits of one to three months at commercial banks, to 13% from 7%. At the same time, it stopped paying interest on the money commercial banks are required to deposit.Mr. Yilmaz's five-year tenure has seen Turkey's inflation rates fall to record lows while the economy rebounded strongly from recession, posting a growth rate last year of 8.9%. That record has boosted the bank's credibility among investors.

Mr. Yilmaz, however, acknowledged in an interview with The Wall Street Journal last month that his legacy, and that of the early months of his successor, will be determined by the success or failure of the bank's two-headed policy.  Timothy Ash, emerging-markets economist at RBS in London, said, "People will be watching closely to see that the bank's gains will be preserved."