NEW YORK—Crude-oil futures capped an aggressive week-long selloff with a 2.6% decline, aided by further strength in the dollar.

After oil slid 8.6% to settle below $100 a barrel on Thursday, crude rallied above $102 on news of stronger-than-expected U.S. jobs growth in April. The Labor Department said the economy added 244,000 jobs in April, up from an increase of 221,000 a month earlier. Economists surveyed by Dow Jones Newswires had forecast a rise of 185,000. 

But the rally was short-lived, as the euro tumbled against the dollar following a report that Greece was considering leaving the 17-nation European currency bloc. 

Light, sweet crude oil for June delivery on the New York Mercantile Exchange dropped $2.62 to settle at $97.18 a barrel, matching the eight-week low of March 15. The price fell $16.75, or about 15%, for the week, the biggest weekly dollar decline since Thomson Reuters began tracking the data in April 1983. 

The steep fall came as non-commercial investors, like funds, held a record-high net long position in Nymex crude futures and options, meaning they were anticipating further gains in prices. 

"The bullish sentiment evaporated rather rapidly," said  Gene McGillian, a broker with Tradition Energy, commenting on the volatile trading Friday and throughout the week. 

With the floor knocked from the market as prices tumbled from near $115 to below $95 intraday this week, Mr. McGillian said it was difficult to find equilibrium. "It's tough to get a good feel," he said.

Several analysts said underlying global trends look bullish down the road, but the wave of weakness held the day. Newfound strength in the dollar helped push investors in dollar-based commodities, like silver and oil, to the exits this week.

Analyst  Jim Ritterbusch said crude prices may have to drop to $92 a barrel, last seen in mid-February, before finding strong buying interest. Goldman Sachs said prices are likely to recover to current levels or higher by this time next year, especially as Libyan oil supplies are likely to remain curtailed by civil strife.

Rising crude-oil inventories in the U.S., the world's biggest oil consumer, and sliding demand for gasoline as retail prices run toward $4 a gallon, have kept the skids under prices. 

 Write to  David Bird at david.bird@dowjones.com 