Texas said Wednesday that it would use a sedative employed in euthanizing animals as part of its drug mixture for lethal injections, amid growing challenges to acquiring another drug commonly used in executions.

The state is adopting pentobarbital to replace thiopental sodium amid a widespread shortage of that anesthetic, which has been used for almost three decades to render an inmate unconscious before other lethal drugs, including a paralytic agent, are administered. 

Oklahoma and Ohio have already switched to pentobarbital. The move by Texas, which has executed more prisoners than any other state, could encourage other states to switch drugs. Texas has executed more than 450 inmates over the past 25 years and is scheduled to execute five prisoners in the next four months. 

The U.S. and China were the only countries that administered lethal injections last year, according to Amnesty International, and the U.S. is the only nation known to use pentobarbital in the process. 

The drug doesn't face supply problems but death-penalty opponents are already attempting to block prisons from getting their hands on it for executions. In January, the sole U.S. maker of thiopental sodium decided to halt production amid a campaign by death-penalty foes. 

The Food and Drug Administration has approved pentobarbital for use on humans. The drug has limited medical uses but plays a big role in treating patients who suffer epileptic seizures, according to Illinois-based Lundbeck Inc., a unit of H. Lundbeck A/S of Denmark and the only FDA-approved U.S. maker of pentobarbital that can be injected into humans. Lundbeck markets the drug under the name Nembutal.

"Lundbeck does not condone use of [pentobarbital] or any product for capital punishment," the company said in a statement. Lundbeck Inc.'s president sent a letter in January to the director of the Ohio prison system urging the state to stop using pentobarbital in executions. The company has sent similar letters to Oklahoma and Texas.

Lundbeck spokesman Anders Schroll said the company was investigating what it could do to stop distribution to prisons for use in executions. But the company doubts any such blockade would be completely effective, he said.

"I don't think that is very realistic but we will give it a chance," he said. "The most effective way to prevent the misuse [of pentobarbital] would be to withdraw it from the market but that would have a tremendous negative impact on the patients who need it."

U.S. pentobarbital sales topped $25 million last year, according to IMS Health, a health-care information company. Lundbeck declined to disclose specific sales figures but said pentobarbital accounted for less than 1% of the company's global sales total.

Dr. Mark Warner, president of the American Society of Anesthesiologists, said pentobarbital was " a very valuable drug but is not used very often." 

Michelle Lyons, a spokeswoman for the Texas Department of Criminal Justice, said "Oklahoma has successfully used the drug in its execution process and our protocol would be the same."

 Write to  Nathan Koppel at nathan.koppel@wsj.com 