LONDON—As Premier League clubs make a final push to revamp their rosters in European football's transfer window, most of the attention has focused on the multi-million pound moves made by a rare crop of headliners including Edin Dzeko, Emmanuel Adebayor and Darren Bent. 

But days before the window closes on Feb. 1, the hottest property in English football isn't a superstar with a stream of highlight clips on YouTube. It's Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain, a 17-year-old kid who plays in English football's third division and signed his first professional contract five months ago.

For this country's biggest clubs, splashing astronomical sums on proven pros is increasingly becoming passe. The new objects of their obsession are teenage prodigies like Mr. Oxlade-Chamberlain, Ipswich's Connor Wickham and Nick Powell, of Crewe Alexandra. Weeks ago, they were unknown to all but the most loyal football followers, but now they're the guys everyone is talking about in the transfer window.

They also have one important thing in common: Between them, they have yet to play a single Premier League match

"There's a premium on attracting young English players," said Tony Cottee, the former West Ham United forward. "Even the richest clubs want a core of homegrown players—and they're prepared to gamble on unproven players to find a gem."

Signing young players is a famously treacherous enterprise. Like any promising prospect, Mr. Oxlade- Chamberlain could see his career derailed by anything from injury to a lack of dedication. But so far, he's proving to be the kind of player Premier League teams dream about.

He can play any position across the midfield and his crossing and final ball have drawn superlatives from scouts, coaches and former players. Listed at 5-foot-10, he's not big, but his quick feet and blazing speed terrify opponents. He's got an eye for goal too, with eight goals in 19 starts this season.

"Some of the things he does are magical," said Nigel Adkins, the Southampton coach. "When you see him running with pace and the skill he's got, it's a joy to watch."

You don't have to tell that to Premier League scouts. In recent weeks, he's been watched by representatives from Arsenal, Manchester United, Liverpool and Manchester City. Four days before the transfer window closes, no one knows where he'll be playing next season, but pretty much everyone agrees it won't be Southampton.

"When the biggest clubs find a young player they want, they don't usually stick around long," said Craig Pinder, a medical worker and a member of a Southampton fan group. "And everyone wants Alex." 

This obsession with potential isn't new to English football. Top clubs have been gambling on teenage promise ever since Manchester United unearthed a wispy 15-year-old from Belfast named George Best.

But thanks to everything from the teetering economy to changes to the way the sport is governed, the Premier League's rampant pursuit of promising young athletes is gaining steam. "People have realized that this is probably the way forward," said Damien Comolli, the director of football strategy at Liverpool.

The upshot has been an unprecedented scramble for young talent. Liverpool paid Queens Park Rangers an undisclosed sum, believed to be more than £500,000, for Raheem Sterling last summer. He was 15 years old. In recent weeks, Eric Dier, a 17-year-old English defender from Sporting Lisbon, joined Everton, while Birmingham City signed Eddy Gnahore, a 16-year-old midfielder, from Manchester City. 

The reason clubs are throwing big bucks at young bucks may have less to do with strategy than economics. Simply put, investing in young players is cheaper than recruiting established superstars—and in the Premier League right now, cheap is good. Few teams have the means to fill holes and some have even announced plans to keep their checkbooks closed this month to protect against the possibility of falling revenues.

At the same time, recent Premier League reforms limiting the number of overseas players in first-team squads have forced teams to restructure their rosters. English clubs are now required to name a 25-player squad each season comprising no more than 17 foreign players over the age of 21 and at least eight that are "homegrown"—that is, a player who has had a minimum of three full seasons in England or Wales before his 21st birthday.

Add in the fact that England's 20 Premier League clubs had 320 overseas players in first-team squads last season, according to a study by the Switzerland-based University of Neuchatel, and the top coaches say the new regulations have forced them to focus on young talent.

Mr. Oxlade-Chamberlain is now the most coveted player in England. In the best case, he will follow the path of Gareth Bale, the Tottenham Hostpur ace who also graduated from the Southampton academy and joined a Premier League club at 17. Mr. Bale is considered one of the most dangerous players in Europe.

But he could end up being Jermaine Pennant. Not so long ago, Mr. Pennant was the next big thing, as much a teenage sensation as Mr. Oxlade-Chamberlain is now. He was lured from Notts County as a 16-year-old by Arsenal, which was later ordered to pay a £2 million transfer fee. Arsène Wenger compared his skills to those of Brazil legend Garrincha. 

But despite becoming the club's youngest ever player and earning a reputed £5 million in wages from the Gunners, Mr. Pennant's Arsenal career ended when he was sold to Birmingham City in 2005 after 26 appearances, three goals and a bunch of fines for failing to turn up to training on time.

