Sixteen years after making his Broadway debut in Tom Stoppard's masterwork, "Arcadia," actor Billy Crudup is revisiting the play from a new perspective. "Arcadia" is set in two time periods, with characters making discoveries that echo one another across the space-time continuum, so it is fitting that Mr. Crudup has graduated to playing a different character in the show—one who exists in another time period altogether.

In the 1995 production, Mr. Crudup played Septimus Hodge, a 19th-century tutor with a particularly prescient pupil, and a friend of Lord Byron. In this revival, a London transfer opening Thursday at the Ethel Barrymore Theatre, Mr. Crudup plays Bernard Nightingale, a modern-day scholar who theorizes that Lord Byron shot a lesser poet in a duel.

"He's played two characters whose world falls apart, but with very different consequences," said the play's director, David Leveaux. "He's grown up with 'Arcadia,' as it were. "It's always been there."

Mr. Crudup, who was born in Long Island and lives in the city, spoke with the Journal about returning to the show. 

 How did the passage of more than a decade affect your decision to join this new staging of "Arcadia"?  

Firstly, you can't believe 15 years have passed. Secondly, very briefly, you say, "I'm too old for Septimus now." When you recover your senses, then you discover you're too old for Bernard, too. [Laughs.] I did have to call Victor Garber and ask his permission, but beyond that, it was an easy call for me.

 Mr. Garber played Bernard Nightingale in the original production, and that's the role you have now. Was it to your benefit or disadvantage having been able to observe his performance first-hand? 

It was a tremendous benefit because I got to watch Victor Garber play the role! [Laughs.] As far as acting it, though, I thought I had an understanding of it just through osmosis and hearing it over and over, when in fact I didn't really have an understanding of what it was like from the inside. I took for granted for a number of weeks that I understood things that I actually didn't. So to that extent, it was a gross disservice to my process to have heard it so many times. I never had that experience before of working on a play from a different perspective. 

 There's so much material to unpack in "Arcadia," and you've got to do it within different time constructs that eventually overlap. How were you able to find the rhythm of the script? 

It's something that's interesting about being in both time periods of this play. In my experience of doing the 19th century, it was a very tight, textual construction. If you followed the rhythms of it in a certain way, there was a very predictable payoff in audience comprehension and amusement. It's not the same for the contemporary part of it. The interactions are much closer to how I might consider jazz, which is unpredictability followed by surprising resonance. That was a difficult leap for me to make because my associations with "Arcadia" were very firmly entrenched. I spent quite a bit of time in rehearsal just trying to adjust to a different way of working with the words, and I'm still making that adjustment.

 In Mel Gussow's book "Conversations with Stoppard," the playwright says: "Writing dialogue is the only respectable way of contradicting yourself." How do you reconcile that idea in "Arcadia"? 

I often sit backstage and think, Where's Tom in this? Who is he? Is he Thomasina, who pines over the lost library of Alexandria? Or is he Septimus, who says, "We shed as we pick up"? Or is he Hannah, saying, "You can't believe in an afterlife"? Where is he in those [characters]? And that's a great insight into him—he lives in each of them. 

 You have a history now with performing Stoppard plays. What's your relationship with the playwright been like over the years? 

We've spent a good deal of time together, and he's incredibly supportive. I can't believe I get to communicate and work with someone of his caliber. The fact that I got to do it once, 15 years ago, that's enough. That's winning the lottery. You shouldn't get more than that. The fact that this is my third [time working with him], it's unfair. For somebody who has the capacity to construct, with what must be formidable effort using incredible theatrical creations, he is, at the same time, such a beautiful collaborator.

 As characters, how do Bernard and Septimus relate?  

It's as though there are some people who choose to hike up to the top of a mountain to see if when they jump, they can fly. Bernard is rushing up the mountain, not really having thought it through, not wearing the right gear, probably still wearing his loafers. As soon as he jumps, he goes, "What am I supposed to do?" Septimus is sitting there going, "I'm pretty sure I know how to." 