CHISINAU, Moldova—Next up on U.S. Vice President Joe Biden's itinerary is the former Soviet republic of Moldova, where he is to make a show of support for the country's pro-Western government and its leader, Prime Minister Vlad Filat.

The 41-year-old Mr. Filat is one of Europe's youngest national political leaders and has a daunting job—governing the Continent's poorest state, which has been riven by separatist conflict and has lost many young people, who have left in large numbers to work abroad.

Further complicating matters, diplomats say, is mounting tension between Moldova, which under Mr. Filat has sought to rapidly strengthen ties with the European Union, and the country's former political masters in Moscow.

Mr. Biden's stop Friday in the Moldovan capital, Chisinau—after meetings in Moscow with Russian President Dmitry Medvedev—is meant to signal U.S. backing for "ongoing democratic and economic reforms," the White House says.

It is also a riposte to Russia, which Western officials allege has been meddling unduly in the affairs of Moldova, a former Soviet republic, which became independent after the collapse of the U.S.S.R.

Russian leaders sent a senior aide to Chisinau after parliamentary elections in November, in what Western diplomats say was an apparent quest to pull together a coalition here that would exclude Mr. Filat and other pro-EU politicians from government.

The Russian Embassy has said the official visit from Moscow wasn't an attempt to interfere in domestic politics, but was aimed at developing cooperative relations. 

In any case, Mr. Filat remained in office, backed by three political parties of the Alliance for European Integration. And he has pushed ahead with his mission to reorient Moldova toward the West. "We are European citizens" with "democratic values and principles," Mr. Filat said in an interview. "Free movement and free trade are our goals." 

Such sentiments have made Moldova a favorite in the eyes of the U.S. and EU among the ex-Soviet republics on Europe's eastern flank.

Belarus's autocratic leaders are in the middle of a major crackdown on dissidents following a disputed presidential election last year. And in Ukraine, the West-leaning politicians of the Orange Revolution have lost power to Russian-backed rivals.

But while Mr. Filat may be getting glowing reviews abroad, he faces a tough audience at home, where he is under pressure to rapidly raise living standards and overcome a political standoff that is blocking the election of a president by parliament.

"People are fed up," says Liliana Vitu, the head of the news and current affairs department at public broadcaster Moldova 1. "If the alliance doesn't do something tangible this year, all the international support won't help."

In the November vote, Mr. Filat's Liberal Democrats and his coalition partners won a combined 59 seats, compared with 42 for the Communists. Still, the coalition is short of the 61 seats needed to elect a president under Moldovan law.

Mr. Filat says he is working to find a solution to the standoff and in the meantime is focused on moving forward in talks with the EU on issues such as the easing of visa rules for Moldovans, many of whom work in the more affluent countries of the West.

"Everything is a priority," Mr. Filat says, ticking off his to-do list: revamp the justice system and interior ministry and clean up corruption in a bid to attract foreign investment, spark economic growth and create jobs.

Mr. Filat says his hope is that "building functioning institutions" at home and strengthening ties with the EU will help with two of Moldova's most vexing problems: the large proportion of its population forced to work abroad and its continued face-off with the separatist region of Transnistria, which has asserted its independence for two decades.

 Write to  Gordon Fairclough at gordon.fairclough@wsj.com 