Here we go, another tacky Super Bowl between a pair of nouveau expansion franchises with no tradition.

Just kidding, of course. Could an NFL title game get any more hard-nosed and classic than the Green Bay Packers versus the Pittsburgh Steelers? A franchise established in 1919 versus one that opened for business in 1933. Nine Super Bowl championships between the two. Cheeseheads against Terrible Towels. Yellow pants versus…yellow pants.

If this Feb. 6 contest were any more old school, it'd order a sidecar and smoke a cigar with Vince Lombardi's fedora. If ever there was a Super Bowl that deserved to be played in 10 degrees and a blizzard, it's this one.

Instead, it will be played in Texas, at the $1.2 billion Cowboys Stadium that Jerry Jones built with a fancy TV set inside. Mr. Jones should be thrilled. This timeless showdown is going to spruce up that gaudy spaceship. 

The Packers got in after a 21-14 victory over the Chicago Bears—a game that got scarily close thanks to a third-string Bears quarterback who almost turned a one-sided NFC Championship into his own personal fairy tale.

The Steelers qualified by performing what many football traditionalists consider a valuable national service by preventing the loudmouth New York Jets from reaching the Super Bowl. 

But like the Packers did in Chicago, Pittsburgh pulled a narrow escape. After jumping out to a 24-0 first half lead, Pittsburgh clung on for 24-19 win, depriving millions of impressionable ears the opportunity to hear two uninterrupted weeks of soliloquies from Rex "Magic Khakis" Ryan. 

For the Jets, it's a rude ending to a brash season that began with a foul-mouthed HBO series and a Super Bowl boast. The fact that mostly everyone expected the Jets to lose the previous week to 14-2 New England won't curtail the pain of a second-straight AFC championship loss. 

The Jets were hardly embarrassed. Left for dead, New York fought back furiously. But in the end, Magic Khakis ran out of magic.

The Steelers have won six Super Bowls, including ones in 2006 and 2009, and another title would make a sturdy case that they deserve a place alongside the Patriots as the NFL franchise of the 21st century. 

Embattled Steelers quarterback Ben Roethlisberger, suspended to start the season for violating the league's personal-conduct policy, may never be held in the starry regard of Tom Brady or Peyton Manning, but the 28-year-old has now guided his team to three Super Bowls in six years. 

The Packers, meanwhile, are more of a late-breaking surprise. A preseason favorite, Green Bay stumbled to a 3-3 start and lost quarterback Aaron Rodgers for two games after a concussion. Despite finishing 10-6, they qualified for the playoffs on the last Sunday of the season and have been forced to play the entire postseason on the road. 

It hasn't troubled the Packers much. They plowed through Philadelphia and top-seeded Atlanta and jumped out to an early 14-0 lead against Chicago, which was plagued by quarterback trouble. Ineffective starter Jay Cutler departed after a knee injury, and his third-quarter replacement, Todd Collins, went 0 for 4.

By then, the public-address announcer in Chicago was pleading anyone with quarterback experience to "pick up a white courtesy phone and report immediately to field level." Instead, Bears coach Lovie Smith summoned Caleb Hanie, an unknown third-year pro who had completed a total of five passes this season—and eight in his entire career.

Mr. Hanie was far more impactful than his predecessors, completing 13 of 20 passes for 153 yards, and two fourth-quarter touchdown drives.

But interceptions, as always, were the destroyer. With a little more than six minutes to play, Mr. Hanie threw one straight into the arms of oversized Packers lineman B.J. Raji, who thundered into the end zone for a touchdown and a mildly suggestive dance that failed to offend Fox announcer Joe Buck.

In the game's final minute, Mr. Hanie led Chicago downfield again, only to throw another pick, this one to Green Bay cornerback Sam Shields. The cheeseheads could finally exhale.

For a franchise full of frozen-turf ghosts and characters, this Green Bay group has a modern, coolly efficient edge. Even the recent, rollicking era of quarterback icon/diva Brett Favre feels like a memory, though now bittersweet.

In its place is a 27-year-old QB with a platinum arm (Mr. Rodgers) and a defense led by a third-generation NFL scion with mermaid hair (Clay Matthews).

Mr. Rodgers didn't have his best game on Sunday. His most impressive play may have come in the third quarter when, on the verge of taking the Packers into the end zone, he threw an interception straight to Chicago's Brian Urlacher. The linebacker appeared ready to rumble for a score, but Mr. Rodgers managed to get an angle and undercut the linebacker at midfield, keeping Chicago off the scoreboard.

It was the kind of scruffy backyard play that an old Packers quarterback would have admired. But this is a different kind of Green Bay leader, and a different kind of Green Bay, now on its way to an old-fashioned Super Bowl confrontation.

—See Jason Gay's daily Greater New York sports columns at WSJ.com/NYSPORTS.