Dire infrastructure is a fact of life in India. But perhaps most troubling is the pathetic speed at which it is improving. 

New Delhi is almost certain to fail in meeting its own five-year investment aim of $500 billion for the period ending March 31, 2012. The shortfalls are manifold. India's ports, for one, are in a troubling state of underdevelopment. 

About 90% of the country's international trade by volume (and 70% by value) is via maritime transport, the Ministry of Shipping estimates. Yet in the first four years of the nation's 11th five-year plan, only $1 billion is likely to have been invested in maritime infrastructure, less than 17% of the target set for the entire five years by the Planning Commission, according to the government think-tank's midterm appraisal of 2010. 

It isn't shipping alone. Compounding that deficit is the inadequate network of roads and railways connecting ports to manufacturing and consumption hubs, which delays the berthing and unloading of cargo. As a result, the average turnaround time at ports—the time needed to ready a ship for return—increased to 4.4 days in the year ending March 31, 2010, from 3.4 days in 2005, as infrastructure failed to keep up with the growth in trade. 

Now, with rising commodity prices stoking inflation—and driving up interest rates—private companies risk paying more for freight and face surcharges for vessels delayed at the ports. So the transportation shortfall threatens to push the country's inflation rate still higher. 

Moreover, India, a net importer of fuels and commodities, risks an escalating scenario that could cripple companies and hit its consumption-driven economy. Firms already struggle with high inventories, and therefore higher costs, because of the unreliable supply chains. 

To make a meaningful difference requires both heavy spending by the federal government and all the private participation it can muster. New Delhi expects more than 60% of the investment in ports in the next few years to come from the private sector, independently or as joint ventures with the government. Ironically, higher interest rates and inflation could encourage companies to hold back on new investments in infrastructure. And the government will need to persuade private players that other departments beyond the Ministry of Shipping will be involved, to ensure that substandard roads and other links to the ports don't clog up the process. 

That's a political miracle India's economy urgently needs. 

 Write to  Harsh Joshi at harsh.joshi@dowjones.com 