European stocks closed just a touch higher Monday, with well-received U.S. economic data helping to offset falls in the basic resources and auto sectors, while concerns regarding European sovereign debt, Japan and Libya were never far away from investors' minds.

"Investors still have plenty to think about: The aftermath of the earthquake continues to be played out, Europe's sovereign debt issues remained in the foreground whilst volatility in the Middle East has ratcheted up considerably," said Octopus Investments' chief investment officer,  Lothar Mentel.

"We have been considering how continued uncertainty makes it harder to form an investment view. Now is not the time to be tinkering with our asset allocation or to take larger overweight or underweight calls. However, we have noticed volatility levels increasing. This indicates an environment where differentiation between 'good' and 'bad' will become more apparent, and one in which fund managers with good stockpicking skills should do well," Mentel said. 

The Stoxx Europe 600 index ended up 0.1% at 276.24 with traders noting very low volumes. The U.K.'s FTSE 100 finished up 0.1% at 5904.49 and France's CAC-40 closed 0.1% higher at 3976.95. But Germany's DAX fell 0.1% to 6938.63 as concerns over Japanese supply shortages hindering the automobile sector's production continued to weigh. Autos feature heavily on the German index.

By the close of European equity markets the Dow Jones Industrial Average was up 0.1% at 12236.59. 

The main indexes nudged off lows following some well-received U.S. economic data. Personal income and spending data showed consumer spending rising more than expected last month, while pending home sales rose by 2.1% month-on-month in February, after falling for two consecutive months. U.S. fundamentals will be closely watched during the week as investors await the crucial nonfarm payrolls data this Friday. Employment in the U.S. is seen as a key piece of economic data to help assess the health of the world's largest economy. 

Earlier in the European session, the focus was on pharma giant AstraZeneca. It lifted its full-year earnings target after reaching a settlement with U.K. and U.S. tax authorities over transfer pricing arrangements. But it lost strong gains to end down 0.1% at 2872.50 pence. 

Meanwhile, the Stoxx Europe 600 technology index led European individual sector gains, after Goldman Sachs upgraded Nokia and Alcatel-Lucent. The Stoxx Europe 600 technology index ended up 1.1% at 227.46. 

A pull back in base metal prices weighed on the heavily weighted mining sector. Increasing chatter about tighter global monetary policy pressured copper futures. Japan's slow recovery following the devastating earthquake also weighed on industrial metals and in turn the auto sector, while fears regarding European sovereign debt remained stubbornly high. 

Indeed concerns regarding the 'peripherals' in the euro zone were gathering pace Monday. Portugal's government bonds widened during the session after credit ratings agency Standard & Poor's said it could downgrade the country as early as this week and speculation increased that Portugal could be forced to tap the European Financial Stability Facility as soon as this weekend. 

However, the single currency managed to come off lows toward the close of the European session. At 1550 GMT, the euro was up 0.4% at $1.4091 and the British pound was flat at $1.6009. In other currencies, the Australian dollar surged against the dollar. Traders cited market chatter about insurance payments relating to December's floods in the country's state of Queensland. At 1559 GMT, the Australian dollar was up 0.2% at $1.0272.

Elsewhere, light, sweet, crude for May delivery was lower in early afternoon, down 71 cents, or 0.7%, at $104.69 on the New York Mercantile Exchange. Crude-oil futures slipped as rebel forces in Libya regained the major oil ports of Brega and Ras Lanuf thanks to western support, Commerzbank analysts said in a note. "This is clearly stirring hopes that oil shipments in Libya could normalize soon," it said.

By the close of European equity markets, most actively traded gold for April delivery on the Comex division of the New York Mercantile Exchange was down $7.30 per ounce, or 0.5%, at $1418.90. 