The river of migrants into Tunisia from Libya has slowed to a trickle, raising concerns that violence and chaos are escalating on the Libyan side, the United Nations' refugee agency said.

Only a few thousand migrants entered Tunisia through the Ras Jedir border crossing from Libya over the previous 48 hours, compared with a daily flow of 10,000 to 15,000 in previous days, Tunisian authorities and the U.N. agency, UNHCR said Friday. 

U.N. officials said they had no clear explanation as to why the flow had ebbed but feared fighting between forces loyal to Libyan leader Col. Moammar Gadhafi and rebels may be preventing many migrants from fleeing.

"Many people appear to be frightened and are unwilling to speak," UNHCR spokeswoman Melissa Fleming told a news conference in Geneva. "The security situation in Libya may be preventing people from fleeing."

The reduced flow was visible Thursday evening to journalists who toured the border area on a trip with Libyan officials. Armed citizen militia members set up checkpoints at intersections, pitching tents at roadside encampments strung up with proregime banners and flags.

Many fleeing workers said they were stopped at checkpoints along the 100-mile road from Tripoli to the border and had their cellphones confiscated by pro-Gadhafi forces who suspected the devices might contain footage of recent events in Libya.

"They took my phone, my lap top and all my cash," said Repon Batsa, a Bangladeshi construction worker who arrived in Tunisia earlier this week.

Many of those trying to leave Libya on Thursday said they felt threatened and caught up in an internal struggle. A group of Bangladeshi construction workers said they had been threatened and robbed of their possessions at knifepoint. Those who came from the Tripoli area said they feared a looming battle between rebels and pro-government forces in the city of Zawiya, west of Tripoli. 

Efforts to evacuate migrants by planes and ships gathered speed Friday, helping ease the risk of humanitarian crisis in southern Tunisia. The U.S. dispatched two aircraft to Tunisia to deliver humanitarian aid, including water, blankets and plastic sheeting to the Libya-Tunisia border, a Pentagon spokesman said. The planes would later be used to fly migrants from Tunisia to Egypt, the spokesman said.

The French foreign ministry said it had chartered several planes to airlift as many as 1,000 migrants to Egypt from an airport on Tunisia's Djerba resort island. Italy's foreign ministry said it had also sent a military cargo plane to Djerba on Friday to ferry refugees to Egypt. A ministry spokeswoman said Italy was planning on Saturday to deploy a naval ship stocked with aid supplies to Benghazi, a rebel-controlled city on Libya's coastline.

The U.N. said Friday that so far, about 100,000 people have escaped to Tunisia. Valorie Amos, the U.N.'s emergency relief coordinator, told reporters in New York that the U.N. on Monday will launch a formal appeal for funds to cope with the crisis.

To shelter migrants who can't leave immediately, the UNHCR has set up a camp in Tripoli near the Libya border for as many as 18,000 people.

In Libya's eastern city of Benghazi, which is under rebel control, 8,000 foreigners were waiting to be evacuated, the UNHCR's Ms. Fleming said. 

In areas under rebel control, food, medicine and fuel will start to run out in 15 days, said Ms. Amos in New York. "We do hear worrying news that supply lines from Tripoli have been cut, which may interfere with supplies," she said.

—Joe Lauria, Stacy Meichtry and Julian E. Barnes contributed to this article.

 Write to  David Gauthier-Villars at David.Gauthier-Villars@wsj.com and Sam Dagher at sam.dagher@wsj.com 