The Big East Conference, a sprawling monstrosity that knows no geographic or numeric limits, is more than just college basketball's biggest and best conference. It's the sport's ultimate sadistic pleasure.

For two months now, the Big East—which could land a record 11 NCAA tournament invites, or roughly one-sixth of the total—has been tearing itself apart for our collective amusement. So far, there have been 28 Big East games involving two ranked teams, including five top-10 showdowns. The totals for all other conferences: 35 and three.

Other conferences like the Pac-10 and Southeastern have regular schedules in which each school plays everyone (or every division opponent) twice. Not the Big East. Its matchups are decided in part by which ones are most attractive. Other conferences cling to the quaint notion that their member schools should be in the same geographic region. The Big East already stretches from Rhode Island to Wisconsin to Florida and is poised to gobble up even more territory in 2012 when it adds Texas Christian as its 17th team.

We admit it: We enjoy the spectacle and the nightly carnage. But we're starting to wonder if the Big East has gone too far. The Big East season is a grind unlike any in the sport. And it might be doing the conference's members a disservice.

Since growing to 16 teams in the 2005-06 season, the Big East hasn't won a national title, nor have any of its teams played in the championship game. 

All five of the other major conferences—the Atlantic Coast, Big 12, Big Ten, Pac-10 and Southeastern—have had at least one title-game appearance over this span, despite having accumulated significantly fewer bids than the Big East.

The Big East's overall NCAA tournament performance has been solid, but hardly befitting its superconference stature. Its .593 winning percentage over the past five years is superior to the ACC and Big Ten, but it's equivalent to the widely derided Pac-10 and behind the Big 12 (.618) and SEC (.614).

As the conference portion of the season winds down, Big East power Villanova—once ranked No. 6 in the nation—is mysteriously collapsing. The Wildcats (21-9), who started 16-1, haven't even had a lead in their last 115 minutes of action, and their next game is at No. 4 Pittsburgh. "We've had little nagging injuries to our best players, and we've played a ridiculous schedule," said coach Jay Wright. "In this league, it can just catch you. It can make you believe you're not that good."

If the Big East stumbles again in the NCAA tournament, where its teams went just 8-8 last season, calls for change are likely to grow louder. Connecticut coach Jim Calhoun has suggested cutting the conference schedule to 16 games from 18.

Big East commissioner John Marinatto said he doesn't anticipate making any changes to the schedule. The conference is contractually obligated to provide CBS and ESPN with 18 games, including a choice of some matchups. And besides, the Big East likes its identity as college basketball's most grueling gauntlet, even though it hasn't collected any titles lately. "We'll get there," Marinatto said. "We'll have another national champion. We're too good not to.

"Sometimes people lament about the negatives, and they forget what our exposure helps bring," he added. "Coaches want the exposure because it helps them get recruits. It's hard to argue with the exposure we get."

For two weeks in February, The Wall Street Journal followed West Virginia, a team that's been trying to secure an at-large NCAA invite amid a brutal six-game stretch against five ranked teams to close the regular season. As tough as that sounds, it isn't even the toughest series of games played by a Big East team this season (St. John's took on eight straight ranked opponents in January).

The run began on Feb. 14 when the Mountaineers played three consecutive top-20 opponents (at then-No. 17 Syracuse, home against No. 8 Notre Dame and at Pittsburgh). They won the middle game and lost the others by double digits. 

The next game, at Rutgers on Sunday, was supposed to be a relative breather, but it wasn't. West Virginia didn't pull away until the final two minutes. The Mountaineers then won a pivotal game against No. 16 Connecticut Wednesday, virtually assuring themselves of an NCAA tournament invite. 

The extreme degree of difficulty in the Big East first hit West Virginia coach Bob Huggins two years ago as he relaxed on the team bus with a Jimmy Johns sandwich after upsetting Georgetown on the road. "My assistants came over and put, like, 12 tapes on my seat," he said. "They said, 'Come on, Huggs, we've got Pitt on Sunday.' That's just our league. It's brutal."

The Mountaineers, a veteran team that reached the Final Four last season, showed signs of strain during the stretch. Junior guard Darryl "Truck" Bryant has agonized over how to snap an epic shooting slump. Through the Syracuse game, he had missed 81 of his last 106 shots. A local reporter asked him if he'd heard critics saying that they thought the freshman version of Bryant was better. (He curtly said no.) "It got so bad, my friends from home started talking about it," Bryant said. 

After shooting extra jumpers before the Notre Dame game despite being exhausted from practice and class, he finally broke out, scoring 24 points. But he's 7-for-30 since then.

Even Huggins, a 29-year veteran who's seen it all, can't hide his nerves. Against Rutgers, the WVU coach, who is the rare college basketball coach who doesn't wear a suit, came out wearing one, saying he wanted to "change the karma." 

By halftime he'd changed back to his usual warmup garb. "I'm not a businessman," he said later. "I'm a basketball coach."

It's great theater, watching the Big East's coaches and players drive themselves to the brink of exhaustion, if not madness, in January and February. 

It just might not lead to great results in March.

 Write to  Darren Everson at darren.everson@wsj.com 