India's prime minister unveiled a new strategic partnership with Afghanistan that seeks to deepen economic, security and political ties and represents a slap at Pakistan's attempts to expand its influence in Kabul. 

Prime Minister Manmohan Singh committed $500 million in development funds during a visit to Kabul Thursday, and backed Afghan President Hamid Karzai's drive to reconcile with the Taliban. 

The two leaders said the partnership isn't targeting Pakistan, which borders both countries, is India's rival and has a fraught relationship with Kabul. But Mr. Singh's visit to Afghanistan this week is likely to fuel Pakistani suspicions of Indian meddling in what Islamabad sees as its own backyard.

At a joint news conference, Mr. Karzai lavished Mr. Singh with praise, calling him one of "the most respected world leaders." A main roundabout in Kabul was bedecked with Indian flags, a honor not given to Pakistan when its prime minister and intelligence agency chief visited last month. Mr. Singh was scheduled to deliver a speech to the Afghan parliament on Friday.

Pakistan has long been upset with India's growing role in Afghanistan, and has accused India of using Afghan territory to support a separatist uprising in Pakistan's Baluchistan province, something New Delhi denies. In recent years, the Taliban launched deadly attacks on the Indian Embassy and an Indian guest house in Kabul; New Delhi blamed those strikes on Pakistan, drawing denials from Islamabad. 

With Pakistan on the defensive after Osama bin Laden was found living in a Pakistani garrison town just 40 miles from the capital, Islamabad, Mr. Singh made a thinly veiled call for more international pressure on Pakistan.

"Peace and security in the region requires all countries of the region to think afresh about the futility of having recourse to terrorism as a means to make state policy," he said.

Mr. Karzai said that, during last month's visit by the Pakistani prime minister, the two "engaged in a very constructive dialogue which I hope can continue for a future free of violence, terrorism and radicalism."

India's overtures to Kabul come as the U.S.-led coalition prepares to withdraw most combat forces by the end of 2014. Afghanistan's neighbors—such as Pakistan, India, Russia, China and Iran—are beginning to position themselves for prominent roles in Afghanistan's post-American future.

Pakistan's prime minister, during a visit to Kabul last month, offered Mr. Karzai support in dealing with the Taliban should the Afghan government abandon its alliance with the U.S. That proposal, initially well received by some of Mr. Karzai's advisers, lost its attractiveness after the killing of bin Laden showcased Pakistan's vulnerability.

Mr. Singh's support for Mr. Karzai's attempts to find a political settlement with the Taliban represents a departure from traditional Indian policy that opposed any deals with the insurgency. 

Indian officials say their biggest concern is that the U.S. may hasten its withdrawal of troops from Afghanistan after the killing of bin Laden, a move the officials fear could destabilize the country further and create a sanctuary for terrorists, while providing an opening for Pakistan to expand its influence in the region.

"India's interests lie in the U.S. and NATO remaining in Afghanistan at least until it is stabilized to an extent," said  P.R. Chari, a defense and security expert at the Institute of Peace and Conflict Studies in New Delhi.

Mr. Karzai said Thursday that he wasn't worried that bin Laden's death would speed up the withdrawal of U.S. forces from Afghanistan.

"The international community will stay in Afghanistan and remain active in Afghanistan," he said. But the U.S. "needs to recognize that the war on terrorism isn't in Afghan homes" he added, referring to insurgent sanctuaries on the Pakistani side of the border.

An Indian official said recently that leaving Afghanistan "to its own devices" would be a mistake and a repeat of history, alluding to the emergence of the Taliban and al Qaeda from the power vacuum in the 1990s after the Soviet Union's withdrawal and the end of U.S. covert aid to anti-Soviet rebels. 

"The cancer could just come back," the Indian official said.

At a state lunch Thursday hosted by Mr. Karzai, Mr. Singh said India wants to see a "peaceful, stable, democratic and pluralistic" Afghanistan and credited Mr. Karzai with helping the country make significant strides.

Details of the strategic partnership were sketchy. Afghan National Security Adviser Rangin Dadfar Spanta said the agreement will lead to increased intelligence sharing between Kabul and New Delhi.

The $500 million in development money will bring India's total development commitment in Afghanistan to $2 billion since the Taliban regime was toppled in 2001.

—Zia Sultani contributed to this article.

 Write to  Amol Sharma at amol.sharma@wsj.com 