It's Girl Scout cookie season, a time when many working parents ask their colleagues to buy a few boxes of the signature treats on behalf of their kids.

Some small-business owners say they welcome the opportunity to support members of their local community through cookie sales, and even encourage the Girl Scouts to do the selling themselves. But others say the activity – and pursuits like it – could make employees feel pressured to place orders when they'd rather not, since noncomformists tend to stick out more in small workplaces than large ones.

  Patricia Vaccarino, owner of Xanthus Communications LLC, a public-relations firm in New York and Seattle, doesn't allow her four employees to pass around Girl Scout cookie or other order forms while on the clock. If she did, she says she would be setting "a dangerous precedent" because the selling "would take time away from the core focus of the business." It might also strain relationships among staffers. "You're opening your business up to all kinds of religious, ethical and moral issues, and the issue of who owes what to whom." A mother of three, she also considers Girl Scout cookies to be "pure junk food." 

By contrast, Ai Media Group Inc.'s 35 employees are welcome to sell Girl Scout cookies in the office, says  Ron Trenka, co-owner of the New York digital-marketing agency. But he discourages them from asking each other to donate money to external groups. The difference is that with Thin Mints, Samoas and other Girl Scout treats, "you're buying a product," says Mr. Trenka. "When employees are going around soliciting [funds] for charities, it does tend to make people very uncomfortable. It creates tension."

Joy Gendusa, CEO and founder of PostcardMania, a direct-mail business in Clearwater, Fla., says she prefers that her staffers' kids come in and sell Girl Scout cookies on their own. So does the Girl Scouts, according to  Michelle Tompkins, a spokeswoman for the global organization. "We really hope the parents don't just bring in the (order) sheets," Ms. Tompkins says. "It's really about the skills the girls are learning, not the number of boxes sold."

PostcardMania's 192 employees are permitted to solicit one another for donations to charities and nonprofits, Ms. Gendusa says. What's more, she encourages employees to support organizations such as the American Cancer Society on behalf of the business. "We do ask them to cough up a dollar here or there or donate their time to nonprofits," she says. "We're kind of hyper about giving."

While PostcardMania has a policy forbidding office gossip, Ms. Gendusa concedes there was at least one time when employees faulted a colleague behind this person's back for not contributing as much money to a charity as everyone else at the firm. 

  Management Flubs Made by Rookie Bosses   

  The Office Brawl? Dealing with Feuding Employees  

  Should Gay Owners Out Themselves?  



None of  Lynda Jackson-Taylor's nine employees have ever asked if they could sell Girl Scout cookies or other items while working at My Kids Attic LLC, a bazaar made up of 50 small businesses in Montgomery, Ala., ranging from clothing retailers to monogram designers. But Ms. Jackson-Taylor allows multiple local Girl Scout troops to set up a sales booth in front of the entrance to her marketplace's premises every year around this time. 

"It's a community service to be able to offer them the location," she says. "I have to hope people who come think it's nice. A lot of businesses won't allow people to sit out in front and peddle things." 

What's more, Ms. Jackson-Taylor says the effort helps boost sales for her vendors, which in turns benefits her company. As scouts' parents drop their kids off to run the cookie booth, and townies stop by to place orders, they tend to also patronize My Kids Attic. "They may have never set foot in here before," she says. 

 Write to  Sarah E. Needleman at sarah.needleman@wsj.com 