Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke in April will start holding quarterly, televised news conferences, in the central bank's latest effort to better explain its actions.

Fed policies have drawn increasing fire in recent years from lawmakers, foreign policy makers and others. Issues include the central bank's interest-rate policies during the housing bubble, its reaction to the financial crisis and its current easy-money policies. Mr. Bernanke has responded by stepping up his public opportunities to counter the criticism. 

The chairman will hold a news conference four times a year, beginning in April, after each policy-making meeting at which the central bank updates its economic forecasts, the Fed said in a statement Thursday.

"The introduction of regular press briefings is intended to further enhance the clarity and timeliness of the Federal Reserve's monetary policy communication," the Fed said.

Mr. Bernanke has held news conferences only twice before. Last month, he took questions from the media at the National Press Club in Washington, rejecting complaints from China and other emerging economies that the Fed's policies were driving up food and energy prices around the world. Two years earlier, he took questions from the press to defend the government's controversial bank rescues during the financial crisis.

A television interview Mr. Bernanke gave in 2009 was the first by a Fed chairman in more than two decades. He has participated in just one other, last December. 

The Fed chairman's traditional reticence contrasts with the policies of several other major central banks. Mr. Bernanke's counterparts at the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan hold news briefings after each policy meeting, and the governor of the Bank of England takes press questions after releasing quarterly inflation reports. 

Still, for the Fed, Mr. Bernanke's latest step is a big one. It marks the most significant change in Fed communication since 2007, when the bank doubled the frequency with which it publishes economic forecasts to four times a year.

And holding news briefings carries some risks—that the chairman will stumble, for example, or that the public or financial markets will interpret him wrongly. New York Fed President William Dudley was recently derided by an audience in Queens for saying he believed underlying inflation was low, referring to measures of inflation that exclude food and energy prices, which have surged recently. 

The Fed, established in 1913, has opened up very gradually over the decades. It wasn't until 1975 that it started reporting to Congress twice a year on the economy and monetary policy. In 1994, the policy-making Federal Open Market Committee began releasing statements disclosing its interest rate policy actions, but it wasn't until 2000 that it did so after every committee meeting. 

Fed officials hope that by holding news conferences, the chairman can help the central bank deliver a stronger and more unified message, which in turn could increase the effectiveness of the Fed's policies.

Vincent Reinhart, formerly a senior Fed official who worked on communications strategy, said the benefits of a news conference are greatest when the issues are complex and the central bank isn't speaking with one voice—which is what happened late last year when the Fed embarked on a program of buying bonds to boost the economy.

When he became chairman in February 2006, Mr. Bernanke's plan was for the Fed to be less personality-driven than under predecessors Alan Greenspan and Paul Volcker. The financial crisis and the uneven recovery from the recession have put Mr. Bernanke under a brighter public spotlight than he anticipated.

 Write to  Luca Di Leo at luca.dileo@dowjones.com 