Democrats have broken ranks over a move to consider Social Security changes—including possibly raising the retirement age—to ensure its long-term fiscal health in combination with an effort to reach a deficit-reduction package.

The idea of putting Social Security into play has triggered a firestorm of opposition from several corners of the Democratic party. Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D., Nev.) and Sen. Chuck Schumer (D., N.Y.), two of the Senate's most powerful lawmakers, have said revisions to Social Security shouldn't be attached to a deficit-reduction plan. They argue the program's benefits are covered by giant trust funds that have no impact on the deficit.

"I believe it is a separate discussion from either the short-term or long-term budget discussions," Mr. Schumer said earlier this month.

Dozens of other House and Senate Democrats appear to agree. AARP, the powerful lobbying group for Americans over 50, is also raising concerns. 

But changes to Social Security are on the table as three Democratic senators, Mark Warner of Virginia, Kent Conrad of North Dakota and Richard Durbin of Illinois, negotiate with three Republicans—together forming the so-called Gang of Six—to craft a deal to cut $4 trillion from the federal budget deficit over 10 years. They are weighing how to do so by paring tax breaks and overhauling large entitlement programs.

Neither party has proposed using any savings from changes in Social Security to reduce the federal budget deficit. The Social Security issue is part of the debate over the budget deficit because Republicans indicated they wouldn't consider changes to the tax code that would bring in more revenue, which Democrats want, unless Democrats entertained alterations to Social Security.

Social Security is the country's largest entitlement program, making it one of the most politically popular. It spent $706 billion in fiscal year 2010, accounting for roughly 20% of the government's budget, according to the Congressional Budget Office. The program has roughly 54 million beneficiaries, including retirees and those with disabilities.

Messrs. Warner, Conrad and Durbin are weighing changes such as raising the retirement age to 69 by 2075, increasing taxes for wealthy workers paying into the program and trimming benefits for certain groups. They have insisted benefit cuts from Social Security wouldn't be used to reduce the government's broader deficit—a position Republicans agree with—but they have kept many details of their plans confidential.

"If we can't grapple with [Social Security, Medicare and other entitlements], we're whistling past the grave," Mr. Warner told executives at a town-hall meeting in Richmond, Va., earlier this month.

The Gang of Six has picked up some support among Democrats. Sen. Bill Nelson (D., Fla.) has signaled that "he'd give fair consideration" to some changes in Social Security "as long as there are no harsh cuts," a spokesman for Mr. Nelson said.

It is unclear if the gang will be able to win enough backing to overcome the uproar over Social Security by Democrats and interest groups, such as AARP.

Any move to reduce Social Security benefits would be politically divisive because many Americans believe their retirement benefits are financed by payroll taxes they pay during their working lives. But as a pay-as-you-go system, Social Security uses the money collected from current workers to pay beneficiaries. Congress has changed the rules of the program—such as eligibility and benefit formulas—many times over the years. 

For decades, Social Security collected more in taxes than it paid in benefits. The program lent that surplus to the U.S. Treasury by buying government bonds, and the government spent that money. 

Defenders of the program say there isn't an immediate need for changes in Social Security. Past surpluses and projected tax receipts are sufficient to pay full benefits until 2037. After that, seniors would get only 75% to 80% of promised benefits if changes aren't made.

AARP is working on a major advertising and education campaign to debunk what it says are myths about the solvency of the program. AARP is willing to consider changes to the program, officials said, but the organization wants it addressed separately from any broader deficit-reduction debate. They have already met with Democratic and Republican leaders to press their case, and they believe they carry sway within both parties.

"Nobody wants to hit a buzzsaw called 'people over the age of 50,' " said Nancy LeaMond, a top AARP official.

President Barack Obama has said he was open to proposals that would make the Social Security program more sustainable in the future, but the White House has so far declined to back the idea of changing the program as part of a broader deficit-cutting effort that includes taxes and programs like Medicare.

—Stephen Power contributed to this article.

 Write to  Damian Paletta at damian.paletta@wsj.com 