 Music Hall of Williamsburg  66 N. 6th St., Brooklyn, (718) 486-5400  March 8 

The last 20 years of hip-hop have seen no shortage of paeans to Brian DePalma's 1983 drug-dealer film "Scarface," both visually and lyrically. Yet few rappers have actually invoked the cinematic scope of Al Pacino's iconic character like Chef Raekwon of the Wu-Tang Clan. That the Staten Island rappers are film buffs is no surprise: Through their 1990s heyday, they sampled countless kung fu films on their own albums. Raekwon's 1995 opus, "Only Built 4 Cuban Linx…," has all the grandeur, violence and complexity of a movie, with the rapper's dense yet fluid storytelling style carrying it all off. So it was no surprise that after countless delays, a sequel finally appeared in 2009 to rave reviews. Of late, Raekwon has sounded re-invigorated; this show celebrates his latest album, "Shaolin vs. Wu-Tang," which features guest turns from Wu cohorts Method Man and Ghostface, as well as Rick Ross and Busta Rhymes.

 Alice Tully Hall  70 Lincoln Center Pl., (212) 671-4050  March 7 

In the early 21st century, guitarist Tyondai Braxton's shows were singular affairs. He could often be found sitting cross-legged onstage, using just his guitar, his beat-boxing skills and a battery of effects pedals to concoct phantasmal full bands. Soon after, he brought that wizardry to the Brooklyn post-rock outfit Battles, injecting lots of loops and Carl Stalling-esque humor into precise muscular riffing. But Mr. Braxton (like his jazz composer father, Anthony) couldn't be contained by this musical entity, either. His 2009 album "Central Market" dabbled in orchestral maneuvers (courtesy of the 30-member Wordless Music Orchestra), with all sorts of time-shifts and oddball instrumentation. On Saturday he'll step out on his own as part of Lincoln Center's Tully Scope Festival, performing works by clamorous Dutch composer Louis Andriessen, well as pieces from his own album.

 Bowery Ballroom  6 Delancey St., (212) 533-2111  Wednesday 

Could there be a more land-locked band than Tennis? A husband-wife duo hailing from Denver who named themselves after one of the driest sports, Tennis is generating buzz with its latest album, "Cape Dory." The irony is that Alaina Moore and Patrick Riley sold all of their possessions to buy a sailboat and spent months floating out on the Eastern Seaboard, far from shore. They then returned to dry land and set about penning songs that captured their nautical period. Rather than sound like a sea shanty, yacht-rock, or Jimmy Buffett's greatest hits, Tennis crafted a winsome set of breezy pop songs that fit right alongside indie-rockers like Best Coast and Beach House in re-imagining Brill Building pop for a new century.

 Santos Party House  96 Lafayette St., (212) 584-5492  Friday 

Marnie Stern's guitar style ostensibly draws on the hyper-masculine tradition of shredders like Eddie Van Halen and AC/DC's Angus Young, with an onslaught of hammer-on notes. More than a simple display of virtuosity (and virility), Ms. Stern uses such tactics to soundtrack agitated mind states, frazzled nerves, and too much espresso. Working with her close collaborator—the seemingly four-armed percussionist Zach Hill—Ms. Stern's two previous albums were exhaustive documentations of such emotions, delivered at the pace of an avalanche. But her most recent effort, a self-titled album released late last year, found more space amid the notes. Ms. Stern offers her usual array of anthems, but she also explored grief, heartbreak, and loss stemming from an ex-lover's suicide. Unflinching in her gaze, she still uses her six-string to blast it all away.

 12-Turn-13  172 Classon Ave., Brooklyn, (718) 623-9689  Saturday 

In the 1980s, Manchester club the Hacienda was ground zero for Britain's mutant blend of dance and rock, featuring performances by the likes of the Smiths, Madonna and New Order as they were breaking into the pop charts. Behind the decks on most nights was Greg Wilson, soundtracking the proceedings with a mix of American soul from labels like Motown and Stax, as well as the nascent New York musical art forms of electro and hip-hop. Mr. Wilson retired from DJing in the '80s, but 20 years later he returned to the scene to great acclaim and found himself serving as a living guidebook to the art form. On Saturday he'll be the esteemed guest of underground partymakers Mister Saturday Night, where Mr. Wilson's impeccable taste and depth of knowledge will mean dancing across epochs.