JOHANNESBURG—The gusher of foreign capital that has prompted fears of inflation and overheating in many emerging markets has created a different set of problems for South Africa.

Africa's largest economy is struggling with a delicate task: Trying to reconcile a weak economy and a strong currency without scaring off investors.

In the past year, foreign capital has powered many frontier economies and their currencies, as investors pumped money into assets that offered higher returns than those in the developed world.

But South Africa, which hasn't been hit by the inflation seen in other emerging markets such as China and Brazil, also hasn't matched their surging growth. Its economy is expected to grow 3.5% in 2011, lagging behind sub-Saharan Africa as a whole, which is forecast to expand 5.5%.

South African officials say the country needs to double its pace of growth to shrink a jobless pool of about one-quarter of the working-age population.

Foreign direct investment has fallen sharply over the past two years, due in part to a downturn in global commodity prices and uncertainties over government labor and mining policies. Yet South Africa's currency remains robust. It appreciated 12% against the dollar last year, and hit a three-year peak of 6.55 to the dollar on Dec. 31. It has weakened since, but clawed back some of the lost gains after the national budget, unveiled in late February, didn't include any new measures to curb the rand's appreciation. Since the start of the year it is down about 5% against the dollar. 

But the currency is still seen as too strong and the economy as too weak. That disconnect troubles politicians and economists. Many South African officials say the rand's strength is hampering a recovery because it makes mining and manufacturing exports more expensive for foreign buyers. That leaves industry vulnerable to competition from manufacturing powers such as China, South Africa's main trade partner. Manufacturing is the South African economy's second-biggest sector after financial services, accounting for about 15% of overall output.

"The strong rand is robbing the South African economy of its growth potential," said  Colen Garrow, an economist at Brait SA, South Africa's largest listed private-equity company. Mr. Garrow says the rand—now at just below seven to the dollar—should be closer to eight to the dollar. That lower level, he adds, could boost annual economic growth to 4%.

But pinpointing the optimal level for the rand is difficult amid brisk global capital flows. South Africa needs these inflows to absorb its current-account deficit, which has to be covered by foreign capital inflows to compensate for the foreign exchange paid for imports. The country isn't expected to resort to stricter controls on capital inflows, such as imposing taxes on purchases of bonds or equities.

In his budget last week, Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan said the exchange rate would be monitored but that there was little South Africa could do to influence global capital flows.

In the first two months of this year, there have been net capital outflows—foreigners have sold a net 6.6 billion rand ($950 million) of bonds and a net 2.3 billion rand of South African equities. Those outflows have removed some of the pressure for authorities to intervene to weaken the rand.

One step the Treasury did take in October was opening its doors wider for capital to leave the country, hoping that more buying of foreign currency will counterbalance the rand's strength. South Africa now allows residents to take four million rand (about $580,000) offshore each year, compared with a previous lifetime limit of four million rand. Limits on amounts that mutual funds and private pension funds can take offshore also were increased, raising the limit for unit trusts to 35% of total assets from 30% and for pension funds to 25% from 20%.

South Africa's central bank also has stepped up purchases of foreign currencies. Those reserves help cushion the economy from outside shocks and act as a deterrent to currency speculators, by providing the central bank with the means to buy rand if the currency is under siege. The Reserve Bank has $37.3 billion on hand, up $9.0 billion from the beginning of last year.

The selling pressure has weakened the rand, although it is now recovering.

If the rand weakens too fast it will spark inflation, prompting interest-rate increases and threatening the corporate borrowing needed to support growth. As a result,  Rian le Roux, chief economist at Old Mutual Investment Group, calls the rand the "biggest wild card" for the economy this year.

Yet South Africa doesn't want to spook investors. Though portfolio inflows, also known as "hot money," amounted to about $13 billion last year, foreign direct investment—a much more stable source of capital—has plunged over the past two years. FDI fell 75% to $1.3 billion in 2010 and 38% in 2009, according to the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development.

With those figures in mind, some economists are taking a broader view beyond the rand. "It's too easy to make the rand a scapegoat," says  Razia Khan, Standard Chartered's regional research head for Africa.

The South African Chamber of Commerce and Industry is lobbying against plans for more labor regulation. But unions have clinched wage increases that are well above inflation. That has helped lead to lowered productivity, while labor rules make it hard for companies to hire and fire.

 Write to  Mariam Isa at mariam.isa@dowjones.com 