SYDNEY—The Australian economy grew solidly in the fourth quarter of 2010, bucking the headwinds of rising interest rates, a still fragile global backdrop and devastating floods that inundated the coal-rich state of Queensland in December and January. 

However, Treasurer Wayne Swan warned the first quarter of 2011 would see the brakes slammed on growth as the full force of natural disasters that struck at the economy are felt. Queensland, which accounts for 20% of national output, experienced its worst flooding on record in January, and was later battered by a category-5 cyclone, prompting a massive rebuilding effort. 

Mr. Swan said the hit to exports as a result of the disasters will reduce tax revenues and cut around a percentage point from first-quarter growth and half a percentage point from growth over the 2010-2011 fiscal year. A hit to growth on that scale could result in a first-quarter contraction, a rare event in an economy that hasn't experienced a recession in 20 years. 

The cautious outlook highlights the challenge the government faces in meeting a multibillion dollar compensation bill to rebuild storm-ravaged homes and infrastructure while at the same time returning a budget surplus by the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2012. 

Debt and deficit are a tense topic in Australian politics and Prime Minister Julia Gillard has staked her minority Labor government's reputation on meeting the surplus target, even as the reconstruction bill is expected to climb. 

In its most recent outlook, the Treasury department forecast Australia would grow at 3.5% over the year and return an underlying deficit of 41.5 billion Australian dollars (US$42.06 billion). In February the International Monetary Fund said the weather disaster could cut up to one percentage point from first-quarter growth. 

"From what I have seen so far, we will have lower taxation revenues," Mr. Swan said. "There will be a heavy toll on the budget due to spending on reconstruction and lower activity."

Illustrating the impact from adverse weather, Mr. Swan said heavy rains alone during December shaved 0.4 percentage points off fourth-quarter growth. Figures released Wednesday showed the economy grew 0.7% in during the quarter. 

To help pay the bill, Ms. Gillard is planning budget cuts and is attempting to push through a A$1.8 billion flood levy, which so far has won lower house approval but could run into stumbling blocks in the upper house. 

Still, the interruption to growth is expected to be brief as the fires of a mining investment boom intensify, with mining companies planning to invest an estimated A$100 billion in new projects in 2011-12, close to double that of the previous year. 

Economists said the mining boom is balanced by a still cautious trend in consumer spending. With households still focusing on savings and debt reduction, the Reserve Bank of Australia has scope to keep interest rates steady for now. 

The central bank expects economic growth to rebound by the end of 2011, to be running well above historic averages, putting inflation at the top of its 2%-3% inflation target band. 

Australia's economy grew 0.7% in the fourth quarter from the third quarter and by 2.7% from the year-earlier period, the Australian Bureau of Statistics said Wednesday. Economists on average had expected growth of 0.8% on quarter and 2.8% on year. 

The main contributors to growth in the quarter were a sharp rise in plant and machinery equipment and a rise in store inventories. A fall in construction detracted from growth, while Mr. Swan estimated the havoc across Queensland sliced four percentage points from growth in the quarter. 

The data "dispels this ridiculous notion that the economy ground to a halt in the second half of last year," said  Adam Carr, an economist at ICAP. 

The Australian dollar was weaker after the report. Wednesday afternoon in Sydney, the currency was trading at US$1.0107, down from US$1.0142. 

The data are broadly consistent with a message sent by the Reserve Bank of Australia after a policy meeting Tuesday that interest rates are on hold for now at 4.75%, as inflation and the mix of growth in the economy means there is no pressing need to raise rates. 

Interest rates rose sharply in the fourth quarter as banks ratcheted up mortgage lending rates in response to funding cost pressures, outpacing increases announced by the RBA. Consumers grew cautious as a result, cooling spending, usually a key driver of growth. 

  Brian Redican, senior economist at Macquarie Bank, said the solid growth belies an underlying softness that will likely show up in the first quarter of 2011. 

"I don't think it really suggests the economy is thumping along," he said. 

He attributes much of the growth to an unintended rise in store inventories, while adding that household consumption is at its weakest levels in years. 

—Geoffrey Rogow contributed to this article.

 Write to  James Glynn at james.glynn@dowjones.com and Enda Curran at enda.curran@dowjones.com 