The Reserve Bank of Australia signaled Tuesday it is likely to leave interest rates unchanged for months to come, sending a message that the inflation outlook for 2011 is largely benign. 

The central bank left its cash rate target unchanged at 4.75% as expected, telling the markets that the high Australian dollar was helping to contain inflation, while the labor market wasn't fanning any wage-push price pressures. 

"Inflation is consistent with the medium-term objective of monetary policy, having declined significantly from its peak in 2008," RBA Gov. Glenn Stevens said in a statement. 

"These moderate outcomes are being assisted by the high level of the exchange rate, the earlier decline in wages growth and strong competition in some key markets, which have worked to offset large rises in utilities prices," he added. 

Still, economists said the statement from the central bank was notable for what it didn't touch on, such as predictions of a record surge in mining investment over coming years, geopolitical tensions in the Middle East and rising oil prices. 

Australian miners are expected to invest close to 100 billion Australian dollars (US$101.81 billion) in 2011-12, up 95% from a year earlier in an explosion generated by the best terms of trade the country has had since the early 1950s. 

The Australian dollar fell on the statement. Tuesday afternoon, it was trading at US$1.0165, down from US$1.0183 just before. 

Mr. Stevens also threw a spotlight on the job market, but doused concerns that with the economy on the cusp of full employment, wages are set to fuel inflationary growth. Unemployment now stands at 5.. 

"The labor market firmed in 2010, with unusually strong growth in employment and a decline in the rate of unemployment. Most leading indicators suggest further growth in employment, though most likely at a slower pace," Mr. Stevens said. 

With inflation already forecast to be at the top of the RBA's 2%-3% target band by the end of 2011, it is clear the on-hold position of the RBA won't be permanent. 

Separately, Australian retail sales were stronger than expected in January while the country's manufacturing sector grew for the first time in five months during February, boosted by new orders and restocking, data released Tuesday showed.

Economists said the retail sales data wasn't as firm as it first appeared, with discretionary spending at its weakest level in two years.

Retail sales rose a higher-than-expected 0.4% to a seasonally adjusted 20.44 billion Australian dollars in January from A$20.37 billion in December, the Australian Bureau of Statistics said Tuesday. Economists expected a 0.3% rise. 

On the manufacturing front, the Australian Industry Group-PricewaterhouseCoopers Australian Performance of Manufacturing Index rose 4.4 points in February from January to 51.1. 

"While only reflecting a single month's improvement, the result underlines the resilience of the sector in the face of extremely tough trading conditions and the impact of the strong dollar," AIG Chief Executive  Heather Ridout said. 

Restocking helped push factory output back into positive territory with the best performances in wood products, paper, chemicals, petroleum and coal products. 

Also Tuesday, the current account deficit widened to a seasonally adjusted A$7.3 billion in the fourth quarter of 2010 from the third quarter. Economists had expected a current account deficit of A$7.1 billion.

—Enda Curran contributed to this article.

 Write to  James Glynn at james.glynn@dowjones.com 