PHIL CAMPBELL, Ala.—Calling all Phil Campbells: The town of Phil Campbell, Ala., is looking for you.

Come June, this speck of a town, with a population of some 1,000 people and just three sets of stoplights, will celebrate its 100th anniversary with a Phil Campbell convention coinciding with its annual hoedown.

The idea is the brainchild of one Phillip Campbell, a 38-year-old writer in Brooklyn, N.Y., who has joined forces with town officials.

"We're very serious about this, we want to make sure that no Phil Campbell is left behind," Mr. Campbell says in a YouTube video he made with his namesakes from the United Kingdom and Australia.

And it isn't just Phillips they're after. The search is on for Phyllis Campbells, and other derivations of the name. So, Felipe, Fulup and Philomena Campbells—come on down!

"We want you to feel that this is your hometown, too," says a letter from Mayor Jerry Mays, mailed to 385 Campbells last month.

Fascination with people of the same name has long been a social curiosity. Documentaries such as "Searching for Angela Shelton" and "The Sweetest Sounds," where Alan Berliner invited all his namesakes over for dinner, explored such themes.

There is a Jim Smith Society that holds annual conventions where Jim Smiths play "Jimgo," their version of bingo, and wear matching T-shirts and hats. And there is a "How Many of Me" website that calculates the number of people with the same name in the U.S., based on a statistical model using old Census data. (There are 458 people in the U.S. named Phillip Campbell, the site says).

Social networking sites like Facebook have made meeting people with the same name even easier. Jonathan Smith of Toledo, Ohio, created an "All the John Smiths in the world unite!" page on Facebook several years ago. 

According to Guinness World Records, the largest gathering of people with the same first and last name was 164 Martha Stewarts who converged on the most famous Martha's TV show in New York in 2005.

Mr. Campbell discovered the town when he was in college in 1993. While watching the television show, "Hee Haw," he saw the town of Phil Campbell get a big howdy.

In the summer of 1994 he visited, meeting the town clerk, who kept a file of the handful of Phil Campbells that had been through.

"I got so excited, and I announced right there that I'm going to bring back all the Phil Campbells," he recalled.

The next year, he brought together 22 Phil Campbells and one Phyllis Campbell, who decided to come in honor of her deceased father. 

"Hello, we've come to take our town back," read the T-shirts they wore.

Former Mayor Ted Murray, 76 years old, wanted to make the convention an annual event but it petered out after a few years.

"I think some people in town thought that it was just for the Phil Campbells," he said.

Last year, Mr. Campbell googled his name and came across the Wikipedia entry for the town, which referred to the 1995 convention as a "stunt," which took him aback.

He learned that since then, the town had started its own annual hoedown festival, giving Mr. Campbell an idea. He could have another convention, only this time he could work with the town and make it part of their celebration. With the aid of Facebook, their reach could be global.

Some residents wonder how the Phil Campbells will respond to their sleepy town, where the few businesses that remain include a Piggly Wiggly grocery store, a Dollar General and the Chat 'N Chew restaurant.

Residents are fiercely loyal to Phil Campbell, narrowly defeating a referendum last year that would have ended its dry status. The vote is a point of pride for a town whose landscape is dotted with church signs. Mr. Mays, 67, points to the town's community college and high school as other points of pride.

And the name, of course. Phil Campbell is the only town in Alabama, and one of a few nationally, whose name consists of the full name of a real person.

Phil Campbell was named after a railroad engineer originally from Liverpool, England. A local businessman told Mr. Campbell in the 1880s that if he built a railroad depot and, along the main railroad, a side track that ran near his general store, then the town would be named after him. The side track and depot were built, and in 1911 the town was incorporated.

Residents say they are looking forward to meeting all the Phils.

"I never knew that there was that many Phil Campbells in the world," said Rita Barton, chairwoman of the town's park and recreation board and chief organizer of the hoedown. 

Melissa Mohr, a 37-year-old life-long resident, thinks the convention is an appropriate way to celebrate their namesake. 

"We wouldn't be here if it weren't for a Phil Campbell," says Ms. Mohr. "That train track has kept us together all these years and hopefully that train track will build our industry up."

No one knows exactly how many Phil Campbells will show up. Mr. Campbell has tried to reach out to the most famous Phil Campbell, the guitar player of the English band Motörhead. 

Phillip Campbell from Australia is likely traveling the farthest. The 42-year-old has already bought his plane ticket for the 40-hour journey.

"It's a great social experiment," he said.

And Philip—that's Philip with one L—Campbell from the U.K., 38, hopes to document the experiment. "Being able to interview a Phil Campbell as a Phil Campbell in Phil Campbell brings all kinds of interesting possibilities," he said. 

Phillip Campbell from Darlington, S.C., went to the 1995 convention. 

"There was probably 15 of us in one group walking down the street, and my wife says, "Now Phillip," and about 10 or 15 voices say, "Yeah?"

He remembers bonding with one gentleman from North Carolina whom he would love to see again this year. He doesn't remember what he does or where in North Carolina he was from.

He just remembers one detail: His name was Phil Campbell.

 Corrections & Amplifications 

The town of Susan Moore, Ala., was named using the first and last names of a real person. This article incorrectly says that Phil Campbell, Ala., is the only town in the state to be named in that way.