BIRMINGHAM, Ala.—Federal officials on Sunday assessed the damage from last week's storms that killed more than 340 people across the South as residents continued the rebuilding process that is expected to cost billions of dollars.

The death toll from the tornadoes and storms that swept across seven states on Wednesday and Thursday was the highest from tornadoes since April 5-6, 1936, when 454 people were killed, mostly in Mississippi and Georgia. Of the current toll, 250 died in Alabama. Thousands more were hospitalized, injured, or remain missing, officials said.

Meanwhile, there was a "slight risk'' of more tornadoes developing in already battered Mississippi and Alabama by Monday, although thunderstorms and hail were more likely, said Jared Guyer, a weather forecaster at the federal Storm Prediction Center in Norman, Okla.

"In relative terms, it's not near the magnitude of the very active weather we had last week," Mr. Guyer added.

Authorities are still sifting through the destruction from an 80-mile-long, 1.5-mile-tornado that tore through Tuscaloosa and Birmingham in central Alabama, killing at least 65 people and injuring more than 1,000. The weather service has categorized that tornado as "at least'' an EF-4, with winds of at least 165 miles an hour.

 Federal officials visited Birmingham Sunday to view the beginnings of a storm cleanup and rebuilding effort. "I don't think words can fairly express the level of devastation here," said Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano, touring the devastated area of Pratt City, a mostly black working-class neighborhood that was hard hit by the tornado.

Finding housing for the thousands of newly homeless throughout the Southeast "will be the single most critical part of the recovery," said Shaun Donovan, who heads the Department of Housing and Urban Development. About 700 families remained in shelters across Alabama on Sunday, but "we know that there are hundreds and hundreds more who are with relatives" who will soon swell the ranks of those who need long-term living arrangements, Mr. Donovan said.

The aim is to keep residents as close to their home as possible in relocations, said Craig Fugate, the director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, unlike after 2005's Hurricane Katrina when thousands of New Orleans residents were dispersed far from Louisiana. "It may not keep them in their neighborhood, but it keeps them in their community," he said.

Congregants at the Pleasant Grove Church of the Nazarene in a suburb of Birmingham held hands Sunday in a circle around the church's walls for prayer, then moved outside to resume relief work. 

Pastor Bruce Hudson transformed from spiritual adviser to factory-floor manager, telling one woman where to route truck loads of supplies coming from a Montgomery church, and asking an older man if he could help him get his hands on a case of Bibles to distribute.

"The Bible calls us to be the hands and feet of Jesus," said congregant Melissa Blackburn. "When you have devastation like this, oh the opportunity."

In Pratt City, the low-slung brick building where Silvester Williams, pastor of the Morningstar Full Gospel Baptist Church, has been holding Sunday services since 1988 has a hole in the roof and an unlit sanctuary full of broken windows. But Mr. Williams, a stocky father of eight with one golden front tooth and a rich, husky voice, said it never occurred to him to cancel the service. Instead he set up a podium, a synthesizer and a small blue tent in the weed-choked driveway under a hot Alabama sun.

Almost all of Mr. Williams congregants are now staying in homeless shelters. When they arrived late Sunday morning, Mr. Williams, who wore a dark robe with crosses embroidered in red along with a black baseball hat that says God is good, greeted each with a handshake or a hug.

In a 45-minute service in front of two white, 10-foot tall crosses made of PVC pipe, Mr. Williams sang and screamed, chanted and whispered and at one point got down on his knees in the weeds to implore his congregants to walk humbly before the Lord.

"This storm was not about us, it was about Jesus," Mr. Williams sang as a keyboardist provided melody to his words. "It was a wake-up call to get to remember we can't do anything without Jesus!"

In his sermon titled "The Eagle Stirs the Nest," Mr. Williams likened the victims of the tornado to eaglets forced out of their comfortable nests. God has forced his children out of their comfort zones with the tornadoes, he said. "Every eagle that has ever learned to fly has had to fall close to the rocks," he said, his eyes closed and his face glistening with sweat.

"God is trying to wake you up and bring you to a point of understanding that I'm still God and I'm still on the throne," Mr. Williams said. "Now let me have you look at your neighbor and say God is love, God brought you through the storm."

"Hallelujah," Mr. Williams sang.

"Hallelujah" the tiny congregation sang right back. 

—Mike Esterl contributed to this article.

 Write to  Douglas Belkin at doug.belkin@wsj.com 