The Yankees and their longtime catcher and designated hitter,  Jorge Posada, are embroiled in a he-said he-said spat over whether Posada refused to play in Saturday night's loss against the Red Sox after he was told he would hit last in the batting order. Posada said after Saturday's game he has felt "disrespected" by the organization over the past year, after the Yankees forced him to quit catching and become a full-time designated hitter and now dropped him in the batting order.

The struggling Posada was slotted into the lineup 9th Saturday by manager  Joe Girardi, the first time since 1999 Posada was placed in that spot. At first, Posada told media that he was fine with the move. But then an hour before the game, Posada told the Yankee manager that he wasn't going to play, but didn't explain why, according to Yankee General Manager  Brian Cashman, who addressed the media during the game.

"At six o'clock [Posada] came into Joe's office and asked him to remove [Jorge] from the DH slot in the ninth hole. There is no injury," Cashman said. 

But as the game wore on and Posada's decision not to play blew into a issue on the national FOX broadcast, Posada's wife, Laura, wrote on the social networking site Twitter that Posada didn't play because of back stiffness.

"Jorge loves being a Yankee > anything. He's trying his best to help his team win. Today, due to back stiffness he wasn't able to do that," she wrote on her Twitter account.

After the game, a mob of reporters surrounded Posada, who said that he indeed had a stiff back, but needed a mental day off as well.

"I told [Girardi] I couldn't play today," Posada said. "That I needed time, first to clear my head, and that was it. My back stiffened up a little bit, I was taking a lot of grounders at first base, and I needed time to clear my head."

Posada acknowledged that he never told Girardi or Cashman about a back problem. And he was clearly angry that Cashman had spoken with the media during the game. 

"I didn't know why he made a statement during the game, the middle of the game, I don't understand that. That's the way he works now," Posada said. "I think he should have waited for the game to be over to talk to whoever – during the game is kind of like, you don't do that, you're not supposed to do that," Posada continued. Posada said he was unsure if there was a rift between him and Cashman and Girardi.

Girardi said he had no problem with Posada or his request, and tried to defuse the situation after the game.

"I just sensed he was frustrated, that was the sense I got…. Sometimes you just give a guy a day to clear his mind and get away from things. As far as his back, I was not made aware of it. 

"I hope for his sake we get through this and we move forward," Girardi said.

Posada said he hoped to be in the lineup for Sunday night's game against Boston, and scoffed when asked if he was weighing retirement.

Posada is a borderline Hall of Famer. He's been the Yankee catcher for the past 15 years and one of the "Core Four" Yankees -- with  Andy Pettitte, Mariano Rivera, and  Derek Jeter-- who were the engine of the most recent five Yankee championships.

The team forced him to hang up his catcher's gear this season and become a full-time DH, a demotion he accepted quietly but grudgingly. This season, he has shown power, but little else – hitting .165 with six home runs.

Posada's Red Sox counterpart, designated hitter  David Ortiz, leapt to the Yankee's defense.

"You want to know what I think?" Ortiz said. "They're doing that guy wrong. They're doing him wrong. You know why? That guy, he is legendary right there in that organization."