General Motors's European unit said it would produce the next generation of the Vivaro light-commercial vehicle for its Opel and Vauxhall brands in Luton, England, securing the future of the U.K. plant in the medium term. Production is due to begin in 2013. 

At the same time, Renault will shift production of its next-generation Trafic light-commercial vehicle to its plant in Sandouville, France, from Luton.

 Toyota will resume earthquake-interrupted production of three hybrid vehicles in Japan on Monday, becoming the second major auto maker after Nissan to restart output after the March 11 quake and tsunami. 



European Aeronautic Defense & Space said it is in exclusive talks to acquire an undisclosed stake in Vector Aerospace of Canada, without disclosing terms. Vector provides aviation repair and overhaul services and has facilities in Canada, the U.S. and other countries. 



Heathrow Airport operator BAA, a unit of Spain's Ferrovial, indicated it could take a couple of years to fully implement recommendations to cope with heavy snowfall.



Bombardier and Empresa Brasileira de Aeronautica announced separate agreements aimed at helping them take advantage of an expected rapid rise in demand for aircraft in China.



The Spanish banking sector was downgraded by Moody's Investors Service Inc., heaping further pressure on Iberian banks following the collapse of Portugal's minority government. 

However, market observers said big names like Banco Santander and Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria might prove resilient to the latest news as Spanish markets are showing some signs of decoupling from Portugal's political and economic crisis.



Piraeus Bank, Greece's fourth-largest lender by assets, swung to a net loss in 2010 on sharply higher provisions for bad loans and a poor performance by its trading division. It reported a net loss of €20 million ($28.2 million), down from a net profit of €201 million a year earlier.



 Credit Suisse Group Chief Executive Brady Dougan's overall pay fell by a third in 2010 and he didn't receive a cash bonus, after the bank's net profit dropped 24%.  



RBS Insurance, part of Royal Bank of Scotland Group, and J Sainsbury's finance arm said they were in talks to set up a five-year partnership under which RBS Insurance would supply car insurance under the Sainsbury's brand. 



Bank of China, China's fourth-largest lender by assets, said net profit rose 29% last year to 104.42 billion yuan (US$15.9 billion), driven by steady loan growth and a mild recovery in its interest margin. 



Procter & Gamble and Teva Pharmaceutical Industries agreed to combine their over-the-counter businesses in all markets outside North America. Financial terms of the deal, which is expected to close in the fall, weren't disclosed. 



 BP suffered a major blow when an arbitration tribunal blocked its $16 billion strategic partnership with Russian state-run oil company Rosneft to explore for oil in the Arctic.  



U.S. regulators said Chevron has been approved to conduct new oil-and-gas exploratory drilling in the deep water Gulf of Mexico, the first authorization since a drilling ban was lifted in the area. 



 Casino operator SJM Holdings Ltd. said Executive Director Angela Leong now owns a stake of about 6% in its parent company after a two-month family dispute over control of the parent was settled earlier this month. 



IMAX reached a deal with China's Wanda Cinema Line to open 75 new IMAX screens, a major step toward its goal of 300 screens in Greater China in the next five years. 



German insurance group Allianz will form a new joint venture with Banco Popular Espanol to manage around €11 billion ($15.5 billion) in assets. 

Separately, Allianz's U.S. real-estate arm plans to spend up to $3 billion to beef up its U.S. investment portfolio as the country's real-estate market shows signs of climbing back from its recent slump. 



Resolution Ltd., the acquisition vehicle set up by insurance entrepreneur Clive Cowdery, posted a rise in full-year pretax operating profit to £275 million ($446.5 million), compared with £6 million in 2009, and raised its dividend. 



Mood Media, a provider of in-store audio and video services, has agreed to acquire Muzak Holdings, best known for providing piped music in elevators, for $305 million in cash.



 The Swiss family that has controlled drug giant Roche Holding for decades said one family member has dropped out of the group's voting pool, meaning that the family pool has lost majority voting control of the company.  



Merck & Co. agreed to return rights for its investigational antistroke medication betrixaban to partner firm Portola Pharmaceuticals amid a review of Merck's product pipeline.



 Autogrill, the Italian retail and catering operator, said it extended its existing contract to manage Starbucks shops and concessions in U.S. airports and highways for another 10 years, and the two companies are planning to open 120 stores in North America during that time.  



Duke Street agreed to buy the Wagamama noodle chain from Lion Capital, after an auction process failed to close with a sale. People familiar with the situation said the deal was worth around £215 million ($349 million). 



U.K. clothing retailer Next said full-year net profit rose 10% to £401.1 million ($651.3 million) and expects inflationary pressure to start to ease in 2012.



Kingfisher, Europe's biggest home-improvement retailer by sales, said it is planning to move into emerging markets and to accelerate growth in existing markets with the opening of around 250 new stores. 



Best Buy's quarterly earnings through Feb. 26 fell 16% to $16.26 billion, as the largest U.S. electronic retailer was hurt by restructuring charges and weak computer and television sales in the holiday period. 



 Research In Motion posted a 32% jump in quarterly earnings to $934 million, but the BlackBerry maker warned of lower average prices for its devices in the current period. 



 Oracle's fiscal third-quarter profit surged 78% to $2.12 billion, as the business-software developer posted strong gains in its traditional software and in its new hardware businesses. 



Baidu, the Chinese online-search provider, will start using new copyright-recognition technology on its online document-sharing platform in May to prevent sharing of pirated content. 



A €3.2 billion ($4.5 billion) public tender offer from Daimler and Rolls-Royce Group for German diesel engine maker Tognum has been submitted to German financial regulator BaFin, a person close to the matter said. 



Sands China is in talks with InterContinental Hotels Group to manage two hotel towers at its $4 billion-plus expansion project in Macau after an agreement with Shangri-La Asia failed, a person familiar with the matter said. 