Some families with long-term-care insurance policies—under fire recently for steep premium increases—are encountering claims denials that can prevent or delay the collection of benefits. But there are ways policyholders can avoid such problems.

About 8 million Americans own long-term-care insurance, which helps cover the cost of in-home care or nursing homes and assisted-living facilities. 

The reasons for claims denials vary. When compared with modern-day coverage, some policies issued 20 years ago have tougher requirements, such as mandatory hospital stays, before benefits are paid out. As a result, even those with severe disabilities, including Alzheimer's patients, may have trouble filing claims.

Some fear recent turmoil in the industry may lead to more claims rejections. Citing factors including higher costs than projected, companies including John Hancock Financial and  MetLife
MET


-0.13
%




 have recently applied for or received approval in one or more states for rate increases of as much as 40%. Some carriers, including MetLife, even have stopped issuing new policies.

Still, most claims-related problems can be avoided. The key: to reread the policy's fine print before hiring a caregiver or entering a facility. In some cases, it also may make sense for beneficiaries or their adult children to enlist help in preparing claims from an agent or geriatric-care manager. 

When a claim is rejected, some beneficiaries—especially those who bought policies in the 1980s and early 1990s—don't have much recourse. Since purchasing long-term-care insurance in 1989, Ruby Pilgrim, 87 years old, of Selma, Texas, has paid around $23,000 in premiums, says her daughter Mary Dunn, 65. Diagnosed with Alzheimer's almost six years ago, Ms. Pilgrim hasn't been able to collect from her policy, which is now owned by Senior Health Insurance Co. of Pennsylvania, or SHIP, which is owned by a state-supervised nonprofit trust.

The problem: Like many older policies, Ms. Pilgrim's requires a three-day hospital stay before it will cover nursing-home expenses. "Since my mother is physically healthy, her doctor cannot put her in the hospital," says another daughter, Sharon Dzierzanowski, 67. She says the family discovered this requirement last year only after complying with the policy's 100-day waiting period—at which point benefits are supposed to kick in—and spending about $13,500 on nursing-home care. After Ms. Pilgrim's claims were denied, the family explored, but opted against, taking legal action—and moved her into Ms. Dunn's home. 

SHIP President Brian Wegner, who declined to comment on Ms. Pilgrim's case, says the company paid out almost twice as much in claims in 2010 as it received in premiums. "Based on the volume of claims we pay, it's evident that we don't shy away from paying claims," he says. "But we have to follow the policy contract."

Although policies no longer contain such requirements, pitfalls remain. Federal law requires tax-qualified long-term-care contracts issued since 1997 to pay benefits under two conditions: when policyholders are unable to perform two out of six basic "activities of daily living," such as dressing or bathing, or when they have a cognitive impairment requiring "substantial supervision," says  Betty Doll, an independent agent in Asheville, N.C. For virtually all policies sold today, a health-care professional, such as a doctor or nurse, must certify that the disability is expected to last at least 90 days.

Some claims are rejected simply because a health-care professional fails to document a disability adequately. Agents say some policyholders undermine their own claims when insurers or care agencies send assessors to verify or document their disabilities.

"Senior citizens don't want to admit their lack of independence," says  David Wolf, an independent insurance agent in Spokane, Wash. For example, he says, one client recently told an assessor her husband was a good driver in order to spare him embarrassment. When the insurer denied the man's claim, Mr. Wolf urged him to see a neurologist, who administered a standardized test confirming a cognitive disability—paving the way for the claim to be approved.

Just because you qualify for benefits doesn't mean your insurer will pay your claims right away. To reduce premiums, policyholders typically choose a waiting, or "elimination," period of up to 100 days before benefits kick in. (Some newer policies sell waivers of this elimination period for home-based care.)

Some policies calculate the elimination period using a "calendar day" method. This requires someone with, say, a 90-day elimination period to wait 90 days before receiving benefits. But many use a "service day" approach in which the insurer counts only the days in which the policyholder foots the bill for his care, using licensed caregivers. As a result, families who bridge the gap by relying on friends or relatives "may muddle through the 90 days only to be told none of it counts," Ms. Doll says. 

Some older contracts mandate the use of caregivers or agencies with specific licenses. One of Mr. Wolf's clients, for example, recently hired an aide from a "home care" agency, only to see his claim denied because his policy requires a "home health care" agency.

Before entering a facility, agents say, it is important to scrutinize a policy's definition of "assisted living." Some, for example, limit coverage to places with 10 or more beds, which may rule out many of the adult family homes that are popular in some states.

—Email: familyvalue@wsj.com

 Write to  Anne Tergesen at familyvalue@wsj.com 