The House plunged back into an inflammatory debate on health care Tuesday, as lawmakers sought to convey their passions about the Obama administration's overhaul without overstepping the vague lines of civility drawn in the wake of the shootings in Arizona.

Republicans have scheduled a repeal vote Wednesday as one of their first acts since winning a House majority. It isn't expected to succeed, because Democrats control the Senate and the White House, but the vote could set the stage for a more piecemeal remaking of the law.

Much of the rhetoric on the House floor Tuesday was the same as that heard during the last Congress, with Democrats speaking of helping the middle class and Republicans warning of a government takeover.

Rep. Ted Poe (R., Texas) said the government was "self-righteously" ordering people to buy health insurance, which he called the "theft" of individual freedom by "omnipotent government." Rep. Tom Reed (R., N.Y.), a freshman, called the law a "monstrosity."

Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz (D., Fla.), adopting an argument often made by Republicans last year, said every minute spent on the health-care law was a minute not spent creating jobs.

"Why we are doing this—other than playing to the vanity of the extreme right wing of the Republican Party—is beyond me," Ms. Wasserman Schultz said. Rep. Elijah Cummings (D., Md.) added that it would be "repugnant" to repeal the law now that people were beginning to reap its benefits.

Despite the strong words, lawmakers generally didn't challenge each other's motives. And in another possible nod to the national mood after the shooting of Rep. Gabrielle Giffords (D., Ariz.), Republicans refrained from using the term "job-killing" to describe the law, as they have in the past, preferring "job-destroying" instead. 

Republicans said they didn't believe their earlier rhetoric created a violent climate but had decided to tweak their language because they feared Democrats would use the "job-killing" term against them. The official name of the repeal legislation remains Repealing the Job-Killing Health Care Law Act. 

The debate over the health-care overhaulPresident Barack Obama's signature domestic accomplishment consumed much of the past two years in Congress. Passed last March, it aims to cover 32 million uninsured Americans and imposes new insurance regulations, such as allowing people to stay on their parents' policies until age 26.

Republicans say the law is unworkable, expensive and amounts to a government takeover of health care. They particularly oppose a provision requiring most people to get health insurance or pay a penalty.

Republican leaders see the repeal debate as honoring their campaign promise to go after the overhaul, which remains unpopular among their supporters.

Though nearly all Democrats are expected to oppose the repeal, the National Republican Congressional Committeethe campaign arm of House Republicans, sent press releases to the districts of 40 Democrats saying the vote was "an opportunity to begin anew" for Democrats who have broken "numerous promises."

Democrats see the debate as a chance to reframe an argument that many in the party believe they lost last year. On Tuesday, they repeatedly called the law a "patients' bill of rights." They also told stories of individual patients they said were benefiting from the new law and would suffer from its repeal.

If the repeal passes the House, Republicans plan to pass a resolution directing congressional committees to craft measures to replace it. Democrats predicted a replacement would never materialize.

The country remains deeply divided on the health law. A recent Kaiser Family Foundation poll shows that 26% favor full repeal and 25% want to undo parts of it, while 41% favor keeping the law as it is or expanding it.

House Minority Leader Steny Hoyer (D., Md.) predicted the fight would not end Wednesday but would continue for the next two years.

"The president is up for re-election," Mr. Hoyer said. "This was a signature issue of his. He cared very deeply about it, and he certainly is going to be talking about it between now and the election."

 Write to  Naftali Bendavid at naftali.bendavid@wsj.com 