HAUPPAUGE—Aleksey Nikiforov stopped and restarted a recent practice as if watching it on videotape, rewinding and dissecting drills with his jacket tugged up against the chilled Long Island rink air. 

The Suffolk Juniors, aged 15 to 20, won their first national championship under Mr. Nikiforov two years ago and are 20-4 this season. They skimmed across the ice for a series of drills, shooting and skating in patterns as intricate as a mayflower pole weaving. But the whistle continually blew. As players gathered around, Mr. Nikiforov streaked across the ice to demonstrate precisely what they were doing wrong.

"Everybody else would be happy with how the drill's going because of the flow or whatever," said Tom Palamara, executive director of P.A.L. Ice Hockey, watching from the bench. "He breaks it down."

The attention to detail is one of the many ways players and fellow coaches say that Mr. Nikiforov has guided at least a half a dozen players into the National Hockey League since arriving in the United States from Lithuania nearly 20 years ago. 

His protégés include Rangers defenseman Matt Gilroy, Toronto Maple Leafs defenseman Mike Komisarek, Florida Panthers left wing Chris Higgins as well as a host of Division I college players. Players he coached in Lithuania include Devils center Dainius Zubrus and retired Islanders and Rangers defenseman Darius Kasparaitis.

But before Mr. Nikiforov, now 53, became a renowned "hockey guru" in the words of Mr. Komisarek, transforming Long Island into an unlikely production factory for professional hockey players, he toiled as a janitor in the same building, scrubbing the glass encircling the rink. He painted walls, washed cars and fixed toilets. He was called the "crazy Russian" for a thick accent many found difficult to understand and a startling intensity that intimidated others.

When he first started working at The Rinx, "Aleksey did anything," said Gerry Hart, a former player for the Islanders, who hired Mr. Nikiforov in 1992, shortly after he arrived in America. Then he did not know about Mr. Nikiforov's history of playing professional hockey in the Soviet Union, or training under famed Russian coach Anatoly Tarasov in Moscow, or guiding Mr. Kasparaitis and Mr. Zubrus to NHL careers.

When Mr. Nikiforov arrived at The Rinx, seeking a position, wearied from months of mixing cement for apartment demolitions in Manhattan, "He was having a tough go of it," Mr. Hart said. "He needed a lot of dental work. He was a mess."

Today Mr. Nikiforov is a bright-eyed, compact man with cropped dark hair and a quick smile that reveals a row of perfect white teeth. Framed newspaper articles adorn the entrance to The Rinx, spotlighting players he has coached into college scholarships and the NHL, which he enthusiastically points out to visitors.

It was a long journey here from his birthplace in Lithuania. His first hockey stick consisted of two broken pieces his father scavenged from a local rink and screwed, then taped, together; his first skates were bought by his mother on the Soviet Union's black market. 

Mr. Nikiforov earned a spot on the junior national team and played professionally, but quickly switched to coaching after realizing his limitations as a player. 

He enrolled in a coaching school in Moscow, studying under Mr. Tarasov, known widely as "the Father of Russian Hockey." When he returned to Lithuania to coach, one of his first students was a young boy named Darius Kasparaitis.

"In those days, Lithuania hockey was not that good," Mr. Kasparaitis recalled recently by phone from Stockholm. "But his goal was to make me and another couple of guys who were more talented to go on and play on the big level."

Over the years, Mr. Kasparaitis and Mr. Zubrus moved on to international renown. But after a falling out with the sports authorities in Lithuania, Mr. Nikiforov said, he and his wife moved to America, leaving their two young children in the care of relatives. They settled in Long Island, while he commuted into Manhattan every day to do demolition work on apartments. 

Waking at 5:30 a.m., he took the train into Penn Station every morning and ran the 25 blocks to his job at 59th street to save on subway fare. 

After a few months, he told his wife he'd had enough. "My wife say, 'Hey, listen, you didn't even try," he recalled recently. 

"I found a place to show yourself, show who you are," she told him—and handed over a listing she'd found in the newspaper for a local hockey league.

Through a contact at the league, he was put in touch with Mr. Hart, who had recently opened The Rinx. Mr. Hart was not impressed.

"His language wasn't all that great and I wasn't convinced that without good language skills that he'd be very effective coaching young kids," he said. But Mr. Hart agreed to hire him as a handyman. In exchange, he promised Mr. Nikiforov the opportunity to volunteer every morning on the ice with students. To his surprise, Mr. Nikiforov excelled. 

"What he couldn't communicate in words, he could demonstrate," Mr. Hart said. "That was far more effective than any skating professional or teacher I had at the time."

He quickly earned the loyalty of his students. "He did the drills as hard as the kids did the drills," Mr. Hart said.

He spent his first months cleaning and coaching, slowly building a roster of loyal players despite the challenges.

When Mr. Gilroy first began skating with Mr. Nikiforov, "I had no idea what he was saying," Mr. Gilroy said with a laugh. "I would go home and say, 'Dad, I can't understand him,' and my dad would say 'Who cares, just do what he does,' and that was it."

Mr. Gilroy switched from forward to defense at Mr. Nikiforov's urging. "Now he's like a father figure to me, especially when I'm around the rink," Mr. Gilroy said.

Mr. Kasparaitis and some other NHL players came to the rink in the summers to skate with his teams. Some of the children who initially viewed hockey as an entertaining diversion began to dream of something bigger. 

"You're kind of thinking, 'Wow, how neat would it be to be playing against these guys one day?" Mr. Komisarek said. 

When Mr. Komisarek, a self-described "pudgy kid," first started skating, "he couldn't find his way out of a corner," said Mr. Palamara, who also coached Mr. Komisarek in high school. 

By that time, Mr. Nikiforov's signature style was already developed. First was the emphasis on skills, at any hour the player was willing to work.

Mr. Komisarek settled into a routine of setting his alarm for 4:30 a.m., making his parents coffee, then tucking a pillow into the car so they could nap during practice. He got no sympathy from his parents after any complaint.

"Whatever Aleksey said was golden," he said.

Mr. Nikiforov brought a European mentality to coaching, which emphasized creativity and skills over raw power. And he made it fun. "The best drill for the kids of that age after 10, 12 years old is some real race, some game," said Mr. Nikiforov, who sometimes has players chase him across the ice or play a sophisticated version of keep-away. 

"I know I wouldn't be in the NHL if it wasn't for him," said Mr. Komisarek, who attended the University of Michigan and was selected seventh in the 2001 NHL Entry Draft by the Montreal Canadiens.

Not everyone flourishes. Not everyone is wiling to spend "more time with Aleksey than my own family," a statement echoed by all his former players. 

His tolerance for sloppiness, failure or minimal effort is limited.

"I always tell people that if he's hard on you it's because he like you and believes in you," said Ron Kinnear, the general manager of the Suffolk Juniors. "Take it as a compliment."

Players once left Long Island to be noticed. Now the Suffolk Juniors roster includes players from Texas and Russia.

"If you tallied up the dollars that he's saved parents on Long Island in terms of hockey scholarships, it's probably in the millions of dollars," Mr. Hart said.

—Kevin Clark contributed to this report.