Bangaore-- Listing on stock exchanges outside of India may be more lucrative for local companies that have a global appeal and customers outside of this country, according to investors.

Stock exchanges such as Nasdaq or the New York Stock Exchange in the U.S. could offer higher valuations and returns to online travel, e-commerce and mobile value-added services companies, as these exchanges already have benchmarks against which the performance of new entrants could be measured. 

"If it is in a category like online travel or e-commerce, which is understood better out of the country, and if the company is catering to global customers, it makes a lot more sense to list on the Nasdaq or NYSE," said Mohanjit Jolly, managing director of global investment firm Draper Fisher Jurvetson. 

Shares of online travel services provider  MakeMyTrip Ltd
MMYT


3.72
%




 jumped 89% on its debut last August, valuing the company at about $903 million, compared with the initial share sale price of $14. The company raised $80.5 million through the share sale. 

MakeMyTrip was a first-of-its-kind in India, but globally there are several online travel vendors, said  Kanwaljit Singh, managing director of Helion Venture Partners, a venture capital firm and investor in MakeMyTrip. 

Others are expected to join MakeMyTrip's ranks soon. 

GlobalLogic, a software products research and development company, plans to list on the NYSE. 

"We are embarking upon that journey," said its global CEO  Peter Harrison, last month, but did not say how soon. 

The company, founded in 2000, is privately held and is backed by venture capital funds Sequoia Capital India, New Enterprise Associates and New Atlantic Ventures. 

Bangalore-based Via, which was earlier known as Flightraja Travels Pvt. Ltd, may sell shares overseas as well as in India. 

"Currently we are looking at different listing and tax structures," said the company's cofounder and chief executive  Vinay Gupta. 

There's a lot of investment capital available for such firms as U.S. investors are eager to buy public equity in companies from emerging markets through the IPO route, said Mr. Singh of Helion. 

Investors are ready to pay a premium on revenue rather than profit in large companies that are leaders in their domestic markets, he said. 

"If a company doesn't have profit, the listing could happen on their business plans and offerings," said T.C. Meenakshisundaram, managing director of IDG Ventures India. "If there is a possibility of rapid revenue growth, investors may back them." 

Nasdaq is the preferred bourse to list on, with the world's top 50 technology companies already traded there, followed by NYSE, said  Draper Fisher's Mr. Jolly. 

"AIM (London) is an alternate exchange for small to mid-sized companies," he said.

Mr. Meenakshisundaram said for premium on profit, it is better to get listed in India, which offers a higher price-earnings ratio than other markets. 

"If it is software or information technology or information technology-enabled services business, India has better benchmarks and companies can get better valuations here," he said. 

Mr. Jolly, too, said listing in India is a better bet for companies in sectors about which there is plenty of awareness among investors, such as microfinance. 

Companies find listing overseas an expensive proposition, which involves educating prospective investors and analysts, who may not know much about India' economy, and hiring investment bankers and counsels. Further, companies need to continue spending on regular filings and compliance processes after the IPO. 

MakeMyTrip said finance costs increased to $2.5 million in the three months ended 30 September 2010 from $600,000 during the same period in the previous year, primarily due to an one-time expenditure on the company's initial share sale. 