RIKUZENTAKATA, Japan—The citizens of this tsunami-shattered city gathered to mourn their dead with prayers at a hilltop Buddhist temple Thursday, while in the downtown below, soldiers and police dug through the rubble looking for the bodies of hundreds of people still missing.

Residents dressed in black, some carrying pictures of family members who died, trudged up the pine-clad slope to the ceremony, past towering drifts of debris. A procession of dump trucks wound down the road past them, going to cart away the remains of their community.

It was the 49th day since the March 11 disaster, a milestone for grieving Japanese Buddhists who believe it is when the souls of the dead depart this world—a time for last goodbyes. Hundreds filled the temple and its courtyard as monks rang a huge bell.

About 2,000 people, nearly a tenth of Rikuzentakata's population, are dead or missing. The center of the city is in ruins. Thousands of homeless survivors are living in shelters set up in schools, community centers and other public buildings on high ground.

Thursday's service and others like it in cities along Japan's northeast coast in many ways represent a collective act of will by the people here to forge ahead and fight back against the overwhelming devastation, which threatens to send the region into terminal decline.

 Fateful Choice on a Day of Disaster: When the Tsunami Struck, a Mayor Had to Decide Between His City and Family  April 9, 2011

"We must reconstruct our city," the abbot of the temple, Kosho Takasawa, said in his sermon. He urged people to embrace the gift of life. "We have to move forward."

Inside the temple, rows of white silk-wrapped boxes holding the cremated remains of dozens of those who died in the waves flanked a massive gold image of the Buddha on a red throne. Mourners wept and made offerings of flowers as monks chanted ancient words of comfort.

Takeki Kanno, a 37-year-old volunteer fireman, said he had come to pray for his mother, aunt and uncle, all of whom were killed by the tsunami. Mr. Kanno said he is still haunted by the sight of an old man's hand reaching out in death from the wreckage.

But, Mr. Kanno said, Thursday's milestone should "mark a return to a more normal life for survivors." He said those who remained "should live for those who passed away."

For all the destruction, there are signs of progress. A temporary Shell gas station has been set up on a hill near one of the evacuation centers. Prefab housing units are going up on school playing fields. More than 2,000 units should be ready by mid-July, according to city officials.

"The pace is faster than I thought," said Mayor Futoshi Toba, who spent weeks after the disaster pushing for more housing, more quickly, to keep his city's already shrinking population from dwindling further.

Now, Mr. Toba says, his focus is on pressing ahead with the search for the missing and speeding the removal of debris from downtown.

Mr. Toba, whose wife Kumi died in the tsunami, attended the ceremony at the Buddhist temple. In the afternoon, he set out to pay his respects to her remains at the home of his in-laws in a city up the coast.

He says he still hasn't been able to tell his sons, Taiga, 12, and Kanato, 10, what happened to their mother. The two boys have been living with Mr. Toba's uncle as their father works to get the city back on its feet.

"I think they know she's dead," he said. "But I just don't know how to say to them that her body was found."

Many are looking for comfort in the ordinary, as the community struggles to re-create a semblance of normalcy.

In the days after the disaster, the Yonesaki Middle School gym was used as a collection point for the hundreds of bodies recovered from ruined downtown. The makeshift morgue now has been moved and classes have started again.

Near where the corpses were stored, the school's baseball team has started practicing again. But the shadow of loss is hard to shake. The father of one of the team's stars, Rinnosuke Yoshida, 14, is among the missing. He was also the team's coach. "I miss my dad and feel sad," said Rinnosuke, a ninth-grader who pitches and plays shortstop. "It makes me feel better to play baseball."

For Matsuo Sasaki and his son, Takashi, Thursday's ceremony was a chance to say goodbye to Mr. Sasaki's wife—Takashi's mother—and other relatives who perished. The family's print shop and home were washed away by the tsunami waves.

Father and son are still living on the floor of a crowded room in a nursing home that serves as a shelter for evacuees. But the family are moving forward with efforts to restart their business. They have joined up with a graphic-design company and a video production house to apply for a government-supplied temporary workspace.

Even in the ruins of downtown, signs of renewal are sprouting amid the devastation. Colorful streamers painted to look like giant carp—a May tradition meant to bring health and good fortune to boys—billow above wrecked buildings. Some families have put up hand-lettered signs at the sites of their former homes telling friends where to find them.

At Thursday's service, the abbot told those assembled that their lives had been spared for a reason and urged them to join together and push ahead. "If you cannot move, allow someone to push you," the abbot said. "If you are able to move, help move others."

The mourners filed outside, greeting friends and neighbors. After a dawn obscured by heavy rains, a bright sun shone in a blue sky. Cherry trees blossomed in the temple courtyard. Seemingly against the odds, spring has come to Rikuzentakata.

—Hitoshi Koreeda contributed to this article.

 Write to  Gordon Fairclough at gordon.fairclough@wsj.com 