TORONTO—India's Tata Steel Ltd. has joined forces with Canadian mining company New Millennium Capital Corp. to develop potentially large-scale iron-ore reserves in Labrador and Quebec, the latest bid by a global steel company to tap Canada's resources to secure raw material for manufacturing operations. 

Amid soaring commodities prices, steelmakers have aimed to secure iron-ore reserves, a key raw material for steel, to guard against supply shortages and as a hedge against rising demand for steel from the emerging economies of India and China. 

Last month, China's  Wuhan Iron & Steel Ltd. acquired a 25% stake in Canadian iron-ore-exploration company Century Iron Mines Corp. And in January, Luxembourg-based ArcelorMittal, the world's largest steel producer, said it would lead a joint venture to acquire  Baffinland Iron Mines Corp., owner of the four billion Canadian dollar (US$4.12 billion) Mary River iron-ore project, considered one of the best iron-ore mines in the world. 

Stainless-steel production in 2010 increased by almost 25% to a record 30.7 million metric tons, led by China, "the driving force in stainless crude steel production," according to the International Stainless Steel Forum. 

Meanwhile, junior exploration companies have been seeking manufacturers as partners in order to obtain the huge amounts of financing needed to turn their exploration properties into working mines. 

Tata has "the financial strength, operating expertise and motivation to carry this project through to production," said  Robert Martin, New Millennium's chief executive, in a release. 

Initially, Tata will spend about C$32 million (US$32.9 million) out of a total of C$50 million to help New Millennium, of which Tata already owns 27.2%, to determine the feasibility of developing the LabMag and KeMag iron-ore deposits along the Labrador Trough in northern Canada. New Millennium will cover the remaining cost. The feasibility study should take 18 to 21 months. 

Assuming the project proceeds, development costs could total C$4.85 billion. Construction would take about three years, Mr. Martin said on a conference call. 

"A successful completion of the feasibility study would enable Tata to consider a viable option for attaining self-sufficiency in iron ore for Tata's operations in Europe," said  H.M. Nerurkar, managing director of Tata Steel, in a release. 

Together the deposits hold more than nine billion metric tons of reserves and resources that could potentially produce 22 million tons annually of concentrate, with a potential mine life of over 100 years, New Millennium said. 

Tata and New Millennium would establish a joint venture to develop one or both of the deposits, with Tata initially owning 80% of the joint venture and New Millennium holding 20%. New Millennium could ultimately increase that stake to 40%. 

Tata will arrange the required equity portion of the financing—excluding New Millennium's optional equity interest—based on a maximum capital expenditure of up to C$4.85 billion if both deposits are developed and up to C$4.68 billion and up to C$3.76 billion, respectively, if only the KeMag or LabMag deposits are developed. 