For years, East Asia's lack of viable bond markets and its companies' consequent reliance on bank lending sparked concern about the region's financial stability. But in the past few years bond issuance has accelerated dramatically. From 2000-2010, Asian credit market issuance as a share of global issuance has grown to 23% from 5%, the result of an annual growth rate of 27%.

The benefits of growing Asian bond markets are many. Risk is priced more transparently and efficiently, and systemic risk is reduced. A vibrant bond market is a means of tapping into long-term savings and maintaining high levels of liquidity while increasing capital available to companies in a high-growth region. 

In 2010, Asian issuers raised a staggering $2.8 trillion via the bond markets—3.3 times the amount raised in the equity markets. The largest Asian nonsovereign credit deal was a $4.4 billion bond by Chinese electric utility State Grid. The market also absorbed perpetual bonds by blue chip names like the Hong Kong conglomerate Hutchison. 

At the same time, local currency markets are growing. Last month, Chinese real estate company Evergrande raised $1.4 billion in a yuan-denominated international bond issue. In December 2010 alone, investors, predominantly foreign funds, bought more than $1 billion of Thai debt in the secondary markets. This means local markets are rapidly achieving critical mass.

This is just the beginning of an explosive boom in Asian credit. In the coming decade, the region will exceed Europe and rival the U.S. as a credit-issuance market. 

This growth will be driven by demand- and supply-side factors. First is the strong demand among Asian companies for more capital to fuel growth. Given the region's demographics and higher growth rates, Asian companies will continue to look to leverage the capital markets to fund growth, capacity expansion and mergers and acquisitions.

The second factor will be improving Asian sovereign credit profiles. As the ratings agencies downgrade European sovereigns and U.S. municipal bonds, Asia is the one bright spot for credit upgrades. This continues a multiyear theme of Asian upgrades following the 1998 Asian financial crisis, and one would expect countries such as Indonesia to join India, Korea and China as investment-grade issuers. These ratings upgrades would naturally benefit banks through greater credit lines and simultaneously enable more global institutional investors to focus on Asian companies.

Asian firms deleveraged dramatically after the Asian financial crisis. Add to this that there are more than 1,000 Asian companies with a market capitalization above $1 billion—more than in the U.S.—and conditions are ripe for large bond issues. 

Asia has also developed wider and deeper investor pools. Asian credit is less than 2% of the holdings of most of the large global pension funds and insurance companies. Growing numbers of U.S. and European institutional investors are setting up Asian credit funds and opening offices in Hong Kong and Singapore. Developed-market insurance companies are steadily increasing their Asian allocations. Top-tier companies will benefit from Asian central banks diversifying their growing reserves away from U.S. Treasurys and developed-market blue chip bonds. 

Moreover, as Asian governments encourage pension-fund growth and the average Asia consumer demographic starts to migrate from 20-year-olds entering the work force to increased numbers of savers, demand will increase for longer-dated credit products. Classic pension-fund success stories include NPS of Korea and EPF of Malaysia, both of which are increasingly focusing on credit as an asset class.

Regional banks will play an important role in developing bond markets, and their balance sheets are growing. Including HSBC, five of the world's top 10 banks by market capitalization are now Asian. Asian companies are key beneficiaries of the growing trend of Chinese banks building offshore Asian branch networks. Other non-Asian global financial institutions such as Bank of America Merrill Lynch and Citigroup are focused on growing their Asian balance sheets. 

The final factor is product innovation and market reforms. Asian companies can now borrow in other Asian currencies. Investors benefit from the positive trends of underlying Asian foreign-exchange appreciation, diversification and local currency yields, while issuers seek lowest-cost funding bases, as well as investor and funding-source diversification. 

Perhaps the biggest trend will be the ability of Asian and global multinational corporations to fund in yuan as a result of the Chinese government's approach to prudently liberalizing its currency regime, thereby providing opportunities for companies with onshore operations to fund these in the local currency. 

While there will be volatility and periods of corrections, these forces—and others unforeseen—will combine to unleash a revolution in Asian credit markets. Issuers and investors will benefit alike.

 Mr. Zuberi is head of Asia- Pacific global markets distribution at Bank of America Merrill Lynch. 