BEIJING—A Chinese sovereign wealth fund has told Spanish Prime Minister José Luis Rodriguez Zapatero that it is mulling an investment of up to €9.3 billion ($13.46 billion) in the country's savings banks, also known as cajas, in a new show of financial support for Spain's troubled economy, a Spanish government spokesman said Wednesday. 

The announcement comes as Mr. Zapatero is on an Asian tour to China and Singapore. During a meeting with Mr. Zapatero Tuesday, Chinese Prime Minister Wen Jiabao said his country plans to continue buying Spanish bonds and would considering investing in savings banks, but no figures were given. 

China was a big investor in Spanish government debt last year and currently holds a total of around €25 billion, or 12% of all foreign holdings. Spain needs to sell €50 billion in net debt this year to finance a deficit it forecasts will be just over 6% of gross domestic product, twice the limit for European Union countries. 

A Chinese investment of €9.3 billion in Spain's cajas would cover more than half the €15 billion these institutions need to raise this year to cover new Spanish minimum-capital requirements. The cajas are scrambling to either find private investors or obtain funds from Spain's state-backed Fund for Orderly Bank Restructuring. 

Most analysts estimate the cajas will need to raise much more capital to cover mounting losses after the collapse of a decade-long housing boom. 

At a press conference in Madrid on Wednesday,  Isidro Faine, head of Spain's savings bank association, said he hadn't been informed of the possible Chinese investment but that he would be "delighted" by such a move. 

China has taken on an increasingly active and public role in the investing in volatile euro-zone financial markets like those of Spain, Portugal and Greece.

The euro zone has become one of China's main export markets, giving it an incentive to help preserve stability there. 

Analysts at Brown Brothers Harriman said the news Tuesday that China would continue investing in Spanish government debt helped lower Spain's risk premium, as measured by the interest rate spread between the Spanish 10-year government bond and the German equivalent. 

 --Pablo Dominguez and Jonathan House contributed to this article. 