SAN'A, Yemen—Thousands of Yemenis, inspired by the wave of activism spreading across the Middle East, marched through the capital demanding the removal of their longtime president, in one of the largest protests seen in this autocratic nation in years.

The demonstrations, organized by a committee of opposition parties, wound through four central districts of the city, with protesters shouting for the removal of President Ali Abdullah Saleh, a key U.S. counterterrorism ally whose government has long been criticized by Yemenis for repression and corruption.

Many chanted: "President—leave peacefully before being forced out the Ben Ali way," invoking how mass protests forced the resignation of Tunisian President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali two weeks ago.

Since the reunification of the northern and southern sides of the country in 1990 and a brutal civil war shortly afterward, Mr. Saleh has sidelined opposition groups and placed his relatives and close allies in key military and political posts.

Mr. Saleh has often cited security issues as a reason to stall political change. His government is battling a separatist movement in the south, a rebel group in the north, and al Qaeda cells that have been blamed for attempted terrorist attacks on U.S.-bound flights.

Secretary of State Hillary Clinton called on Mr. Saleh to pursue political and economic change, but also reaffirmed U.S. military and developmental support. U.S. aid to Yemen last year was roughly $300 million.

  More photos and interactive graphics  

On Thursday, State Department Spokesman P.J. Crowley noted Yemen's economic and security challenges, and warned of lumping the country in with other nations in the region. "A solution for Yemen may or may not specifically apply to another country in the region," he said.

Yemen's political groups have a history of showing a united front against the leader. Since mid-2010, they have participated in "National Dialogue" talks with Mr. Saleh's party in attempts to forge a power-sharing agreement. Mr. Saleh called off those talks in late 2010, his aides and opposition officials say, in part due to the opposition's refusal to compromise over their demands.

The protests Thursday, a weekend day in Yemen, were organized by the same steering committee that participated in the talks. Leaders from the Joint Meeting Parties, which comprises Islamic groups and secular Socialists, among others, had met Monday to plan their strategy. 

Demonstration organizers said that approximately 100,000 people participated in the San'a marches. The JMP also organized demonstrations in several southern and central provinces, which they said were attended by thousands more people.

In downtown San'a, crowds streamed along the main streets, with police generally letting them pass uncontested. 

"The Saleh regime has failed to manage the country for more than 30 years, and now the time has come for the political parties to lead popular protest against this regime," said Aidrous al-Naqib, a representative of Yemen's Socialist Party within the JMP.

Government officials disputed the opposition's crowd estimates and denounced the protesters. "The opposition is trying to cause chaos in the country, but the people of Yemen will not listen to their wrong call," said Interior Minister Rashad Al-Masri.

JMP leaders said they will hold rolling protests each Thursday until they win political concessions from the president.

Opposition parties have a minority bloc in parliament, but argue that their power has been blunted by elections biased in the ruling party's favor. JMP officials are looking for constitutional and electoral changes that would balance power between parliament and the strong executive controlled by Mr. Saleh. 

American officials expressed concern at the breakdown in national dialogue talks—which aimed to achieve those goals—and at constitutional amendments, pushed through parliament last month by Mr. Saleh's party, that overturn term limits that would have forced him from office in 2013.

Yemen suffers from high unemployment and a shrinking income from its rapidly decreasing energy reserves. Almost half of its 23 million people live on $2 a day or less, and a third suffer from chronic hunger, according to the United Nations.

Mr. Saleh announced this week he was raising the salaries for army soldiers and he promised to sharply cut taxes, moves seen as attempts to pacify public anger about the economic pain felt across much of the country.

The protesters chanted for Mr. Saleh to step down and allow for free elections. "What started in Tunisia is not over," shouted the crowd at the university campus.

A competing progovernment protest organized by Mr. Saleh's ruling party, called the General People's Congress, attracted a couple of hundred demonstrators in a different region of the capital. 

 Write to  Margaret Coker at margaret.coker@wsj.com 