MUMBAI— State Bank of India
SBKJY


0.00
%




 beat expectations by posting a 14% rise in net profit for its fiscal third quarter, aided by a strong growth in core interest income. The lender said Saturday rising provisions continue to blot its earnings. 

Separately, the state-run bank said it was working with the finance ministry and other banks and would soon work out a payment mechanism for oil-related transactions with Iran.

State Bank of India is treading cautiously to avoid possible U.S. sanctions due to any dealings with the blacklisted Hamburg-based European-Iranian Trade Bank AG.

Indian oil companies that import crude from Iran will open accounts with SBI, which will in turn deposit the payments for Iranian crude with European-Iranian Trade Bank, or EIH Bank. 

This comes amid international efforts to cut off funding for what the U.S. and others say is Tehran's pursuit of nuclear weapons. The new mechanism may ruffle U.S. feathers as the Treasury Department blacklisted EIH Bank in September, saying it provided a financial lifeline to Iranian companies that it alleges support weapons proliferation.

EIH isn't subject to sanctions by the United Nations or the European Union. But the U.S. Treasury has barred it from conducting any business inside the U.S. and freezing any assets it holds in the U.S. financial system.

Indian firms dealing with the bank could face the same penalties under U.S. legislation passed into law by President Barack Obama in July. SBI has branches in Los Angeles, Chicago, New York and other U.S. locales.

The country's largest lender has been plagued by a nagging rise in bad loans for the past year—a consequence of chasing growth even as India raced back to the pre-financial crisis high-growth trajectory. Lenders are witnessing rising demand for loans from both individuals and companies, even as the central bank continues to raise rates to battle high inflation.

Net profit for the October-December period rose to 28.28 billion rupees ($619.9 million) from 24.79 billion rupees a year earlier. The earnings topped a Dow Jones Newswires poll of seven analysts, that tipped third quarter net profit at 26.88 billion rupees.

But provisions and contingencies more than doubled to 20.52 billion rupees, of which provisions for bad loans alone was 16.32 billion rupees, over thrice the 5.15 billion rupees provided for a year earlier. 

The lender reported fresh slippages of 31.53 billon rupees during the quarter, despite net bad loans as a percentage of total advances falling to 1.61% from 1.88% a year earlier and 1.70% in the previous quarter.

Its provision coverage ratio as on Dec. 31 stood at 64.07% in accordance with the quarter wise targets permitted by the central bank, targeting the 70% norm by September 2011. On increasing provisions for the so-called teaser loans that the bank gives, chairman O.P. Bhatt said that it had not made such provisions as dictated by the central bank.

"Neither is there opacity nor is there risk in our teaser loans. We have written to the Reserve Bank of India about it," Mr. Bhatt said at an earnings conference.

Teaser loans offer lower interest rates in the first few years of a loan's tenure, after which they are reset at higher market levels. At its monetary policy review in November last year, the central bank raised the standard asset provisioning for teaser loans to 2% from 0.4% to make such loans costlier for lenders. It said some borrowers may find it difficult to service the loans once normal interest rates become effective.

Quarterly net interest income, the difference between interest earned and interest paid, surged by over 43% to 90.50 billion rupees from a year earlier as the bank controlled expenses. Net interest margin, the difference between lending rates and the cost of funds, broadened to 3.40% from 2.56% a year earlier. This was aided by a 0.72 percentage point drop in the cost of deposits to 5.20% and a 5.23 percentage point increase in low cost current and savings account deposits, which now form 48.17% of all deposits.

Mr. Bhatt also said that the bank could stick to its plan of raising 200 billion rupees through a rights issue in the current fiscal through March only if the government acted quickly. "We can do it if we get the approval even by February 1. Beyond that the timetable will be disturbed," Mr. Bhatt said. 

He said the Department of Financial Services within the Ministry of Finance had already cleared the proposal for the rights issue. The lender has asked the government to subscribe to the issue in proportion to the latter's shareholding in the bank, which stood at 59.40% as of September 2010.

 Write to  John Satish Kumar at john.kumar@dowjones.com 