BEIJING—When President Barack Obama traveled to Beijing in November 2009, his first visit there, U.S. officials pressed the Chinese government to agree to a joint news conference with Chinese President  Hu Jintao—a fairly routine event during meetings of world leaders.

The episode illustrates the cloak of secrecy that surrounds Mr. Hu, who arrived in the U.S. on Tuesday for a four day visit—making him almost certainly the least understood of the world's major leaders.

More than eight years into his tenure, little is known about the 68-year-old lifelong bureaucrat, who leads an emerging superpower that is increasingly challenging the U.S. economically, politically and militarily. He rarely speaks to international media, divulges little in his meetings with other world leaders, and engages with his own population only in highly stage-managed encounters.

The secrecy reflects the increasingly consensus-driven nature of Communist Party leadership, where Mr. Hu is actually a mere senior among equals, and is constrained by concerns that he will be seen as overstepping his bounds. It is a formula that has managed to keep China's economy growing, but a leadership style that also seems to many observers increasingly at odds with China's growing stature in the world.

"There's a tension between China's ever-growing importance and the lack of a top leader who has a human touch and can articulate China's interests and concerns," says  Cheng Li, an expert on Chinese politics at the Brookings Institution in Washington.

Ahead of his U.S. trip, Mr. Hu agreed to address questions that would be submitted separately by The Wall Street Journal and the  Washington Post. China's Foreign Ministry supplied Mr. Hu's responses to seven of the questions submitted. Mr. Hu didn't grant interviews to the U.S. press ahead of his previous visit, in 2006. 

Mr. Hu called for enhanced cooperation with the U.S. in areas such as energy, infrastructure development and aviation and space, and said the two nations "should abandon the zero-sum Cold War mentality" that has governed ties in the past—while also making digs at U.S. monetary policy and the future role of the dollar. 

Mr. Hu acknowledged that "political restructuring must deepen in the course of economic and social development and meet people's growing enthusiasm for participating in political affairs." 

See photos of past visits.

But he gave no sense that this would accelerate from the slow, gradual liberalization the party has allowed, and he defended the status quo, saying China's rapid economic growth and social stability prove that its political system fits its "national conditions." And Mr. Hu declined to address questions about a number of sensitive subjects, including imprisoned Nobel Peace Prize winner  Liu Xiaobo and complaints about alleged Chinese cyberattacks.

The secrecy complicates what U.S. Ambassador to China  Jon Huntsman says is one of the most important goals of Mr. Hu's visit to the U.S.: to "humanize" what has become the world's most important bilateral relationship, so that average Americans and Chinese see ties as more than a set of abstract issues and problems.



"It's highly understandable that U.S. people hope to see and know more of the personal side of Chinese leaders," says  Liu Weidong, a researcher with the Institute of American Studies at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, a Beijing think tank. He says the secrecy could "hinder Americans from better understanding China."

Mr. Hu's four-day visit is the first by a Chinese leader since 1997 that Washington has formally designated a state visit. Like the Obama administration, Beijing hopes Mr. Hu's trip will help smooth rocky bilateral ties. But its top priority, analysts say, is to ensure that he appears to the public back home as a respected statesman.

His last visit fell short by that measure. The Bush administration declined to designate it a state visit, a diplomatic snub compounded when the announcer at the White House welcome ceremony referred to China's national anthem as that of its rival, Taiwan. Then a member of the spiritual group Falun Gong, outlawed in China, shouted protests at Mr. Hu from the press area.

Mr. Hu's schedule this time sticks largely to scripted or closed-door events, but does include several that could give Americans a closer peek at his personality—or risk showcasing his aloofness. This time, Beijing did agree to a joint press conference with Mr. Obama—after heavy prodding from the U.S.—which is scheduled for Wednesday.

On Thursday, Mr. Hu will travel to Chicago, where he is scheduled to visit the prestigious Walter Payton College Preparatory High School and tour its Chinese government-backed Confucius Institute for Chinese-language learning. But he isn't likely to take questions from students, according to a spokeswoman for Chicago Mayor  Richard M. Daley.

Even by China's standards, Mr. Hu is opaque. Premier  Wen Jiabao has given occasional interviews to foreign media, as did Mr. Hu's predecessor, Jiang Zemin—who was also known to disarm foreign guests by belting out songs.  Deng Xiaoping, godfather of China's reform era, charmed the American public by donning a 10-gallon hat at a Texas rodeo during his first trip to the U.S. in 1979, weeks after the two countries established formal diplomatic ties.

Analysts say Mr. Hu's secrecy is driven partly by his personality, but also by the nature of China's leadership today. Power is more diffuse, and Mr. Hu, who heads the party's nine-member Politburo Standing Committee—which meets in secret and makes all important decisions in China—must worry how his actions will be assessed by the group's other members, who often have competing interests.

The tensions are growing now ahead of a leadership transition in 2012, with various factions jockeying to ensure that their members are promoted. In what many analysts interpret as a sign of the limits of Mr. Hu's power, U.S. officials say he appeared not to have been informed about a sensitive test flight of China's new stealth fighter when U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates asked him about it during a meeting in Beijing last week.

"The political system on the outside is very strong and very authoritarian, but internally nobody including the top leader can say something different" from the consensus, says  Jing Huang, professor at the National University of Singapore's Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy. 

"The top leader has to be extremely careful so he cannot be blamed for a mistake," he added. 

Source: Chinese government

The party's secrecy is also designed to shield leaders and their relatives from public scrutiny. Authorities bar discussion of leaders' families, who are kept out of the public eye. In 2003, Mr. Hu's daughter married  Daniel Mao, a wealthy former Internet executive, in a secret ceremony in Hawaii that was potentially sensitive given Mr. Hu's public emphasis on improving the lot of China's poor. After the wedding, Mr. Mao stopped making public appearances.

Then in 2009, when authorities in Namibia said they were investigating corruption allegations involving a company connected to Mr. Hu's son, all traces of the story were scrubbed from Chinese Internet sites.

But the official aversion to transparency clashes with Chinese society's increasing openness, and is fueling growing public cynicism. Last month, state television carried a report of Mr. Hu visiting a Beijing woman and her daughter who were said to be renting an apartment for low-income residents built as part of a government housing push. The report said the woman paid a mere 77 yuan a month in monthly rent—about $12—a pittance even in China.

Criticism of the report quickly exploded on the Internet. Commentators claimed that the mother and daughter were actually well-off and didn't qualify for subsidized housing. Photos circulated purportedly showing the pair traveling in fashionable cities such as Shanghai. State media insisted that the report was accurate. But many Chinese remain unconvinced, and "77 yuan" has become a catchphrase for bogus propaganda.

—Yoli Zhang  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Jason Dean at jason.dean@wsj.com 