President Barack Obama's advisors are telling potential donors that he is in a weaker position heading into the 2012 election than he was in 2008 and are detailing potential vulnerabilities of likely opponents, according to people who have seen their presentation.

The donor meetings and the recent hiring of several senior campaign staff members are among the early moves Obama aides have made before the official launch of the president's re-election effort, which Democratic officials say will come shortly after April 1.

The centerpiece of their pitch to donors is a 10-page slide show, which features the slogan "Change that Matters" and offers an early glimpse into the thinking of the president's re-election team. Jim Messina, a former White House official who will become Mr. Obama's campaign manager next month, has been presenting the "strategy briefing'' around the country in recent weeks.

Mr. Messina made several stops in South Florida last week to reconnect with 2008 donors, particularly those who supported Hillary Clinton when she was a rival to Mr. Obama for the Democratic nomination. The president's political aides, people at the meetings said, are trying to establish stronger ties to some of these donors as they navigate what may be a difficult fund-raising environment.

Part of Mr. Messina's presentation is to caution donors that while Mr. Obama has recovered after the trouncing his party took in the 2010 elections and is well-positioned for 2012, he will face a tough re-election fight that will require substantial donor support, according to people familiar with the presentation. 

Key Campaign Aides Named

The slide show cites Michigan and Pennsylvania as places where Mr. Obama's standing has dropped since 2008 while GOP support has gone up. Using bureaucratic short hand for President of the United States, the slides warn: "POTUS maintains clear but narrowed support" and note there is "significant work to do to increase support among key demographics."

Mr. Messina, along with Rufus Gifford, who will move to Chicago in the next few weeks to serve as finance director for the campaign, have also been previewing how the Obama team sees its potential opponents. 

When he discussed the emerging GOP field in Miami, Mr. Messina made no mention of former Gov. Tim Pawlenty of Minnesota, participants said, even though Mr. Pawlenty has clearly been taking steps to build a White House campaign. 

But Mr. Messina did talk about what Obama aides see as likely vulnerabilities for Jon Huntsman, the president's outgoing ambassador to China, who is leaving his post to consider a campaign against his boss. The focus on Mr. Huntsman suggests Democrats see a threat in the former Utah governor, considered a moderate among potential GOP candidates.

Mr. Messina, responding to a question, said it would be easy to "show the hypocrisies" in Mr. Huntsman's candidacy by stressing his ties to the administration, according to people at the event.

In addition, donors said Mr. Messina explained that Mr. Obama's political aides view Mr. Huntsman's support for a health care overhaul in Utah as a potential flashpoint for GOP primary voters, much like a state health plan that has caused problems for former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney.

As governor, Mr. Huntsman signed legislation that created a health insurance exchange similar to the one in Massachusetts, where consumers, using a fixed contribution from their employers and pre-tax funds from their own paychecks, can buy and compare plans.

The Utah law lacked an individual mandate, which is part of the new Democratic-backed federal law and the one Mr. Romney signed in Massachusetts.

John Weaver, a Huntsman advisor, said the former governor supported a "market-based" health reform plan different from Mr. Romney's law. He said the Obama team's focus on Mr. Huntsman shows how much of a threat the White House believes he is. "You can tell when someone's concerned about someone when they keep talking about them," Mr. Weaver said.

The Obama' team's PowerPoint presentation, which has also been shown to donors in Austin, Dallas, New York, Los Angeles, San Francisco and Boston, presents donors with polling that shows Mr. Romney and former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee running 5 percentage points behind Mr. Obama, while Newt Gingrich, Sarah Palin and Michele Bachmann trail by double digits. Mr. Messina, according to donors in Florida, said last week he wouldn't be surprised if Ms. Bachmann, who raised $13 million for a congressional election last fall, wins the Iowa caucuses.

Sean Spicer, communications director at the Republican National Committee, said the president's political allies must realize they're in a tough spot if they're highlighting how he matches up against potential rivals and not simply focusing on Mr. Obama's record in office.

"So the president's big case is: I'm up by a few points among people with a lot less name recognition at a time when the public is not fully engaged in the race?" Mr. Spicer said. "That's not a real compelling argument."

In the initial phase of the Obama campaign, the Democratic National Committee in Washington will mostly handle the president's response to Republican candidates. A bare-bones re-election team at campaign headquarters in Chicago will raise money and re-engage 2008 volunteers.

The president's longtime advisors, David Axelrod and Robert Gibbs, will also play a role in defending him.

Mr. Messina's pitch to donors stresses the need to build a network in states of small business owners and religious leaders, particularly among Latino and African-American voters. His overall message, according to a Florida donor, was, "We're in good shape, and we want to reconnect with you."