WASHINGTON—Senate Republicans on Monday blocked Jim Cole from being confirmed to the No. 2 spot at the Justice Department in an upset that, for now, keeps him from securing the job permanently. 

The 50-40 vote left Democrats short of the 60 votes needed to end debate and proceed to a vote on confirming Mr. Cole as deputy attorney general. Republicans have for almost a year blocked Mr. Cole's confirmation out of concern about his approach to prosecuting terrorists. Mr. Cole has said he supports all available tools, including federal trials, but Republicans prefer military commissions. 

"In the same week that the men and women of our intelligence community are using fresh evidence to track down al Qaeda, Republicans are blocking us from confirming the man who signs the warrants they need to hunt down terrorists," Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D., Nev.) said in a statement. "It is dangerous for Republicans to hold up a key member of the president's national security team. This is the first time a nominee for deputy attorney general has ever been filibustered, and tonight Republicans made history for all the wrong reasons." 

President Barack Obama had installed Mr. Cole in the job at the end of last year through a recess appointment. Without full Senate confirmation, Mr. Cole would be able to serve as the Justice Department's No. 2 only through the remainder of 2011, Senate aides said. An aide to Mr. Reid said the confirmation was a priority and that Democrats would try again. 

Mr. Cole was previously a partner at Bryan Cave and had earlier served as a deputy chief of the Justice Department's public integrity section. Mr. Cole had testified in favor of using all available tools to prosecute terrorists, including military commissions and civilian trials. Republicans favor using military commissions. 

"As a key member of the president's national security team, it is critical that Mr. Cole be confirmed by the Senate as Deputy Attorney General as quickly as possible to provide the necessary continuity and tenure for effective leadership on these vital issues to this country," the Justice Department said in a statement. 

 Write to  Siobhan Hughes at siobhan.hughes@dowjones.com 