Stocks rose again in light volume, boosted by corporate earnings and data showing a pickup in U.S. economic growth at the end of 2010. 

The Dow Jones Industrial Average posted its sixth gain in seven sessions as it finished up 50.03 points, or 0.4%, at 12220.59. International Business Machines and Chevron each gained 1.3%. The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index closed 4.14 points higher, or 0.3%, at 1313.80, with energy stocks in the lead. The Nasdaq Composite added 6.64 points, or 0.2%, to 2743.06.

At week's end, all three measures outpaced the losses they posted the previous week amid Japan's nuclear crisis.

Stocks got a boost Friday after  Oracle
ORCL


0.15
%




 and  Accenture
ACN


-0.79
%




 posted encouraging earnings and forecasts late Thursday, and government data Friday showed gross domestic product expanded at a slightly faster clip than previously thought at the end of last year. 

But the light volume Friday led some investors to question the rally's strength. NYSE composite volume was well below average, at 3.6 billion shares. 

"The market could easily go in either direction,"  Edgar Peters, co-head of global macro strategies at investment boutique First Quadrant said. "There is good economic news, but there's a lot to worry about, too," he added, noting the unrest in the Middle East and North Africa, plus Japan's devastation.

Investors largely shrugged off a disappointing University of Michigan consumer-sentiment reading. The figure came in below economists' expectations at 67.5. 

Oracle gained 1.6% after the business-software company's fiscal third-quarter profit surged 78% to top its expectations, with strong margins and a surge in licensing revenue. 

Accenture gained 4.6% after the company raised its revenue outlook and reported a 26% jump in fiscal second-quarter earnings, highlighted by a surge in new bookings. 

Mobile-device maker Research In Motion's shares plunged 11% after the company warned of lower earnings and revenue in the current period. The company also said it planned to allow Android applications to run on its PlayBook tablet computer due out next month, viewed as a concession as the company struggles to compete against  Apple's
AAPL


0.90
%




 iPad. 

Retailer  Wet Seal's core profit for the fiscal fourth quarter rose above projections, helping shares rise 13%. 

  Wynn Resorts
WYNN


-3.31
%




 gained 2.3% after it said Thursday that it had formed a strategic relationship with one of the largest poker sites operating in the U.S., even though the federal government considers such activity illegal. 

Darden Restaurants' fiscal third-quarter earnings rose 13% to beat its own projections, but a promotional misfire at casual-dining chain Olive Garden helped push shares 4.9% lower. 

Lo-Jack slid 14% after J.P. Morgan analysts cut their investment rating on the shares to "neutral" from "overweight," citing higher legal costs and slower licensing revenue associated with a licensee in Brazil. 

Body Central surged 23% after the apparel company's fourth-quarter earnings leapt 86% and the company gave an upbeat outlook. 

 Write to  Brendan Conway at brendan.conway@dowjones.com 