TOKYO—The Bank of Japan's current account is likely to grow to levels not seen since early in the last decade—when the central bank implemented its quantitative-easing monetary policy—as the BOJ continued Friday to aggressively provide emergency funds to calm markets unnerved by last week's massive earthquake and the ensuing nuclear power crisis. 

For a fifth straight day, the BOJ offered same-day money market funds, to the tune of three trillion yen Friday morning, of which financial firms took up 1.677 trillion yen ($21.24 billion). The bank announced an additional one trillion yen later in the day, with 300 billion yen in bids. Providing same-day funds effectively makes money available immediately to cash-strapped financial companies. 

The BOJ's current account balance—a measure of deposits placed by financial firms with the BOJ—is expected to reach around 33.2 trillion yen Friday, based on the bank's previous balance forecast and Friday's same-day operation results. That would make the balance the largest since Feb. 24, 2006, when the central bank was in the late stages of its quantitative-easing program. 

An expansion in the balance "mainly reflects the effort to stabilize the money market. However, in our view, it can also be regarded as preemptive unsterilization" of foreign-exchange interventions, said Masafumi Yamamoto, chief Japan currency strategist at Barclays Capital. 

Unsterilized intervention refers to a central bank leaving the extra yen resulting from intervention in the banking system, in a bid to weaken the currency. Central banks can counterbalance the effect of printing money through a process known as sterilization, in which they sop up money by issuing local-currency bonds.

The BOJ's fund injection comes in tandem with joint action by Japan and its Group of Seven counterparts to weaken the Japanese currency. The yen hit a record early Thursday morning in Asia of 76.25 yen against the U.S. dollar, posing a threat to Japan's export-driven economy, which is already burdened by the impact of the quake. 

A person familiar with the BOJ's thinking said Friday that "the bank will continue ample liquidity provision, along with yen funds injected via interventions." 

"Since the bank has already supplied plenty of funds, it would be difficult to distinguish which money is increased via interventions, but [the bank's stance to keep providing liquidity] could consequently make" interventions unsterilized, the person added. 

Analysts say leaving the interventions unsterilized would make the finance ministry's interventions more effective in pushing down the yen as it makes monetary conditions in the domestic markets even more accomodative. 

Japan's central bank has been flooding the short-term money market with liquidity since Monday as last week's massive earthquake, devastating 10-meter tsunami and an ensuing nuclear crisis heightened concerns about the ability of banks to meet a surge in demand for funds from companies and households. 

Amid increasing downside risks from the quake and the yen's appreciation, Japan's central bank has made its easy-policy stance clear to market participants. 

BOJ Gov. Masaaki Shirakawa said in an emergency statement issued Friday morning that "the Bank of Japan will pursue powerful monetary easing and, to ensure stability in financial markets, will continue to provide ample liquidity." 

Other operations Friday include the buying of two trillion yen of Japanese government bonds via a reverse repurchase agreement and purchases of 150 billion yen treasury discount bills via its asset-purchase program, which the central bank earlier this week doubled the size of to 10 trillion yen. 

It also offered two trillion yen of two-week funds and three trillion yen of 1.5-month loans in the afternoon.

 Write to  Megumi Fujikawa at megumi.fujikawa@dowjones.net 