When Bobby Fischer turned 13 in 1956, he appeared to be simply another talented chess junior. Less than two years later he became the youngest U.S. chess champion ever, a record that still stands. (He played eight times for the American championship and won every time, once by winning every game.) Several months later he was the youngest player ever to qualify for the Candidates tournament—the winner of which would challenge the world champion for the title—and by so doing became the youngest-ever grandmaster, a record that lasted more than 30 years. By the time he became the world champion in 1972, Fischer was in a class by himself. 

No chess player in modern times has ever been so dominant, not even Garry Kasparov. And no chess player in modern times has ever fallen more ignominiously from the heights of success. The story of Fischer's astonishing rise and bizarre later life is told in Frank Brady's "Endgame," a sympathetic but nonetheless disturbing portrait by someone who knew Fischer well.

How did Fischer become so accomplished so quickly? He didn't have the support that generations of Soviet chess players—including Mr. Kasparov—received during their formative years. Part of the answer is simple: Fischer was brilliant. Not an idiot savant who finds the one thing his brain is uniquely wired for but a true genius who was off-the-charts smart and found the best way to apply it. Think of Einstein or Picasso—and then add Michael Jordan's competitive instinct.

Fischer profoundly deepened the way grandmasters studied the game's opening phase. He was perhaps the clearest and most logical player in the pantheon of great chess champions. And Fischer was a learning machine: He studied both his own games and those of his opponents with unparalleled objectivity and purpose. In the book Fischer wrote about his best matches, "My 60 Memorable Games," the reader is privileged to observe his brilliant mind at work analyzing, probing, seeking the truth.

The other part of the answer to "How did he do it?" is that Fischer was driven. "All I want to do, ever, is play chess," Fischer said in a 1962 Harper's magazine profile. Unfortunately, his drive had a dark side. He was maniacally focused on chess. Over time this monomania showed itself to be part of a larger set of psychological problems that became especially apparent in his interaction with others.

Fischer accused players of cheating, made unreasonable demands at tournaments and eventually refused to compete for long periods of time. He withdrew from the qualifying tournament for the 1969 World Chess Championship match—after bolting to a dominating lead halfway through—because the organizers would not accede to his unique scheduling requirements. In the next cycle, three years later, Fischer destroyed his opponents and earned the right to challenge the reigning champion, Boris Spassky. Fischer then proceeded to make so many demands that in the days leading up to the 1972 World Chess Championship in Reykjavík, Iceland, it was unclear whether he would even show up. It required a personal appeal from Secretary of State Henry Kissinger and President Richard Nixon to persuade him to play. Fischer kept complaining and eventually forfeited the second game in protest. Even with the benefit of a free point Spassky was badly overmatched, and Fischer finally became the world champion.

 By Frank Brady  Crown, 402 pages, $25.99

For the U.S., it was an exhilarating triumph. One American, it seemed, had in effect beaten the entire Soviet nation. If landing on the moon had proved America's power, Fischer's victory showed its genius. But for Fischer the victory was the start of a long decent into loneliness and paranoia. The quest for the championship had given his life structure; with nothing to replace it, his very personality unraveled. For years he lived as a loner; he became a pauper, refusing to use his fame to earn the fortune that was within easy reach.

Eventually—and through an extraordinary set of events—Fischer agreed to play a rematch with Spassky (which Fischer won) in 1992. The match earned Fischer more than $3 million. Unfortunately, it also made him a fugitive of the U.S. government, because the match was held in Yugoslavia, which was under economic embargo. After the match Fischer dropped out of chess once again, this time never to return.

Fischer's re-emergence in 1992 was a bittersweet event for chess players. On the one hand, Fischer was finally back. On the other, he was undeniably far beyond the peak of his powers. And he was not exactly charming: His response to the U.S. Treasury's order not to play in Yugoslavia was to spit on the document and denounce America.

It got worse. Shortly after the 9/11 attack Fischer gave a hateful interview in which he said that he was happy that both America and Jews were finally getting what they deserved. He had displayed an anti-Semitic streak ever since he was a teenager—this in spite of having a Jewish mother and possibly a Jewish father. (Fischer's patrimony is a subject of historical dispute; one of the possible candidates is Paul Nemenyi, a Jewish Hungarian physicist.)

Before the 9/11 interview, this odious side of Fischer's personality had been tolerated. Not after the ugly 9/11 remarks. The chess world disowned him, with a motion even coming before the U.S. Chess Federation to ban Fischer from its organization. Then came his arrest in Japan in 2004 for tax evasion, as he had never paid taxes for his 1992 prize money. Ultimately Iceland took pity on Fischer and granted him citizenship in 2005, allowing him to find some measure of peace in the last few years of his life.

How one interprets the arc of Fischer's life depends on whether one views him as a fundamentally sane man who made bad choices or as a fundamentally disturbed man whose demons overcame him. Frank Brady appears to believe the former; throughout "Endgame" Mr. Brady takes pains to explain, where possible, the rational basis for Fischer's actions.

One example: Mr. Brady goes out of his way to take the press to task for assuming that Fischer's decision in the late 1970s to have all the fillings in his teeth removed was proof of Fischer's supposed "insanity" (those are Mr. Brady's quotation marks). The author asserts that Fischer had his fillings removed for "what he believed was a legitimate health reason. . . . Bobby believed that false teeth and metal fillings (especially silver) were detrimental to periodontal health because they irritated the gums. He was also convinced that mercury in most fillings has a toxic effect on the body." Well, that explains that!

Surely it is more sensible to interpret Fischer's strange beliefs (metal fillings aren't the half of it), isolation and self-destructiveness following his 1972 triumph as a psychological unraveling than to say, for instance, as Mr. Brady does, that Fischer went about "deliberately maintaining his isolation" perhaps because he was "influenced by Nie tzsche to some extent" and therefore "so focused on his path of righteousness and giving free rein to his different-drummer sensibilities that he refused to be distracted by trivia—as he saw it."

If you deny Fischer's mental illness, then you cannot trace its development and explore the role it played in how Fischer lived. His illness seems at turns to have both helped and hindered him as a chess player; ultimately it was his undoing as a person. What Fischer needed was psychological and medical treatment. What he got was adulation, pity and eventually rejection. Since only his chess was lovely, that is all we wanted from him. When he stopped performing for us, we stopped tolerating him.

Mr. Brady's biography is well-written, studiously researched and filled with fascinating details. It imparts the love of chess and affection for "Bobby" that the author clearly feels, having known Fischer for many years. Perhaps it is Mr. Brady's affection for his subject that keeps him from accepting the fact that Fischer was severely mentally ill throughout his life. Boris Spassky, after losing his world-championship title to Fischer, said: "I think I understand him." Perhaps one day the rest of us will too. Until then, we have "Endgame" to fill the void.

—Mr. Wolff, a chess grandmaster, is a managing member of Grandmaster Capital Management LLC.