ATHENS—Greece's finance minister has sacked the country's top tax official, Dimitris Georgakopoulos, for failing to boost revenue collections that have bedeviled the country's efforts to close its gaping budget deficit, a ministry official said Thursday. 

"Mr. Georgakopoulos's resignation was requested by the finance minister," the official said. "It has been submitted and it has been accepted." 

Mr. Georgakopoulos served as the ministry's general secretary for tax and customs, overseeing the government's deeply dysfunctional tax collection offices. 

Despite efforts to overhaul the country's tax system, Greek government revenue collections in the past year and-a-half have consistently failed to meet budget targets. 

"There was an evaluation of his performance and it was judged unsatisfactory with respect to his responsibilities, which are to oversee revenue collections," the official added. 

Last May, Greece narrowly avoided default with the help of a €110 billion (about $152 billion) bailout from the European Union and International Monetary Fund in exchange for measures to bring down its budget deficit from 15.4% of gross domestic product in 2009, to below 3% by 2014. 

Since then, Greece has narrowed that gap by €14 billion to €22 billion in 2010, or 9.4% of GDP, thanks to a mixture of deep spending cuts and tax rises. But that reduction came from a bigger-than-expected drop in spending that more than offset a lower-than-expected increase in revenue last year. 

In 2010, net ordinary budget revenue rose a meager 5.5% to around €51.4 billion, against a 13.7% increase that Greece had agreed to with the EU and IMF. Under the loan deal, Greece had been targeting ordinary budget revenue after tax refunds of €55.2 billion. 

Further, since the start of this year, Greek media have reported that net budget revenues have already fallen €870 million short of target after particularly poor revenue collection at the start of February. 

Official Greek budget data for the first two months of the year are expected to be released later Thursday. 

 Write to  Alkman Granitsas at alkman.granitsas@dowjones.com  