HONG KONG -- Investment banking revenue hit a record for Southeast Asia last year and the region will continue to be a hub of deal activity this year even as inflation becomes a growing problem,  Citigroup Inc.
C


0.67
%




 Asia-Pacific Chief Executive  Shirish Apte says.

Increasing opportunities in countries in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, or Asean, are the reason behind Mr. Apte's move to Singapore from Hong Kong in the coming month, he told Dow Jones Newswires in an interview. Chief Executive  Stephen Bird, who runs Citigroup's Asia-Pacific operations with Mr. Apte, will remain in Hong Kong.

Mr. Apte said he will continue to focus on India, Asean and Australia, while Bird will remain responsible for Greater China, Korea and Japan.

"Recent inflation risks pose upside pressure to our inflation forecasts and a bias towards earlier rate hikes than previously expected, but we do not expect this to hamper deal activity, from the conversations we are having with our clients, many continue to want Asean investment stories," Mr. Apte said.

Citigroup operates in seven Asean markets, namely Vietnam, Thailand, Singapore, the Philippines, Indonesia, Malaysia and Brunei. The three other Asean member states are Cambodia, Laos and Myanmar.

Total investment banking revenue in Southeast Asia last year hit a record $1.59 billion, up from $1.19 billion in 2009, boosted by record volumes of initial public offerings and debt deals, according to Dealogic.

Citigroup's investment banking revenue in Southeast Asia last year totaled $57 million, up from $49 million in 2009.

The region's continued growth in capital raising--whether through bonds, IPOs or follow-on offerings--will come as bank financing becomes increasingly limited.

"Companies in the region are beginning to see that they have a finite capacity for growing through bank debt, so they'll need to raise equity or debt through capital markets," said Mr. Apte.

"With Basel III and all the caps on lending coming up, financial institutions are going to continue going to capital markets to raise funds."

Under Basel III, banks will face restrictions on dividend payments and executive pay if their capital falls below 7% of their assets, measured on a risk-weighted basis. Basel III will also require banks to keep more liquid assets, so they can meet daily funding needs for 30 days.

Southeast Asia's stock markets were among the best performers globally last year, adding to the attraction of tapping the equity capital markets for funds, said Mr. Apte.

Indonesia's stock market, for instance, rose 46%, and Thailand's jumped 41% in 2010, although share prices have been hit since the start of this year by concerns regional central banks will need to fight inflation with a series of interest-rate rises that will temper growth.

Mr. Apte said while there are risks of a correction in Southeast Asian equity markets, political volatility is less of an issue.

"In recent years, most of the region has also seen political stability, even Thailand, which has been bouncing back," said Mr. Apte. "We will continue to invest in the Asean region to support growth."

Last year, Citigroup started equity broking operations in Indonesia and Malaysia, and became the first U.S. bank to offer credit cards in Vietnam.

Citigroup was an adviser last year on several major Southeast Asian IPOs, including Global Logistic Properties Ltd.'s $3.0 billion offering in October, and Mapletree Industrial Trust's $718 million deal the same month.

It also advised Singapore's DBS Group Ltd. on the $104 million sale of its asset-management operations to Japan's Nikko Asset Management, a unit of  Sumitomo Trust & Banking Co., in exchange for a 7.25% stake in the Japanese outfit.

Deal activity in Southeast Asia will continue to be hectic, said Mr. Apte, with Singapore deals focused on real estate and financial services, Indonesia transactions on commodities and minerals, and Malaysia deals on palm oil and energy. There will also be activity in Vietnam, despite recent falls in its currency.

"We have ambitious long-term plans in Vietnam and this includes helping companies raise capital and advise on both inbound and outbound M&A," said Mr. Apte, whose firm helped the government of Vietnam raise $1 billion from the debt markets in 2010.

Citigroup is a bookrunner on PT Garuda Indonesia's IPO that will raise around $500 million for the state-owned flag carrier, according to a term sheet seen by Dow Jones Newswires last week. The bank is also a bookrunner on the $1.6 billion rights offering by Indonesia's Bank Mandiri Persero.

 Write to  Nisha Gopalan at nisha.gopalan@dowjones.com 