Charlie Sheen is in escrow to purchase a home in the same Beverly Hills, Calif.-area neighborhood in which he lives, according to people familiar with the matter.



The home, which is listed for $7.5 million, is currently owned by Mike Medavoy, chief executive of Phoenix Pictures and producer of films like "Black Swan." Mr. Medavoy purchased the home several months ago for $6 million, according to public records. 

Located in a gated community on a half-acre lot, the 9,000-square-foot, two-story Mediterranean-style house has six bedrooms and eight bathrooms and recently underwent extensive renovations. The home has an outdoor bar and kitchen, two terraces and a heated veranda that overlooks a swimming pool. There is also a library, butler's pantry and a formal dining room as well as views of the city and mountains. 

Mr. Sheen stars in the CBS show "Two and a Half Men," which ended production for the season after incendiary media interviews by Mr. Sheen. The 45-year-old actor, who has claimed to have cured himself of drug and alcohol addiction, went on a media blitz this past week, criticizing the network and one of the show's creators for the decision to halt production. Mr. Sheen, who has five children, currently lives with two girlfriends. 

Mr. Sheen's manager didn't return calls for comment. Mr. Medavoy could not be reached for comment.  Jade Mills and  Joyce Rey of Coldwell Banker Previews International have the listing. 

A 2,070-acre ranch in Utah has hit the market for $30 million. The property is partly owned by the heirs of the late  Jim Trees, who was once CEO of New York investment firm Fischer, Francis, Trees & Watts.

Located near Springdale, Utah, the ranch is surrounded by Zion National Park and is adjacent to more than 9,500 acres of grazing land. The property is home to an organic apple orchard and several ranch buildings designed by architect William McDonough, known for his sustainable designs. The largest house sits on a bluff and has 3,400 square feet with four bedrooms and 3½ baths. 

Ken Mirr, the owner of Mirr Ranch Group in Denver, has the listing. 

Diego Arria, the former Venezuelan ambassador to the United Nations, has sold his Roxbury, Conn., home for $7.75 million. 

The home, which was listed for $8.9 million, has nearly 70 acres of land along with a pool, guest house, horse barn and tennis court. The five-bedroom main house is about 10,700 square feet. 

The identity of the buyer could not be learned.  Peter Klemm of Klemm Real Estate had the listing. 

—Candace Jackson

—Email: privateproperties@wsj.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications  Executive Jim Trees was retired from his post as CEO of New York investment firm Fischer, Francis Trees & Watts when he passed away. A previous version of this column described Mr. Trees in a way that suggested he might have been CEO at the time he passed away.

 Corrections & Amplifications: An earlier online version of this story included an incorrect photo of the home that Charlie Sheen is in escrow to purchase in the Beverly Hills, Calif.-area.