BRUSSELS – U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert Gates delivered a blunt message Friday to allies in Afghanistan: Don't rush for the exits.

In remarks at North Atlantic Treaty Organization headquarters in Brussels, Mr. Gates told troop-contributing nations that there was "too much talk about leaving and not enough talk about getting the job done right" in Afghanistan, where some 140,000 U.S. and international troops are now deployed.

The U.S. and its allies have committed to handing the main responsibility for security to the Afghan government by the end of 2014, and the Obama administration has set a goal of beginning a gradual troop drawdown in July, if conditions on the ground permit. But in his remarks, Mr. Gates expressed concern that recent security gains may be lost if coalition members withdraw too quickly.

Progress in Afghanistan, he said, "could be threatened by ill-timed, precipitous, or uncoordinated national drawdowns."

Mr. Gates arrived in Europe after a visit earlier in the week to Afghanistan, where he visited U.S. troops in the heavily contested Eastern and Southern parts of the country. Commanders in both regions said they expected to see serious fighting in the months ahead, but Mr. Gates said that the surge of U.S. forces had brought "home-field advantage" to U.S. and Afghan forces in areas once dominated by the Taliban. 

In his remarks, Mr. Gates acknowledged the political pressure in European capitals for a swift end to the war. And he mentioned another factor: The extraordinary budgetary pressures on both the U.S. government and its European allies. The U.S. government, for instance, is currently spending around $120 billion a year on the war, and saw more casualties in 2010 than in any year since the war started in 2001. 

"We have all made extraordinary contributions to this effort, in the face of fiscal and political pressure," he said. "In order to ensure that these sacrifices are not squandered, we need to keep our focus on succeeding in our missions, and not get pulled away prematurely."

Mr. Gates also made a plea for a bulked-up civilian mission to help boost the Afghan government's ability to guarantee the basic rule of law. Military observers have pointed out that the Taliban are often able to "out-govern" the Kabul government by running a shadow court system that can resolve local disputes and dispense criminal justice. 

"It's worth recalling the core grievances in Afghanistan that spawned and subsequently empowered the Taliban 20 years ago," Mr. Gates said. "One of these grievances was the lack of government at the local level, which fed lawlessness and corruption that affected individual Afghans in their daily lives. Under such conditions, the harsh and repressive forms of dispute resolution and discipline advertised by the Taliban as justice seemed a tolerable alternative." 

For several years, U.S. military officials have scolded Europeans about alleged foot-dragging over Afghanistan, from delays in delivering aircraft to national restrictions on the combat role of certain forces. 

While Mr. Gates said he saw weakening commitment in European capitals, the war has also seen a steady drumbeat of criticism in the U.S. The polling organization Rasmussen Reports published a survey earlier this month that said the majority of registered U.S. voters supported an immediate withdrawal or a rapid withdrawal timetable.

Plans seem to be in place to begin the first stages of a drawdown. Lt. Gen.  David Rodriguez, the deputy commander of U.S. Forces in Afghanistan, told reporters in Kabul earlier in the week, "Thus far, we're still looking at the conditions-based withdrawal beginning in July, and we're staying on that path right now." 