For an unborn baby to develop fully, obstetrics groups firmly recommend 39 weeks in the womb—and not a day less, if labor will be induced without a medical reason. 

Doctors and mothers, though, have been less rigid, often pre-scheduling induced deliveries a week or even two weeks ahead of the 39-week mark. The assumption is there's no harm if modern medicine accommodates a busy obstetrician, a hectic family schedule or simply the mother's desire to get to the finish line and give birth. Then there is the vanity factor: A popular request this year is to have a baby on a once-in-a-century birthday, 11-11-11.

The result has been a steady rise in "early term" elective inductions using labor-stimulating drugs. Such deliveries account for about a quarter of births, up from less than 10% in 1990. 

Now, a growing body of medical evidence indicates that gestation even a few days short of a full 39 weeks can lead to short- and long-term health risks. Public health officials, safety advocates, private insurers and employer groups are stepping up pressure to sharply reduce early term deliveries. The practice drives up costs of neonatal intensive care and leads to a higher rate of caesarean sections. C-sections are more expensive than natural deliveries and result in longer hospital stays and more risks for the mother, including infection. A study last year estimated that reducing early term births to 1.7% could save close to $1 billion annually. 

Recent studies have exploded the conventional wisdom that 37 weeks is full term and letting babies grow larger in the womb might actually increase risks. A 2009 study in the New England Journal of Medicine found that of 24,000-plus repeat elective C-sections, more than a third were performed before 39 weeks. The risk of complications, including respiratory distress, seizures and bloodstream infections, increased even among babies delivered in the last three or four days of the 38th week.

According to the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, infants born at 37 to 38 weeks face problems with brain development and function, including psychological, behavioral and emotional problems. It recently launched an education program for doctors, midwives and nurses. "We know the best incubator is the uterus, and if there is no reason for a baby to be delivered early then it should never occur before 39 weeks," says  Diane Ashton, deputy medical director for the March of Dimes, which is leading a national campaign to reduce early induced deliveries. "Why would you subject your child to short- and long-term complications if they are avoidable?" 

Some hospitals have tough new policies in place that discourage or even prohibit doctors from scheduling deliveries before 39 weeks unless there is a medical reason, such as high blood pressure or uncontrolled diabetes in the mother or a problem with the fetus. Some hospital childbirth classes educate mothers-to-be about the risks of early induction and have parents sign consent forms acknowledging they are aware of the risks. 

The Leapfrog Group, a coalition of big corporate health-care purchasers, in 2009 began asking hospitals around the nation to report their rate of early term induced births that weren't medically necessary. Last year, only about half the hospitals responding to the survey met Leapfrog's 2010 target for such births, of no more than 12% of total deliveries. Leapfrog has asked hospitals to reduce elective inductions to 5% of their total deliveries for 2011. (Check on individual hospitals by state at leapfroggroup.org.)

Insurer  Aetna
AET


0.70
%




 is funding a March of Dimes program that helps hospitals adopt prevention policies, and it is using claims data to advise newly pregnant women of the importance of 39 weeks in the womb. Aetna asks hospitals to report their rate of earlier elective deliveries, and it highlights hospitals that meet Leapfrog targets on its website. "The risk to babies is completely avoidable, and we are using all the levers we can to raise awareness and get hospitals to put policies in place to prevent it," says  Joanne Armstrong, senior medical director and head of Women's Health at Aetna. 

  Leah Binder, Leapfrog chief executive, says the group encourages employers and other payers to use their purchasing power to design benefit plans "to assure these deliveries don't continue to occur." Under one proposal, starting next year Minnesota hospitals would have to submit data about the use and reasons for elective induction as a condition of payment by state public-health programs, which cover 38% of deliveries. 

HCA, the Nashville-based hospital giant, studied 17,792 deliveries in 27 hospitals over three months in 2007. Of those, 9.6% were elective deliveries prior to 39 weeks without a medical reason. Almost 18% of infants delivered electively without medical necessity at 37 to 38 weeks, and 8% of those delivered at 38 to 39 weeks, required neonatal special care for 4.5 days on average, compared with 4.6% of deliveries at 39 weeks and beyond.

"In the face of new and compelling data that there should be no elective deliveries before 39 weeks, there is very little rational basis to act differently," says  Jonathan Perlin, president of clinical and physician services and chief medical officer at HCA. He says 96% of deliveries now meet the 39-week rule. Dr. Perlin encourages pregnant women to challenge doctors who suggest early induction without a compelling medical reason, "because they aren't using the most current evidence."

Such policies have met resistance. At Phelps County Regional Medical Center, in Rolla, Mo., a proposal to prohibit non-medically indicated induction prior to 39 weeks was voted down three times by the hospital's obstetrics committee.  James Davison, an obstetrician and spokesman for the program, says administrators and board members helped push it through last year. 

Methodist Medical Center in Peoria, Ill., joined a program sponsored by hospital alliance Premier Inc. in 2006 to reduce elective inductions. "We had to change a practice pattern that had been going on for years," says  Marc Boyd, the hospital's obstetrics unit director. Dr. Boyd himself valued the ability to schedule inductions so he could deliver his patients without having to get up in the middle of the night. "But when I looked at the data and saw we were affecting these babies, too bad if it was going to hurt me," he says. 

Two years ago, TriHealth Inc. in Cincinnati began barring elective inductions without medical necessity before 39 weeks at its two hospitals.  Michael Marcotte, medical director of quality for maternity services, says it has reduced the rate of such births to 4% from 15% to 20%. 

In a study last year, St. John's Mercy Medical Center, of St. Louis, reported 63% of women who attended classes on the risks said the classes influenced their decision not to have early elective induction. The hospital gives pregnant mothers laminated cards with questions to ask the doctor if they feel intimidated. "Women want to do the right thing for their baby, and if the issues are explained to them, they will," says  Kathleen Rice Simpson, a nurse-researcher who conducted the study.

  Tara Gaston, a 30-year old attorney in upstate New York, whose husband is a naval officer, says she understands why mothers, such as those with military spouses deployed overseas, may want to schedule a delivery so the husband can be present. But she had no idea of the risks when she agreed to have labor induced for her first child at 37 weeks a decade ago. Her son, healthy now, had problems including repeated respiratory infections for several years. She says she was told waiting too long might be harmful because of the baby's large size. "I wish someone had told me the risks were greater of inducing delivery, so I could make an informed decision," she says. She went on to have two more healthy children and declined pressure to induce both, each born in the 40th week of pregnancy. 

 Write to  Laura Landro at laura.landro@wsj.com 