 Military loyal to Libyan Col. Moammar Gadhafi launched counter-offensives against multiple rebel-held cities across Libya, an escalation that appeared to gain the government little ground but increased the likelihood of entrenched warfare in the North African country. 

The afternoon government assault, employing tanks, jets, helicopter gunships and heavy artillery, floundered in the key central-coastal city of Misrata, sandwiched between the government's two major strongholds of Tripoli and Sirte.

But government forces did succeed in stopping an advance by rebels on Sirte, Gadhafi's home town, from their capital, Benghazi, in the east.

 An eight-man British delegation was arrested and later released after it landed by helicopter outside of the Libyan port of Benghazi on an unauthorized and unannounced visit, rebel officials said. The diplomatic team had arrived to establish contacts with the rebels, British officials said.  

 Italy's government said it would put a freeze on Libyan assets in Italy, in accordance with sanctions imposed by the European Union on Feb. 28 as a result of the turmoil in the North African country. It stopped short of agreeing to freeze the assets of the Libyan central bank and the Libyan Investment Authority, which both own stakes in several key Italian companies. 

 Republican leaders in the U.S. Congress said the country should consider providing arms, intelligence and training to opposition forces fighting to overthrow Libya's Col. Moammar Gadhafi, a move that would mark a sharp escalation in Washington's involvement in the conflict. 

Administration officials said President Barack Obama is considering a wide range of options to aid opposition forces but wants any action to be closely coordinated with international allies.

 Some academic and other institutions in the U.K. and U.S. are scrambling to determine whether they have received the sort of donations from Libya and the Gadhafi family that led to last week's resignation of the head of one of the U.K.'s most prestigious universities. 

 In Bahrain, tens of thousands of opposition demonstrators encircled a sprawling government compound in a gathering timed to coincide with a cabinet meeting as protesters sought to further escalate pressure on the ruling Al-Khalifa family to accept sweeping reforms. 

Opposition leaders said the demonstration expanded their strategy of escalating pressure on the ruling family by marching on politically sensitive locations across the capital.

 Oman's government made another bid to tamp down protests by announcing the second cabinet reshuffle in a week, though some demonstrators said they'll continue to press for deeper reforms. 

The government also took a tough line toward recent incidents in Sohar, a port city in the north, where protesters last week torched a supermarket and blocked highways. 

 In Egypt, thousands of angry protesters stormed several buildings belonging to the hated internal security forces over the weekend, seizing what protesters described as a treasure trove of documents related to the regime of ousted President Hosni Mubarak. 

 The European Union's executive arm is keeping pressure on Germany and others to show flexibility in support for Ireland and Greece, ahead of crucial negotiations on the euro-zone's future in coming days, as Olli Rehn, the EU's Commissioner for Monetary and Economic Affairs, said Ireland and Greece must not be financially overburdened.  

 The leaders of Ireland's Fine Gael and Labour parties agreed on a program for a coalition government, as they prepare to rule during the country's worst-ever debt crisis. 

 Queen Elizabeth II will make her first-ever state visit to the Republic of Ireland, a country no ruling British monarch has visited since 1911. 

 Former French President Jacques Chirac is due to stand trial Monday on embezzlement charges related to his stint as Paris mayor, but a last-minute claim filed by a co-defendant could lead the court to adjourn the case indefinitely. Chirac has denied the charges. 

The leader of France's far-right National Front party, Marine Le Pen, would come out ahead of incumbent Nicolas Sarkozy in the first round of voting if a presidential election were held now instead of in the spring of 2012, according to the surprise result of a new political-opinion poll. 

 The Kosovo native suspected of murdering two American soldiers at Frankfurt's airport was specifically targeting U.S. military personnel heading to Afghanistan, German prosecutors said. The suspect, 21-year-old Arid Uka, has confessed to the murders, prosecutors told reporters, describing how Uka struck up a conversation Wednesday with U.S. airmen before opening fire on them.  

 A Turkish court jailed two leading investigative journalists pending the outcome of a trial into an alleged plot to topple the Islamic-rooted government. They had been detained along with six other journalists on Thursday, after police raids of their homes, drawing expressions of concern. 

 Brisk hiring in February pushed the unemployment rate below 9% for the first time in nearly two years—a development that reflects a broadening recovery but also underscores how much ground the economy has yet to regain. 

The Obama administration said it might have to reject seven permits for deep-water drilling that have become the subject of high-profile legal and political battles if a federal judge in New Orleans forces the government to make a quick decision on the applications. 

State and federal officials are pushing to more tightly regulate the way banks and other mortgage servicers treat struggling homeowners in a bid to stem foreclosures. 

Republicans and Democrats in public are digging in their heels over funding the government for the rest of the year under the continuing threat of a government-wide shutdown. 

 Japan Foreign Minister Seiji Maehara resigned over an illegal donation scandal, dealing the latest blow to Prime Minister Naoto Kan's faltering government and threatening to diminish Japan's credibility in international circles. Maehara, who spent barely six months in the job, was considered by many to be a successor to Kan. 

China dropped its annual target for new bank lending this year, eliminating a policy tool that has been a key part of Beijing's arsenal to control liquidity and inflation, as it looks to overhaul the way in which it looks at lending and the way it regulates banks. 

 China's Premier Wen Jiabao pledged to make combating inflation the government's top priority this year, without sacrificing rapid economic growth and strong job creation that is critical to maintaining social stability.  

In Taiwan, a fire official said nine people died and 12 others were injured in a fire at a pub in the central city of Taichung. The official said preliminary investigations show that the fire broke out at the pub early Sunday after a performance involving the use of LED lighting went awry. 

 Afghan President Hamid Karzai rebuffed a rare personal apology from U.S. Gen. David Petraeus, telling the commander of coalition forces that saying sorry was "not enough" to make up for a helicopter attack that killed nine Afghan children last week. 

 A roadside bomb killed 12 civilians, including five children, in eastern Afghanistan. A spokesman for Paktika province's governor said another five people were wounded when the bomb planted by insurgents exploded next to a truck traveling between the towns of Turwa and Wazakhwa carrying civilians. 