It was improbable that it should matter that all 13 parts of the FX series "Lights Out" showed up in the mail in January—a splashily colored package with a picture of a battered boxer on the front cover that looked much like all splashy promotion covers for TV series destined for well-merited oblivion. As it turned out, it mattered all right—it was a gift—to have at hand episode after sterling episode of this unflagging drama of a former boxing champion looking for a comeback: a story whose reflection of current hard times colors every scene. And in this coloration there is nothing splashy—only faint but nonetheless haunting evocations of so many other careers gone, other former champs toppled and now looking for a way back, of people who once earned plenty now struggling to pay bills.

Tuesdays, 10-11 p.m. EDT, on FX

Sunday, 8-9 p.m. EDT, on PBS. (Dates and times vary; check local listings.

This is a boxing story sublimely unromantic about the business but penetrating in its grasp of the pride that drives a competitor like Patrick "Lights" Leary (Holt McCallany). He wants a rematch to reclaim his title mainly for the big payday it would bring—and he wants this, by every evidence, only in order to pay for his daughters' schooling, to keep the family cars from being repossessed, for his wife's peace of mind while she pursues a medical career. He has a house of mansion-like splendor, bought when he was the unbeatable champ earning big money—we see a lot of the sumptuous place, with its gently rolling lawn and the glamour-kitchen—a house that's now a frightening financial drain. One of many for the Learys. 

What Lights wants is to save all this. He appears to be that rarity—a happily retired contender, content to live surrounded by a devoted family, to cook for them in that kitchen (he spends a lot of time stirring and seasoning) and to care for the girls while his wife is at work. It's a role Mr. McCallany brings off to perfection, just as he does the other altogether opposite side of Lights—the one never successfully submerged in the pleasures of domesticity: that of the fighter hungering for a return title bout and a victory that would kill the taste of defeat.

It's a measure of the skills that went into this superbly imagined character—the series' writer is Warren Leight—that the two parts merge so seamlessly in the character of Lights. He's a man contending with the bleakest of realities, one who performs humiliating, even brutal roles to bring some money home. But he's a man also conscious of life's joys, most of them derived from his family. His wife, the sharp, independent-minded Theresa (Catherine McCormack), adores him, as do their three daughters, Daniella (Ryann Shane), Ava (Meredith Hagner) and Katie (Lily Pilblad).

Which brings us to another rarity. It's hard to remember when we last had a television series whose child characters weren't caricatures—pathologically hostile, chronically gross, brooding nutcases or smelly deviants of one kind or another. Such a series seems to have arrived, finally, in "Lights Out." Some viewers may, of course, be taken a bit aback, at first, at the novelty of characters like these recognizably human children.

The bond of family love and loyalty lies at the heart of this drama—a tie tested by Johnny, Lights's brother and quasi-manager, a character who springs to instant life in Pablo Schreiber's skilled performance. No bond, though, is more telling or complicated than that between Lights and his father, known as "Pops" Leary—a skilled trainer of boxers and owner of a gym that has seen better times. Stacy Keach's talents have never been seen to better advantage than in this portrayal of Pops—a performance whose every line rings with a grim authenticity, even when he's being charming as the role occasionally requires. 

The show's documentary-like power owes a lot to those training scenes, not to mention the ringside instruction during a fight. By the time Pops has finished telling Lights—bleeding heavily from a cut over the eye—how to destroy an opponent aiming to enlarge that wound, you've learned something useful, or so it feels, in the atmosphere of deadly combat that hangs over large parts of the show. The best parts. There are three major slugfests, all literally breathtaking, none whose outcomes ever seemed predictable. The most crucial one comes, of course, in the show's season-ending episode, April 5.

There is plenty of combat, some of it deadly, that goes on in places other than the boxing ring, most of it between competing agents of corruption. One of the more irresistible of these, as masterfully portrayed by Bill Irwin, is the smoothly menacing, lawyerly Hal Brennan, sports gambler and promoter, and an electrifying presence in scene after scene. His competition is the corrupt schemer, and all-powerful boxing promoter, Barry Word, a role Reg E. Cathey plays with marvelous panache.

There's everything to be said for a production whose secondary characters are as artfully conceived as these. That's only one of the reasons I found myself glued to the series for hours at a stretch and, at the end, looking for more. The others had to do with the pleasures—count pure excitement among them—of subtly woven, unfailingly suspenseful plots. Here's a series, furthermore, that yields scarcely a dead line, though there's the occasional familiar moment. At a crucial point during a bout, when Lights is taking a dangerous battering, he turns to see his wife, who has been deeply angry with him. But she's there now, in the crowd at ringside, beaming love, cheering him on. 

It's enough to turn the tide of the battle; Lights comes alive, a newly energized fighting machine. He couldn't have done it without her, he says during the victory celebration, and a marvelous scene it is. You know you're watching first-rate drama when even the hoariest of clichés come out sounding perfectly right.

A word—after nature's latest display of murderous havoc—for the peaceful pursuits of pelicans, as reported in Sunday's "Nature: Outback Pelicans" on PBS. The film chronicles the improbably mysterious habits of Australia's pelicans, coastal birds that fly off every 10 years to the hottest, most uninhabitable place on earth—the Australian outback. Every decade, heavy rains flood the desert's dry river beds, creating rich supplies of fish—the pelicans' food. So it is that 100,000 of these enterprising birds take off, every decade, at who knows what signal, on a thousand-mile flight to their paradise in the desert—a journey fascinatingly detailed here.

 Write to  Dorothy Rabinowitz at Dorothy.Rabinowitz@wsj.com 