RIO DE JANEIRO—The death toll from severe flooding in southeastern Brazil approached 500 people Thursday, as further rain threatened to complicate relief and recovery efforts after walls of mud and water gushed across entire towns in recent days.

After a helicopter flyover and visit to some of the affected areas in the state of Rio de Janeiro, President Dilma Rousseff, in her second week in office, vowed to cut bureaucracy that could hinder prompt delivery of federal funding and aid for overwhelmed state and local officials.

Noting the speed and force of flooding that caused "mountains to dissolve," Ms. Rousseff criticized reckless development in affected areas, where mudslides and swollen rivers washed away homes and commercial properties, many of which have gone up in recent decades without proper zoning and building codes.

"It's not only a natural disaster, but a problem also caused by irregular land occupation," Ms. Rousseff said, adding the government needed to provide better oversight. "Housing in risky areas has become the norm in Brazil, and no longer the exception."

The recovery and challenge to better prepare for future calamities present the first major test for Ms. Rousseff, a left-leaning former bureaucrat who took office Jan. 1. Aside from a practical need across Brazil to improve limited and shoddy infrastructure and vast slums with precarious housing, the country is under pressure to ensure safe and adequate facilities for soccer's World Cup in 2014 and the Summer Olympics in 2016.

Rio state police said at least 470 people died from the rains as of late Thursday. More than 5,000 more have lost homes, mostly in and around Nova Friburgo, Petropolis and Teresopolis, old hillside cities built in the mountainous region north of Rio's dramatic coastline. At least 13 people died in the state of São Paulo, further south, after floods there earlier in the week.

In Rio, the government sent 250 troops to help firefighters, police officers and residents dig out. Access was hampered as landslides washed out roads and bridges. Authorities were especially fearful for isolated residents still trapped in areasthat are at risk of further landslides.

Television images Thursday illustrated the plight of those affected. Neighbors, some carrying makeshift stretchers and coffins, did relief of their own in areas where officials haven't arrived. Residents outside one stranded house, surrounded by passing waters, mimed a need for food and water to a news helicopter overhead.

One particularly dramatic news sequence, filmed by the Globo television network, captured a middle-age woman huddled with a tiny dog amid the brick ruins of her home, floodwaters gushing past them. Seizing a rope thrown across the swell by neighbors, she tied it around her hips and leapt into the torrent. The current swiftlyripped the dog from her arms, but she was saved by the neighbors, who tugged her up a wall.

Flooding during Brazil's rainy summer season is common this time of year. Last year, rains also killed hundreds around Rio, most notably after a mudslide caused a hillside slum to give way.

Meteorologists at the Climatempo weather service said the intensity of the downpours, expected to continue through Sunday, has been unusual. Nova Friburgo, for instance, received 15 inches of rain, including about 11 inches overnight Tuesday, nearly twice the average for the month over the past 30 years. "The volume," said Climatempo's Fabiana Weykamp, "was absurd."

 Write to  Jeff Fick at jeff.fick@dowjones.com 