WASHINGTON—The Supreme Court refused Monday to review a ruling that blocked a lawsuit alleging a Boeing Co. subsidiary helped the Central Intelligence Agency seize terrorism suspects abroad and secretly transfer them to other countries for interrogation.

The high court rejected an appeal by five men who said U.S. operatives—with support from Jeppesen Dataplan Inc., a Boeing unit—abducted them and sent them to other countries where they were tortured. They alleged Jeppesen provided critical flight planning and logistical support to the CIA's "extraordinary rendition" program. The men were seeking unspecified monetary damages from the company.

Both the Bush and Obama administrations warned that allowing the lawsuit to go forward could threaten national security. 

A divided federal appeals court agreed last year, ruling 6-5 that the case couldn't proceed. The San Francisco-based Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals said the lawsuit must be dismissed because there was no feasible way to try the case without the risk of divulging state secrets. The Supreme Court let that ruling stand without comment.

Federal courts have refused to hear claims from ex-detainees alleging their rights were abused, and the U.S. government has refused to provide compensation to those who allege they were tortured or unlawfully detained.

Last year, the British government agreed to compensate the lead plaintiff in the Jeppesen case, Binyam Mohamed, and 14 other ex-detainees who alleged the U.K. aided the U.S. in violating their rights. 

Mr. Mohamed, who was the subject of a 2006 Page One story in The Wall Street Journal, was once considered so dangerous that his very existence was classified. He says he was taken by the CIA to Morocco, where he alleges he faced "unspeakable torture," including having his genitals cut. 

The Bush administration initially sought to try Mr. Mohamed before a military commission for allegedly planning to blow up apartment buildings in the U.S. It later dropped all charges and approved his release to the U.K., where he now lives.

The case is Mohamed v. Jeppesen Dataplan Inc., 10-778. 

 Write to  Brent Kendall at brent.kendall@dowjones.com 