 Southern European and Asian men are the least likely to take in household chores, according to a study by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. The Paris-based think tank surveyed 29 countries to determine how much time people spent doing unpaid work.  

The results showed that women spent considerably longer than men doing daily chores, a factor that could hinder their ability to take part in paid employment, the study says. 



 The European Union this week will propose new laws that aim to remove obstacles that stop professionals from one member state working elsewhere in the EU, in a bid to make the region more competitive.  



 Privatization plans, further tax increases and changes to pension policies are emerging as early sticking points as Portugal's government and opposition parties try to carve out a common position for bailout talks with the European Union.  

A delegation from the European Commission, the European Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund arrived in Lisbon to assess Portugal's economic situation as part of negotiations that begin next week to iron out the terms of an estimated €80 billion ($115.4 billion) bailout package. 



 The U.K.'s Office for National Statistics said it is investigating whether market-sensitive inflation figures were leaked to foreign-exchange or bond traders ahead of their official release, but by Tuesday evening the government said an initial probe showed no evidence of a leak. 



Official data showed the U.K's inflation rate fell in March and retailers reported the biggest drop in sales in 16 years. The Office for National Statistics said consumer prices rose 4% in the 12 months through March, compared with a rise of 4.4% in the year through February.

Separately, the British Retail Consortium said retail sales fell 1.9% in the 12 months through March—the biggest fall since 1995. 



 Germany is set to accelerate its shift from nuclear power to renewable energy and increased energy efficiency, according to a draft plan by the environment and economy ministries.  



 Finland holds elections Sunday, as opinion polls show support for the nationalist True Finns Party—which opposes any aid to fellow euro-zone members—has soared in recent months, partly in response to dissatisfaction with the fact that taxpayers are being asked to bail out Greece, Ireland and Portugal when welfare benefits are being cut at home.  



Serbia's prime minister says he will travel to Washington to negotiate a precautionary standby loan with the International Monetary Fund. Mirko Cvetkovic says Serbia will not ask for a direct loan deal, like the current one which expires this month.



 Authorities in Belarus hinted that unnamed opponents of the country's authoritarian government could have been behind Monday's subway bombing in Minsk that killed 12 and injured dozens more—in a sign they may clamp down further on dissent. 

Belarus's security services said they had detained three unidentified people in connection with the rush-hour blast, but were still hunting for their chief suspect.



 Istanbul bankers are betting that Turkey's Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan is set to appoint a new central-bank governor to oversee one of the world's most experimental monetary policies, one whose closeness to the government's powerful economy chief is raising questions about the bank's independence. 

iii

 A deal to keep the U.S. government funded for the remainder of fiscal 2011 contains large budget cuts for high-speed rail projects and the Environmental Protection Agency and leaves almost no program immune from the largest spending reductions in the country's history. 



Senators John Kerry and John McCain introduced proposed legislation that would establish a "privacy bill of rights" to protect people from the increasingly invasive commercial data-collection industry. The bipartisan proposal would create the nation's first comprehensive privacy law. 



Galleon Group founder Raj Rajaratnam's lawyers meticulously took jurors through more than a dozen research reports and news articles they say back his trades in a stock at the center of his insider-trading case.



NASA announced that New York, Los Angeles and Florida's Kennedy Space Center will get to display three of the retiring space shuttles. The fourth will be relocated to a Smithsonian Institution site outside Washington, D.C.



 Japanese officials said they will put greater emphasis on protecting the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant from strong earthquakes and tsunamis, after a series of aftershocks over the past week showed the facility's vulnerability to another major incident. 

A reminder of the potential threats facing the plant came when another large quake hit Fukushima prefecture, the second in as many days. The magnitude-6.2 quake caused no damage or disruptions to any of the power plants in northeastern Japan, and didn't result in a tsunami. 

Meanwhile, Prime Minister Naoto Kan defended the government's handling of the monthlong crisis, the same day in which the Japanese government raised its assessment of the nuclear crisis to a high-severity ranking matched only by the Chernobyl incident in the former Soviet Union in 1986.



 Taiwan's air force landed fighter jets on a stretch of highway in the island's south, an exercise that analysts said was partly aimed at drawing attention in the U.S. to the island's stalled requests for advanced weapons. 



Indonesia chose South Korea's state-run aircraft maker as the preferred supplier of 16 fighter jets, the first time Seoul has been able to export a military jet it developed.



Pakistan has privately demanded the Central Intelligence Agency suspend drone strikes against militants on its territory, one of the U.S.'s most effective weapons against al Qaeda and Taliban leaders, officials said. 



 A new United Nations report declared the Palestinian Authority is ready to operate as a sovereign government in a range of areas, continuing a string of international praise for the Palestinian state-building project. 



Former Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak was abruptly hospitalized at a Red Sea resort for heart problems during an investigation into allegations of corruption and the violence against protesters, state TV reported.



 France called on the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to be more aggressive against Libyan government forces attacking the besieged city of Misrata, but NATO officials said they were doing a good job protecting civilians in the country's third largest city. 

Former Libyan Foreign Minister Moussa Koussa, who defected to the U.K. last month, was set to travel to Qatar for an international meeting on Libya on Wednesday, Britain's Foreign and Commonwealth Office said.



Militiamen and soldiers loyal to Ivory Coast's defeated president Laurent Gbagbo have started surrendering their weapons, but it may be months before his successor can restore security to the shattered city of Abidjan.