SYDNEY—U.K. Secretary for Defense Liam Fox emphasized Tuesday the importance of the next generation U.S. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter to counter China's development of its own stealth jet, after Britain and Australia agreed to strengthen defense cooperation in Asia during talks in Sydney.

"Clearly if we don't have the equipment others have, we would put ourselves at a potential disadvantage," Mr. Fox said in response to questions following the signing of the strategic pact. "That's why we are very committed to the Joint Strike Fighter, the F-35, because it does have the sort of fifth-generation stealth technology we are likely to need in the future."

The F-35 program survived a recent U.K. government-defense review intended to help slash military spending as part of a wider effort to cut its deficit. According to the Royal United Services Institute, a military think tank, the British government is seeking to cut defense outlays by 11% by 2017 as part of £81 billion (US$129 billion) of savings in public spending over four years. As part of these cuts, the U.K. is taking out of service its aging fleet of Harrier jump jets and seeking to sell other unwanted equipment or delay new procurement programs.

Public images of China's J-20 fighter have spooked Western defense analysts and shown that Beijing has made significant progress in developing its own stealth aircraft that combines a radar-eluding design with top fighter performance and avionics. The developments come on top of China's growing assertiveness in the region, which has contributed to territorial disputes with Japan and Vietnam and could pose a challenge long-term for the U.S. and its allies in the region.

"The fact that China has unveiled that particular capability makes it all the more important we invest in the technology we require, which is why in the defense review we reiterated our commitment to that particular project," Mr. Fox said.

Other defense officials have expressed increased interest in the F-35 since the J-20 was unveiled. But the jet, assembled by prime contractor  Lockheed Martin
LMT


0.02
%




 Corp, of the U.S., is costly, and the program has been the subject of budget-cut talks in the U.S. and the U.K. U.S. defense officials estimate the planes will cost roughly $92 million apiece in 2002 dollars, the measure used by the Pentagon to track cost growth, up from $50 million previously.

In a joint statement on Tuesday, with the Australian and U.K. delegations led respectively by Foreign Minister Kevin Rudd and his British counterpart William Hague agreed to share "strategic high-level documents" and maintain dialogue on key strategic issues, including the need to "react quickly and effectively when threats to our national interests arise."

Canberra has become increasingly concerned by China's increase in military expenditure and is pressing for greater transparency on defense spending across the region, with Mr. Rudd using a recent visit to China to press for more openness in response to Beijing's military buildup. Australia's defense department estimates that China spent more than US$150 billion in 2009 on its military, more than double the official Chinese figure.

"Australia and the U.K. are committed to seeking a constructive and cooperative relationship with China on regional economic development and common security concerns, as well as on addressing global challenges," according to the joint statement.

Australia is boosting defense spending as it seeks to counterbalance China's power in the region. Canberra plans to spend more than US$50 billion over the next 20 years on projects that include purchasing air warfare destroyers, submarines, frigates and the F-35 aircraft. 

 Write to  Enda Curran at enda.curran@dowjones.com and Rachel Pannett at rachel.pannett@dowjones.com 