LONDON—Retail sales across the euro zone slumped unexpectedly in November as weak consumer demand in debt-laden economies such as Spain and Ireland outweighed strength in France and elsewhere, official data showed Thursday. 

While the data could feed concerns that the euro-zone economy will run at two speeds in 2011, separate data released Thursday by the European Commission showed confidence among retailers and manufacturers rose in December, painting a mixed outlook for the bloc. 

The European Union's Eurostat agency said retail sales volumes dropped 0.8% in November from a month earlier—the sharpest monthly fall since April—and were just 0.1% higher than in November 2009. 

Figures for October were also cut substantially to show sales were flat on the month and 1.2% higher on the year. October's sales were initially reported rising 0.5% from a month earlier and 1.8% from a year earlier. Economists had expected sales in November to rise 0.1% from a month earlier and 1.9% from a year earlier. 

Retail sales fell 0.2% month to month in Ireland, 0.3% in Spain, and 4.2% in Portugal—all countries that are undergoing tough austerity measures to tackle their budget deficits. By contrast, retail sales rose 0.9% in France, the region's second-biggest economy and one of the drivers of the bloc's recovery. November figures weren't available for Germany, but in October retail sales there rose 0.1% from a month earlier. 

Eurostat said retail-sales volumes of food, drinks and tobacco across the euro zone fell 0.9% in November from a month earlier, while sales of non-food products decreased 0.8%, the sharpest drop since August 2009. Retail sales across the EU as a whole fell 0.4% on the month and rose 0.8% on the year in November. 

The EC's confidence figures for December showed manufacturers and retailers in the euro zone became significantly more optimistic about their prospects during the month, although consumer confidence ebbed on concerns about the economic outlook and the jobs market. 

The EC said its overall Economic Sentiment Indicator for the euro zone rose to 106.2 from 105.1 in October, the seventh-straight monthly rise. Economists forecast the indicator would rise to 105.8. 

The steady rise in the ESI suggests the euro-zone economy will continue to grow in the months ahead, despite the fiscal problems facing a number of members. 

The largest improvement in confidence came in the retail sector, with the Commission's measure rising to 4.6 from minus 1.5. Confidence among manufacturers also improved markedly, rising to 4.0 from 0.7. Economists had forecast a rise to 2.0. Manufacturers reported a strong rise in new orders, including export orders. 

However, confidence in the services sector weakened slightly, and was unchanged in the construction sector. 

Consumer confidence also weakened, falling to minus 11.0 from minus 9.4 in November. That reflected growing fears about future job losses, although manufacturers, service providers and retailers all reported that they were less likely to cut payrolls, and more likely to hire new workers than in recent months. 

Consumer confidence was also dented by expectations that prices will rise faster over the coming 12 months, and that was consistent with responses from manufacturers, service providers and retailers, all of which said they expect to raise their prices at a faster pace. 

The pickup in economic sentiment was strongest in France, the Netherlands and Germany, while sentiment in Spain and Greece deteriorated. 

A separate measure of the environment for manufacturers in the euro zone—the Business Climate Indicator—rose to 1.31 from 0.91 in November, and is now approaching the all-time highs reached in the early months of 2007 before the onset of the financial crisis. 

 Write to  Nicholas Winning at nick.winning@dowjones.com 