(See Corrections and Amplifications below.)

Persian food is a cuisine that seduces subtly with its gentle spices and playful dances of sweet and tart. It's always a shade elusive—just what is that warm spice, that cool tang, that crimson berry?—compelling you to return for more. Call it a love affair, if you will, a guilty passion that will demand far more of your time than the French cinq à sept (that famous two-hour window after work when Parisians are said to meet up with their lovers before returning home to dinner). No, Persian food is decidedly an all-day commitment. From the fragrant ritual of grinding spices in the morning—dried rose petals, cardamom, angelica, nutmeg, among others—to the long hours of temptation as dinner simmers, filling the house with exotic aromas.

A good thousand years before recipe tweeting, the Persian Empire, now Iran, picked and chose the best culinary ideas with all the acumen of an adventurous chef at a global cyber-market. From India came their prized basmati rice. From the Turks, came yogurt; from the Arabs, in the seventh century, came lamb, dates and figs. Three hundred years later, came dried fruit from the Turks. With the shifting of empires came an ever-expanding world of seeds and spices, which the Persians, with their fertile land and temperate climate, turned into a beautifully nuanced, profoundly luxurious cuisine.

I'd love to tell you that I discovered Persian food in Iran, but I was actually on an island off the coast of Denmark (where else?), in the summer home of Danish-Iranian friends. We'd spend the days traipsing through heather-filled fields. By evening, we'd return home ravenous in that way particular to days spent outdoors. And then we'd feast. Each night, our hosts would set a succulent, heady stew and a golden dome of rice on the table. One bite and we'd be transported from the rugged moors of Denmark to an opulent, exotic world.

Khoresh is the all-encompassing Farsi word used for the many stews that form the heart of Persian cooking. These stews are redolent with spices, but never "spicy." They're delicate and sometimes even mild, but never bland. Khoresh-e karafs, for example, made with celery, is quite subtle and loved by children. Khoresh-e-esfenaj-o alu comes with plump prunes and tangy spinach. In khoresh-e fesenjan ba jujeh, pomegranates bring a sweet pucker to chicken and walnuts. And in khoresh-e bademjan, my favorite, silken eggplant surrounds tender chunks of lamb. Lately I've been experimenting with making mine with short ribs, as there is no meat more tender when cooked long and slow. But lamb is the classic way to go, and in either case the meat melts into the eggplant and the eggplant into the meat in something that can only be described as a very sexy union.

The showstopper of a Persian feast is not, however, the khoresh, but the accompanying rice, chelow. For centuries, young Persian brides were judged by their mother-in-laws on the success of their chelow. The crust—the tah dig—is the prized currency and is traditionally given to the most honored guests. In theory, the rice is meant to form a golden, intact and perfectly domed cake. When I first tried my hand at one, I imagined that if it could be made in a rustic kitchen on a wild island, it could surely be made with ease in New York with the latest appliances. How wrong I was. After several disasters resembling collapsed sand castles, I realized that chelow was clearly not in my genes and that I'd better cheat and use a nonstick stockpot. Instant success. I highly recommend it. 

Collapsed or whole, chelow is utterly addictive. And the accompanying traditional yogurt companion dish rounds out a meal that's a feast, yes, but an intimate one. This is food that flirts with you. Flirt back.

 Corrections & Amplifications 

The Turks are thought to have introduced yogurt to the Persians. An earlier version of this story incorrectly said it was the Greeks who did so.

 3 red onions, peeled and thinly sliced  3 cloves garlic, peeled andminced  6 large lamb shanks  ½ cup olive oil  1 teaspoon salt  ½ teaspoon freshly ground  black pepper  1 teaspoon turmeric  ½ teaspoon ground saffron dissolved in ¼ cup warm water  2 cups organic tomato juice,more as needed  2 cups chicken stock, more as needed  4 tablespoons lemon juice  9 small Italian eggplants or 3 standard eggplants  1 teaspoon advieh (see following recipe) 

 1. Preheat oven to 300 degrees.  2. Dry meat with paper towels and sprinkle with salt.  3. In a Dutch oven, brown meat in 3 tablespoons of the oil until it caramelizes on all sides. Remove and set aside. Add onions and cook until translucent, then add garlic and cook, stirring, a minute or two more. Pour off excess oil. Return lamb to the pot and add salt, pepper, turmeric, saffron water, tomato juice, stock and lemon juice. Bring to a simmer, turn the heat down to its lowest setting and cook, covered, for 3 hours.  4. Meanwhile, peel eggplant and slice lengthwise into 3 pieces if using Italian eggplant and 5 if using standard ones. Lay pieces side by side on paper towel. Sprinkle eggplant with salt and let sit for 30 minutes. This will remove any bitterness. Rinse eggplant and pat each slice thoroughly dry.  5. In a large skillet, heat 3 tablespoons of the oil and sauté the eggplant, shaking the pan to toss, until the eggplant turns a rich gold. (This takes a bit longer than you might expect, as it will need to be done in batches.) Set aside.  6. Stir advieh spice mix into khoresh and season to taste. Then add eggplant, stirring gently to combine. Cover and bake for 30 minutes. Uncover and bake an additional 15 minutes. (You may reduce heat to 200 degrees and continue to bake, covered, until your guests are ready, for up to 30 minutes more.)

 2 tablespoons ground dried rose petals  2 tablespoons cinnamon  1 teaspoon freshly ground cardamom  ½ teaspoon freshly ground pepper  1 teaspoon ground angelica  1 teaspoon ground nutmeg  1 teaspoon ground cumin  ½ teaspoon ground coriander seeds  1 teaspoon dried Persian lime powder 

Thoroughly mix the spices together. Store what you don't use in an airtight container away from direct sunlight. Note: these spices are available from  kalustyans.com .

 1 long seedless cucumber, peeled and diced  ½ cup raisins  3 cups plain yogurt, preferably full fat  2 tablespoons chopped scallions, the white part only  2 tablespoons fresh mint, chopped  3 tablespoons fresh dill, chopped  2 cloves garlic, minced  3 tablespoons chopped walnuts  1 teaspoon salt freshly ground black pepper  the petals from a few dried rosebuds for garnish (optional) 

Mix all the ingredients together, except for the rosebuds. Refrigerate for at least 1 hour and up to 1 day. Garnish just before serving.

 4 cups long grain basmati rice  8 cups water  2 tablespoons salt  2 tablespoons plain, full fat yogurt  1 teaspoon ground saffron, dissolved in 4 tablespoons hot water  1 cup butter, vegetable oil or ghee 

 1. Rinse rice five times in lukewarm water.  2. Parboil rice in the water and salt for 6 to 10 minutes, until just soft to the bite. Rinse under cold water for a minute or two.  3.In a small bowl, mix yogurt, ¾ cup of the butter or oil, ½ cup water and about 1 cup parboiled rice. Spread mixture over the bottom of a non-stick Dutch oven and pack it down. This will be the golden crust once rice is cooked.  4. Mound remaining parboiled rice into a pyramid shape in the pot. Cover and cook for 10-15 minutes on medium-heat to form a golden crust.  5. Dissolve remaining butter in 1 cup hot water and pour over rice pyramid. Do same with saffron water. Place a clean dish towel over the pot and cover firmly with a lid. Cook over medium-low heat for 50 more minutes.  6.Remove pot from heat. Allow it to cool on a damp surface for 5 minutes without uncovering. Then holding a serving platter tightly over the uncovered pot, invert the two together, unmolding the rice onto the platter. The rice will emerge as a golden crusted cake. If this does not happen, break the crust into pieces and serve it on the side. It will be every bit as good.

—Recipes adapted from "New Food of Life" by Najmieh Batmanglij.