ROSEDALE, Miss.—The Mississippi River crested Tuesday at Memphis, Tenn., and kept rising to the south, dealing a blow to Mississippi's gambling and agriculture industries. 

Fifteen of the state's 19 riverside casinos have been closed because of flooding, with another scheduled to shut down Wednesday, said Larry Gregory, executive director of the Mississippi Gaming Commission.

See the latest data from flood gauges throughout the Midwest and South.

The gambling facilities, stretching from Tunica in the north to Natchez in the south, employ about 13,000 people and generate some $13 million a month in state and local taxes.

The casinos themselves float, but access ramps and parking lots are under water. It could take weeks for the casinos to reopen, said Mr. Gregory. 

The state's gambling industry "has been hit hard by the recession," said Webster Franklin, president of the Tunica Convention and Visitors Bureau. "The flood has come at a time when we'd hoped to begin rebounding."

In Memphis, the river hit its expected high of 47.8 feet, but it will take weeks for the water to recede. Area levees were holding.

Barges continued to navigate the Mississippi, but smaller ports have had to shut down because the equipment used to load and unload goods was submerged. Three conveyor belts used to handle agricultural goods were underwater at the Port of Rosedale, in the heart of the Delta about 115 miles southwest of Memphis. 

"Everything's shut down now, and we're looking to be down another four to five weeks," said Butch James, the terminal manager. He spent much of Tuesday in his office, gazing out at the engorged river. "We won't be doing nothing," he said. 

Some residents in the lowest-lying areas evacuated weeks ago in anticipation of the rising waters, which authorities said were expected to crest as soon as Tuesday night in the northernmost part of the state. About 600 people who live around the fishing camps of Tunica Cutoff have fled to relatives' homes or a local shelter, said Larry Liddell, public information officer for Tunica County. 

Statewide, 585 homes have been affected by flooding, according to Mike Womack, executive director of the Mississippi Emergency Management Agency. But the flood-protection system along the Mississippi was holding. "We think the main levee system is in good shape," he said.

What concerns him is the expected flooding of the Yazoo River basin as the tributary gets backed up from where it meets the Mississippi at Vicksburg. Mr. Womack estimates that flooding in the area could reach 850 homes and between 300,000 and 600,000 acres of land, much of which is devoted to agriculture.

Fields of recently planted corn, cotton and soybeans throughout the Delta have been inundated, officials said. "I really can't compare it to anything," said Andy Prosser, head of marketing at the state Department of Agriculture and Commerce. "This is unprecedented territory."

Yet some Delta residents seemed unfazed. In the town of Gunnison, 60-year-old Odessa Jackson Owens has spent three decades living with her husband in a house right next to the levee. "We're not worried about it at all," she said Tuesday, as she cooked up ham and spaghetti.

Though Bolivar County, where Gunnison is located, suffered a major levee break in the historic flood of 1927, Ms. Owens isn't budging. "We didn't have this tall levee then," she said.

—Leslie Josephs and Jerry A. DiColo contributed to this article.