Indonesian stocks are perkier than a cup of java. But with Asia twitchy about inflation, is it time investors woke up and smelled the coffee? 

The Jakarta Composite Index gained more than 170% in 2009 and 2010. For the first few weeks of 2011 it slipped back on fears about inflation and potential monetary tightening, but then it recovered, setting new records along the way. Jakarta's average multiple of 2011 earnings is about 15, richer than Thailand's 13 or the Philippine market's 14.

Risks abound. Wing Kin Chow, who runs Prudential Asset Management's IOF Indonesia Equity Fund, says Indonesian stocks remain vulnerable to rising food and energy prices, currency fluctuations, or any spike in risk aversion—which could send capital fleeing the market for safe havens overseas. There is the danger that interest rates will have to rise sharply to head off inflation. And the country's creaking infrastructure and its outdated labor and land laws are in need of upgrades.

Yet Indonesia has received several tacit endorsements in recent weeks. Standard & Poor's has upgraded the country's sovereign debt to a BB-plus rating, just one step below investment grade. Global bond buyers, meanwhile, shelled out $2.5 billion on 10-year Indonesian government bonds yielding 5.1%. And Chinese premier Wen Jiabao visited the capital Jakarta last week on a goodwill visit, carrying a fistful of foreign investment dollars. 

All this reflects a strong macroeconomic backdrop. The Indonesian currency, the rupiah, has been at or near seven-year inhighs against the U.S. dollar recently. Foreign direct investment was up 11.6% in the first quarter. The country's budget deficit looks under control, and its ratio of debt to gross domestic product has been coming down steadily in recent years. Indonesia's GDP growth could hit 6.2% in 2011, according to the International Monetary Fund. That's better than any year in the past decade other than 2007—when it was barely higher, at 6.3%—and better than is expected from some of Indonesia's neighbors, such as Malaysia and Thailand. 

Crucially, S&P has also said it may raise Indonesia's credit rating further. That could open up the local debt markets to some foreign investors, such as U.S. pension funds, that can't buy debt whose rating is below investment grade. 

This could provide the jolt Indonesia needs to weather nervousness about Asian markets in general. In particular, energy and financial-services stocks would benefit from a lower cost of borrowing. In this year of living dangerously, Indonesia's upgrade potential offers some insurance. 

 Write to  Duncan Mavin at duncan.mavin@wsj.com 