Radiolab, the cult public-radio show that visited NYU for a live performance Monday night, came off flawlessly except for one small hitch. No, it's not what you're thinking: A Republican prankster didn't trap hosts  Robert Krulwich and Jad Abumrad into saying unbecoming things about conservatives. Rather, the winner of a listener contest, who was supposed to visit the stars backstage at the Skirball Center, didn't show up.

Radiolab's publicists assured one and all that the lucky contestant must have been laid low with the flu, or the victim of sudden-onset amnesia, or that something induced him to confuse or forget the date. But the incident suggested, and endearingly so, that in the constellation of public radio hits, Radiolab remains somewhat in the shadow of culture-shifting programs such as "This American Life" and "Prairie Home Companion." I mean, would any mortal pass up the opportunity to swap conversation with Garrison Keillor or  Ira Glass? One would guess not. They'd lift themselves off their deathbeds, IVs still attached, and schlep themselves over to the Skirball just to shake hands.

To the extent I was familiar with Radiolab before Monday night—"a mash-up of science, wonder and discovery," according to a press release, it broadcasts 10 hour-long programs a year, but produces podcasts every couple of weeks or so—I thought it a bit precious, with its cosmic curiosity, cutesy sound effects and the hosts finishing each other's sentences. 

It didn't rivet me the way "This American Life" does at its best. Not that I don't have issues with "This American Life." If I were Ira Glass, I think I'd have shut down the show after he broadcast the "Squirrel Cop" story. There was no way he was ever going to exceed that episode, originally aired in 1998, about a rookie police officer's first day on the job and the chain of calamities that ensued when he was dispatched to somebody's home to catch a squirrel cowering in the attic. 

In any case, we got tickets to the show at the instigation of my daughter, who hears Radiolab through the downloads, as do about half the listeners these days, according to Mr. Krulwich. That has apparently helped fuel the growing success of the show, which has been on the air since 2005. There was such demand for tickets that a second show had to be added Tuesday night. 

"This show sold out from the Twitter announcement in 48 hours," reported  Jennifer Houlihan, a spokeswoman for WNYC, which produces the program, syndicated nationally to 300 stations. From New York, Radiolab heads to Los Angeles and Seattle for live performances there.

Monday's show concerned itself with symmetry, coming at the subject from various angles, including brain-scan experiments at Princeton and President  Jimmy Carter's decision to change the part in his hair—though it didn't do much good when he ran for re-election against one of the most symmetrically pleasing humans ever,  Ronald Reagan. Not that the hosts, seated on stage and facing each other across a table with their computers, went so far as to suggest that Reagan's election was the result of even features. Before we knew it, we'd made the cosmic leap from politics to matter and its symmetrical, or nearly symmetrical, opposite: antimatter. 

I was concerned when Ms. Houlihan informed me the broadcast would last two hours, with one intermission. But it turned out to be more worthy, or at least amusing, than much of what passes for entertainment these days. The performance was driven by Mr. Abumrad's deft, quasi-musical orchestration of sound bites, mostly from scientists; animation projected on a screen behind the hosts; their seemingly effortless repartee; and the live soundtrack performed by the cellist  Zoe Keating, who was seated stage right. 

When it was over, Ms. Houlihan took us backstage to greet the stars, a particular thrill for my daughter. Frankly, I don't know where public radio finds guys like Mr. Abumrad, a composer who has picked up journalism along the way. He's one of those sensitive males, much like Mr. Glass, who puts the rest of us to shame and who takes out the garbage without being asked, or whatever the new-age domestic equivalent is. (Mr. Abumrad's wife was one of the first backstage to assure him he did fine.)

"We spend most of our time in an airless booth arguing with each other," said Mr. Abumrad, 37, who seemed in awe that several hundred people would stay seated for two hours. "We're practically unshowered."

Mr. Krulwich, 63, a veteran broadcaster who has worked for  CBS
CBS.A


0.12
%




 and ABC, seemed almost as surprised as his co-host that they had fans, and not just fans but also fan clubs—in such far-flung places as St. Petersburg, Oslo and Copenhagen. Most of all, he seemed impressed that his own children, ages 25 and 21, listen to the program. "My kids had gotten bored with, and not paying too much attention, to anything I did," he admitted.

"It's a show about friendship," he went on, of his relationship with Mr. Abumrad. "We could have suppressed that," but decided not to—their shared fascination with subjects such as photons, brain scans and bathroom mirrors that conspire to help you build a false image of yourself is apparently genuine. "We had breakfast for two years before we did anything," Mr. Krulwich said.

— ralph.gardner@wsj.com 