U.S. aviation regulators and accident investigators both appear to be searching for ways to resolve a previously reported dispute over who should have access to safety data that airlines voluntary provide to the government, according to federal and industry officials.

For weeks, the Federal Aviation Administration and the National Transportation Safety Board have sparred over what information board investigators should gain access to regarding safety lapses by U.S. airlines over the years. The NTSB has sought such material, previously voluntarily disclosed by airlines and pilots, as part of its ongoing probe of an American Airlines Boeing 757 jetliner that ran off the end of a runway last December in Jackson Hole, Wyo.

Nobody was hurt, but safety board investigators are looking into why certain panels on top of the wings failed to automatically deploy as usual to help slow the plane. The board also wants to determine why the panels, sometimes called speed brakes or spoilers, weren't manually deployed as safety and operational rules typically require.

  AMR Corp.'s American Airlines unit has declined to comment on precisely what happened.

A final compromise about the data at issue, these people said, is likely to take some time and could still end up being blocked by strong feelings in both camps. The bureaucratic, inside-the-Beltway flap has potentially important policy implications, however, because it could set a precedent about the scope of the safety board's activities in the future.

The board's chairman has talked about getting broad access to incident data historically off-limits to NTSB accident investigators.

The FAA and industry officials, on the other hand, worry that such a policy reversal could chill collection of voluntary safety data. In return for obtaining a steady stream of voluntary safety data, FAA officials for more than a decade have promised they typically won't use the disclosures to punish or publicly embarrass airlines or pilots.

While several industry and government officials initially said the board wanted full access to specific incident data, others familiar with the matter recently said the NTSB's official request is for "summary data" that doesn't identify specific flights or demand other data that could result in public disclosure of mistakes previously reported by individual carriers or pilots.

The FAA, for its part, initially reacted coolly to the board's request, with some agency officials hinting they were poised to reject it. But last week, government officials clarified the latest status and tenor of the fluid discussions. The FAA, according to these officials, has stopped short of formally making any decision, referring the issue instead to a high-level group of industry and government safety experts.

The board wants the historical information to determine trends about safety system malfunctions and pilot mistakes that led to runway incidents similar to the Wyoming event.

So far, the board hasn't officially indicated what theories it is pursuing in the American Airlines incident.

FAA officials have declined to comment on the agency's position.

But recently, the FAA's discussions with the safety board became less tense and more cordial, according to several people close to the developments.

"The current sense is that with some common sense and care, this can be worked out to everyone's satisfaction," according to one veteran government expert familiar with the details.