When it comes to Mayor  Michael Bloomberg's weekend jaunts to Bermuda, the billionaire chief executive maintains a strict don't ask, don't tell policy: Don't ask where he is—because he's not telling. 

Since becoming mayor nine years ago, Mr. Bloomberg has steadfastly refused to reveal when he leaves the five boroughs for non-city business, arguing he's entitled to a private life without reporters and photographers following him, for example, to Bermuda's majestic Mid Ocean golf club.

The controversy surrounding the mayor's demand for secrecy when it comes to his out-of-town trips exploded, once again, into public view last month when the mayor apparently jetted off to Bermuda as a massive blizzard barreled toward New York City. The mayor owns a multimillion-dollar mansion on the island.

When asked at a City Hall news conference about his whereabouts on Dec. 25-26, Mr. Bloomberg neither confirmed nor denied that he was in Bermuda. "I don't know how, where you get that information," Mr. Bloomberg told a reporter.

"I can tell you this—I was totally in communications and in charge and accountable all the time, and that's the way I've been for nine years."

He attended midnight Mass on Dec. 25 in Manhattan and was at a news conference mid-afternoon Dec. 26. In between, he's believed to have been in Bermuda.

At a public hearing on Monday examining the city's sluggish response to the post-Christmas storm, council members repeatedly referenced the mayor's absence during the lead-up to the storm. The members of the mayor's administration who testified never challenged the veracity of that claim.

Council Member  Peter Vallone Jr., who endorsed the mayor's re-election in 2009 and has been highly critical of the city's response to the storm, said he is drafting legislation that would require the mayor to notify the city clerk whenever he leaves the city.

"The man doesn't take vacation. He has every right to go away on an occasional weekend, and to keep his location secret, but the charter requires he delegate his power whenever he leaves the city," said Mr. Vallone, arguing that the public has a right to know when that happens.

"I'm well aware that during snow emergencies he's always reachable," Mr. Vallone added, "but during the next terrorist attack, he may not be."

According to City Hall, when the mayor leaves town, he gives signatory authority to a deputy mayor. But City Hall refuses to say when the mayor leaves town or identify his designee for specific dates.

On Tuesday, the mayor said he's in charge "all the time," no matter where in the world he is.

When the Wall Street Journal pointed out that the president lets the nation know where he is at all times, including vacations, the mayor said he believes there's a difference between running the city and the country.

"The problem is the mayor would have no private life, couldn't be with his kids when you have the press following you around all the time. President's job is different," he said, adding that he believes the president is entitled to private time, too.

The mayor said he always has his cellphone and his police detail has "all sorts of communications" devices. 

"To the best of my recollection in nine years there's never been a time when you couldn't communicate, get me on the phone, whether I'm traveling or uptown or downtown," he said.

 Write to  Michael Howard Saul at michael.saul@wsj.com 