ISTANBUL—The point man for the Obama administration's financial wars on Iran, North Korea and al Qaeda, Stuart Levey, has decided to leave his senior U.S. Treasury Department post at what is turning out to be a particularly critical time.

Mr. Levey's departure will leave President Barack Obama without the principal architect of Washington's economic-sanctions campaign against Tehran, just as that campaign is likely to be ramped up following the breakdown of talks among Iran, the U.S. and a bloc of global powers on Saturday.

The negotiations, held in Turkey, were aimed at curtailing Iran's nuclear program. With no date set for a resumption of the dialogue, American and European diplomats acknowledged here that they would likely need to put in place more of the economic penalties against Iran that Mr. Levey's office has been central to implementing over the past year. Lawmakers on Capitol Hill, meanwhile, are vowing to increase pressure for more punishing sanctions.

Senior Obama administration officials disclosed Mr. Levey's departure, after nearly a decade in government service, but stressed that it doesn't signal a shift in U.S. policy or a slackening of Washington's financial campaigns against Tehran, Pyongyang and international terrorist groups.

They said the White House is set to nominate David Cohen, Mr. Levey's deputy at Treasury and longtime confidante, to succeed him as the undersecretary for terrorism and financial intelligence. Mr. Levey, a Republican, was one of the few senior members of President George W. Bush's national security team to stay on under Mr. Obama.

"When Stuart came [into the Obama administration], he agreed to stay for six months, and it's been two years. There's no perfect time for these things. But this is as good a time as any" to make the change, Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner said. "It will have no effect on policy, or on our ability to execute the President's policy."

Messrs. Levey and Cohen, in a joint interview at the Treasury last week, said they believed U.S. strategy wouldn't be slowed because the two men had closely coordinated in implementing sanctions policy over the past two years. 

A Harvard-trained attorney, Mr. Levey, 47 years old, said he is taking time off before deciding on his next job. He said his letter of resignation would arrive at the White House Monday and that he would stay on at Treasury for about one more month.

Mr. Cohen, 48, is a Democrat who was a partner with Mr. Levey at a Washington law firm. He returned to private practice after a stint in the Clinton administration's Treasury Department in the 1990s, and rejoined Treasury in 2009.

Washington's sanctions campaign against Iran is likely to intensify in the coming months, as Tehran has so far shown little interest in negotiating a diplomatic settlement over its nuclear program.

During the two days of talks with Iran, U.S. and European officials had hoped to reach an agreement on new measures to address international fears that Tehran is seeking to develop atomic weapons, a charge Iran denies. Instead, Iran's chief nuclear negotiator, Saeed Jalili, said the Obama administration and its allies need to start lifting economic sanctions against Tehran before it engages in substantive talks on its nuclear work. He also said the international community must publicly recognize Iran's right to develop the technologies required to produce nuclear fuel.

Stuart Levey has recast U.S. financial sanctions

• 2004: Named Undersecretary of Treasury for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence; office grows to over 700 people.

• 2005: Treasury names Macau's Banco Delta Asia a "pawn" in North Korean money-laundering activities, restricting Pyongyang's ability to obtain hard currency

 • 2006: Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice approves an escalation of sanctions on Iranian financial institutions, which will include banks Saderat, Melli and Mellat.

• 2007: U.S. lobbies United Nations to constrict businesses of Iran's elite military unit, the Revolutionary Guard Corps.

• 2010:  U.S. sanctions force global firms to pull their insurance from Iran's largest shipping company, the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines, leading to the seizure of some of Iranian ships.

• 2011:  India seeks to purchase Iranian oil in non-dollar currencies, due to mounting U.S. sanctions on Tehran.

The countries negotiating with Iran—which included the U.S., the U.K., France, China, Russia and Germany—ended talks Saturday saying they had found no common ground to continue the diplomacy. U.S. and European officials could only say they hoped Tehran would reassess the proposals presented to it and agree to return to the table.

Mr. Levey has been hailed by both Republicans and Democrats for reimagining the use of financial warfare since moving to the Treasury in the wake of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the U.S. 

The Ohio native traveled widely across Asia, the Middle East and Europe to press foreign governments and businesses to cut off their financial ties to Iranian and North Korean entities believed to be involved in weapons proliferation and terrorism. Since 2004, he has also built up Treasury's Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence into a major cog in the U.S. national-security apparatus, with more than 700 people involved in activities such as tracking illicit financing and approving export licenses for sensitive technologies. 

Treasury officials now have a prominent seat in virtually every national-security debate.

"Stuart built the U.S. government's effort to combat terrorist financing from the ground up, and created a highly effective, world-class organization that has made Treasury an integral player in U.S. national-security policy," said Tom Donilon, Mr Obama's national-security adviser.

Mr. Levey's strategy has specifically focused on using international companies' needs for the U.S. dollar, and their fears of being barred from the American financial system, as leverage to gain their cooperation. At times, the Treasury Department hasn't even needed to formally sanction foreign companies, but merely register Washington's fears about their activities, in order to impact their businesses.

In 2006, the Bush administration succeeded in virtually freezing North Korea out of the international financial system after publicly accusing a Macau-based bank, Banco Delta Asia S.A.R.L., an arm of Delta Asia Financial Group, of laundering money on Pyongyang's behalf. In recent months, Treasury's sanctions on Iran's largest cargo-shipping company, the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines, has resulted in international insurance for its ships largely drying up. 

"If these big banks make mistakes, and find they're being unwittingly used by the Iranians to finance weapons systems or terrorism, it's a real blow to their reputations," said Henry Paulson, who oversaw Mr. Levey's work as President George W. Bush's last Treasury secretary. "That's a pretty big club."

Still, Messrs. Levey and Cohen acknowledged that America's adversaries are continuing to adapt to U.S. financial measures and that the ultimate impact of long-term sanction campaigns remains unclear.

North Korea stunned Washington last year by displaying to a visiting American scientist thousands of new centrifuge machines used to produce nuclear fuel. Pyongyang appeared to have evaded wide-ranging international sanctions to procure the raw materials and computer systems needed to covertly build the centrifuge facility.

Iranian officials, meanwhile, have given no indication that Washington's mounting financial war on Tehran will lead it to giving up or suspending its nuclear programs. 

Mr. Cohen said the Treasury has "rewritten the rules of economic warfare" in recent years. But he added: "We'd like to add some new plays."

 Write to  Jay Solomon at jay.solomon@wsj.com 