Irish tourism is founded upon the dynamism and friendliness of its natives. But in the midst of a humiliating financial bailout, can those in the industry truly enjoy "the craic" with visitors when the Republic of Ireland finds itself in the doldrums?

"I don't want to deny there is pain out there," said Tourism Ireland Chief Executive  Niall Gibbons. "People are in some tough situations, but the way to get out of this is to get out into the marketplace and win business. It is not going to happen on its own."

Mr. Gibbons's job is tougher than most. The Republic of Ireland is still in a state of shock—its lurch from boom to bust as sudden as it was momentous. 

In the 1990s, the Republic of Ireland was hailed as the "Celtic Tiger" when its economy went into rapid growth. But the country's property bubble burst in 2008, with devastating consequences. 

Last November, the country suffered the ignominy of asking the EU for a €67.5 billion ($87 billion) rescue package to tackle a massive hole in the government's finances. A few weeks later it unveiled a budget that will make at least €6 billion of cuts. Brian Cowen, the Taoiseach (prime minister) himself, was not immune—taking a 5% (€14,000) reduction (along with thousands of others in the civil service) to his €228,000 salary.

The global downturn has had a significant impact on visitors from the U.S. and Britain as well. In 2009, tourism revenue to the island of Ireland was €3.46 billion, down from €4.29 billion the year before. Over the same period, total visitor numbers fell to 7.63 million from 8.68 million. Preliminary figures for 2010 predicts that visitor numbers will fall further to 6.6 million.

The figures, while not surprising, make for grim reading. However, in an interview with The Wall Street Journal, Mr. Gibbons remains optimistic. "The industry is incredibly resilient," he said. "They [the people working in the industry] personify everything that is good about Ireland." 

Asked whether the drip feed of bad news coming out of Ireland has put visitors off, he responded, "Our strengths are the Irish people themselves, the scenery and the welcome. We see no evidence of that perception diminishing."

If the industry is indeed rolling up its sleeves in anticipation of more tourists, what can be done to show that the show is still on the road?

"Heading into 2011, we have a very big campaign ready to launch in our main markets," Mr. Gibbons said. "We are optimistic that we will see a return to growth."

Mr. Gibbons points to an announcement in the Republic of Ireland's December budget—the reduction in travel tax on all flights from €10 to €3—as "a very positive sign when other countries are introducing tourist taxes." 

Tourism Ireland, while also partly funded by the U.K. government's Northern Ireland Office, also had its €70 million stipend ring-fenced in the same budget.

The industry contributes only 3% of the Republic of Ireland's GDP, but the boom in tourist numbers from the 1990s has been a source of immense pride to the country. The move to support tourism—in arguably the most austere budget in the state's history—underlines the importance attached to the industry.

In 2011, said Mr. Gibbons, there will be no sign of retrenchment as promotional campaigns are renewed in North America, the U.K. and mainland Europe.

Tourism Ireland's move into social media, which gathered pace in 2010, will be continued. Some 185,000 people "follow" Ireland on Facebook and Twitter, both of which direct website users to special offers and promotions. 

For the first time, the body will advertise on German television and there will be a new direct flight from Charlotte, N.C., with U.S. Airways, into Dublin from May.

"North America accounts for 12% of our visitors but 20% of all revenue," said Mr. Gibbons. 

The past decade has seen a sea change in the type of visitor from the North American continent. Traditionally, the 40 million people who claim Irish ancestry made up the majority of visitors to the "old country." That now has changed.

"One of the most interesting things is that 10 years ago, of the North American market, 70% of all visitors had a family connection," Mr. Gibbons said. 

"Now 70% of people visiting from there do not have a family connection. They are good visitors in terms of staying in good hotels and hiring cars."

After Britain and the U.S., Germany and France are the next biggest markets and have not fared as badly. "Europe has been the star performer on tourism into Ireland in the last 10 years," he said.

But despite some signs of recovery in the tourism sector, can the Republic maintain its famous welcome in the midst of the worst recession in a generation? After all, some Irish themselves are voting on the current state of affairs with their feet. The flow of immigrants and emigrants into and out of the Republic of Ireland has changed rapidly in the past three years.

In the year ending April 2007, there were some 109,500 immigrants entering the Republic, with 42,200 emigrating. However, by 2010 estimates by Ireland's Central Statistics Office show that there were only 30,800 immigrants, compared to 65,300 leaving the country. 

The estimated net outward migratory figure of 34,500 for 2010, up from 7,800 in April 2009, represents the highest level of net outward migration since 1989.

The Republic has also had to contend with claims—both at home and abroad—that it has become more expensive in the past decade. 

But according to Hotels.com's latest Hotel Price Index, Irish hotels are now the cheapest in Western Europe. A visitor attitude survey for 2010 carried out by Tourism Ireland provides further good news—showing that 57% of visitors believe Ireland represents "good all round value for money," up 10 percentage points on the year before. 

Tourism Ireland's job this year will be to hammer home the message that there are bargains to be had.

Under a special arrangement agreed by politicians in both Northern Ireland and the Republic, Tourism Ireland promotes tourism throughout the island of Ireland. 

Mr. Gibbons, who is from Dublin and married with four children, has been with the body since it was founded under the auspices of 1998's Good Friday Agreement. He was made chief executive in June 2009, having previously held the role of director of corporate services and company secretary. 

Can optimism, endeavor and goodwill turn Ireland's tourism fortunes around? For Mr. Gibbons, the answer is yes.

"There is a genuine warmth and friendliness to Ireland out there," he said. "Ireland is still shining very brightly.

"I started after the Good Friday Agreement. We have had 9/11, the SARS outbreak and Bird Flu. We will get through this."