RAMALLAH, West Bank—Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas defended his handling of peace talks with Israel on Monday after the publication of leaked documents that appear to show Palestinian negotiators offering far-reaching concessions to Israel on the conflict's most sensitive issues.

The Palestinian documents, released by al Jazeera late Sunday, triggered a massive outpouring of anger in the Palestinian territories directed at the Palestinian Authority leadership, which held uncompromising positions in public but appears to have given way to Israel in private negotiations.

Israel, meanwhile, is portrayed in the documents as slowing the Mideast peace process by turning down unprecedented Palestinian concessions.

Chief Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat, in charge of the office from which al Jazeera and Palestinian officials said the leaks originated, said al Jazeera had "misrepresented our positions, taking statements and facts out of context."

A senior Israeli diplomat said because the documents came from the Palestinian side they distorted the negotiations by making it appear that only Palestinians offered concessions while Israel stood intransigent.

"You only see them consulting each other and thinking what to do, what to say, you see them at work," the diplomat said. "You don't see the Israeli team at work."

The office of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu declined to comment on the leaks.

 January 2010: A Palestinian negotiator presented an offer to a White House aide, saying, "What is in that paper gives them the biggest [Jerusalem] in Jewish history, symbolic number of refugees return, demilitarized state… what more can I give?"

 June 2008: In a meeting with then-Israeli Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni, Palestinian Authority adviser Ahmed Qureia ceded every Jewish settlement in East Jerusalem except Har Homa. The adviser noted: "This is the first time in history that we make such a proposition; we refused to do so in Camp David."

 September 2009: Before U.S. President Barack Obama hosted a meeting with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas, Mr. Abbas's chief negotiator warned damage would doom Mr. Abbas's political standing at home.

 2008: In two meetings, then-Foreign Minister Ms. Livni seemed to propose transferring Arab citizens of Israel to a future Palestinain state.

 --Source: Al Jazeera 

A Palestinian official with access to the original documents said that all the documents released so far appeared to be authentic. A former Israeli official quoted in some of the documents also said they appeared authentic.

U.S. State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley said the U.S., which brokered the talks, was reviewing the documents, but wouldn't vouch for their veracity.

Al Jazeera on Monday continued its gradual release of what it said were nearly 1,700 leaked Palestinian documents, including minutes of meetings, internal emails, and draft agreements covering September 1999 to September 2010.

The documents appear to have been copied off the server of the Palestinian Negotiations Support Unit, a Western-funded team of legal advisers to Palestinian negotiators established in 1999.

In an emotional 30-minute televised news conference, Yasser Abed Rabbo, a senior Palestinian Authority official, accused Qatar, where al Jazeera is based, of conspiring with Iran and Syria to oust Mr. Abbas from power.

"No agreement will be signed without the approval of the Palestinian people," he said.

Hamas's deputy leader Osama Hamdan said on al Jazeera that the documents prove the Palestinian leadership is "not honest and have no credibility to negotiate."

The leaks comes as WikiLeaks continues to unveil its own trove of leaked U.S. State Department cables, which revealed fundamental contradictions between Arab leaders' public and private pronouncements.

The leak of the Palestinian documents highlight a shifting media landscape in the Arab world in which new media outlets are shaking regimes' monopoly on information and challenging the status quo across the region.

Al Jazeera, Twitter, and WikiLeaks have been given partial credit for helping foment and sustain the popular unrest that lead to the downfall of Tunisian President Zine al-Abedine Ben Ali this month.

Al Jazeera said it intends to release the documents in batches in coming days, with each new batch focusing on a particular issue, such Israeli-Palestinian security cooperation and the Gaza War.

On the streets of Ramallah on Monday, a few dozen supporters of Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas's Fatah party tried to storm al Jazeera's offices, but were dispersed by Palestinian police. On the streets they scrawled graffiti reading "al Jazeera = Israel."

The leaked documents portray an Israeli negotiating team, both under former Prime Minister Ehud Olmert and current Prime Minister Netanyahu, that rebuffed Palestinian offers that were more generous than those previously made public.

They include verbatim minutes of one-on-one meetings between Palestinian and Israeli leaders that reveal a chummy and often jocular atmosphere.

Minutes from a June 15, 2008, meeting with then-Israeli Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni, then-U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, and Palestinian negotiator Ahmed Qureia have been particularly controversial. 

According to the leaked minutes of the meeting, Mr. Qureia offered Israel every settlement in Jerusalem except for one, noting that "this is the first time in history we make such a proposition."

Many Palestinians have seized on the documents as proof that the peace process is dead.

"One has to ask…if Israel said no even when the Palestinians offered every Jewish settlement in Jerusalem except one, is a two-state solution a possibility?" former Palestinian Authority adviser Amjad Abdullah said.

Ms. Livni's office also declined to comment.

The senior Israeli diplomat said the Palestinian leadership's rush to deny the reports also cast doubts on the sincerity of Palestinians' private concessions.

"It makes you wonder what will happen should we strike a deal one day and the Palestinians will need to sell it to their public," the diplomat said. 

"Will they be able to say to their public, we've made compromises? I don't know. This really casts doubt on their ability to make compromises and stand by it."

Israeli analysts said the documents could serve to boost international sympathy for the Palestinians at time when the Palestinians are trying to rally support for a United Nations Security Council resolution condemning Israeli settlements, and trying to persuade Western countries to recognize Palestinian statehood.

"This could have an effect on European countries deciding whether or not to recognize Palestinian statehood," said  Ofer Zalzberg, an Israeli Jerusalem-based political analyst with the International Crisis Group. "In the immediate term this is where there could be some impact."

Former and current Palestinian officials said the documents had to have come from the Negotiations Support Unit, an office of approximately 30 legal advisers to Palestinian negotiators. 

The office was set up in 1999 and funded by Western donor countries to provide legal expertise to Palestinian negotiators. 

The unit is staffed primarily by Western-educated and -raised Palestinian expatriates whose growing prominence in peace negotiations has been a source of constant tension with parts of the Palestinian Authority leadership. 

The NSU has seen high turnover, with many of its most prominent advisers leaving on bad terms. Within the unit, there is widespread dissatisfaction with the Palestinian leadership's approach to negotiations, according to people familiar with the matter.

A spokesman for the Palestinian Security Forces, Adnan Damirir, said an official investigation had been opened to identify and prosecute the person responsible for the leaks.

 Write to  Charles Levinson at charles.levinson@wsj.com 