  International Paper,
IP


-1.18
%




 the world's largest paper and packaging company, is a different company than it was six years ago. It's more international, for one thing, with 30% of revenues now coming from abroad. It's also generating a lot more cash, keeping costs down, and allocating its capital better.

"We are more global, more balanced and more focused," says Chairman and Chief Executive  John Faraci, who ascended to the top spot in 2003. "We're a different company."

As a result of the makeover, the Memphis-based company is positioned to report some of the best and highest-quality earnings in its history. Indeed, its first-quarter earnings beat expectations by a mile, as all product lines across all geographies showed good performance. Yet, International Paper's stock remains undervalued. Investors are overlooking the potential for the shares to deliver a total return of more than 40% in the next year -- including a dividend yield of 3.4% -- from their current level of around $32.

Healthy industry fundamentals bode well for the company's prospects: demand for containerboard used in packaging is increasing, inventories have peaked and capacity is running full tilt.

Most of International Paper's business is tied to industrial and consumer packaging, and the brown boxes made from its linerboard are the most commonly used shipping containers in the world. Corrugated-box shipments in the U.S. were up 2% through the first quarter, following a 3.5% rise for all of 2010. That's the first sequential gain following such a yearly advance since 1994, according to veteran paper and pulp analyst  Chip Dillon of Credit Suisse. Tight supplies will likely lead to price increases of about $50 a ton on containerboard this summer, Mr. Dillon expects.

He sees the stock reaching $42 a share based on his earnings estimates of $2.85 a share for this year and $3.90 a share for 2012.

"We feel very strongly momentum is continuing to build," says  Tim Nicholls, the company's chief financial officer.

This is a time for investors to be thinking inside the box and adding International Paper to their portfolios.

—For more stories, see barrons.com.