LONDON—A serving British legislator has pleaded guilty to charges connected to the country’s parliamentary expenses scandal, an admission which could trigger a by-election.

Eric Illsley, currently the House of Commons’ member of parliament for the Barnsley Central constituency, told a London court Tuesday that he dishonestly claimed around £14,000 (US$22,000).

Mr. Illsely had previously denied three charges of false accounting. The judge, Justice John Saunders, said Mr. Illsley will be sentenced next month.

If he is jailed for more than 12 months, Mr. Illsley will be disqualified as a lawmaker, meaning an election would need to be held to select his replacement. He currently sits as an independent legislator, having already been suspended by the main opposition Labour party.

Prosecutors had accused the 55-year-old of dishonestly claiming expense payments for insurance, repairs, utility bills and taxes on a home in London between 2005 and 2008.

Mr. Illsley “took advantage of the trust placed in him by his constituents to act honorably on their behalf,” Simon Clements, head of the special crime division of Britain’s Crown Prosecution Service, said following the hearing.

“Instead, he siphoned off public money into his own pockets and betrayed those who rightly expected the highest standards of integrity from him as a Member of Parliament,” Mr. Clements said.

Labour Party leader Ed Miliband urged Mr. Illsley to step down from the House of Commons following his admission of guilt.

“I think he should now do the right thing and resign as a member of Parliament, because I don’t think he can be a credible voice for his constituents having pleaded guilty to such a serious offense,” Mr. Miliband told the British Broadcasting Corp.

Last week, ex-Labour lawmaker David Chaytor was jailed for 18 months on expense fraud charges.

The prosecution of Mr. Illsley and Mr. Chaytor follows the 2009 disclosure of previously secret files which revealed how politicians had billed the public for items including second homes, horse manure and pornographic movies.

Two former legislators and two House of Lords members are scheduled to face trial in the coming months on charges related to their expenses.

A total of 392 current and former legislators were ordered to repay £1.12 million ($1.8 million) following their extravagant or inappropriate claims.

Low taxes campaign group the Taxpayers’ Alliance said Mr. Illsley should not have stood for office at Britain’s national election last May if he knew he had made wrongful claims for public money.

Mr. Illsley has served his district in northern England since 1987 and was returned at May’s election with a slightly reduced majority.

“It is disgraceful that Mr. Illsley has dragged out the process and stood for Parliament again, despite knowing that he was a guilty criminal who had ripped off the taxpayers whose interests he was supposed to serve,” said Matthew Sinclair, the Taxpayers’ Alliance’s director. 