  Q: I have two children soon to be 16 and 17 and need to find a car for them. I am looking to spend $4,000 to $6,000. Would you suggest an older model car with few miles, or a newer car with higher miles? Any recommendations for a vehicle in this range?  

— Kevin Hohman, Zionsville, Ind. 

A: The types of cars that safety experts usually recommend for new teenage drivers are family sedans like the Toyota Camry, Ford Taurus and Honda Accord. Such cars tend to be inexpensive in the used market, especially if they are more than five years old. They may not have the latest electronic safety gadgets, but they usually provide good crash protection, stable handling, and little temptation to drive them like sports cars. Try to find the newest car with the lowest miles that is still within your price range. That may be a 10-year-old car with 40,000 miles or a four-year-old car with 100,000 miles. Whether you should err on the side of miles or years depends on the car. Have a mechanic look over any vehicle you are seriously considering.

  Q: We have 78,000 miles on our 2002 Chrysler Town & Country V-6 minivan. We've changed the oil regularly and kept the body in good shape. Can we reasonably expect the engine to last at least 150,000 miles or should we replace it with a new Odyssey?  

— Ron Warner, Chesterfield Mo. 

A: The Chrysler vans are pretty robust and I have seen many that have gone 200,000 to 300,000 miles without much trouble. I would hang onto yours as long as it is running reliably. The Honda Odyssey is a nice design (mechanically if not aesthetically) that drives more like a car than most of its rivals. But it can be expensive compared with other brands and has been far from trouble-free in terms of reliability.

  Q: I have a 2002 Mercedes Benz SLK 320 in near perfect condition. Recently, I mistakenly left the lights on overnight and drained the new battery. I got it jumped and it seems to work fine now. Should an overly protective owner get another new battery at my next scheduled maintenance?  

— Richard Walker, Chicago 

A: Ask the mechanic to check the battery's condition the next time you take the car in (or sooner if shows signs of weakness before then). You may not need a new one. 

You might also try using a battery-maintaining device to keep the charge at the proper level when the car sits for extended periods. You can get one at an auto parts store for less than the price of a new battery. 

  Q: My wife drives a 2005 Subaru Baja with 85,000 miles. This has been the perfect car for her—on-demand, all-wheel drive, open cargo bed and Subaru interior. What are the best replacement options seeing Subaru has discontinued this model?  

— Dick Stowell, Weld, Maine 

A: Honda's Ridgeline is the closest thing to the Baja in that it is essentially a pickup truck built on a car-style chassis. The Honda is considerably larger, though. You might try a compact pickup like the Toyota Tacoma, or a small SUV with an easy-to-clean cargo area like the Honda Element, Toyota FJ Cruiser or Nissan Xterra. 

— Email mecar@wsj.com 