WASHINGTON—House Republicans began a push Thursday to pick apart the Democrats' sweeping health-care law, an undertaking carrying possible risks alongside political rewards.

A day after House Republicans voted unanimously to repeal the entire health law—an effort almost certain to die in the Senate—the chairmen of four House committees announced their plans to move on to the bigger challenge of coming up with specific measures to kill or replace parts of the legislation. 

"Today is Day One of our efforts to replace Obama Care with something better—a lot better," said Rep. Fred Upton (R., Mich.), chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee.

The chairmen provided few details but said they would pursue such longstanding Republican priorities as limiting medical liability lawsuits and allowing consumers to buy insurance across state lines.

Republicans see a political opportunity within their party. As a Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll released Wednesday indicates, nearly eight in 10 Republicans say they favor repealing the law. The House repeal vote was a statement to the tea-party movement, whose energy was crucial to Republican success in the 2010 elections.

The reaction of party activists to the repeal vote showed the potential for the issue to continue energizing the GOP base. ForAmerica, a conservative advocacy organization, said those who voted in the House to kill the health bill "listened to the central message of this past November's election...This will clearly be an issue in the next cycle, and we will not forget."

"We had to do that, because that is so seminal to what we've been talking about for two years," said Rep. Scott Garrett (R., N.J.). "We believe that the health-care bill was so egregiously wrong for America, so costly, and can have a negative impact on job creation as well, that it needs to be done right now."

Still, members of both parties say the GOP will have to strike a careful balance in pushing the issue as the 2012 elections approach. In coming months, Republicans plan to bring up health-related measures periodically, while focusing primarily on spending. 

While Republicans overwhelmingly favor repeal, the country overall is evenly divided on the law, and far more Democrats and independents are likely to vote in 2012 than did in 2010. In the Journal/NBC poll, 45% of respondents supported undoing the law, while 46% opposed a repeal. Among independents, 43% favored repeal and 43% were opposed.

"Are [voters] unhappy with the health-care plan? Sure," said Republican strategist David Winston. "But they're more unhappy with the unemployment rate. The key thing is to make sure it's clear in their minds how it's related."

Moreover, Republicans had lambasted Democrats during the last campaign, with some effectiveness, for focusing on health care rather than on jobs and the economy. Now Democrats are seeking to turn the tables by leveling the same charge at Republicans.

 "The question [Americans] are asking this Congress is, 'Why don't you work together to help small businesses and entrepreneurs create jobs for our country?' " said Rep. Rob Andrews (D., N.J.). "The answer the majority gives them is, 'We will get to that someday.' "

 Republicans counter that by imposing mandates and taxes on some businesses, the new law discourages hiring. They formally titled their bill "The Repealing the Job-Killing Health Care Law Act," and they almost invariably call the health law "job-destroying" or "job-crushing."

 Democrats strongly dispute that the law is costing jobs, saying that tax credits it includes to help businesses buy insurance will free up money for hiring, and that more than 200,000 jobs were created in the health-care sector since March.

House GOP lawmakers have been scrutinizing the law and brainstorming about alternatives. The House Judiciary Committee held a hearing Thursday on limiting medical liability lawsuits. The Ways and Means Committee is holding hearings on the regulations imposed by the new law.

Rep. Marsha Blackburn (R., Tenn.) has drafted a bill that would allow consumers to buy insurance across state lines. The Judiciary Committee is planning hearings soon to explore the law's constitutionality. Many of the Republican ideas have little chance of passage in the Senate.

"The tree is rotten, so you cut it down," said Rep. Dave Camp (R., Mich.), chairman of the Ways and Means Committee. "If we can't cut it down, we'll prune it branch by branch."

Republicans are setting no deadlines for coming up with health-care proposals and said they would most likely offer piecemeal measures rather than a single sweeping bill. Democrats mocked them for having no alternatives.

After this week's clamorous repeal debate, GOP leaders were signaling their intent to pivot quickly to jobs and spending issues. They will hold a House vote on cutting federal spending on Tuesday, the day of President Barack Obama's State of the Union address. Congressional debate will soon turn to whether to raise the government's debt limit and how much money to spend for the rest of the fiscal year. In coming months, Republicans plan to bring up health-related measures periodically, while focusing primarily on spending.

 Write to  Naftali Bendavid at naftali.bendavid@wsj.com 