WASHINGTON—Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates defended his plans to trim the Pentagon budget over the next five years and at the same time criticized Congress for failing to pass a budget for the current year, a move that could force faster, across-the-board cuts in military spending.

In recent days, some Republican lawmakers have criticized Mr. Gates for planning to make a $78 billion in cuts from the previously planned Pentagon budget, a move that would unfold in coming years.

But by funding government under a continuing resolution, rather than passing new spending bills for the current fiscal year, Mr. Gates said the current Congress is forcing up to $23 billion in cuts.

"We have a crisis on our doorstep," he said.

Mr. Gates made his remarks while traveling to Ottawa, Canada, Wednesday, but they weren't released by the Pentagon until Thursday.

If Congress allows the government to run on last year's spending levels, rather than passing a 2011 spending bill, the Pentagon will be forced to make cuts. The Obama administration proposed spending $549 billion on the Pentagon budget for 2011. The current funding resolution passed by Congress would maintain 2010 spending levels, or about $526 billion.

Mr. Gates said he would try to shield funding for troops deployed in Afghanistan and Iraq, as well programs designed to help grievously wounded service members and efforts designed to alleviate the burdens of military families when spouses are away on long deployments.

But unless something close to the Obama administration's budget is passed, deep cuts in training and maintenance could "hollow out" the military, he said.

The cuts the Pentagon proposed for the 2012 budget, including halting work on the Marine Corps Expeditionary Fighting Vehicle and an Army surface-to-air missile, are designed to ensure the services have money to spend modernizing other, more critical equipment, Mr. Gates said.

The reduction in the number of troops deployed to Iraq has allowed the Pentagon to slow its war spending. Mr. Gates said Wednesday evening that he planned to ask Congress for $120 billion in war funding in 2012, down from last year's request of $159 billion.

At hearing Wednesday, Rep Howard "Buck" McKeon (R., Calif.), chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, criticized the proposed elimination of the Marine's EFV and Mr. Gates's other cuts.

"I will not support initiatives that will leave our military less capable and less able to fight," he said.

Mr. Gates said that of the $78 billion in cuts, much is from changed economic assumptions like lower inflation and fewer pay increases. Only about $10 billion in cuts will come from cutting the force size or reducing other defense programs.

But in Congress, Mr. Gates has been criticized from both sides. Some deficit hawks believe deeper cuts in defense spending are needed, especially given the growth in the Pentagon budget since the Sept 11, 2001, terror attacks.

Also on Wednesday, Rep. Chris Gibson (R., N.Y.), a freshman elected with tea-party endorsement, said military spending should be "on the table" and considered for cuts.

Mr. Gates has repeatedly insisted that slashing the Pentagon budget is not the way to balance the budget, and that current spending, when viewed as a percentage of the overall budget, is within historic norms.

"When it comes to the deficit, we are not the problem," Mr. Gates said.

 Write to  Julian E. Barnes at julian.barnes@wsj.com 