 Cooperstown, N.Y. 

A nighttime chill still grips the hills around Lake Otsego here, but Francesca Zambello, 54, the new general and artistic director of the Glimmerglass Festival—formerly known as the Glimmerglass Opera, and once one of the most exciting opera companies in the U.S.—is thinking ahead to July and August. She has 40,000 tickets to sell, and most will be bought by people who come from somewhere else. So, in addition to putting her own stamp on the opera programming, much needed after several uninspiring seasons under her predecessor, she is busy rebranding the whole experience. The new "Festival" will encompass ancillary concerts and events as well as operas, and Ms. Zambello is reaching out to merchants and other cultural institutions in the area with the idea that some vigorous collaboration can turn this agricultural corner of upstate New York into a Destination. 

Last fall, for example, she asked Paul D'Ambrosio, vice president and chief curator at Cooperstown's Fenimore Art Museum, if the museum could do an Edward Hopper exhibit to go with the Glimmerglass production of "Later the Same Evening," John Musto's 2007 opera based on several Hopper paintings. Mr. D'Ambrosio was dubious at first. "But she seemed so sincere and passionate—so I thought, why not give it a try? I've been here for 25 years, and the two institutions have never collaborated before, even though the opera crowd is very much our crowd." The museum will present "A Window into Edward Hopper" (May 28-Sept. 11), a 45-work mix of etchings, paintings and some rarely-seen early drawings. Mr. D'Ambrosio notes that this will be the first major Hopper show in the region of Stephen Clark and Edward Root, Hopper's great patrons. "There's no question that it will attract more people to the area," Mr. D'Ambrosio says. "We have to do it. We're not on a major road to anywhere, so we've got to appeal to people to come here."

Ms. Zambello wants opera lovers to know about the wealth of cultural and leisure opportunities in the area so they will come more often and stay longer. The bucolic setting was one of the reasons she took the job in the first place. "We don't often get the chance to experience music in this kind of surrounding," she said. "It makes you hear and see it differently. There's a mystic, spiritual mix of land and culture." The intimacy of the 914-seat opera house designed by Hugh Hardy—"a cross between Bayreuth and a barn"—is another key aspect of the Glimmerglass brand. "I consider us a boutique institution. We are offering the up-close, personal experience, where the artists are right in your lap." That, she feels, can be a powerful draw for new opera fans as well.

An array of new events, such as song evenings, cabaret shows, discussions, lectures, talk-backs and Q&A sessions, many modestly priced or free, are designed to get more people onto the opera grounds. "We have 100 beautiful acres on Lake Otsego, and I'm trying to open up our land to the public," Ms. Zambello says. "We have picnic sites. You can hike, or sit by the lake. We have a nature walk, ending with a dock where you can swim. You can arrive for a matinee in your kayak—we have kayak parking! I want people to arrive in their wet bathing suits!"

That's not exactly the traditional view of the art form, but Ms. Zambello has always exploded stereotypes. While she directs opera in major theaters (her "Ring" cycle will be at the San Francisco Opera this spring), she's a great believer in access, which includes expanding opera's boundaries to incorporate musicals. The 2011 Glimmerglass season will feature Irving Berlin's "Annie Get Your Gun," which Ms. Zambello sees in a historical performance context: doing classic musicals with big voices and orchestra and no amplification. It will star soprano Deborah Voigt, who will be fresh from her first Metropolitan Opera Brünnhilde in "Die Walküre." Ms. Voigt will also mentor the company's young artists and perform a solo cabaret show that she wrote with Ms. Zambello and playwright Terrence McNally.

How did Ms. Zambello recruit such a big name to her $6.3 million opera company? "In this job, you definitely have to use your Rolodex," she says. "Still, we're all artists, and we want to do things that challenge us in some way."

There are other notables on the season's roster. Jeanine Tesori and Tony Kushner have written a one-act opera, "The Blizzard at Marblehead Neck," that will have its world premiere on a double bill with the Musto piece. David Pittsinger will create the role of Eugene O'Neill in "The Blizzard at Marblehead Neck," Rod Gilfry will be Frank in "Annie Get Your Gun," and Anne Bogart will direct "Carmen." The other repertory opera is Cherubini's "Medea," which continues the Glimmerglass tradition of mounting unusual works. 

Ms. Zambello will direct "Annie Get Your Gun" and "The Blizzard at Marblehead Neck" herself. In contrast to some recent, theme-driven seasons, when all the operas were staged on one set, or on repurposed old sets, all the productions will be new and distinct from one another. "I want the audience to see different visual things. Not that we have lavish production budgets, but they are enough to tell the story and make a visual statement, and directors have five weeks of rehearsal to create performances with actors and singers."

In the spirit of making the most of what you have, Ms. Zambello is casting her net wide in the neighborhood. Ommegang, Cooperstown's boutique brewery, will be the company's official brewery, and a contest to name a Glimmerglass beer is in the works. The Inn at Cooperstown is assembling a package that includes behind-the-scenes opportunities at the opera. Lodging can be hard to find during the opera season; the company will now offer assistance to anyone who asks. Ms. Zambello also is suggesting such places as La Petite Maison in Waterville, about 30 minutes from the opera house, as postmatinee dining destinations. The Fenimore will offer VIP tours of its superb collection of Indian art as an "Annie Get Your Gun" tie-in. Childcare will be available for some performances; a kennel is recommended for people traveling with pets. And discussions are under way with the Cooperstown's most famous attraction, the Baseball Hall of Fame. 

The possibilities seem endless. Ms. Zambello would love to see "Last of the Mohicans" hikes. She also has her eye on "The Fabulous Beekman Boys," the cable-TV reality show featuring a New York City couple who bought a farm in nearby Sharon Springs. The Beekman merchandise line—goat-milk soap, cheese, linens and the like—adds shopping for local products to the activities mix, and there will now be a Glimmerglass shawl among them. She wouldn't mind being on the show, either, reinforcing that connection of art and land. After all, her opera house looks like a barn, and when the sliding side walls are open and the wind is right, you can smell the cows. 

 Ms. Waleson writes about opera for the Journal. 