 The Village Vanguard  178 Seventh Ave. South, (212) 255-4037  Through Sunday 

The music of Argentine composer-bandleader-pianist Guillermo Klein is some of the most exciting larger-ensemble jazz being created today, yet his 10-piece ensemble, Los Guachos, sounds nothing like "traditional" big-band music. In his late set on opening night at the Vanguard, it was hard to determine whether a given piece was in a major or minor key, or what the time signature was, and forget about following any obvious formal structural pattern. Mr. Klein also sidesteps the traditional set up of brass, saxes and rhythm section call-and-response, and reconsiders the typical inter-relationship of individual soloist and full ensemble. Yet the only difficulty is in describing it—the music itself hardly sounds complicated or inaccessible. Like his approximate contemporary, Maria Schneider, Mr. Klein's tone colors are absolutely stunning, his melodies rich and tuneful, and everything falls into place perfectly.

Mr. Klein's new album is titled "Bienestan," which he says came about by accident. He had written a piece he called "Impresion de Bienestar" (which translates roughly as "comfortable feeling"), but bassist Matt Penman misread the title as "Bienestan." This led Mr. Klein to imagine a mythical Middle-Eastern kingdom that apparently boasts its own unique musical culture. Certainly, Mr. Klein's music sounds like it came from no known country on planet earth. 

The album, in fact, sounds even less like one of Mr. Klein's previous six or so CDs, and with good reason. It's a collaboration with the highly accomplished pianist Aaron Goldberg. Mr. Goldberg plays piano (I refuse to refer to the instrument as an "acoustic piano," even for the sake of clarity), along with Mr. Penman on bass and drummer Eric Harland. Mr. Klein plays Fender Rhodes, but it's hardly what you'd expect on your usual four-handed keyboard duo, even on the two duets, "Airport Fugue" and "Implacable." 

With Los Guachos, Mr. Klein's piano passages mainly serve as introductions to set tempo and groove—much like those of Duke Ellington and Count Basie. One is hardly ever conscious of the piano at the Vanguard; he uses it to support and underscore, sometimes interjecting a sung passage (mainly mumbled under his breath like an Argentine João Gilberto). 

On "Bienestan," conversely, it's all about the keyboards—they predominate, and that's despite the fact that five cuts feature Chris Cheek and Miguel Zenon, two saxophonists from Los Guachos. Also unlike Mr. Klein's previous albums, "Bienestan" includes several jazz and songbook standards. Charlie Parker's "Moose the Mooche" has been reconfigured to sound like it was written by Milton Babbit, with unexpected repeats, stops and starts; possibly Messrs. Klein and Goldberg are aware that this "I Got Rhythm" variation was named after a drug dealer, and the unexpected tempo shifts give it an appropriately hallucinogenic feel. In fact, the most familiar melodies on "Bienestan" are the furthest out: The album opens with an "All the Things You Are," wherein Jerome Kern meets Philip Glass.

Both on the album and with Los Guachos at the Vanguard, the melody and the rhythm never stop, and the thing never becomes purely academic. Because I'm conscious that Mr. Klein came from Buenos Aires, in my head I hear tricky time patterns that, to my North American ears at least, seem to be an outgrowth of the tango, and, in the slower ballads, a bolero. Yet if I were listening in a blindfold test, I might just as easily have pegged the composer as hailing from Tel Aviv, Tokyo or Teaneck.



 Dizzy's Club Coca-Cola  Broadway at 60th Street, (212) 258-9595  Through Sunday

Whereas Los Guachos, currently playing at the Vanguard, sound like no other band, the Juilliard Jazzers sound like every other band—which can be a good thing. A band doesn't have to have an agenda, other than bringing together four outstanding players (one of whom, bassist Ron Carter, approaches the living-legend category) who are also gifted composers, playing a combination of their own originals (notably Mr. Carter's subtle, semi-bossa, "Mr. Bowtie") and standards in a way that's at once mellow and stimulating. Saxophonist Ron Blake (who has an exceptionally palatable tone on soprano), pianist Frank Kimbrough, drummer Carl Allen and Mr. Carter don't bebop you to death with a deluge of notes, nor do they play in meters so tricky that you'll reach for a slide rule and a metronome to follow them. It's hardly generic— think of this, instead, as all-purpose jazz.

 Dizzy's Club Coca-Cola  Broadway at 60th Street, (212) 258-9595  Monday

Reading Donald Bogle's excellent new biography of Ethel Waters, "Heat Wave," puts me in the mood to hear her greatest living successor. There are a zillion reasons to love Catherine Russell, not least of which is that she'd rather sing the blues than a bossa nova or Björk. She dwells mostly in the 1930s, doing justice to the legacies of such icons as Fats Waller and Ella Fitzgerald, as well as many sub-styles of the blues, from the more formal "classic" mode of Bessie Smith ("Kitchen Man") to the jumping jive of Louis Jordan and Wynonie Harris ("Quiet Whiskey") and the hardcore Chicago style of Howlin' Wolf ("Spoonful"). Like Waller and Waters, her record sessions are populated with the best players of her time, and such ace accompanists as John Allred (trombone), Howard Johnson (tuba) and guitar virtuoso Matt Munisteri all pause for the cause on her outstanding 2010 "Inside This Heart of Mine."



 Jazz Gallery  290 Hudson St., (212) 242-1063  Friday-Saturday

I'm tempted to call Gerald Clayton the fair-haired wonderboy of the piano for the new decade, except that his medusa-like dreadlocks are anything but "fair." At 26, he is already a certified keyboard superstar, and the buzz surrounding his new album, "Bond," is palpable. It's mostly originals, but many piano fiends will go straight for the album's three standards. The opener, "If I Were a Bell," is clearly the money track: Mr. Clayton starts by expressing the melody clearly but understatedly, treating it like something newly written and pooh-poohing 60 years of accumulated musical baggage. He never completely abandons the tune in subsequent choruses, but rather slaloms in and out of it, rocking from side to side.

 Birdland  315 W. 44th St., (212) 581-3080  Through Saturday

How do you like your re-created 1960s pop hits: with or without irony? Big sister Ann Hampton Callaway is a bebopper, Liz is a Broadway baby, but they find common ground in reminiscing about the music of their youth. Ann takes the big soulful numbers, like "You've Lost That Lovin' Feelin,'" while Liz's specialty is the comparatively introspective texts of Burt Bacharach and Jim Webb. This full and wildly entertaining show is the most purely theatrical production to run in prime time for a week at Birdland, boasting a full script, costume changes and modulations. Comedy is the glue that holds it together, as in the sisters' sideline analysis of the inner significance of the lyrics to "Come Together." Somehow, taking a deep, concert-style bow after nonverbally rendering the themes to "Star Trek" and "Batman" is very funny.