New York state is weighing whether to prohibit high-school teachers from grading their own students' Regents exams. The  Board of Regents, which sets education policy for the state, is set to vote next week on the ban. 

The proposed rule is tucked into regulations governing an overhaul of teacher and principal evaluations. Last year, the Legislature passed a law requiring the state to revamp the evaluations and tie them, in part, to student standardized test scores. 

In New York, teachers have been grading their own students' Regents tests for decades. Students need to pass five Regents tests to obtain a high-school diploma. The proposed rule also applies to elementary and intermediate grade-school tests, but schools typically send those tests outside for scoring.

In February, a Wall Street Journal analysis of 2009 Regents scores statewide showed a bulge in tests that received the exact score of 65, the minimum necessary to pass a Regents exam. Experts on testing and statistics said the results suggested widespread score inflation. For the 2009 U.S. History and Government Regents, for example, New York students were 14 times more likely to get a 65 than one point lower.

If it passes, the ban would take effect as school districts implement the new evaluation systems, as early as the 2011-12 school year.  Tom Dunn, a spokesman for the New York State Department of Education, said the agency will provide guidance to schools on how to implement the rule. He declined to say whether teachers would be allowed to grade the tests from students in their building—or whether the tests would have to be graded by teachers outside the school entirely. 

Mr. Dunn said the proposal was made because an independent advisory group of "nationally known experts," which advises the state on assessment issues, recommended that "educators not have a vested interest in the exams they score."

In New York City, the largest district in the state, officials worried about the cost of a significant change in the grading system. "We fully support creating a system where scoring is distributed across schools, and teachers don't grade their own students' tests," said  Matt Mittenthal, a Department of Education spokesman. "But it will take a real investment and support from the state to ensure this does not become an unfunded mandate on districts."

In mid-February, the city DOE said it was going to increase its auditing of high school achievement benchmarks, including Regents test scores. 

A separate analysis of Regents data shows a smaller but significant bump at 85. While the bump at 65 is found predominantly at low-income schools, the jump at 85 occurs in both high schools and middle schools in higher-income districts. A score of 85 for an eighth-grader means that the student can skip certain classes in high school, such as algebra. An 85 for high-schoolers helps earn them a "Regents Diploma with Advanced Designation," which carries benefits in college admissions. 

"For some kids and some schools, that's going to matter," said  Jonah Rockoff, a professor at Columbia University's business school who frequently analyzes school-related data sets. 

At the request of the Journal, Mr. Rockoff analyzed the 2009 Regents scores across the state and found that the jump at 85 is "not happening by chance." The bulge at 85 is "a miniature version" of the peak at 65 across schools in the state, he said. "We see some teachers nudging the kids over the bar to get that accolade," he said. Mr. Rockoff said the patterns are "very consistent with teachers awarding an extra point on the essay questions as a means of moving kids over the cutoff." 

"It's always been a goal of every district to get kids to a mastery level," said  John Sawchuk, principal at Columbia High School in East Greenbush, N.Y. In 2009, 27 students scored exactly an 85 in the living-environment Regents exam, while four scored an 84. Mr. Sawchuk said there's no evidence that his teachers got to those numbers on purpose, and in fact, because the school was audited a few years ago, teachers are unlikely to take any chances. He said that no teachers would jeopardize his or her "reputation as an instructor to give a point" to a student. 

At Westhampton Beach High School in Long Island, 18 students received a score of 85 in the living-environment test in 2009, while three got an 84. Principal  Chris Herr, said his teachers' "professionalism" wouldn't allow them to push scores just to get over the 85 hump. "We've looked at our data across multiple exams and multiple years and we haven't seen any real patterns," he said. The 2009 science results that show a higher number of students at 85 than any other score are "probably a statistical anomaly," he said. 

 Write to  Barbara Martinez at Barbara.Martinez@wsj.com and Tom McGinty at tom.mcginty@wsj.com 