Most Asian stock markets edged higher, boosted by strong U.S. jobs data Friday and a rebound in commodity prices, but Japanese shares declined on concerns about potential power shortages.

The region's gains were tempered by caution over the euro zone's sovereign-debt troubles. Analysts also flagged worries about global economic growth.

Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index rose 0.8% to 23336.00, snapping an eight-session losing streak. China's Shanghai Composite Index gained 0.3% to 2872.46, Australia's S&P/ASX 200 edged up 0.3% to 4756.80 and Taiwan's Taiex climbed 0.6% to 9035.48. Singapore's Straits Times Index jumped 1.2% to 3136.94, after the ruling People's Action Party remained in power with an overwhelming majority despite winning the lowest proportion of the popular vote since the nation's independence in 1965.

South Korea's Kospi, however, slipped 0.4% to 2139.17 because of concerns the Bank of Korea might raise interest rates this week to fight rising inflation.

Across the region, resource stocks bounced as crude and silver prices moved higher after plunging last week. In Tokyo, Inpex rose 1.6%. In Sydney, Santos and Woodside Petroleum climbed 1.7% and 1.2%, respectively, while Fortescue Metals Group gained 2.5%. Sterlite Industries (India) climbed 1% in Mumbai. Cnooc gained 1.8% and PetroChina rose 1.7% in Hong Kong.

In Tokyo, the Nikkei Stock Average fell 0.7% to 9794.38. Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan on Friday called for the Hamaoka nuclear-power plant, located near an earthquake fault line southwest of Tokyo, to suspend its operations. Chubu Electric Power, which owns the Hamaoka plant, agreed to the government's request Monday to shut down the plant.

"There are concerns [about power shortages] since many auto makers and other manufacturers are concentrated in the Chubu area," said Okasan Securities strategist  Hideyuki Ishiguro. 

Chubu shares slumped 10%. Other utilities also fell: Kansai Electric Power dropped 2.6% and Kyushu Electric Power slid 1.5%.

Fast Retailing dropped 4.2% after reporting disappointing domestic same-store sales for April at its Uniqlo shops. Isetan Mitsukoshi Holdings fell 2.7%; the department-store operator sharply lowered its group net-profit outlook for the fiscal year ended March 31.

In Hong Kong, mainland property developers rose on bargain-buying after suffering heavy losses recently. China Resources Land gained 5.4% and China Overseas Land & Investment climbed 3.8%. Esprit Holdings fell 3.3%; First Shanghai strategist  Linus Yip attributed the drop to the re-emergence of concerns over euro-zone debt. Esprit generates the majority of its revenue in Europe. 

In Shanghai, power-generation stocks gained as rising demand and drought in some regions has led to power shortages in the country. Huaneng Power International climbed 4.9% and Datang International Power Generation rose 3.3%. 

Traders were cautious before the release of key economic data for April on Wednesday, including the monthly inflation report. Analysts expect the rise in the consumer-price index to have slowed to around 5.0%-5.2% after hitting 5.4% in March, the fastest increase since July 2008. 

In Sydney, construction and mining-services provider Ausenco jumped 9.2% after it announced a contract at Taseko Mines' Gibraltar copper-molybdenum project in Canada.

 Write to  Shri Navaratnam at shri.navaratnam@dowjones.com 