Bahrain plans to try in a military court nearly 50 doctors and nurses who treated antigovernment protesters during months of unrest, broadening the ruling Al-Khalifa family's crackdown on Shiite opposition supporters. 

Bahrain's Justice Ministry confirmed Tuesday that 23 doctors and 24 nurses would be tried on charges including attempts to topple the kingdom's Sunni monarchy and taking part in illegal rallies.

"Hard evidence showed that the [medical] complex was used extensively for the activities of saboteurs who sought to spread chaos, cause disruptions and trouble and create sedition within the kingdom," the ministry said.

Tuesday's move marks the latest stage of the monarchy's strategy to pursue and prosecute the opposition and its sympathizers.

On Thursday, Bahrain's military court handed down its first convictions related to the demonstrations that rocked the kingdom, sentencing four protesters to death for killing two policemen during demonstrations in March.

Meanwhile, Tuesday's confirmation that medical staff would be tried came hours after two former lawmakers from Al Wefaq, Bahrain's largest opposition Shiite bloc, were arrested, said Khalil Al-Marzooq, the senior party leader.

He said the government was systematically targeting the opposition "segment by segment."

"No one is secure and there is no impunity for anyone," said Mr. Al-Marzooq. "They [the government] have reached Al Wefaq at last and they are leaving no space for a political solution."

The weakened state of Bahrain's opposition movement stands in contrast to other Middle East countries, where government crackdowns have led to ever-greater demands for political change.

Attempts to stifle dissent in Tunisia and Egypt hastened the downfall of those governments. In Yemen, the opposition demands for the ouster of President Ali Abdullah Saleh have resulted in plans for a negotiated transfer of power.

Human-rights organizations and medical charities said the trials of medical staff underlined the regime's desire to extinguish the remnants of opposition, even if it risked international condemnation.

"We are really worried about where this is going.…Due to militarization and fear, the whole medical system in Bahrain is under threat. It's the most blatant abuse of the health system we've seen in any political arena," said  Jerome Obberreit, director of operations for Médecins Sans Frontières, also known as Doctors Without Borders. Mr. Obberreit added that the charity's repeated proposals to set up operations in Bahrain had been met with no formal response from the government.

In April, Doctors Without Borders published a report condemning the military crackdown on medical staff and wounded patients, stressing Bahrain's health centers were "no longer safe havens for the sick or injured, but rather places to be feared."

For more than a month earlier this year, the Salmaniya Medical Complex, which includes 20 wards and nearly 1,000 beds, became the center of the battle to topple Bahrain's two-century-old monarchy.

Protesters seeking safe haven from government attacks camped on hospital grounds while some staff sympathetic to their cause led chants calling for the ouster of the ruling family. Some senior doctors summoned the press to call for the resignation of government ministers, while paramedics and ambulance drivers reported being attacked by security services and prevented from treating the wounded.

During the unrest, medical staff repeatedly said they were under professional duty to treat all and strongly rejected claims by authorities that helping antigovernment protesters was akin to supporting their cause.

On March 15, police stormed the hospital after King Hamad bin Isa Al-Khalifa called in troops from Saudi Arabia and United Arab Emirates to quell gathering protests. Scores of doctors were arrested, while others fled the country. Government security forces and masked military gunmen remained in hospital wards for weeks.

In February, political groups representing the majority Shiite population and independent voters kicked off a popular uprising with protests demanding more democratic reforms. Shiites have long complained of job and educational discrimination, and chafe at the notion that the ruling family has barred Shiites from most positions in the armed forces and police and have instead imported foreign Sunnis to keep law and order.

At least two dozen protesters were killed and hundreds of others arrested in the crackdown. Four security officials, including the two policemen, have died in the street clashes. Four protesters have died in police custody since their arrests.

—Alex Delmar-Morgan contributed to this article.

 Write to  Joe Parkinson at joe.parkinson@dowjones.com 