Artists have been drawn time and again to "Tristan und Isolde" and its eternal themes of love, death and philosophy. This most mysterious work of Wagner's, with his strongest, most poetic libretto and arguably his finest music has served to inspire numerous directors who have presented a spectrum of literal and abstract interpretations. 

A hotly awaited new "Tristan" from British director Graham Vick that premiered at the Deutsche Oper Berlin on Sunday was a woefully conceived and aesthetically ugly affair that showed little internal logic. 

Paul Brown's set seemed to represent a suburban living room. Characters emerged and exited from the bedroom, kitchen and the patio (via large glass windows that could have used an extra wipe-down), sometimes in an apron or wrapped in a towel. A bewildered-looking naked woman appeared briefly about 10 minutes into Act I, but the sailors were too busy harassing Isolde to notice. The opera's dichotomy of light and darkness was literalized by a massive industrial dome light that hovered over the production like an albatross. In between, one could pluck out a few good ideas: the lovers singing over a freshly dug grave; the ever-present reminder of Morold's coffin; the flash-forward of decades in Act III. Still, Mr. Vick and his team were greeted by loud boos. Luckily, this Regietheater nonsense was counterbalanced by considerable musical skill. 

German tenor Peter Seiffert was on top form as Tristan. He carried the production and sang with clarion tones well into the third act, in which he landed one punishing high note after another with urgency, clarity and force.

Starring opposite was Austrian soprano Petra-Maria Schnitzer, making her Isolde début and singing with dramatic flair and, for the most part, accuracy. Her range was impressively full and the creamy texture of her voice made for delightful harmonizing with Mr. Seiffert. Nonetheless, while she performed the Liebestod beautifully, she lacked the vocal complexity to make it her own. 

Deutsche Oper musical director Donald Runnicles led the orchestra in a dramatically urgent reading of the score that helped inject some drama into this curiously inert production. 

—A.J. Goldmann

 Until April 3.  

  www.deutscheoperberlin.de  