India's mobile-telecommunication industry has long been credited for championing the low-cost wireless revolution. Its next challenge is to persuade Indian consumers to start paying up. 

Nine of India's 15 telecom companies are rolling out third-generation services. One early mover, Tata Teleservices is already running television advertisements boasting merits of the new technology, including faster Internet access and video calling. 

Tata and the other eight paid a staggering $15 billion to buy the 3G airwaves from New Delhi, making the networks significantly more expensive than the second-generation technology currently in use. The trick now will be to charge enough to make that investment profitable.

Consider that the telecom industry's approach to India so far has been to offer dirt-cheap services to capture as many subscribers as possible. Call rates in India are as low as two U.S. cents a minute. 

True, some companies are still quite profitable despite the low charges. For example, Bharti Airtel generated a 35% margin on earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization in the quarter that ended September, though this was five percentage points lower than a year earlier. 

But growth lately has come thanks to rapid expansion in rural India. After their numbers increased five-fold in just three years, rural subscribers accounted for a third of total users at the end of September, according to the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India. 

Rural consumers, though, can't be expected to snap up expensive 3G services. Nor can most of India's urban consumers, in fact. Three-quarters of India's urban households earn less than $550 a month, says Indicus Analytics, a market-research firm. For this crowd, many of the 3G offerings-and the smartphones that optimize them-will be too expensive. 

Moreover, language diversity in India means the pool of customers will be fragmented. Right now, most applications offered by Tata are in English. But even those developed in Hindi will mean large groups of users will be excluded. Expanding offerings to accommodate several languages will add to costs. 

Ultimately, competition could make 3G unprofitable for many companies. Starting Thursday, India's mobile users get the chance to switch service providers without changing phone numbers, which will only intensify competition. 

"Even with such low call rates, it's possible for six or seven companies to make money, but not 12 or 13. Some of them will have to merge," says Romal Shetty at KPMG. He predicts the industry will start consolidating within 18 months-after New Delhi finishes updating new telecom guidelines, and completes an investigation into the sale of 2G licenses in 2008. 

Talk is cheap. India's mobile operators need to change that. 

 Write to  Harsh Joshi at harsh.joshi@dowjones.com 