For football fans more familiar with the game's Xs and Os, here's a quick look at the main labor and business issues at heart of the impasse and potential lockout:



 Q:What is the owners' argument for changing the current collective-bargaining agreement?

 A: The owners say costs have skyrocketed but say that isn't reflected in the current CBA. After owners receive a $1 billion expense credit, players get about 60% of the roughly $8 billion in remaining annual revenue. Owners want another $1 billion in credits.



 Q: What is the players' argument for keeping the deal?

 A: Players say the game is more profitable than ever. Revenues have doubled in the past decade and are now more than $9 billion a year. They see no reason for a pay cut, especially since the game is more violent and risky than ever.



 Q: Is the NFL profitable?

 A: The NFL is the most successful major sports league in the world. Each team is profitable.

What makes it different from all other sports leagues is that none of its teams lose money.



 Q: What are the larger economic forces behind the NFL's position? 

 A: The NFL has boomed in the past two decades as owners built stadiums with help from about $8 billion in taxpayer money. Also, average ticket prices more than doubled, and broadcast-rights fees are about $4 billion a year. But growth has flattened. Fans don't want to pay more for tickets, and there is no longer taxpayer money available for new stadiums.



 Q: What do both sides stand to lose (and when)?

 A: The losses have already begun for the owners as sponsors make alternate plans amid the uncertainty. Players would begin to lose signing-bonus money this month if there is a lockout. However, under a lockout the real losses won't kick in until preseason games are missed in August and as player salaries aren't paid as scheduled beginning the first week of the regular season. Owners still may collect TV revenue, per their contracts, but that remains the subject of litigation.



 Q: What will the sponsors and television partners do if there is a lockout? 

 A: Unless U.S. District Court Judge David Doty rules otherwise, the networks will pay the NFL on schedule and receive refunds in later years if needed. They are already planning alternate programming. Sponsor contracts are less definitive. Some have already asked for rebates, and sponsors are also planning for other ways to spend marketing dollars. 



 Q: How long could a lockout drag on?

 A: A long time. NFL players have buckled quickly in past work stoppages, but those took place during the season, when all players were losing money immediately. Owners have more leeway, especially if they get to use their TV money. The real pressure would come in the summer, when the prospect of missed games, missed paychecks and missed stadium revenue becomes real.



 Q: Will there be a draft?

 A: Yes, but no drafted players can sign contracts until there is a new CBA.



 Q: Could the NFL be permanently damaged?

 A: Permanent damage is unlikely as leagues have shown great resilience after work stoppages, but expect lower ticket sales in the near term if a significant part of the season is cut.