"Mediterranean" may be the most evocative word in world geography. Is there anywhere else that conjures up more compelling images of movie stars on beaches and moguls on yachts—not to mention a diet rich in olive oil and fish? But what about Mediterranean wine? Is there a wine synonymous with this part of the world or, in this case, does the adjective "Mediterranean" simply not apply? 

It would be easy to come to that conclusion by looking at the wine lists of some Mediterranean restaurants in New York, not to mention St. Louis, Los Angeles and San Francisco. I checked out a dozen such lists and found very few that offered wines with an actual directly-on-the-Mediterranean address.

One wine was particularly conspicuous by its absence: Vermentino. The bright, zippy white gets my vote as the most Mediterranean wine in the world. Thought to have originated in Spain, Vermentino has been grown in a number of Mediterranean locations for hundreds of years, including Provence and Liguria, Corsica and Sardinia. Some Vermentino vineyards, like those of Abbatucci in Corsica, even have great ocean views.

Vermentino is one of the most important grapes in Corsica, especially in the coastal Patrimonia region, where it's also known as Malvoisie. Actually, Vermentino has even more aliases than it does addresses. It's known as Rolle in Provence, Pigato in Liguria and Favorita in Piedmont, and there are dozens of other names as well.

Less than 10 miles south of Corsica on the island of Sardinia, Vermentino is produced in a lighter, higher-acid, more citrusy style—much like the Vermentinos (aka Rolles) of Provence. Vermentino is also produced on Italy's mainland, in the coastal region of Maremma in Tuscany and further north in the Liguria region, where Vermentino takes on a decidedly minerally, sometimes almost stony, edge.

But to some wine directors it's just too obscure. According to Jordan Ogron, assistant general manager and wine director of the Los Angeles restaurant Fig and Olive, not many of his customers drink Vermentino. Mr. Ogron has one Vermentino on his list (2009 Domaine Gioieilli for $78), but he said, "No one really knows what it is." He listed the three favorite white wines of his town: Chardonnay, Pinot Grigio and Sauvignon Blanc. 

Maybe his Vermentino would be more popular if it were cheaper, I ventured. After all, his had a pretty big price tag. "I'm looking for a cheaper Vermentino," replied Mr. Ogron, "but I haven't found one I'm really excited about." (I found the Gioieilli for less—$60 a bottle—at The Dutch restaurant in New York, where wine director Joshua Nadel actually has four Vermentinos on his list.)

But Guernio Melis, a native Sardinian based in New York who is a wine buyer at Restaurant Gordon Ramsay and a sommelier at Orso, told me he didn't feature Vermentino because it was cheap. "The guests expect something more expensive when they come to Gordon Ramsay," he said. "Burgundy, Bordeaux." This was a curious outlook for a Sardinian: Where was his native pride in the grape? I asked. "Italians have issues," he said—an observation that seemed to extend beyond viticulture. 

In fact, affordability is one of Vermentino's great charms. The first Vermentino I tasted a number of years ago cost about $7, and even today that same wine, Argiolas Costamolino Vermentino, costs only about $10 a bottle. It's a bright, clean, lively wine that's a perennial good deal. Argiolas is a top Sardinian winery producing a wide range of wines under the direction of renowned oenologist Giacomo Tachis of Marchese Piero Antinori.

Marchese Piero Antinori is one of several high-profile producers who have long produced other more famous wines (Tignanello, Solaia) but now make Vermentino as well. The Marchese Antinori began making Vermentino at his Maremma estate, Tenuta Guada al Tasso, in 1996. More recently, in 2009, the top Piedmontese producer La Spinetta began making Vermentino in Tuscany, too, under the name Casanova della Spinetta.

The Casanova della Spinetta Vermentino was one of 20 or so bottles I collected for my tasting, purchased from retailers across several states since most shops only carried one or two. David Gettenberg of Englewood Wine Merchants in Englewood, N.J., believes that it is a wine that had to be explained: "Vermentino is a hand-sell," he said. The Casanova della Spinetta was his only Vermentino. "When people think of Italian whites they think Pinot Grigio."

The majority of the Vermentinos I purchased were Italian, but four came from Corsica, two were from Provence and two hailed from distinctly non-Mediterranean locales: California and Texas. The California wine, from Uvaggio Cellars, bore a self-congratulatory back label identifying its makers as "two incredibly hip wine lovers" and Vermentino as a grape that was "Pinot Grigio meets Grüner Veltliner." 

I'm not sure I agree with either characterization (if you're hip, do you have to say so?), though some of the lesser Vermentinos I tasted did put me in mind of a commercial kind of Pinot Grigio, i.e., simple and dilute. That's one danger of Vermentino—it's easy to grow and some wineries overproduce, turning out a rather flavorless, characterless white. 

Thankfully there were more Vermentinos with the expected verve, including a citrusy, summery 2009 Château Les Valentines, a Vermentino blend from Provence, and an equally compelling 2009 Cascina Feipu dei Massaretti Pigato from Ligura that had a similarly bracing acidity as the Valentines but also a wonderfully minerally finish. 

I found a trio of terrific Vermentinos from the Galluri region of Sardinia, each marked by lots of fruity, aromatic notes as well as mouthwatering acidity. I particularly loved the 2009 Vigne Surrau Sciala, a wine that seemed to simply burst out of the glass. It was a gulpable, not drinkable, wine. I loved the 2009 Piero Mancini Vermentino almost as much. There were a couple broader, spicier versions of Vermentino from Corsica, including the 2009 Antoine Arena Patrimonio and the 2009 Domaine Gioieilli. 

At the end of my tasting, I couldn't help wondering why Vermentino was still so obscure. It's not only delicious and accessible but also reasonably priced and easy to pronounce. Its bright acidity and citrusy flavors were perfect for summer. Maybe Vermentino producers just needed some sort of collective slogan, one that would provoke Pinot Grigio regulars and also evoke its Mediterranean roots. Perhaps: "Pinot Grigio is perfect for drinking on boats, but Vermentino is the wine of yachts."

—Email Lettie at wine@wsj.com 

 2009 Cascina Feipu dei Massaretti Pigato, $25 

This lovely Pigato from the Liguria region of Italy (Pigato is the Ligurian clone of Vermentino) has a wonderfully savory quality—a nutty, almost bitter-almond-like note and lots of minerality in the bright, brisk finish. 

 2009 Antoine Arena Haut de Carco Patrimonio, $30 

Although native Corsican Antoine Arena left home to become a lawyer, he returned to his family's land and set about making what are considered among the best wines in Corsica, if not France. His Haut de Carco vineyard, from which this wine is produced, is a dramatic site practically surrounded by the ocean—and it produces an equally dramatically rich, almost spicy, minerally wine.

 2009 Château Les Valentines Côtes de Provence, $20 (500 ml) 

Provence is probably better known for its rosés than its white wines, but the wines of both colors from the Les Valentines deserve to be better known. Owned by husband-and-wife team Gilles Pons and Pascale Massenot since 1997, this beautiful estate overlooks the sea and is located just a few miles from St. Tropez. This lively, citrusy white is a blend of Vermentino, Clairette and Ugni Blanc. 

 2009 Piero Mancini Vermentino di Gallura, $15 

The Gallura penisula of Sardinia is the source of some of the best Vermentinos in Italy, if not the world and the Piero Mancini Vermentino is a typical Galluran wine—bright, fresh and clean with delightful notes of lemon and grapefruit. 

 2009 Vigne Surrau Sciala Vermentino di Gallura, $23 

This was one of the most aromatically expressive Vermentinos of my tasting; in fact I'd call it downright exuberant, both on the nose and on the palate. Made at a very modern estate not far from the legendary Costa Smeralda or Emerald Coast of Sardinia, it's a delightful, delicious, mouth-tingling white. 

