News of Osama bin Laden's killing by U.S. special forces in Abbottabad, Pakistan, should make readers wonder about the future of Washington-Islamabad ties. Before the success of this operation, at least, this relationship seemed fragile. Last month, Pakistani army officials delivered an ultimatum to their American counterparts that special forces and drones that targeted terrorists be withdrawn.

Coming days will tell whether bin Laden's death makes matters better or worse for Pakistan-U.S. relations. Islamabad seems keen to downplay its apparent role in the event but may still get caught in a tide of anti-American backlash. Washington may also confront Pakistani calls to get out of the region now that bin Laden is out of the scene. Whatever the outcome, though, perhaps it's telling that one cannot assume that unambiguously good news in the war on terror will be good news for this bilateral relationship.

 Deadly Embrace: Pakistan, America and the Future of Global Jihad 

 By Bruce Riedel 

 Brookings Institution Press,  180 pages, $24.95 

As Bruce Riedel reminds us in his "Deadly Embrace," this relationship has been fraught for a while. Pakistan's status for the United States has oscillated from "most aligned ally" in the 1950s—when it served as a vital location for intelligence gathering against the Soviet Union and became a formal treaty ally of Washington's—to the most sanctioned state in the late 1970s when the Carter administration cracked down on Pakistan's record on human rights abuses and nuclear proliferation.

One constant among these ups and downs, as Mr. Riedel tells it, is the Pakistanis' perception of betrayal. During the 1971 India-Pakistan war and the East Bengal uprisings before that, Islamabad thought that the U.S. should have steadfastly stood by it, as is expected of a treaty ally. Instead, the most President Nixon did during the war was to send the USS Enterprise into the Bay of Bengal, not that it deterred Indian military action. 

Islamabad again complained about betrayal in the 1990s when the U.S. imposed sanctions for its nuclear program. After all, a mere decade before, Washington had been gung-ho about the military dictatorship of Zia-ul-Haq and armed the mujahideen to fight the Soviets in Afghanistan. 

Washington would, of course, have reasons other than hurt Pakistani feelings to rue its 1980s policy when those mujahideen turned their guns on America in the 1990s, culminating in 9/11. Mr. Riedel, now at the Brookings Institution in Washington, argues that the jihadi movement that eventually became today's terrorists was part and parcel of Zia's program for a more austere vision of Islam.

 By Bruce Riedel  Brookings Institution Press, 180 pages, $24.95

His argument is only partially correct. As Husain Haqqani, now Pakistan's ambassador to the U.S., had shown in his astonishingly candid book, "Pakistan: Between Mosque and Military," the military's dalliance with Islamists had long preceded Zia. The secular democratic prime minister, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, had already forged the Islamabad-jihadi nexus in his last days in office in the 1970s—a futile attempt to bolster his sagging political fortunes. 

Mr. Riedel is on more secure footing when he proceeds to a discussion of the emergence of global jihad. President Obama thanked Pakistani President Zardari on Sunday night for his cooperation in finding and killing bin Laden, but Americans should know of the historical complicity of both civilian and military regimes in Pakistan in nurturing the jihadis. 

Other writers have told that story before. Here, Mr. Riedel, a former senior intelligence official, confirms the degree and scope of the complicity of Pakistani regimes—especially the behemoth Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) agency. He also shows that the U.S. government gave scant heed to the global Islamist networks that formed in Pakistan in the 1980s and 1990s.

The book provides a lucid and mostly accurate survey of the evolution of the U.S.-Pakistan relationship. But it throws up little that is new or striking for those who have followed this subject. Part of the problem is the book's brevity, which seems off for a treatment of a relationship that is both so complex and so key for global stability. There is little scrutiny of the critical choices that defined this relationship. There is, for example, only a cursory discussion of how Pakistani leaders inveigled the U.S. into forging an anti-Communist alliance in the 1950s.

Mr. Riedel's policy recommendations are mixed. The vast majority of them are commonsensical. He admits that the U.S. has often been guilty of supporting a seemingly stable dictatorship instead of boosting apparently unreliable democrats. Instead Washington needs to embrace democratic regimes, however wobbly.

At the same time, Mr. Riedel stresses that the ISI must end its unholy nexus with Islamist networks. Doing so is as much in Pakistan's interests as those of the U.S., given that the ISI cannot wholly control its acolytes—as recent Taliban attacks on Pakistan's own soil show. He also argues that the U.S. should play a delicate and behind-the-scenes role in diminishing tensions between Pakistan and India over Kashmir. 

Mr. Riedel clearly would prefer that Washington adopt a liberal and consistent policy toward Islamabad, but sometimes he goes too far. He notes that Pakistan has felt betrayed in the last decade because George W. Bush chose to offer India a civilian nuclear deal. So Mr. Riedel recommends Pakistan be given a similar nuclear deal. But this equivalency is absurd. As the author himself notes, Pakistan's record in the nonproliferation arena has been downright egregious.

How this relationship goes forward, especially with some of the above recommendations, is anybody's guess. U.S. policy makers are too short-termist, while Pakistani ones are too distrustful of American goals. That said, there is little question that both sets of policy makers will now have to reassess the future of this troubled relationship in light of bin Laden's end. 

 Mr. Ganguly is director of research at the Center on American and Global Security at Indiana University, Bloomington. 