LAS VEGAS— Motorola Mobility Holdings Inc.
MMI


-0.40
%




 didn't wait long to make a splash as an independent company, unveiling its first tablet and several smartphones as it jumps on the 4G bandwagon. 

The tablet, called Xoom, runs on the latest version of Google Inc.'s Android software. Chief Executive Sanjay Jha also unveiled a phone called the Droid Bionic, which will run on Verizon Wireless's fourth-generation network, and talked up the Atrix 4G, which will run on  AT&T Inc.
T


0.69
%




's newly redubbed 4G network.

These devices will serve as a barometer for how Motorola Mobility will compete as a smaller, standalone company. Wednesday marked its second day as a public entity, as the company now faces off against other behemoths in the smartphone and tablet business, including  Apple Inc.
AAPL


-0.04
%




 and Samsung Electronics Co., which last year became the top manufacturer of Android phones.

While Mr. Jha acknowledged that size does matter for a technology company, he believes the more important factor for success is the ability to continue innovating, he said in an interview. 

Still, Mr. Jha said Motorola plans to sell fewer smartphone models than the 23 it released in 2010, and that he would focus on products with a broader appeal. 

The Xoom will run on Google's "Honeycomb" version of Android. It will sell through Verizon Wireless as a 3G device in the first quarter, but Mr. Jha said the company plans to introduce a 4G version later on. Customers eventually will be able to take the 3G tablet back to Verizon Wireless stores to get it upgraded to a 4G connection.

Mr. Jha said the company hopes to sell the Droid Bionic, the latest device in Verizon Wireless's line of high-end Android smartphones, in the second quarter. It is the first of several devices Verizon Wireless is unveiling Thursday when it talks up its own 4G service. The other is the previously unveiled Atrix 4G, which Mr. Jha showed off during an AT&T event earlier Wednesday. 

Both phones feature large screens and a dual-core Tegra processor from  Nvidia Corp.
NVDA


0.05
%




, promising higher speeds. 

While much of the hype has been around the Xoom, Mr. Jha said that in the long run he believes the smartphone will still play a bigger role in the lives of consumers. "The most compelling device fits in your pocket," he said. 

Over the next few years, he sees the ratio of product launches to be roughly four to five smartphones for every tablet released. 

 Write to  Roger Cheng at roger.cheng@dowjones.com 