Amid the second leg of a lengthy tour, Robert Plant said his latest group, Band of Joy, continues to exceed expectations.

"It's morphed into part Led Zeppelin III, part Grateful Dead, part Jefferson Airplane, part Bascom Lamar Lunsford. It's mountain music trips out," Mr. Plant said by phone late last week. On Saturday and Sunday, the rock legend will bring the Band of Joy to the Beacon Theatre.

The set list for the show comprises a bit of reimagined Zeppelin, a smidgen of songs from the 2007 Plant-Alison Krauss collaboration "Raising Sand," some material from Mr. Plant's solo career—which is now twice as long as his stint in Zeppelin—and a dose of "Band of Joy" (Rounder), which includes traditional American rock, country and blues, as well as songs by Los Lobos and Richard Thompson. The concerts are an eclectic mix pulled together by the charm and force of Mr. Plant's personality, the wonder of his voice and his spirited band, featuring Buddy Miller and Patty Griffin on guitar, Darrell Scott on stringed instruments, Byron House on bass and Marco Giovino on drums.

The music has been evolving since Mr. Plant, who is 62, and the Band of Joy began their tour in Memphis last July, about two months before the album's world-wide release. Back then, the group seemed locked in from the show's opening moments when it moved easily from "Down to the Sea," culled from a 1993 Plant solo disc, to "Angel Dance" from the new album. Later, it reworked "Gallows Pole," a traditional folk blues that appeared on "Led Zeppelin III," as well as six other Zeppelin songs. Mr. Plant pushed and prodded the band to stretch out and have fun.

"I think we were masking a whole lot of nerves," he said. "It was great, though. It started becoming a bit more mysterious on the second and third nights."

Mr. Plant said he and the band continue to explore their potential during the sound checks when they sit in a circle and toy with arrangements. "There's a fantastic collective will to take the stuff to a beautiful place," he said. "When you think that these guys have their own deal going, it's encouraging and uplifting." Messrs. Miller and Scott and Ms. Griffin, each o whom have fruitful solo careers, get a spotlight solo vocal during each set.

The sound check's experimental spirit translates well to the concert stage. "Nobody overcooks it," Mr. Plant said. "It's almost a kind of unspoken agreement that you only do enough. I don't know if it's called 'taste' or 'feel.' We're all great foils for each other."

Assembling the Band of Joy gave Mr. Plant a chance to connect with the kind of rural American music that influenced him as a young man and helped shape Led Zeppelin's varied sound. "I didn't want to have to go back to the U.K. and scratch out something that fell between trip-hop and space-out. I'd already experienced natural music with Alison [Krauss] and other friends—Ralph Stanley, of course. I love that natural feel and flow where you can gambol over space and time. Popular music is all and everything."

A part-time resident of Memphis, Tenn., Mr. Plant says the musical landscape these days is richer in the U.S. than in England. "In Britain, the stuff that gets the most exposure is what you'd expect. In America, there's a cultural diversity; when you move from region to region, the music changes. There's a workshop feel in America. I was hoping to become a member of that workshop."

When the Band of Joy is at its most expansive, it's likely to be Mr. Miller who's behind the mischief. "He's Duane Eddy on acid," Mr. Plant said of the guitarist. In Memphis, Mr. Miller treated the stately Plant-Jimmy Page composition "Please Read the Letter" like garage rock; later, he added a different texture to "Rich Woman," which also appeared on "Raising Sand," as if he was challenging the signature sound he helped give that award-winning album. 

Mr. Miller's feel for Americana helps recast the Zeppelin songs—which seems part of Band of Joy's mission. Mr. Plant has a healthy approach to his old material. "I don't have a phobia about it. It was a different time." He sees a link between 1970's "Led Zeppelin III," the group's folkiest album, and what Band of Joy is doing now.

"The two projects," he said, "have some similarities over 40 years: the spirit of the '70s."

—Mr. Fusilli is the Journal's rock and pop music critic. Email him at jfusilli@wsj.com or follow him on Twitter: @wsjrock.