As Borders Group Inc. prepares for a critical meeting with publishers this week, two key executives are leaving, a new sign of turmoil amid the retailer's dire finances.

Late Monday, Borders said that  Thomas Carney, general counsel, and  D. Scott Laverty, chief information officer, had resigned their posts. The news was disclosed in a Securities and Exchange Commission filing Monday. 

Asked for comment, Borders said that as part of its previously disclosed efforts to improve liquidity, "We have evaluated our leadership structure and, as a result, some positions have been eliminated." The two men couldn't immediately be reached for comment.

The bookseller did receive an important vote of confidence on Monday, however, when a large distributor said it is continuing to ship new books to Borders. 

Last week Borders said it was halting payments to a number of key publishers and vendors. But Ingram Content Group, the Nashville-based unit of closely held Ingram Industries Inc., said it would continue supplying books to the chain. 

Ingram declined to discuss whether it has asked for different terms. 

Distributors such as Ingram handle titles from a range of publishers, shipping to retailers and handling billing and returns. 

Borders is seeking to refinance its debt, a plan that may include asking publishers to convert some of their receivables to debt, plus the infusion of new capital, and new bank lenders.

"A successful refinancing of our company is in the best interest of Borders, our vendors and our customers," said Mary Davis, a spokeswoman for Borders. 

Several publishers contacted on Monday said they haven't yet decided whether to ship new books to Borders. 

"We're sorting this out," said  Peter Workman, president and owner of Workman Publishing Co. 

On Sunday, National Book Network, a leading distributor owned by Rowman & Littlefield Publishing Group Inc., said it was temporarily halting shipments of new books to Borders. 

The bookstore chain is setting up meetings with leading publishers in New York this week to explain its refinancing strategy.

Borders launched a promotional campaign the day after Christmas that is still under way. It offers consumers a 50% discount on toys, games and selected books, and 75% off on video games. 

Borders shares, which sank 13% on Friday, rose six cents on Monday to 96 cents in New York Stock Exchange trading.

Separately,  Barnes & Noble Inc.
BKS


1.86
%




 said Monday that its preliminary same-store sales rose 9.7% for the nine-week period ended Jan. 1, boosted by demand for its Nook e-reader. Barnes & Noble said its stores generated their largest sales day in the company's history on Dec. 23. The retailer is building its digital strategy around the advantage of being able to demonstrate its Nook e-reader line in its stores, where customers can try the devices and get instruction

 Write to  Jeffrey A. Trachtenberg at jeffrey.trachtenberg@wsj.com 