Monsanto swung to fiscal first-quarter profit of $6 million, compared with a prior-year loss of $19 million, as its seeds and genomics business turned in sales growth of 13% and the agribusiness giant recovered from a sharp drop in sales of its herbicides in the prior-year period. 

PSA Peugeot-Citroën sold a record 3.6 million vehicles in 2010 as a boost through government incentives more than offset an estimated 5% decline in the European market, and Chief Executive Philippe Varin said France's largest car maker remains open to equity alliances with other auto makers. 

 The decision of car maker Renault to suspend three employees, including one management committee executive, apparently involves spying on the company's electric cars program, French Industry Minister Eric Besson said.  

Australians last year snapped up increasing numbers of sport-utility vehicles and luxury cars as the nation's mineral wealth and growing economic strength sent auto sales surging to a record high. 

Brazilians purchased a record number of cars in December, contributing to the highest annual sales ever in 2010 as rising wages and consumer confidence boosted purchases. 

 British Airways said heavy snowfall that forced the cancellation of some flights last month will cost the airline about £50 million ($77.6 million). 

Boeing said its commercial-aircraft deliveries declined 4.9% for the fourth quarter and 4% for the full year. 

 Rolls-Royce Group said it has inked a deal potentially worth more than $5 billion to supply Trent 900 and Trent 1000 engines for up to 61 new wide-bodied aircraft for British Airways.  

Airbus says Korea's Asiana Airlines has placed an order for six A380 superjumbo jets. Airbus said Asiana—which plans to operate the aircraft on key routes to Europe and the U.S.—has not decided whether to equip its planes with the Rolls-Royce engine or an alternate powerplant.

 Belgian bank KBC Group warned its fourth-quarter results would be hit by up to €330 million ($434.1 million) in provisions against troubled Irish loans and "irregularities" discovered at its KBC Lease U.K. unit.  

South Korean lending giants Woori Finance Holdings and Hana Financial Group said they may acquire some of the troubled banks reeling from real estate loans that went sour, as the country's regulators consider how to prop up the nation's savings-bank sector.

Indonesia's monopoly watchdog fined Japan's Mitsubishi and three local companies a total of 31 billion rupiah ($3.5 million) for violating competition rules. 

U.K. construction and engineering company Costain Group was again rebuffed by potential bid target Mouchel Group, which said its sweetened proposal to buy it for about £152 million ($235.8 million) wasn't enough. 

Constellation Brands, the world's biggest winemaker, said its fiscal third-quarter profit more than tripled to $139.3 million from $44.1 million a year earlier, as margins increased and fewer charges hurt the bottom line. 

 Investors in BP welcomed a U.S. presidential commission's report on last year's Gulf of Mexico oil spill, saying it reduced the likelihood that the company would be found guilty of gross negligence. 

Austrian oil and gas company OMV said it acquired two Tunisian exploration and production units from U.S.-based peer Pioneer Natural Resources for around $866 million. The Vienna-based company fully-acquired Pioneer Natural Resources Tunisia and Pioneer Natural Resources Anaguid. 

The U.K. government has received around ten first round bids for state-owned bookmaker, the Tote, people familiar with the situation said. 

Meanwhile, the Tote itself, which is lobbying hard against the sale, also submitted proposals by the Dec. 10 bid deadline arguing that the bookmaker should be run independently. 

 French market regulator Autorité des Marchés Financiers allowed the Hermès family to create a holding company to house more than 50% of the shares of luxury goods company Hermès International without having to launch a public tender offer for the entire company.  

MasterCard said it acquired the right to put its name on the former Beijing Olympics basketball arena, the first foreign firm to get commercial naming rights over an arena in China's capital, as the U.S. card company tries to enter the Chinese electronic payments market that has been largely closed to foreigners. 

Malayan Banking said it has offered US$1.4 billion for Singapore brokerage firm Kim Eng Holdings, as Malaysia's biggest bank by assets builds its presence throughout Southeast Asia.

Moody's raised its 2010 forecast a second time in three months, saying it benefited from robust bond issuance in the fourth quarter and accelerated completion of software projects for its analytics customers. 

Sara Lee is moving ahead with plans to split up its meats and coffee businesses into two separate companies after it rejected Brazilian beef processor JBS's takeover offer last month, people familiar with the matter said.

 Italian cable maker Prysmian neared victory in a two-month old takeover battle for Dutch peer Draka after a Chinese rival said it wouldn't make an offer for Draka. The deal would make Prysmian the world's largest maker of industrial cables.  

India's International Coal Ventures plans to bid for developing huge coal reserves in Mongolia's Tavan Tolgoi mining deposit, government officials and industry executives said. 

Ranbaxy Laboratories discontinued a drug discovery and clinical development collaboration with Merck & Co. aimed at developing new anti-bacterial and anti-fungal drugs, a spokesman for the Indian drug maker said. 

As Borders Group asks publishers for leniency on paying bills, the U.S. bookstore chain has been in discussions with restructuring advisers about ways to rework its debt-heavy balance sheet, said people familiar with the matter.

Recruiting company Hays reported a 21% rise in net fees in its fiscal second quarter as the global economic recovery fueled strong growth in its international operations, offsetting weakness in the U.K., where its business continues to suffer from public-sector cuts. 

Facebook said it intends to breach a critical 500-shareholder limit this year, meaning it will be forced to begin disclosing financial information or stage an initial public offering by April 2012, according to a new 100-page private-placement memo being distributed to potential investors in the company.

 Apple delivered on plans to launch an App Store for its Macintosh computers as it seeks to extend the popularity of the store concept beyond its mobile devices. The company said the new store initially contains more than 1,000 computer apps in 21 categories, such as productivity, games and education. 

Social-networking company LinkedIn, whose members include more than 85 million business professionals, intends to file for an initial public offering within months. 

 Mobile phone maker Sony Ericsson launched its latest attempt to grab a major share of the market for smartphones based on the Android platform, revealing a new flagship device called the Xperia arc.  

Taiwanese smartphone maker HTC saw its fourth-quarter unaudited net profit more than double to 14.59 billion New Taiwan dollars (US$500 million) from NT$5.53 billion a year earlier, driven by strong growth in handset shipments. 

Motorola Mobility Holdings unveiled its first tablet and several smartphones as it jumps on the 4G bandwagon. The tablet, called Xoom, runs on the latest version of Google's Android software.