The high-profile criminal lawyer who once defended the "Unabomber" is representing Arizona shooting suspect Jared Lee Loughner. 

Judy Clarke was appointed Monday by a Phoenix federal judge as Mr. Loughner's defense counsel. Also appointed was attorney Mark Fleming.

Both are based in California. The public defender's office recommended them for the assignment because of a concern by the office that Arizona lawyers who have expertise in death-penalty cases may face perceived conflicts, according to a motion filed Monday by the Arizona defender's office. 

Qualified local criminal lawyers may be viewed as unable to vigorously defend Mr. Loughner, said an Arizona attorney who practices in federal court, because the lawyers appeared before John Roll, a federal judge killed in the shootings. It is safer, the attorney said, to appoint counsel who have not had previous contact with Judge Roll.

Mr. Loughner made his initial court appearance Monday after federal prosecutors charged him Sunday with the killing and attempted killing of five federal employees, including congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords, who remains in critical condition. Separate state charges against Mr. Loughner are expected. Twenty people were shot Saturday when a gunman started firing at a public event held by Rep. Giffords. Six died; Rep. Giffords remains in critical condition.

A longtime public defender in San Diego, Ms.Clarke is no stranger to controversial cases. She has represented "Unabomber" Theodore Kaczynski; Sept. 11, 2001 conspirator Zacarias Moussaoui, serial bomber Eric Rudolph; and Susan Smith, the South Carolina woman who drowned her two young sons in 1994.

Ms. Clarke hasn't returned requests for comment. 

Ms. Clarke now splits her time between private practice in San Diego and teaching criminal law at Washington and Lee University School of law in Virginia. 

In an article that ran last spring in a Washington and Lee school publication, Ms. Clarke said she considered criminal defense work a higher calling.

"We stand between the power of the state and the individual," she said. "None of us, including those accused of crime, wants to be defined by the worst moment, or worst days, of our lives."

Mr. Loughner, who left behind a trail of rambling, incoherent writing and videos, might have grounds to mount an insanity defense, said Mark Heyrman, a professor at the University of Chicago Law School who specializes in mental-health law. There appears to be considerable evidence that Mr. Loughner was delusional, Mr. Heyrman said.

"There is all this evidence about what he wrote and how he behaved in school," he said. "But because of the enormity of this act, there will be a great deal of hostility to an insanity defense and understandably so." 

—Evan Perez contributed to this article.

 Write to  Nathan Koppel at nathan.koppel@wsj.com 