The New Directors/New Films festival turns 40 on Wednesday when the curtain rises at the Museum of Modern Art's Titus I Theater for opening night. Jointly overseen and curated by MoMA and the Film Society of Lincoln Center since 1971, the festival has hosted the premieres of works as varied as the 1977 TV film "Doomed Love" by then-71-year-old Portuguese director  Manoel de Oliveira, and "Joe's Bed-Stuy Barbershop: We Cut Heads," from then-26-year-old NYU student  Spike Lee. The Wall Street Journal asked a half-dozen of the filmmakers featured in this year's festival to examine the wide range of narrative and documentary features that have shown during New Directors' four-decade existence and to discuss a film that resonated for them. 

Mr. Chandor cited  Peter Sollett's 2002 Lower East Side tenement romance "Raising  Victor Vargas" as close to his heart. "I actually lived on Avenue A and Ninth Street right when that film came out," Mr. Chandor said. "It's a pretty little movie, but it was also a great eye-opening experience. Seeing this kind of little film with this very personal small story really explode and get the attention that it did coming out of the neighborhood that I lived in was a very, very exciting thing for me." 

Mr. Olsson's film meshes a cache of evocative Swedish 16mm interview footage of U.S. civil rights activists with commentary from contemporary artists sensitive to the history and personalities the footage depicts. "There was a British film called 'Radio On' that had a huge influence on me," Mr. Olsson said. The 1979 film's blend of late '70s pop music and a determinedly grim industrial England road movie milieu kindled a fascination with braiding sound, vision and idea on screen. "Music and moving images have this love affair that I'm so fond of," Mr. Olsson said. "It's always a trade between content, music and visuals to me. My interest is to combine images and music to carry a message." 

Mr. Albright's path to co-creating "The Destiny of Lesser Animals," a culturally complex policier set in Ghana, included a Fulbright Scholarship-supported stint teaching film students in the West African nation. There, he was struck by the universal appeal of  Chris Eyre's 1998 "Smoke Signals," a film he chose to screen for his Ghanaian students. "I took [the film] to Ghana as an example of American independent cinema," Mr. Deron said. "The kids in the audience, the faculty that was there, that was one that they really hung on to. It was kind of reassuring in a way to have that kind of shared feeling." 

"This was a super delicate film to cut because there are so few elements," Ms. Almada said of her hypnotically detailed feature documentary depiction of life and death in a sprawling Mexican graveyard in a region plagued by drug cartel murders. The 2008 Guggenheim fellow credited discovering  Lourdes Portillo's highly personal "The Devil Never Sleeps" (1994) with expanding her creative horizons. "It was one of the first documentaries that I saw that broke a lot of the rules," Ms. Almada said. "It had this poetic and lyrical quality about it. It was kind of investigative but never discovered anything concrete in the end."

"I studied communications," the Peruvian co-director (along with brother Diego) of the Lima set "Octubre" said. "But I wasn't a cinephile." Nevertheless Mr. Vega recalled developing a kinship with  Arturo Ripstein's 1972 "Castle of Purity" while attending university. Like "Octubre," a wryly toned drama about a Lima loan shark, Mr. Ripstein's film explored universal themes. "That story could happen anywhere in the world," Mr. Vega said. "I think we both focus a bit on the humor of that really strong flavor of the human condition to give an idea of what humans are really about." 

Maryam Keshavarz recalled approaching the Norwegian director of "Reprise,"  Joachim Trier, after a 2007 screening of the film at New Directors to ask how best to mix a cast of professionals and nonprofessionals. "I was at the beginning and just molding the story and thinking about casting," she said. "I talked to him about how he worked with the actors. It was really exciting for me as a director." The experience, she said, was empowering. "Instead of being afraid," Ms. Keshavarz said, "I started to embrace how my film would be shot."