Calvert Johnson hardly looks like a subversive. Whether rifling through shelves in search of a piece of music or slipping on thin-soled leather shoes before playing the organ, Mr. Johnson comes across as the musician that he is: serious, focused and a tad single-minded. But when he talks about selecting a program for a concert tour in Japan, his eyes sparkle with mischief. 

The tour—truncated in the wake of the March earthquake—consists of organ recitals at Tokyo's Rikkyo University on May 14 and at Kinjo Gakuin University in Nagoya on May 26. Both institutions have ties to Agnes Scott College, a liberal arts college in Georgia where Mr. Johnson is professor of music and organist. "The organizers wanted the early stuff and Baroque," he says, referring to 16th and 17th century European composers, along with a nod to 19th century Romantics. "But I persuaded them that, for a well-rounded recital, we needed to include some 20th century pieces—and why not slip in Asian pieces there?"

In Japan's classical music scene, this is noteworthy. "I hate to even mention this," says Scott Shaw, who moved to Japan 21 years ago and teaches music at Rikkyo University, "but if you bring a foreign performer over you're almost guaranteed to get more people out to the concert than somebody equally good or better who's Japanese." Japanese audiences also have definite musical preferences, and when it comes to organ "people want to hear [J.S.] Bach," says Mr. Shaw. "I used to play all English composers and, as far as recitals go, that was a real career-ender."

Although the first organs came to Japan via Christian missionaries, wider Japanese audiences discovered the instrument when the Baroque revival movement that swept through Europe and the U.S. after World War II reached Japan about a decade later. Musicians and audiences embraced 17th and 18th century music and performance styles. When Japan's strong economy created a boom in the construction of concert halls, builders modeled them after Europe's great halls and churches, complete with pipe organs. 

This has produced some great Japanese organists who have been gaining recognition at home and abroad. Not so with composers. Akira Nakamura, producer at the Concert Hall of the Art Tower Mito—whose Japanese-built organ suffered earthquake damage—notes that Japanese composers are few and not popular. 

So for Mr. Johnson to play Bach, Mendelssohn and, in between, works by Japanese composers Shinji Inagi and Reiko Arima along with a piece by Chinese-born Wang Anming—well, that makes a statement. It's one likely to serve him, and Asian composers, well. 

U.S.-based music critic Steven Ritter sees this as a riff of sorts on the earlier phenomenon of "Russian musicians bringing their orchestras over here to play Gershwin in the 1980s." With Mr. Johnson's performances, Mr. Ritter says, "there's going to be an American playing their music by their new composers in their halls. He is saying, 'We in America find this music worthwhile and so I'm going to teach you about your own music, which you're probably not paying any more attention to than Americans do to their own composers.'" 

In truth, Mr. Johnson is almost alone in the U.S. in paying close to attention to contemporary composers with Asian surnames. Known for his work in Italian Baroque, he decided in the 1980s to research a neglected demographic, women composers, which is how he happened upon Ms. Wang. At the time, a few Chinese composers were working in Europe and the U.S., so finding Ms. Wang's work "was not totally unexpected. But I wasn't expecting the combination of a Chinese composer and organ," he says. "That was a surprise."

A decade later on a trip in Japan, Mr. Johnson met Isaac Nagao, a music educator in Kyoto who had written pieces for both organ and harpsichord. He was particularly taken by Mr. Nagao's "Hosannah," a piece that uses a call and response between organ and audience to combine the contradictory sentiments of "Palm Sunday, the celebratory aspect of Jesus' entry into Jerusalem and his death." 

Interest soon morphed into obsession. With the help of musicians in Nagoya, Mr. Johnson tracked down all the published works for organ and harpsichord available, returning to the U.S. with more than 25 scores. After more research, he published "Soliloquies: New Japanese and Chinese Music for Harpsichord and Organ," a 2008 CD with works by nine composers.

"This is the only CD entirely devoted to contemporary Asian composers that I had ever seen," says Mr. Ritter. And he was skeptical. In his experience, orchestral works by composers of Chinese or Japanese origin just featured a lot of "the stereotypical sounds of that region," such as a pentatonic melody with a parallel harmony in fifths (classical European music favors parallelisms in thirds or sixths) or the insertion of gongs or bamboo flutes. 

But this, Mr. Ritter says, "was different. These composers, while not discarding their origins altogether, didn't feel confined by them. So what you get is a lot of interesting music, much of which you would not say was written by an Asian composer necessarily." The way a piece is structured, for example, might follow a traditional East-Asian scheme—slow at the start, gradually getting higher and louder before subsiding—but since this is not exclusive to Asia, few listeners would immediately read into it the composer's origin. 

Mr. Johnson has since added Korean compositions to his collection in preparation for a second CD. "It's a smart move," Mr. Ritter points out. In a competitive music scene, "if you don't have the name recognition of an Itzhak Perlman, one of the best ways to break into the recording market and grab someone's attention is to program a CD like this that has something new to offer."

It remains to be seen whether through recitals and CDs Mr. Johnson will achieve fame and convert audiences in Asia and at home. But in the eyes of at least one composer, he is already a hero. He has "given us a chance to be heard," says Ms. Wang, "and we are most grateful. He is a pioneer."

 Ms. Lawrence is a writer based in Brooklyn, N.Y. 