The U.S. strike against Osama bin Laden will likely give President Barack Obama an immediate boost in popularity at a moment when unemployment and high gas prices are taking a toll on his approval rating and Republican opponents are criticizing his foreign policy.

The next test of the president's leadership is whether he can use the momentum to win concrete policy achievements on pressing domestic issues, lawmakers and strategists said.

Amid the weak economy, Mr. Obama's job approval dropped to 41% in a Gallup survey last month, tying its record low. That has the potential to hamper him as he faces the tricky task of winning bipartisan agreement on a broad deficit-reduction plan and on legislation to raise the nation's statutory borrowing limit, or debt ceiling.

To succeed, Mr. Obama will likely have to persuade both parties to sacrifice key goals on such issues as taxes and federal spending levels.

Rep. Buck McKeon (R., Calif.), chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, called the bin Laden killing "symbolically huge" but predicted any impact on the course of Congress would be short-lived.

Photos from around the world.

 "Justice has been done" and more.

A look at Monday's front pages of U.S. newspapers on the news of Osama bin Laden's death. 

On the ground

Diagram from the U.S. government

Photos inside and out

"I remember 9/11, and I remember how we all did come together. But it only lasted a couple of weeks, and I don't expect any long-lasting changes to come from this," said Mr. McKeon. "I don't think it will have a thing to do with the debt limit vote or passing the appropriations bills. I really don't."

But Jane Harman, a former ranking Democrat on the House Intelligence Committee, said the success in killing bin Laden gives Mr. Obama "a giant reset opportunity" for his relationship with Congress. 

"The same folks that he is having dinner with tonight are going to be talking to him about the deficit tomorrow," said Ms. Harman, referring to a gathering Mr. Obama is hosting at the White House Monday night with congressional leaders of both parties. She said Mr. Obama should use the moment to appeal for bipartisanship on other issues.

Mr. Obama is already seizing on the moment to connect with Americans who have welcomed bin Laden's death. He will travel to Ground Zero in New York City for the first time as president on Thursday to mark the moment and meet with the families of 9/11 victims, White House officials said. He last visited the site of the attack on the World Trade Center during his 2008 campaign on its seventh anniversary. 

Bill McInturff, a Republican pollster who conducts the Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll with Democratic pollster Peter Hart, said Mr. Obama would likely see a temporary bump in his job approval rating, "and he can certainly use those months to get the advantage." But, he added, "normally what happens is in those three to four months you get dragged down by the economy and gas prices."

Mr. McInturff looked at prior presidents who faced rallying moments due to foreign crises or successes—John Kennedy after the Cuban Missile Crisis, George W. Bush after the capture of Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein, and 10 other incidents—and found an average bump of 13 percentage points in presidential job approval, which faded after 22 weeks. He excluded Mr. Bush's experience after the Sept. 11 attacks, which saw a far larger approval-rating jump lasting nearly two years.

For Mr. Obama, the biggest political benefit of his handling of the hunt for bin Laden could be in answering critics of his foreign policy. 

Republicans have criticized his decision to support military action in Libya, saying he acted too slowly, appeared indecisive and traded away a U.S. leadership role. The criticism forced Mr. Obama to address the nation in defense of his Libya policy, even though more than half of Americans said in April's Wall Street Journal/NBC poll that they approved of Mr. Obama's handling of the situation.

The White House believes Republicans will now have a harder time arguing that the president's foreign policy is ill-defined, given his decisive action.

"Sometimes he's accused of being too thoughtful and too cautious," said Senate Armed Services Chairman Carl Levin (D., Mich.). "Here's a case where his thoughtfulness really paid off.''

 On Monday, some Republican lawmakers said the bin Laden killing showed a change in Mr. Obama's style. Sen. Pat Roberts (R., Kan.), a former chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee who has criticized Mr. Obama's foreign policy, especially in Libya, said the president's actions marked a sharp departure. "To this point, instead of being commander-in-chief, he's been follower-in-chief,'' he said. "This is the direct opposite, 180 degrees.''

Other GOP observers seemed more skeptical. "This was the conducting of a military raid, not a conducting of foreign policy," said Karen Hughes, who was an adviser to Mr. Bush. "There's going to be some very tough days ahead on foreign policy as a result of this."

The White House also believes the bin Laden killing can answer criticism that Mr. Obama doesn't see American as a uniquely special country, a critique adopted by some of the president's potential Republican election opponents. Portions of Mr. Obama's speech Sunday night, in which he described Mr. bin Laden's killing as a reminder "that America can do whatever we set our mind to" seemed designed to take on that argument.

For the moment, Republicans and Democrats are unified in their praise for the president's handling of the search for bin Laden. Mr. Obama himself minced no words in assigning credit for the mission's success. His speech Monday night was peppered with phrases that began "I directed" and "I met repeatedly."

"Two presidents and a number of agency heads had this as their No. 1 goal, and it was achieved under this administration, so they deserve the credit," said Thomas Kean, the former Republican governor of New Jersey and co-chairman of the 9/11 Commission.

The dynamic facing Mr. Obama is reminiscent of Mr. Bush's experience in 2003 after the capture of Mr. Hussein. Democrats hailed the capture of the Iraqi leader but soon returned to criticizing the president for the Iraq war.

"We were immediately turning to election, much like now. So, after a brief time of celebrating a victory, partisan politics inevitably returned," recalled Gordon Johndroe, who was a deputy press secretary and National Security Council spokesman in the Bush administration.

It's hard to overstate the profound impact such an event has at least temporarily on the morale in the White House, the intelligence community and in the military, Mr. Johndroe said.

"These are great moments when you capture or kill someone so wanted," he said. "But they can be fleeting because you have to turn back to the business at hand."

—Jared Favole and Laura Meckler contributed to this article.