  Charles Schwab Corp.
SCHW


0.90
%




 on Tuesday said it agreed to pay $119 million to settle charges it misled investors about the risks of a supposedly safe bond mutual fund that plummeted 35% in 2008.

The Securities and Exchange Commission also filed a complaint in U.S. district court in San Francisco against two Schwab executives, alleging they made misleading statements about the fund.

The settlement is the latest victory for the SEC as it ramps up enforcement actions in the wake of the financial crisis. It is a blow to Schwab, which has long cast itself as being on the side of investors.

Yet the deal will recoup only a fraction of the money investors lost in the fund, YieldPlus, which held $13.5 billion at its peak in 2007. The fund had ridden strong returns to become the largest fund in its category. But big losses during the financial crisis and a wave of investor redemptions since then have left the fund with just $147 million in assets, according to investment-research firm Morningstar Inc.

Schwab and its managers marketed YieldPlus as a cash alternative with only slightly more risk than a money-market fund, regulators said, even though it invested heavily in mortgage-backed securities and other holdings with significant credit risk.

The  Schwab YieldPlus Fund also broke its own stated investment rules, the SEC said. Though the fund had a stated policy that it wouldn't invest more than 25% of assets in any one industry, YieldPlus invested roughly half of assets in private-issuer mortgage-backed securities without obtaining shareholder approval, regulators said. Schwab neither admitted nor denied wrongdoing. "Schwab would never seek to profit at the expense of its clients," the company said in a statement, adding that the settlement "is in the best interests of the company, its stockholders, and clients who experienced losses in the YieldPlus fund as a result of the global financial crisis."

  Kimon Daifotis, the former fixed-income chief, "denies the SEC's allegations and will vigorously contest them," wrote  David Bayless, an attorney for Mr. Daifotis, in an email to The Wall Street Journal. "He did nothing wrong."

  Susan Brune, an attorney for  Randall Merk, the executive vice president, said in a statement that he would also fight the SEC's lawsuit: "The SEC's claims are infected by hindsight bias and are not supported by the actual evidence."

In recent years, a number of bond mutual funds have loaded up on riskier holdings and seen precipitous slides, only to face regulatory charges after investors have seen losses. Regulators last year charged Morgan Keegan & Co. with fraud related to bond funds that held mortgage-backed securities and posted steep losses. In a statement last April, Morgan Keegan said it "strongly disagrees" with the charges, saying they were based on "erroneous analysis as to both the facts and the law." 

The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority on Tuesday ordered Schwab to pay $18 million into a fund to repay YieldPlus investors. That amount includes $17.5 million in fees that Schwab collected from sales of the fund, plus a $500,000 fine, Finra said.

The latest regulatory action involving YieldPlus "speaks to a problem about the bond market overall, and that's this lack of transparency," said  Miriam Sjoblom, bond-fund analyst at Morningstar. It's difficult for investors to assess the risks of a bond-fund portfolio, and "regulators are at the same disadvantage," Ms. Sjoblom said.

Schwab said it would take a $97 million after-tax charge in its fourth-quarter financial results relating to the regulatory settlements. 

 Write to  Eleanor Laise at eleanor.laise@wsj.com 