ORINDA—A few months ago, a resident of this bucolic East Bay city walked into City Manager Janet Keeter's office and dropped a ruptured Porsche tire on a chair. "This is what happened to my tire when I hit a pothole," Ms. Keeter recalled him saying.

Complaints of car damage from Orinda's 93 miles of winding roads are mounting. Although the hillside city of 18,000 is among the most affluent in the Bay Area, its roads rank among the worst. To return the roads to acceptable condition would cost between $50 million and $75 million, officials say—money the city hasn't been able to raise, despite its wealthy residents. 

In 2010, only three cities in the region—Rio Vista, St. Helena and Vallejo —had roads ranked below Orinda's using a federal rating index, according to a report by the Metropolitan Transportation Commission, a regional agency. The Bay Area average was 66, while Orinda's came in at 51. A rating of 50 or below means a road's surface is in poor or failed condition.

Measured another way, much of Orinda's road network is in even worse shape. According to a Nov. 10, 2010, city report, 73% of Orinda's 64 miles of residential roads are rated poor or failed. 

A drive with resident Richard Nelson last week along Charles Hill Circle helped show why: Pavement buckled and tilted at odd angles, while in one section cracks in the pavement were so wide that fresh shoots of green grass were growing through.

"It's getting to be a crisis here," said Mr. Nelson, a financial-services industry executive, as he swerved his sport-utility vehicle to avoid an oncoming car on the narrow road.

Aside from putting wear and tear on cars, Mr. Nelson said the road conditions have created a safety hazard, with motorists and bicyclists at risk of collisions when avoiding potholes. That could put the city at a liability risk, city officials say, although they add they haven't had to pay out any major settlements.

But Orinda doesn't have enough money to repair the roads, a problem shared by many other cities in California faced with tight budgets. Orinda is heavily dependent on property-tax revenue, which has to be divvied with the state, because the largely bedroom community has relatively few stores and other businesses on which to levy sales tax, said Chuck Swanson, director of the city's public works and engineering services.

Another problem for Orinda: It is a relatively new city, having been incorporated in 1985, when it inherited a formerly rural road system that received only minimal county maintenance. 

The city does a better job of maintaining its main arteries, using a mix of local funds and state and federal road subsidies. Many of the problems are concentrated on the network of residential back roads where most residents live but the state and federal money isn't directed.

Mayor Victoria Smith said Orinda's annual budget of $10 million, which also has to go to support essential services such as police and fire, isn't enough to repair the roads. She said the $750,000 the city spends annually on roads goes mainly to emergency repairs such as plugging potholes after each rainy season.

"If we can't find more money, we may have to go back to gravel on the residential roads," Ms. Smith said.

But many residents here wouldn't tolerate that prospect. Aside from likely causing even more damage to vehicles, gravel roads would stir up billowing clouds of dust that some local officials say could cause the city to run afoul of state clean-air regulations. 

Although the city is among the wealthiest in the Bay Area, Orinda has been unable to raise money to fix the roads in part because of limits on how much property taxes can be increased in California, local officials say. 

As president of a citizens' committee the city asked in 2008 to help advise it on the problem, Mr. Nelson said Orinda's best shot at raising enough funds to replace the roads would be a bond measure. But twice in the past five years residents narrowly voted down bond measures of about $60 million each that would have been slated for the roads. 

"Some people feel it would be a misuse of funds," said John Vanek, service manager at Orinda Motors, where many locals take their banged-up cars for repair. "They think there is already been a lot of money spent on a new library and a new city hall." 

The city council took up the road issue again at a meeting May 3, when it appointed a subcommittee to explore alternatives. Mr. Swanson said the subcommittee likely would recommend putting another bond measure on the ballot in 2012.

 Write to  Jim Carlton at jim.carlton@wsj.com 