  (See Corrections & Amplifications item below.)  

For much of her career, Danielle Steel was best known as a couture-clad San Francisco writer and society gal with a handful of husbands and a soccer-team's worth of kids. But the author—who has sold nearly 600 million books—now lives mostly in Paris, happily husband-less. Today, the "social Steels" are Danielle's daughters—fashion designer Vanessa Traina and her editor sister, Victoria—who help keep their mother plugged into movies, music and new media. 

Perhaps that's why Ms. Steel's newest book, "44 Charles Street," skews conspicuously current. Named after one of Manhattan's most atmospheric streets, the novel—Ms. Steel's 97th—explores straight-from-the-zeitgeist topics ranging from single parenthood and the recession to drug abuse and Internet dating. 

Despite having written for some four decades, Ms. Steel still manages to turn out at least a book a year—every year—aided by the same trusty researcher she's had since the 1970s. Locations, in particular, are crucial to Ms. Steel. "My kids live in lower Manhattan, so they picked Charles Street," she says. "We had to use a number that doesn't actually exist and that's how we came up with 44."

Having closed her San Francisco art gallery and sold much of her couture, Ms. Steel is admittedly far less fashion-focused than she was decades ago. But armed with her girls and a lifetime of experience, the newly Parisian Ms. Steel still loves to shop—for flowers, chocolates and especially clothes. "I'm not an aging gracefully type," Ms. Steel says. "But I do believe in aging with grace."

 The French don't really exercise and I'm originally French. I used to ride horses and ice skate as a child, but I would rather die than exercise today. I smoke, I drink and while I have a trainer, I avoid her by all means necessary. People in California always want to know about your workout program; I don't really know what to tell them.

 There are very few "secret" shopping spots left in the world today—for truly unique items, I like to go to auction houses, including my favorite—Drouot in Paris. They've been in business since 1852 and I show up a couple of times a week to bid on old books, wines, paintings, vintage clothes and garden furniture. Whether I spend a lot of money or a little, I always find something surprising. 

 Perfume is like a personal signature, which is why I like to mix my own. For years I've paired Femme by Rochas with Shalimar and love the results. 

 I'm a terribly irresponsible eater—I love soft-boiled eggs and chocolate. I never met a chocolate I could not eat. I'm quite fond of Scharffen Berger, the dark chocolate-maker from San Francisco, but I also love Maison du Chocolat.

 Happy movies and chick flicks are what I like to see. "Notting Hill" is a favorite, as is "The Holiday" with Kate Winslet and Cameron Diaz. People might say I have the worst taste in movies, but I want a happy ending. If I wanted to stay home and cry, I could just look at the world around me.

 I love Le Voltaire in Paris, but fancy meals are really wasted on me. I don't like grand restaurants or kowtowing waiters. I don't need that kind of attention and I don't want it. One of the best dinner parties I ever attended was at Dolly Parton's house. She served meatloaf and fried chicken and it was fantastic. 

 I grew up with my father, so I know more about cars than most women. I'm partial to vintage cars, but not fancy vintage. For years I had a collection of classic model 1940s Fords, but those were sold. We always had Mercedes station wagons because they were useful for hauling around a lot of kids.

 Shoes from Roger Vivier are my favorite right now. But I'm also partial to Blahnik, Vuitton and Zanotti. I'm surprisingly practical in much of my life, but not when it comes to my shoes. I want them chic, pretty and sexy. Vivier's pieces feel chic and very classic.

 I go to bed late and wake up early, but for the few hours I'm actually in my bed I like sleeping on beautiful Pratesi sheets. I love wonderful bedding, wonderful towels and wonderful soaps. I work with a charity that provides supplies for the homeless and I always try to include a bar of really nice soap.

 My favorite hotel in the world is the Ritz in Paris. I stayed there two or three times a year for 23 years until I bought my own place in the city. I always stayed in the Ernest Hemingway suite; it's like a protective womb.

 Chanel is the only real couture today and this last show was the most wearable I've seen yet from Karl Lagerfeld. 

 People have entire relationships via text message now, but I am not partial to texting. I need context, nuance and the warmth and tone that can only come from a human voice. 

 San Francisco is a great city to raise children, but I was very happy to leave it. There's no style, nobody dresses up—you can't be chic there. It's all shorts and hiking books and Tevas—it's as if everyone is dressed to go on a camping trip. I don't think people really care how they look there; and I look like a mess when I'm there, too.

 My favorite saying is by Anne Frank: "I still believe in spite of everything, that people are good at heart." I, too, have great faith in human nature.

 Writing is a solitary endeavor, but not a lonely one. When you write, your world is populated by the characters you invent and you feel those people filling your life.

 I like to shop for quality basics—Prada, Chanel, Givenchy and of course, Hermès handbags. I am very fond of what Phoebe Philo is doing at Céline and I love Jil Sander for trousers. I don't buy trends, because the pieces don't last and I wind up never wearing them. That's why I like to shop with my children; they'll always tell me the truth.

 I love to dance, but I don't do it nearly as much as I used to. The music doesn't matter. Ballroom dancing, modern stuff—I've always loved it. I used to give dance parties, but now i just dance with my kids. They take me along to discotheques in the summer—probably because I'm the only one who can pay the bill

 Lust is temporary, romance can be nice, but love is the most important thing of all. Because without love, lust and romance will always be short-lived.

—Edited from an interview by David Kaufman

 Corrections & Amplifications:  The author Danielle Steel says she doesn't drink alcohol and still retains her collection of couture clothing. Ms. Steel's daughter Vanessa Traina is a stylist, fashion consultant and editor, and her daughter Victoria Traina is a fashion designer. This interview incorrectly says that Ms. Steel drinks alcohol and has sold much of her couture. The article also incorrectly characterizes Victoria Traina as an editor and Vanessa Traina as a fashion designer.