Murali Dharan used to eat a mound of white rice every day, overindulged in ice cream, rarely worked out and was overweight. When his chest started hurting one evening three years ago, the Los Altos entrepreneur took painkillers and went to bed. Only later did he find out that he had suffered a heart attack at age 46.

The experience of Mr. Dharan, an Indian immigrant, isn't uncommon in the Bay Area. He and other relatively young South Asians—including Indians and other ethnic groups like Pakistanis and Sri Lankans—are up to three times as likely as all other ethnic groups combined to die of heart disease, according to a study of California death records from the Palo Alto Medical Foundation, a research center.



That has translated into what some doctors describe as an epidemic of heart disease among the region's South Asians, one of the largest ethnic groups in the Bay Area after Caucasians and Latinos, according to the U.S. census. The causes include low levels of so-called good cholesterol and lifestyle factors such as high-carbohydrate diets and lack of exercise.

"With this large immigration of young, hard-working South Asian engineers, you see more South Asians living in this area having more cardiovascular events," said César Molina, a physician in Mountain View.

Some Bay Area organizations say they are trying to spread the word and help South Asians prevent heart problems down the road. But while experts recommend that all South Asian adults be screened for heart disease because of their elevated risk, many physicians still suggest screenings only for those patients who show other, more well-known risk factors, such as high blood pressure. 

Dr. Molina, an emergency-room doctor at El Camino Hospital since 1990, was unaware of the link until about 10 years ago. "Then a lot of young, 30- and 40-year-old engineers started showing up with heart attacks, and they didn't have the classic risk factors," he said.

In response, Dr. Molina and his colleagues in 2006 opened the South Asian Heart Center within the hospital, focused on teaching South Asians and their doctors about the elevated risk and how to manage it. The center offers subsidized heart screenings and advice to South Asians.

The same year, the Palo Alto Medical Foundation created a South Asian Wellness Task Force, a committee of physicians, nutritionists and scientists focused on researching South Asian health issues and disseminating information to patients. South Asian Heart Center Executive Director Ashish Mathur is also working with doctors in Marin County to potentially open a heart center there that would focus on South Asians.

"In our little microclimate, South Asians are a very significant minority," said Latha Palaniappan, a researcher at the Palo Alto Medical Foundation who was co-author of the study. "Often, you associate heart disease with lower socioeconomic status. Here you have a group that has all the advantages—health insurance, access to good food, they don't smoke that much—but they still have a disproportionate risk of heart disease."

One problem in treating South Asians with both heart disease and diabetes is cultural miscommunication between doctors and their patients, said Dr. Palaniappan. A physician might tell a South Asian diabetes patient to avoid pasta and bread, without telling them to also stay away from white rice, a South Indian staple.

Mr. Dharan, 49, took it upon himself to research why he had a heart attack. He learned about the South Asian link and read online about what he should to do lower his risk of future heart problems. At the South Asian Heart Center, he received blood tests and consultations with a nurse and a nutritionist.

His research spurred him to stop eating rice altogether in favor of big salads and vegetable curries. He also swore off ice cream despite his sweet tooth. He hired a strength trainer and started lifting weights twice a week. Over the past three years, he has lost 25 pounds.

"I was fairly typical of most people in Silicon Valley, running around, focused on the career," Mr. Dharan said of his lifestyle before the heart attack. "I was clearly, in hindsight, a walking time bomb for cardiac risk." Now, he said, "I'm much better off."

 Write to  Vauhini Vara at vauhini.vara@wsj.com 