  Q: My 2010 Volkswagen CC performs very well but for one thing: From a standing start there seems to be a slight delay before kicking in. Have there been any reported problems? 

—Gerard R. Cleere, Scottsdale, Ariz.

 A: This is a common complaint with the CC. Its modern, turbocharged four-cylinder engine has an annoying, old-fashioned problem called turbo lag. It relies on the turbo's boost for much of its power, but the power doesn't develop until the turbo is spinning quickly. The time it takes for the power to kick in is probably about half a second, but seems much longer. When the engine finally begins to pull the car with authority, it tends to lurch forward. This is probably because you have continued to push the throttle pedal further in search of power. There are aftermarket electronic engine-control modifications available, but going light on the throttle under initial acceleration may be the best solution.

  Q: I have a 2000 Audi A8 with 35,000 miles. The tires are original. I took the car in for inspection and was told that I should really replace the tires although there is still plenty of tread left. The reason stated was that after five to six years the rubber may become unstable. Is this true? 

—Bob Markmann, Park City, Utah

 A: The tire industry doesn't have official guidelines on how long you should keep tires before the possibility of degradation. In general, experts say 10 years is pushing it. How you drive and where your car is stored make a difference in how long tires last. However, I think it's time for you to start shopping for new ones.

  Q: My 2004 Envoy has the in-line six-cylinder engine and it is the smoothest engine I've ever had in any car or SUV, even smoother than my wife's Northstar Cadillac. What SUVs today use the in-line six engine? 

—Edward Turk, Independence, Ohio

 A: The only "straight-six" SUVs I can think of are the BMW X3 and X5. Perhaps I'm overlooking one or two, but I don't think so. I also think you might consider a V6 model. As a longtime fan or inline sixes I understand why you may wish to avoid V6 engines. But the V configuration has taken over in engine design and we may just have to accept it. Besides, the V-style engines are a lot smoother and more refined than they used to be.

 Q: My wife transports our 3 year old through rural Central Pennsylvania in a 2004 Cadillac Escalade because I have always believed that large, heavy vehicles preserve life in the most catastrophic accidents. I am considering a 2007 Escalade or a 2010-11 SRX. How would you characterize the overall safety trade-off between these two vehicles for worst case scenario head on, side impact and deer collisions? 

—Barry Davis, Felton, Pa.

 A: Trade-off is the right word. The Escalade and other large SUVs will give the driver and passengers the advantages of momentum, mass and size when colliding with other vehicles (most of which will be smaller) and large animals like deer.

However, they are typically harder to control when making evasive maneuvers to avoid such collisions. The bigger SUVs are also less stable and can be harder to keep under control compared with smaller crossovers like the SRX or midsize sedans.

—Email mecar@wsj.com 