The 112th Congress opens tomorrow, and "a band of Senate Democrats" intends to "press forward . . . with a proposal to curtail filibusters and other methods of slowing the chamber's work," the New York Times reports:

It was only six years ago that Republicans were threatening to abolish the filibuster, at least as it applied to judicial nominees, while Democrats were defending it as a time-honored tradition. Subsequently, the tables turned, with the GOP losing both the White House and its Senate majority.

Udall's plan would effectively reduce the number of votes needed to confirm a presidential nominee or pass legislation to 51 from 60 (actually, to a majority of voting senators, or half plus the vice president's, from three-fifths of those currently in office). You can understand why this would appeal to the Democrats, who spent the 111th Congress being vexed by the filibuster, even when they had the 60 votes to overcome it. But for their purposes, the timing is awful. In the medium term, filibuster "reform" would be more likely to end up helping Republicans.

Let's consider first what the filibuster cost Senate Democrats in the preceding Congress. By far the most consequential piece of legislation enacted over the past two years was ObamaCare, which had no Republican supporters. To get it through the Senate, then, the Dems had to pass it at a time when they had 60 votes (which they did for a total of only about six months), and they had to secure every one of those 60 votes.

How would things have been different had the Dems needed only 51 votes? Let us count the ways:

• They would not have had to give up the "public option" in exchange for Joe Lieberman's vote, so that the final product would have been more to the liking of the Democrats' progressive base.

• They would not have had to make special deals to win the votes of senators like Ben Nelson, Bill Nelson and Mary Landrieu, so that the process would have looked less corrupt.

• Some Democratic senators could have voted against the bill, so that they would face re-election without having to defend an unpopular law.

• Scott Brown would have been deprived of the ability to promise to be the 41st vote against ObamaCare, and thus might have lost his Massachusetts Senate race to that dreadful woman.

• Even if Brown won, a 41st Republican would not have locked the Dems into the version of the bill already passed by the Senate. As constitutional scholar Randy Barnett suggested in our Weekend Interview last year, this might have enabled them to recraft the law to make it less vulnerable to court challenge.

Yet it's unlikely that abolishing the filibuster now would save the Democrats from similar headaches anytime soon. It would make presidential nominees easier to confirm, though if President Obama loses next year, that would only be another reason for Republicans to celebrate.

The chief beneficiary of the abolition of the legislative filibuster, however, would be whichever party controls the House. Given their strong showings last year in elections for governor and state legislatures, which control congressional redistricting, this is likelier than not to be the Republicans for some time.

Further, a Republican Senate majority just two years hence is a realistic prospect. It would require a pickup of four seats, or three if the GOP wins the White House. Of the 33 Senate seats up in 2012, only 10 are currently held by Republicans. Of the 23 Democratic seats up, five are from states that John McCain carried. If the Republicans win the presidency and a bare Senate majority in 2012, the Democrats will sorely miss the filibuster in 2013.

Does that mean the Republicans would be wise to join the Dems in their effort to abolish the filibuster? Not necessarily. In 2009-10, a filibuster-free Senate would have produced not only a version of ObamaCare that was both more left-wing and more politically and legally defensible, but also, in all likelihood, a cap-and-trade law restricting energy use, the so-called Disclose Act limiting political speech, and some sort of amnesty for illegal immigrants.

Now and then, the Democrats do manage to take the presidency and majorities in both houses of Congress. It happened in 1976, 1992 and 2008. Assuming it's a once-every-16-years occurrence, Republicans might want to defend the filibuster for fear of what the 119th Congress might do in 2025-26.

As an aside, the Times reports that Majority Leader Harry Reid may defer a decision on the Udall plan by putting the Senate in recess tomorrow and then bringing it back into session "in the same legislative day when lawmakers returned on Jan. 24":

Maybe that explains how Byrd lived so long.

 Sen. Sheppard Had a Way With Words 

  Chilling Effect   The Met Office, Britain's counterpart to the National Weather Service, "warned ministers to expect an 'exceptionally cold winter' but then kept the prediction secret from the public," London's Daily Mail reports:

This is the same Met Office that, as we noted in December 2009, persuaded 1,700 scientists to sign a petition attesting to the "professional integrity" of the climate scientists whose shenanigans were laid bare by the Climategate emails.

  Four More Years?   As Barack Obama approaches the midpoint of his term, Yale legal scholar Stephen Carter has an essay in Newsweek arguing that the president is really much like his predecessor, at least when it comes to foreign policy:

There's a point here. On the other hand, watch one of the recent interviews with Bush, who has been promoting his memoir, "Decision Points," and we're sure you'll agree that in some ineffable way, he was better.

  Tomorrow's a Day of Mine That You Won't Be In   The Washington Examiner reports that President Obama's approval ratings have been creeping up--to 50%, according to Gallup--since he's been on vacation in Hawaii:

If Obama is serious about improving his ratings, why not try a two-year sabbatical?

  Preparing for 2013   "Obama Talks With William Daley About a Job"--headline, New York Times website, Jan. 3

  We Balm Global Warming   "Obama Balms the Base"--headline, WSJ.com, Jan. 3

  With DNC in Mind, City Bans Carrying Urine, Feces   "Students Opt to Squat"--headline, Inner West Courier (Five Dock, Australia), Jan. 3

  If Only Justice Stewart Had Lived to See This   "Artist Creates Touchable 'Porn for the Blind' "--headline, Time.com, Jan. 3

  Doesn't the Repeal of 'Don't Ask, Don't Tell' Obviate the Need for Beards?   "Does the Army's 'No-Beard' Rule Discriminate Against Jews?"--headline, Commentary website, Jan. 3

  They Must Be a Couple of Boobs   "Brothers in Line to Become Chairwoman of Legislature"--headline, Watertown (N.Y.) Daily Times, Dec. 31

  Decision Point   "Bush Fired as Texans' Defensive Coordinator"--headline, Houston Chronicle, Jan. 3

  Nothing but Bad News for the Women's Track Team   "More Employers to Cover Transgender Surgery, but New Hurdles Expected"--headline, Puffington Host, Jan. 4

  Why in the World Did People Start Drinking It?   "Lemonade Used to Flush Loos"--headline, Daily Express (London), Jan. 1

  Because Only Living Birds Can Fly   "Why Did 4,000 Dead Birds Drop From the Sky in Arkansas"--headline, Washington Post website, Jan. 3

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

 Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  God: 'I Started Getting a Raine Compex'--Now That Would Be News   "Nina Raine: 'I Started Getting a God Complex' "--headline, Daily Telegraph (London), Dec. 3

  Sacrament Mocks Doritos and Pepsi--Now That Would Be News   "Doritos and Pepsi Mock Sacrament of the Lord's Supper"--headline, Pantheos.com, Jan. 3

  Look Out Below!   "Airports Toy With the Idea of Tossing the TSA"--headline, MSNBC.com, Jan. 4

  It's Always in the Last Place You Look   "New Breast Cancer Drug Found Deep in the Sea"--headline, The Wall Street Journal, Jan. 4

  Everything Seemingly Is Spinning Out of Control   "Shoppers Brawl at Sears Customer Service Line"--headline, WTOP-FM website (Washington), Jan. 4

  Breaking News From 1   "Bethlehem Man Celebrates New Year as Uninvited Houseguest"--headline, Express-Times (Easton, Pa.), Jan. 3

  Breaking News From Stardate 3478.2   "Update: USS Enterprise Captain Relieved of Command"--headline, NPR.org, Jan. 4

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  Kate and Allah   Katie Couric of the "CBS Evening News" has a suggestion for her network's entertainment division, Mediaite.com reports:

This promises to be the greatest thing for network ratings since--Katie Couric!

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Rod Pennington, T. Young, Richard Belzer, Greg Askins, Zack Russ, Hillel Markowitz, Michele Schiesser, Aaron Spetner, Matt Dombrowski, Kim Gigstead, Brian O'Rourke, John Sanders, A.L. Wanamaker, Rick Weisehan, Abe Beyda, Connor DeVries, Rex Pilger, Hugh Phelps, Leonard Peirce, Bruce Goldman, Frank Free, Steven Aucella, John Williamson, John Bobek, Steve Obeda, Larry Fransson, Mark Finkelstein, Doug Black, Connie Broski, Joe Perez, Lewis Sckolnick, Herbert Sorock, Ethel Fenig, Jeanie Ribble and Mark Zoeller. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)