SYDNEY, Australia—The floods ravaging Australia's Queensland state have taken a toll on local tourism and are likely to weigh on the already struggling national industry as it grapples with a rising currency and higher interest rates.

Over the past month, rainfall that has blanketed an area roughly the size of Germany and France combined has deterred travelers from Queensland over the Christmas and New Year holidays, hotel managers say. The Queensland Tourism Industry Council estimated the floods could cost the local industry about $100 million. 

Economists said the floods will also cut the country's gross domestic product by about 2.5 billion Australian dollars (US$2.49 billion), with lost mining revenue cited as the biggest hit, but the loss in tourism revenue could be an additional drag. 

Hotel managers throughout the state, including places untouched by flooding like the northern town of Port Douglas, have seen rescheduling and cancellations pick up in recent days as the flooding has continued. 

In Bundaberg, the southern gateway to the Great Barrier Reef on the Burnett River about 200 miles north of Brisbane, flooding has now affected a region roughly the size of Belgium. At many local hotels, guests were evacuated for a few days last week, with few hotel managers worried about future bookings. 

"We shut down for a few days, then the water started to recede and we reopened because so many people couldn't get back out of town," said  Brian Zemek, acting manager of the Burnett Riverside Quality Hotel. "Everyone is just trying to get the town up and running." 

Still, some of Queensland's largest tourism destinations remain fully open for business, including the Gold Coast and Cairns, though concern about the flooding has impacted business even there with tourism businesses in overdrive trying to stave off cancellations.

The floods come at a tough time for the industry, which is struggling to cope with a 20% surge in the Australian dollar in the last six months that has kept foreign visitors from booking trips to the country.

A string of interest-rate increases has further crimped domestic travel, dealing a blow to small businesses in tourism, which account for 29% of all Australian small businesses, according to the government. 

The decline, coupled with the country's reliance on mining, prompted the government to step up efforts to protect the industry even before the floods. Last month, the government spent A$3 million to bring  Oprah Winfrey and her television show to film a series touting the country as a tourism destination. 

Australia's tourism slump is a rare bleak spot in an economy forecast to expand by more than 3.5% next year, according to the country's central bank, as demand from Asia for its resources drives growth. Tourism accounts for 2.6% of Australia's gross domestic product, or A$26 billion of revenue as a percentage of the country's economy.

"These floods are severely affecting tourism in some regions of Queensland," said  Daniel Gschwind, chief executive of Tourism Industry Council and a board member of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority. 

 Write to  Geoffrey Rogow at geoffrey.rogow@dowjones.com 