Journal Community (at WSJ.com/Community) is the social network where you can ask questions about anything and share your knowledge and expertise.

Go to our site and join the discussion. Sunday Journal will publish some of the questions and answers you post online.

Comments may be edited for brevity and clarity.

 Q: What are your financial resolutions for 2011? 

 A: 1) To quit smoking and save $2,555 and 2) improve my cash position.

—Elizabeth Hasbrouck

To pay off my student loans and free up that cash flow to pay off the mortgage in three years.

—Ryan Shells

To invest in Chinese, Japanese and German financial instruments.

—Stanley Platt

To keep on track contributing 20% of my wages to my 401(k).

To stay at my current job to become 100% vested in the company match.

—Carol Kujawa 

To buy a house.

—Gina Wu

To work harder and hopefully grow our small business. Times are tough, even here in Australia, for small business.

—Susan Rattray

To rearrange my stock portfolios.

—John Beshoff

To get into emerging markets and oil.

If there is another round of quantitative easing, then investigate U.S. stocks.

—Kreisly Condalor 

To start my own copy-editing business online to supplement my retirement income.

At this point in life, I need a career that is both flexible and portable.

—Sue Van Sickle

Q: At age 54, what actions would you suggest to change careers, with limited savings -- and nowhere close to enough money saved for retirement?

—Thomas Corley

A: I think it's always important to differentiate yourself. Yes, it may be more difficult to find jobs at a later age, but if you possess a unique skill, that would help differentiate you from others.

—Machiko Fuji

Look into re-educating yourself and go back to school. Universities and colleges have excellent programs with incentives.

—Sharon Spurgeon

If you have family or a family business, start there. If you have friends with like-minded business senses and are willing to work for "less" and have a good idea and are willing to put in effort, look to start a business. Otherwise, find a day job like most other folks.

—Roy Hodges

Take any actions with great caution. What lifespan will your new career have? What are the risks if you stumble? Are you borrowing money to retool?

You may be better off finding a position that will use your skills.

Community college courses to make your English and math impeccable are first steps. Scan the horizon for your slot.

Most of all, keep your head up. You can do it.

—Mhu CaoMhu Cao

That would depend on your skills. Going back to school is good up to a point. I know a lot of Ph.D.s looking for work. It is much better to have a good skill.

—  Mary Pippert 

Teach. Private schools can use your talent.

—Joe Aveni

Go back to school for something you really want to do. When you get out, you may have to move and take a job that others don't want.

Health care is something to look into. You will need to repackage yourself. Best of luck.

—Emilyn Page

At age 54, it is probably time to downsize the career, family and house. Children need to move out and start pulling their own wagons. Nonworking spouses should go to work.

Finally, you should downsize your career and do something fitting your age and skills.

I know of a person who recently retired as an executive at 55 and is now loving work as a waitress. I know another person who is a retired pilot and now enjoys work as a security guard.

I can think of worse things than living on a boat and cleaning docks, or working at a ski resort doing maintenance or renting cars on some sunny resort island.

What I am describing has a future, but trying to "restart" a new career path in the corporate world at age 54 is unlikely. Good luck!

—William McKibbin

Next month's question:

 Q: What was your first job and how did it help you later in your career? 