Last summer, the city's community-garden coalition and city agencies battled over the future of urban gardens and farms and their place within the larger environmental landscape of the city.

Out of that came a basic need to understand the present purpose and services of such gardens and farms in communities, including understanding where they are, who uses them and how much food they produce.

Developing a plan for the future of urban farms in New York City is the focus of the Five Borough Farm project through the New York nonprofit Design Trust for Public Space. 

The organization was recently awarded $90,000 from the Doris Duke Charitable Foundation to work with organizations throughout the city to develop a map, quantify the many benefits of urban agriculture and develop a set of recommendations on how the city should support urban agriculture activity.

The Doris Duke Charitable Foundation, established in 1996, primarily supports the arts, the environment, medical research and the prevention of child abuse. One of the key areas of importance to the foundation is the recognition that 80% of the U.S. population lives in urban areas. "Activities that take place on urban land are just critical in supporting the health of our environment, everything from clean water and air to biodiversity," says Edward Henry, president of the foundation.

The decision to fund the Design Trust for Public Space project "is because there is no hard data about the real effects of urban agriculture. Whether it's on economics, health or qualitative issues about the environment," says Mr. Henry.

The program funds two fellows who will conduct a survey to first determine what is going on in urban agriculture in the city. "Urban agriculture is a kind of trendy topic right now and there's tons of activity going on in New York and nationally," says Deborah Marton, executive director of the Design Trust for Public Space.

Next, the fellows will develop ways to measure the activities going on in the city, everything from the environmental impact to public health to economic benefits. The program will design a set of standard metrics that can be used by any city looking to evaluate its urban agriculture programs.

Having good tools to measure the costs and benefits of urban agriculture is key to helping cities "decide whether to build a community center or a basketball court or a playground or an urban farm," says Ms. Marton. "They need some way of understanding what is the bang for the buck. Right now, that way doesn't exist."

 Write to  Melanie Grayce West at melanie.west@wsj.com 