 New York 

In 1996 a highway was being constructed in Lod, a town 10 miles southeast of Tel Aviv, when, as so often happens in those parts, the workers came upon an ancient and heretofore unknown archaeological site. Naturally all work stopped at once, a bevy of specialists, led by Dr. Miriam Avissar, was called in and, a few months later, a wonder was announced to the world.

The most conspicuous component of the excavations was a merchant's house from about A.D. 300. Discovered therein was the nearly intact mosaic floor of a dining room. Of several mosaics unearthed at the site, this is the one that now stands unveiled to the general public, for the first time anywhere, in the Leon Levy and Shelby White Court in the Metropolitan Museum's Greek and Roman Galleries. The Met is the first of four American venues to which the mosaic will travel before returning to Israel, where it will be the star of the not-yet-completed Shelby White and Leon Levy Lod Mosaic Center. At the Met, regrettably, it is accompanied by a video loop whose soundtrack, although informative, is likely to distract viewers who would prefer to contemplate the mosaics in silence.

Anciently known as Lydda, Lod was destroyed by Roman soldiers during the Jewish Wars in A.D. 66. Refounded by the emperor Hadrian as Diospolis some 60 years later, it fell to Muslim invaders in A.D. 636. Probably we will never know anything about the owner of the house in Lod. Whether he was a Roman or a native of Roman- occupied Judaea is unclear. It is equally uncertain whether he was Christian, Jewish or pagan. What is evident is that, at a time when Christianity was becoming the dominant creed of the Roman Empire, there is nothing visibly religious about the recently unearthed floor. But as befits a mosaic discovered within walking distance of the Mediterranean, it is brimming with aquatic and nautical imagery in its three adjoining frames: the largest, 13 feet by 13 feet, is flanked by two others, each 13 feet by 5.3 feet.

Together these three mosaics form the best of what has been discovered thus far at Lod: a work conspicuous not only for the freshness of its preservation—aside from one bald patch, it is as good as new—but also for the vibrancy and variety of the images contained within it.

The subdued polychrome tiles, or tessarae, of the Lod mosaic inhabit an elaborate filigree of cable patterns that are mostly black on white. In the central panel is a menagerie of lions and giraffes, together with elephants and rhinos set into a schematic landscape whose white mosaic ground can be interpreted as sun-bleached earth. Encircling the scene are several emblems or cartouches depicting, among other things, a rabbit feasting on grapes and a lion feasting on a stag. Interwoven among these images are bream, mullet, snapper and dolphins, not to mention doves. The adjoining zones of the mosaic contain two enchanting ships, a magnificently coiled sea monster, and still more scenes of lions attacking stags and a snake wrapping itself menacingly around a big fish.

 The Roman Mosaic From Lod, Israel 

The Metropolitan Museum

 Through April 3 

It is hard to see what larger point if any can plausibly be read into these emblems of animal violence. Despite their carnage, one senses an almost vaudevillian jauntiness to the endless cycle of life as depicted on the mosaic floor.

Though the subject of mosaics is far too vast and multifarious for easy generalization, it is fair to say that from their inception in Greece about 400 B.C. to the present example seven centuries later, mosaics were seen as a minor, ludic art that was hardly to be mentioned in the same breath with painting and sculpture. Having not yet acquired those immortal longings that they would come to have after being co-opted by the Christian church, mosaics were associated with the pleasanter parts of life: a bathhouse, a fountain dedicated to some local nymph or, in the present example from Lod, the opulent dining area of a wealthy citizen. These were floors, after all, that you walked over and danced upon. With very rare exceptions, mosaics had not yet begun that crucial migration to walls where, for the first time, they would begin to be taken seriously as culture and art. Let it also be said that not all mosaics are equal and that the Lod mosaics, though lovely, neither aspire to nor attain the almost painterly richness of detail that one finds in the mosaics from the House of the Faun in Pompeii or the House of Dionysus at Delos.

Perhaps it is best to interpret the Lod mosaics as expressing the wised-up and mock-solemn cynicism of a rich man all too learned in the ways of the world: It is a cynicism tempered by an intimation of serene well-being, enhanced by a healthy dose of self-satisfaction and fueled to satiety by more than a little wine and meat.

There is a tendency to regard ancient artifacts, and especially mosaics, with a kind of breathless solemnity. But to do so is to miss the point of these splendid relics. We must never forget that, all those centuries ago, men and women feasted and quaffed in happiness, and that servers hastened to fill their cups or bring on the next course, over the nearly indestructible tesserae of the Lod mosaics that are now on view at the Met.

 Mr. Gardner is a critic based in New York. 