Sheldon Harnick, who will appear at Feinstein's this week in "She Loves Him," a cabaret show devoted to his lyrics starring Broadway ingénue Kate Baldwin, is one of the most successful wordsmiths in musical theater. With composer Jerry Bock, he wrote not only the popular "Fiddler on the Roof," but also "Fiorello!" "Tenderloin," "She Loves Me," "The Apple Tree," "The Rothschilds" and many others. In addition to winning three Tony awards, Mr. Harnick is also one of the few songwriters to win a Pulitzer Prize for drama, which he did at the start of his career for that most metrocentric of musicals, "Fiorello!" 

When asked what makes a great song, the 86-year-old takes the time to think before speaking. 

"There are different kinds of great songs—comedy songs, love songs and so forth," he finally says. "But, finally, I think the primary thing that makes a song great is the music. There are great songs, like 'Body and Soul,' for instance, where the lyric is not very good. Yet something about the combination of the music and words expresses a universally shared feeling or experience."

Mr. Harnick started as a violinist in Chicago, but by the time he was diagnosed with a neurological condition that cut short his professional playing career, he was already working toward becoming a songwriter. "To me, the life-changer was 'Finian's Rainbow' by Yip Harburg and Burton Lane. Charlotte Rae [a fellow student at Northwestern University and future Broadway and TV comedian] played the cast album for me, and I was dazzled by what Yip had done. Not just the lyrics, but the fact that he was trying to say things that I thought were rather important. It was Yip that made me think that I could try and be a theater lyricist." 

After he arrived in New York, Mr. Harnick wrote both music and words for several songs in revues, but Mr. Harburg convinced him that he would do better to concentrate on lyrics.

In 1976, Mr. Harnick collaborated with Richard Rodgers on the legendary composer's penultimate show, "Rex," and he notes that both of Mr. Rodgers's key collaborators, Lorenz Hart and Oscar Hammerstein II, were major influences. "I was always fascinated by the kind of sarcasm and the edge that Larry Hart had," he recalls. "It took me a longer time to appreciate Oscar Hammerstein and also Irving Berlin. They were not as biting and witty as Hart, and they struck me as bland at first. Later, I came to realize that Hammerstein was a true poet. What I eventually appreciated about Berlin was the extraordinary combination of simplicity and yet freshness. He was simple without being banal." 

Frank Loesser was still another favorite. "His inventiveness fascinated me," Mr. Harnick says. He also admires the way many of his heroes had a gift for writing numbers that moved the plot but also functioned perfectly as independent songs. Mr. Harnick has had hits—"She Loves Me" and "Sunrise, Sunset" leap to mind—but he feels his own work falls short in this area. 

"Yip introduced me to a protégé of his, the composer Phil Springer," Mr. Harnick says. "We had a meeting and Phil said, 'Sheldon, I don't think you could write a commercial lyric if your life depended on it.' And that was the end of that." 

Likewise, Mr. Harnick said he was told by the pop-music firm Hill and Range (publisher of most of Elvis Presley's hits): "There are too many ideas in your songs. Listen to the crap that's out there—that's what we want." But in shows like "The Rothschilds," he says, "all of the songs were so wedded to the book that they were impossible to take out of the show."

Yet millions of performers and listeners would agree that Mr. Harnick doesn't have to apologize. Ms. Baldwin said in a phone interview recently: "I think there's a sincerity to Sheldon's work, and when you sing it, you have to get out of the way so that the lyric can come through. It feels rather magical, because you feel like you're being taken care of as a performer. His music reminds me to hang on to those qualities that get challenged every day—things like honesty, warmth, intelligence and humor. His humor isn't about telling jokes; it's about realizing that the world is a little bit absurd and choosing to laugh at it."