A company that arranges for individual investors to buy pieces of strangers' life-insurance policies is altering the way it sells to those investors, amid growing scrutiny of the firm's practices.

  Life Partners Holdings Inc. of Waco, Texas, arranges for investors to pay premiums, then collect when the insured person dies. It says it has sold about $2.8 billion worth of policies to 27,000 clients. 

In an announcement emailed to its outside sales agents that was reviewed by The Wall Street Journal, Life Partners said the new approach would target annual returns for its clients of 7% over seven years, instead of the targeted 12% to 14% annual returns over shorter periods, typically four to six years, it had promoted as recently as last year. 

In the announcement, the company told the agents it had conducted a review "in light of the issues raised by the Wall Street Journal," which published a Page One article in December focusing on Life Partners. The article reported that many of the insured people are living well beyond the estimates provided by Life Partners, requiring the investors to pony up more money for annual premiums and cutting their eventual returns.

The company confirmed earlier this month that it is the subject of an investigation by the Securities and Exchange Commission and said it is "cooperating fully" with the agency. The full scope of that investigation isn't clear.

In a written statement, a lawyer for Life Partners,  Ida Draim, said the target rate of a 7% compounded annual return over seven years was "derived through feedback from our clients" about the level of return they generally seek for life-settlement investments. 

Life Partners said in the email to agents it would alter the way in which premiums are paid to insurance companies. It will begin to pay insurers the least possible amount each year to keep policies in force, rather than the annual amount recommended by insurers. The switch means that the upfront payments that investors make to purchase policies and cover premiums would be stretched further than under current practice, to seven years, the company said. In general, life insurers don't like being paid the minimum in premiums because it makes it tougher for them to turn a profit. 

That change is aimed at alleviating investor concerns about repeated annual premium calls after an insured person has outlived the initial life expectancy, Ms. Draim said. Clients "would rather escrow a larger amount of premiums upfront than receive premium calls" years after making a purchase, she said.

Life Partners also said it would help to expand a secondary market for its fractional policies, aiming to ease concerns that the investments are difficult to resell.

The Life Partners attorney said executives "do not anticipate making any change" to the way the company estimates life expectancies. That issue is a critical part of the investment equation and one focus of the SEC investigation, according to people contacted by the agency.

As previously reported, the life expectancies are calculated by a Reno, Nev., physician who in 2008 testified he sometimes did dozens a day and didn't review his prior predictions for accuracy. Life Partners has said it stands by the doctor's methods.

 Write to  Mark Maremont at mark.maremont@wsj.com and Leslie Scism at leslie.scism@wsj.com 