Japan will have to import more oil, fuel and natural gas for electricity generation to make up for the shortfall caused by the shutdown of nuclear power plants after the earthquake. This will put upward pressure on global prices in markets already concerned about the availability of energy supplies amid widespread unrest in the Middle East.

The 8.9-magnitude earthquake that struck Japan on Friday sent the cost of natural gas and other fuels that can be used for power generation soaring, as reports of widespread shutdowns to the country's nuclear facilities poured in. Japan is the world's largest importer of liquefied natural gas, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration.

On Saturday, an explosion struck the No. 1 reactor at the Fukushima nuclear plant, with radiation above legal limits reported in the vicinity. Slightly radioactive steam was released from a second reactor at Fukushima after Japanese officials warned that pressure was building at the unit.

Extended closures of nuclear facilities are likely to follow the desperate struggle to contain a fire and radiation leaks at  Tokyo Electric Power Co.
9501


0.14
%




's Fukushima complex. Safety checks and inquiries can take months. Ten Japanese nuclear reactors with a combined capacity of 8.6 gigawatts, or about one-fifth of the country's nuclear power, have been taken off line because of the earthquake.

Roughly a quarter of Japan's electricity comes from nuclear generation, according to the EIA. About two-thirds is powered by conventional sources such as gas, petroleum and coal.

Based on events that followed previous closures of quake-hit reactors in Japan, imports of these conventional sources of energy will have to rise. The country is likely to need to tap the liquefied-natural-gas and fuel-oil markets most heavily. Prices for both fuels rose on Friday, before it was known whether any reactors were damaged. 

LNG is gas that is transformed into a liquid under low temperatures so that it can be transported by ship.

"The biggest thing is that we have to wait and watch to see how many nuclear plants are shut down and for how long," said  Vivek Mathur, an analyst at energy consultancy ESAI.

In July 2007, Tepco, as Tokyo Electric Power, is known, sharply increased its fuel-oil and LNG imports after closing seven reactors at its Kashiwazaki-Kariwa plant in northwest Japan following an earthquake. The reactors took nearly two years to repair and restart.

The global gas market has more spare supply to send Japan's way than was available in 2007. But fighting in Libya has slashed the North African nation's exports over the last few weeks, and supplies could be strained further if protests destabilize other gas producers in the region. 

Oil prices were close to 2½-year highs before the earthquake, but fell $1.54, or $1.50, on Friday to $101.16 on the New York Mercantile Exchange as a quarter of Japan's refinery capacity shut down automatically, and traders feared that widespread damage to infrastructure would hurt demand. Japan is the world's third-largest oil consumer. 

Even with a decline of 3.1% for the week, prices are still up 20% from the 2011 settlement low of $84.32, hit Feb. 15.

U.K. gas prices, which can reflect conditions in the global LNG market, were up around 4%, traders said Friday.

Prices for fuel oil, which can be burned to generate electricity, could prove even more volatile if Japan's imports soar as they did in 2007. Japan currently isn't a big fuel-oil buyer, but it may now need to ramp up fuel-oil imports or buy more crude oil to process into fuel oil. 

The cost of high-sulfur fuel oil, which normally closely tracks crude prices, rose in the Northwest Europe market on speculation that Japan would soon draw on European supplies.

Replacing the lost nuclear power capacity with natural gas would require between 1 billion and 1.2 billion additional cubic feet a day, or 238,000 barrels of extra fuel oil a day, Barclays Capital said in a report issued Saturday.

—Ben Lefebvre contributed to this article.

 Write to  Simon Hall at simon.hall@dowjones.com, Mari Iwata at mari.iwata@dowjones.com and Sarah Kent at sarah.kent@dowjones.com 