HELSINKI—Finnish lawmakers failed Tuesday to reach a clear all-party majority on whether to support the country's participation in a bailout of Portugal. 

Lawmakers had discussed the country's participation in the bailout within their own parties, ahead of a scheduled decision in the Grand Committee of the Finnish parliament on Wednesday. 

The Grand Committee decides parliament's position on EU legislation and the decisions by its 25 members are politically binding. 

As expected, euro-skeptic True Finns—the party that holds four of the committee seats after general elections on April 17—said it will vote against any Finnish payments to EU countries at risk of default. 

The Social Democratic Party, with 6 seats, reiterated it wouldn't support a bailout unless certain conditions are met. The Social Democrats call for an assessment of how much debt Portugal, Greece and Ireland can actually handle, the commitment and responsibility of private investors and banks, and limitations to taxpayers' liability. 

The Greens (1 seat) declined to reveal their stance on the bailout. However, the Centre Party (5 seats) said it will support the Portuguese bailout. Earlier, the National Coalition Party (6 seats) and the Swedish Peoples' Party (1 seat) expressed its full support for the package. 

In total, 12 lawmakers of the 25-seat Grand Committee are expected to support bailing out Portugal, with six conditional votes, four clearly opposing a bailout, and with one party not disclosing its stand. The Left Alliance and the Christian Democrats (each with one seat) had not yet announced their decisions on Tuesday. 

Based on the support, Finland's interim government will prepare a proposal to the Grand Committee Wednesday morning, prior to the Grand Committee meeting in the afternoon. 

The Grand Committee will Wednesday discuss whether there's enough support from the parties for Finland to back bailing out Portugal, or not. However, a final decision may not be reached until Friday. 

"There is a great likelihood that even if the Grand Committee reaches a decision in principal on Wednesday [May 11], it might want to formulate

justifications in its meeting on Friday," Counsel Clerk to the Grand Committee, Peter Saramo, said. 

Portugal said last week it had agreed a three-year, €78 billion bailout program with the European Union and the International Monetary Fund to help its ailing economy. But the deal has to be supported unanimously by all euro-zone governments. 

Finland is the only euro-zone country that needs parliamentary approval before agreeing to any further guarantees for the European Financial Stability Facility and the planned European Stability Mechanism. 

Finland is also one of six euro-zone members that have an Triple-A credit rating, and whose guarantees are therefore crucial to ensuring that the EFSF can borrow cheaply on international bond markets. The EFSF then lends that borrowed money to countries in need. 

Earlier, EU Economics Commissioner, Olli Rehn, said Finland will have to decide before May 25, allowing the EU time to give the first tranche of aid to Portugal in June. 