This past January, Syracuse's men's basketball players strode onto the court at Madison Square Garden before their game against St. John's and unveiled warm-up outfits with a provocative claim: that the Orange were New York's college team.

Syracuse then dealt St. John's its only loss at the Garden this year, handing the Red Storm a decisive 76-59 defeat.

"As far as their shirts, they're entitled to their own opinion," said Red Storm senior Sean Evans stiffly, recalling the incident nearly two months later. "We are New York's team. We think we are. We're going to prove it."

On Thursday at 2 p.m. St. John's (21-10, 13-6) will have its chance. The two teams will face each other again in the quarterfinals of the Big East Tournament. 

A resurgent St. John's has recaptured the city's attention. But Syracuse (25-6, 12-6) retains a mad affection among its alumni in New York. 

We do not expect diehard fans from either side to change their minds, irrespective of the evidence. But for everyone else, we're here to provide an answer to the question of which school can credibly make the claim to home-court advantage on Thursday.

Here's how each school stacked up across six categories: 

On January 19, 1931, St. John's defeated CCNY, 17-9, in its first game at Madison Square Garden. Syracuse would not step onto the Garden court until eight years later, when it defeated Manhattan, 42-31.

Over the years, St. John's would become increasingly comfortable in the arena, compiling a record of 396-260 (a stellar .603 winning percentage). 

While Syracuse is 84-69 overall at The Garden (.549), it is 66-41 there during Coach Jim Boeheim's tenure (.617). Over that same span, St. John's is 168-120 (.583).

After this year's win, the Orange and St. John's have split 28 games at the Garden, according to Syracuse, but the Red Storm retains an edge in history, number of games and overall winning percentage.

 Advantage: St. John's

The athletic directors of St. John's and Syracuse agree that it was easy to tell which school had a greater share of the 14,440 fans at Madison Square Garden during the schools' clash earlier this season. 

But they don't agree which school had that share. Syracuse athletic director Daryl Gross said because of the Orange's success in recent years they routinely have more fans. "Naturally we're going to have more fans there and the bulk of the crowd was our fans," he said.

"It's clearly a home game for St. John's," countered St. John's athletic director Chris Monasch. "I know we had more fans than Syracuse." 

Syracuse's Boeheim refused to take a position that could end up on a Red Storm bulletin board. "I think it was even," he said.

In truth, there is no way to tell definitively. But over the past two years, Syracuse has significantly outdrawn St. John's in its— admittedly fewer —games at the Garden, averaging 16,878 fans (over five games) to St. John's 9,357 (over 14 games).

But the Red Storm is gaining ground. Last year, St. John's drew an average of only 8,054 fans over its five Big East contests. This season, that number spiked to 13,267. 

 Advantage: Syracuse

Syracuse and St. John's each had 28 games available to television viewers in New York City during the regular season. Since each network reaches different numbers of households, we compared the ratings for each team's games on the same station.

According to data provided by the Big East, Syracuse averaged 1.09 rating for its ESPN games, while St. John's averaged only .9. On SNY, Syracuse averaged a .17 rating compared to .1 for St. John's.

Across every category and network, Syracuse's ratings were consistently higher in New York City. Overall, the average ratings across all networks were .41 for Syracuse to .3 for St. John's. 

 Advantage: Syracuse



Walk into nearly any Modell's or Manhattan's Niketown and Syracuse merchandise is on display. Outside of the Garden, there is only one Manhattan location where St. John's merchandise is available and a limited number of locations throughout the city, largely concentrated in Queens, according to a spokesman. 

St. John's merchandise sales are projected to be more than $100,000, according to the University, up from $88,500 last year, with the "vast majority" coming from inside the region. 

By contrast, Syracuse estimated it made roughly $20 million in sales last year, according to Marc Donabella, its director of marketing for athletics, with at least 80% of that coming from New York state.

 Advantage: Syracuse

 The New York's college team campaign was originally devised to highlight Syracuse as the only BCS school in New York State, with a "big-time football and basketball program," said Syracuse athletic director Gross. "When we play in MSG, it becomes Syracuse's home away from home, it's just so obvious." 

Syracuse spends roughly $100,000 a year on the campaign, which this year included 70 cab tops (which will increase to 140 during the Big East Tournament), a box at the U.S. Open, and branded merchandise.

 In the past, the campaign has also included a billboard in Times Square. Donabella said royalties were up 24% since the tagline's launch in 2005.

The Red Storm currently spends "a little over" $100,000 on its own campaign, "A New Era at St. John's," according to a spokesman.

In the past year, Red Storm athletic fundraising is up 47%, corporate sponsorships are up 27%, men's basketball revenue has grown by 70%, and season ticket sales have increased by 26%, according to the University.

"The most important thing we've done in the past year is improve the quality of our basketball program," Monasch said, a theme neatly captured by this year's campaign.

 Advantage: St. John's

St. John's dominates this category with 116,000 alumni in the region (including around 53,000 in New York City) to Syracuse's 43,000. 

"New York has always been an important place for us," said university vice president Robert Wile. "When the basketball program is thriving it makes the whole city—obviously St. John's alums—but the whole city feel better."

In fact, only 268 of St. John's 2,245 season ticket holders are alumni.

 "When St. John's is good and they're competitive, there's just a love affair," said long-time St. John's fan and alumnus Mike Repole, who began following the team as a 15-year-old. "St. John's has a huge following not just from alumni. When you meet a Syracuse fan in New York City, he went to Syracuse."

But Syracuse alumni boast a particularly rabid devotion. Despite only being home to 20% of the school's alumni, New York-area graduates have contributed 40% of the alumni donations since 2007.

"The thing about the connection in New York is very broad; it's not just athletics," said Larry Bashe, president of the Syracuse University Alumni Association who is based in the region. "We have internships and classes down here, there's an academic connection, there's a cultural connection."

Still, that's fewer people and fewer connections than St. John's. 

 Advantage: St. John's



 Although this analysis resulted in a draw, it seems clear St. John's is on a trajectory to claim clear ownership of the city. Besides, Syracuse guard Scoop Jardine said St. John's folks shouldn't take a bunch of Orange shirts so seriously.

"People would think it's cocky doing that, but it's just having fun," he said. "It's college."

That sentiment was echoed by his coach.

"I think this whole 'New York City team' kind of gets blown out of proportion a little bit," Boeheim said. 

Do you want to know the real New York team, he asked?

"The New York Knicks."