If screenwriter and actress Annie Mumolo had more time, she'd be focusing on her untitled (and still unproduced) comedy about three 30-something friends stymied by a snowstorm en route to New York City for New Year's Eve. But since 2006, Ms. Mumolo has spent her energy on "Bridesmaids," the new comedy she co-wrote with "Saturday Night Live" star Kristen Wiig. The film, about a single woman (Kristen Wiig) who has to organize her best friend's pre-wedding rituals, was co-produced by Judd Apatow as a sort of all-female version of his signature "bro-mance" formula. 

The Journal caught up with Ms. Mumolo, 37, to discuss women in comedy, scenes that didn't make the cut, and what it's like to work under the Apatow umbrella. 

 Does "Bridesmaids" try to appeal to men and women equally, or is it a movie for women that's just different from the average romantic comedy?  

We didn't set out to target any demographic. When we started, we just wanted to write a story showing women being funny the way we know them to be funny. Men do seem to like the movie, but we didn't want to specifically make something that men were going to like. We also didn't just want to do a chick flick. We just wanted to tell a relationship story in a funny, real way. 

 Is this film a rebuke to the Christopher Hitchenses of the world, who believe women aren't funny? 

Anyone who doesn't think women are funny hasn't ever been close with a woman. I know that people have that point of view, and I don't get it. Maybe that's from their experience. Women are funny in different ways than men are—but women are very funny people. Women communicate in very specific ways, and there's a lot of humorous things about they do so, especially in relationship dynamics. 

 How did you wind up working with Mr. Apatow?  

After Kristen did "Knocked Up," she got the call from Judd, then she called me up. We had just started brainstorming this idea and she asked me to tell him about it. I had the luxury of ignorance—I didn't know I was officially pitching anything. I went in there, told him what the story was, and later that night Kristen and I came up with another idea we wanted to tell him about. He said, "No, we're doing this one—I already sold it to Universal." 

 How much input did he have in the story?  

It was a very collaborative process. We wrote the drafts of the script and we would get notes from him. Toward the end he made some smart decisions. We had a Vegas sequence that we took out because he said "Vegas is done in movies. It's been done in my own movies, it's been done all over the place, we can't do Vegas." It was tough to remove but ultimately it was one of the smartest choices for the story. 

 When do you think you'll have a chance to pick up the comedy about New Year's Eve in New York City?  

I want to re-engage with it. It's hard right now with the time commitment, but I'd like to see that through. I have a couple of other feature ideas that I might be going out with and I'm just interested in continuing on with the feature world. I'm going to see what comes my way after "Bridesmaids."

 Write to  Julie Steinberg at julie.steinberg@dowjones.com 