Investigators said Friday they have discovered dozens of welding defects in pipe removed from the scene of a massive pipeline explosion last September in San Bruno, Calif., that killed eight people and destroyed 37 homes.

The National Transportation Safety Board on Friday released a metallurgical analysis of approximately 55 feet of pipe that appeared to rule out several possible causes of the pipeline failure, including corrosion or external blunt force, such as from a backhoe, and to suggest the blame could involve substandard welds.

Problems identified in the pipeline, built in the 1950s by owner  PG&E Corp.
PCG


-0.35
%




, included welds that used insufficient welding material and those in which metal wasn't properly fused, the report said.

Chris Johns, president of Pacific Gas and Electric Co., PG&E's utility unit, said the report was an "important step" in determining root causes of the explosion.

Mr. Johns said that the utility continues to operate its gas-transmission lines at 20% below maximum allowable pressures to provide an extra margin of safety. 

An engineer for the California Public Utilities Commission who worked on the report could not be reached for comment Friday. The NTSB said it would not comment on the lab report.

Although defective welds were found, it wasn't clear if other factors could have played a role in the explosion, such as excessive pipeline pressure.

 Some combination of factors could have converged to create the circumstances required for the catastrophic failure in the 30-inch-diameter high pressure gas-transmission line. 

The NTSB hopes to issue a final report that lays out the causes of the blast after it conducts hearings in Washington, D.C., during the first three days of March. 

Officials say finding the cause of the explosion is critical in case similar weaknesses at other pipelines are putting people at risk. 

The investigation has uncovered discrepancies between the types of pipe that records suggested were in the area and the actual pipes found there. 

The utility's records said the pipeline was made of seamless pipe, so inspectors hadn't suspected problems with welds in seams. 

After the blast, investigators discovered the pipe had lengthwise welds, as well as many small pieces of pipe welded together.

The report found that "longitudinal seams showed various defects," including incomplete welds.

The report was prepared by a six-member team of engineers from the NTSB; the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration, which regulates interstate pipelines; the California Public Utilities Commission; and PG&E.

 Write to  Rebecca Smith at rebecca.smith@wsj.com 