BRUSSELS—European Union governments are moving toward an agreement on rules that would restrict short-selling of stocks and sovereign debt, after addressing worries that the rules could make it harder for governments to sell debt, EU diplomats say.

But the governments must still negotiate with the European Parliament, which has passed a more restrictive version of the legislation that includes limits on trading credit derivatives linked to sovereign debt. 

The Parliament appears to have an ally among national governments: Germany at a meeting of officials Wednesday evening proposed to include a ban on "naked" short-selling of credit default swaps linked to sovereign credit default swaps.

Short selling is a way to bet that the price of a security will fall: Investors sell borrowed securities that they don't currently own, hoping that the price will fall and the security can be purchased and returned at a lower price. "Naked" trading is when investors trade borrowed securities or derivatives without making arrangements to own the underlying security.

EU finance ministers aim to reach a final agreement on the rules when they meet Tuesday.

Governments were previously deadlocked over the sovereign debt provisions. France and Germany want a ban on naked sovereign debt short sales, which they argue have exacerbated the euro-zone sovereign debt crisis.

But a number of other governments said the restrictions on naked short-selling could reduce market liquidity for their debt. The most recent version of the legislation, which was drafted by Hungary, holder of the rotating EU presidency, includes provisions to satisfy these concerns, such as an exemption for countries that demonstrate that the rules are disrupting their sovereign debt markets.

The other major contentious point is how much authority the European Securities and Markets Authority, the new pan-EU regulator, will have to restrict short-selling. The latest compromise gives the ESMA the power to ban short-selling of stocks when it determines an emergency situation exists. It can ban short-selling of sovereign debt in an emergency with the consent of the national government in question.

The U.K. opposes this provision, arguing that the European Council, representing the national governments, should have the power to determine when an emergency situation exists. 

 Write to  Matthew Dalton at Matthew.Dalton@dowjones.com 