WASHINGTON—Top financial executives from several big U.S. companies endorsed the idea of revamping corporate-tax rules following a Friday meeting with Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner.

The session produced no specific breakthrough, signaling many more meetings ahead on the Obama administration's efforts to overhaul corporate taxes. 

Still, executives described the discussion as productive. Much of it focused on the administration's aim to overhaul corporate taxes in a way that doesn't add to the budget deficit—a goal known as "revenue neutrality." 

Some business executives at the meeting suggested a more lenient standard that could add somewhat to future budget deficits, but also would allow them to keep some existing tax breaks, according to industry officials with knowledge of the situation.

A spokesman for Johnson & Johnson said company officials "welcome the opportunity to work with the administration and Congress to achieve corporate tax reform in a fiscally responsible manner that promotes economic growth and employment opportunities in the U.S."

"We are encouraged by today's meeting and look forward to a fruitful dialogue with the administration and Congress on how to level the playing field for American businesses through a more modern tax code," said  Frank Calderoni, chief financial officer for  Cisco Systems Inc.
CSCO


0.86
%




 

The U.S. corporate tax code has a couple of features some big corporations have found increasingly troublesome. It has one of the highest rates in the industrialized world, at 35%, a result of widespread tax-rate reductions by other countries. And it is one of the few big economies that seeks to tax corporate income earned outside its borders when it is brought back home. 

Those policies have disadvantaged many U.S. firms in the global marketplace, according to numerous critics. The high U.S. rate also has made the U.S. relatively unattractive to investment, both for U.S. firms and for foreign companies, these critics say.

Skeptics note that many U.S. companies pay effective tax rates that are well below the official rate, thanks to a variety of specific breaks, as well as sophisticated planning aimed at shifting income to low-tax countries. 

Passing legislation on the tax code's rates and other issues is likely to prove difficult. President Barack Obama has said that changes to U.S. corporate-tax rules must not cut revenue significantly, and worsen the nation's already-grim budget outlook. Instead, he has said a corporate-tax overhaul must be basically revenue neutral. 

Just lowering the corporate tax rate is expensive in budgetary terms—it costs the government about $120 billion over 10 years for each percentage point it is reduced, according to government estimates. Giving up world-wide taxation of corporate income and moving to a so-called territorial tax system, where only income generated in the U.S. would be taxed, likely would add significantly to the cost. 

That means that businesses might have to give up a lot of other tax breaks they currently enjoy in order to win the basic rate reductions and other changes they want. 

Further complicating matters, U.S. companies have different preferences. Firms that have enjoyed rapid growth in their overseas markets—particularly those in the high-tech and pharmaceutical sectors—tend to care most about changing the taxation of their foreign income, such as by switching to a territorial system. U.S.-focused companies, such as retailers, and others that pay high effective tax rates tend to care more about a big rate reduction.

Small businesses that don't even pay through the corporate tax code seem increasingly likely to become part of the debate too. 

The U.S. corporate tax code's relatively high rates and other features have encouraged many entrepreneurs to organize new businesses as non-taxable small businesses, particularly over the last 20 years or so. Owners pay tax on those companies' earnings through their individual returns. 

Some tax experts say the U.S. might have to look to those small businesses to give up some tax breaks, too, as a way of spreading the cost of corporate reform. 

 Write to  John D. McKinnon at john.mckinnon@wsj.com 