The U.S. government played two of its best cards on Thursday in the insider-trading trial of Galleon Group founder  Raj Rajaratnam: testimony from its star witness and secretly taped telephone recordings of the former hedge-fund manager allegedly receiving inside information. 

Appearing before a packed federal courtroom in lower Manhattan during the first day of testimony, witness  Anil Kumar, a former consultant at McKinsey & Co, said Mr. Rajaratnam had paid him $500,000 a year through an offshore account for inside information.

Prosecutors played a recording of an Aug. 15, 2008, call during which Mr. Kumar tells Mr. Rajaratnam that a transaction that will boost the shares of Advanced Micro Devices Inc., a McKinsey client, is about to be completed. "They've shaken hands" on a deal, Mr. Kumar tells Mr. Rajaratnam. "You can now just buy."

Prosecutors said Mr. Rajaratnam bought 10 million shares of the stock after the call and another 25 million shares after he got more information about the deal from Mr. Kumar.

Read the wiretap conversation between Raj Rajaratnam and Anil Kumar. Plus, conversations between

 Raj Rajaratnam and Rajiv Goel 

 Raj Rajaratnam and Adam Smith 

Mr. Kumar, who pleaded guilty to conspiracy and securities fraud in January 2010, is seen as a crucial witness in the government's case against Mr. Rajaratnam. His performance on the witness stand, especially when he is cross-examined by Mr. Rajaratnam's lawyers, could have a big impact on whether the government wins a conviction, lawyers say.

Mr. Rajaratnam is accused of making improper trades based on tips about publicly traded firms allegedly obtained from a "corrupt network" of consultants, company insiders and others. Mr. Rajaratnam, who is facing 14 counts of conspiracy and securities fraud, has denied wrongdoing.

Prosecutors and Mr. Rajaratnam's lawyers for months fought over the admissibility of the wiretaps as evidence in trial. The judge ultimately allowed the recordings to be admitted. About 90 hours of telephone conversations involving Mr. Rajaratnam are expected to be used as evidence. 

The trial at the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York comes 1½ years after federal prosecutors signaled a renewed vigor in their pursuit of white-collar crime by revealing that they had used wiretaps for the first time in a significant insider-trading case. 


‘'They've shaken hands' on a deal, Mr. Kumar tells Mr. Rajaratnam. 'You can now just buy.'’


Mr. Rajaratnam's lawyers have argued that his trading and Galleon's trading were based on a "mosaic" of research, not inside information. In his opening statement Wednesday,  John Dowd, one of Mr. Rajaratnam's lawyers, said Galleon spent about $300 million a year on research, and prosecutors had failed to do their "homework." 

Mr. Kumar, the former McKinsey consultant, testified that Mr. Rajaratnam told him in 2002 that Galleon had $100 million a year to spend on research, some of which the hedge fund manager said could go to McKinsey. Mr. Kumar said he made a couple of proposals to provide industry research to Mr. Rajaratnam, but the hedge-fund manager didn't respond.

Eventually, Mr. Rajaratnam told him at a charitable event that such industry research "wasn't really what I want," and proposed hiring Mr. Kumar as a private consultant for Galleon for $500,000 a year, Mr. Kumar testified.

"You have such great ideas. It's worth a lot of money," Mr. Kumar said Mr. Rajaratnam told him. Mr. Rajaratnam also told him he was "underpaid" and "you deserve more," Mr. Kumar said.

Mr. Rajaratnam later told Mr. Kumar that he should get someone outside the U.S. to sign the consulting agreement on his behalf with Galleon and had him set up an account with Galleon under Mr. Kumar's housekeeper's name in order to reinvest the money with Galleon, Mr. Kumar said. The structure was so McKinsey didn't know about the payments, Mr. Kumar said.

"Before 2004, did you ever give confidential information about McKinsey clients to Mr. Rajaratnam?," asked Assistant U.S. Attorney  Jonathan Streeter.

"No," Mr. Kumar said.

"After 2004, did you do that?" Mr. Streeter asked.

"Yes," Mr. Kumar said.

Jurors also heard two other wiretap recordings on which prosecutors said Mr. Rajaratnam received secret tips about public companies.

On one, Mr. Rajaratnam is heard speaking with  Adam Smith, a former Galleon trader and another cooperating witness. In the May 1, 2008, call, Messrs. Rajaratnam and Smith are heard discussing  Vishay Intertechnology Inc.,
VSH


-0.50
%




 one of the companies about which prosecutors contend Mr. Smith passed inside information on to Mr. Rajaratnam. Mr. Smith said that a bank where an information source of his worked had lost out on providing investment-banking advice on a transaction involving Vishay. "But he said they're finally a willing seller," Mr. Smith said on the recording. "The deal looks phenomenal to him…I'm gonna buy some."

The Vishay deal never happened. Nevertheless, prosecutors allege that passing the tip was part of an ongoing conspiracy to trade in insider information.

Mr. Smith, who pleaded guilty to conspiracy and securities fraud, is expected to be a witness later in the trial, which is expected to last about 10 weeks. 

Prosecutors played a third call between Mr. Rajaratnam and  Rajiv Goel, a former manager in  Intel Corp.'s
INTC


-0.24
%




 treasury department. On the October 2008 call, Mr. Rajaratnam discusses PeopleSupport Inc. with Mr. Goel and says he knows information because "one of our guys is on the board."

Mr. Streeter, the prosecutor, said Mr. Rajaratnam made profitable trades in Mr. Goel's personal brokerage account, using inside information he received from others. Mr. Goel pleaded guilty to conspiracy and securities fraud last year and is cooperating with prosecutors. He also is expected to testify. 

In his testimony, Mr. Kumar described how he decided to become a cooperating witness. After he hired a lawyer, he said, he "bared his soul," telling his attorney he wanted to do what was necessary to "address" the situation. He then struck an agreement with prosecutors for his cooperation, he said. 

Mr. Kumar said he has agreed to forfeit about $2.1 million allegedly paid to him by Mr. Rajaratnam, and about $600,000 in gains on the funds he was paid by Mr. Rajaratnam.

 Write to  Chad Bray at chad.bray@dowjones.com and Susan Pulliam at susan.pulliam@wsj.com 