(See Correction & Amplification below .)

That Catherine Deneuve is the most beautiful woman in the history of cinema is not a difficult argument to make. "Belle de Jour"? "The Umbrellas of Cherbourg"? We rest our case. But she's been plucky, too, having regularly taken on the kinds of rigorous roles—for Luis Buñuel, Roman Polanski, Andre Techine, Lars von Trier—that a goddess of her magnitude might have avoided entirely. 

Still, it's hard not to cough up a laugh when she materializes in "Potiche," François Ozon's time-capsule comedy about a woman on the verge. Dressed in a rouge-red, Giscard d'Estaing-era sweatsuit, her lacquered hair trapped under some kind of net, Suzanne puffs her way through her morning jog, a smile bouncing precariously on her lips. She's delightfully surprised by a fawn in the wood; she blows a kiss at a chirping bird; she admires two rabbits making more rabbits. Then she writes a poem. Throughout all of this, Philippe Rombi's music, written in the key of déjà vu—and which someone, apropos, is whistling—places the whole scene squarely in 1977. If Suzanne threw a beret in the air, à la Mary Tyler Moore, we wouldn't be at all surprised. Except, of course, she's wearing that hair-net/kerchief thing.

"Potiche," or "Trophy Wife," is based on a '70s play of the same name and is largely one long gag about a pampered woman's overdue awakening. As such, it requires a bit of patience, if not respect: Suzanne, like Ms. Deneuve, is a classic, a bourgeois beauty suspended, as if in aspic. For years, she has simply had nothing to do. Her household is run by servants. The various needs of her philandering, plutocratic husband, Robert (Fabrice Luchini), are served by his secretary, Nadège (Karin Viard). Her son (Jérémie Renier) is obviously, obliviously gay; her daughter, Joëlle (Judith Godrèche) takes after her uncharitable father. "Of course I'm happy," Suzanne says. "I made up my mind to be." It isn't until workers seize the family factory and take her husband hostage that Suzanne has greatness thrust upon her. She is reunited with her sofa-sized, communist ex-lover, Babin (Gérard Depardieu). She changes work rules. She increases production. Cast onto a sea of social unrest, she floats. 

You can see it all coming, of course, and "Potiche" would be easy to dismiss if it weren't so tartly funny at times and if Mr. Ozon weren't up to mischief. Period humor usually relies on our taking a superior attitude about how we were then as opposed to how brilliant we are now. To Mr. Ozon, the supposedly bygone issues are really quite current: Joëlle wants to outsource everything to Tunisia; the dictatorial husband is against collective bargaining entirely. He's even compared by the workers to Hitler. ("Oh, no," murmurs Suzanne. "He has that lock of hair, but still.") Babin is no hero either, despite his man-of-the-people facade.

If Hollywood were France and we didn't have irony, Mr. Ozon might have been George Cukor, a film artist for whom women provide the palette and the canvas, the subject and the subtext: It's his actress, rather than his title character, who is really the subject of his film. The most astonishing moment is when Babin opens a locket that's been pilfered from Suzanne and finds their photos in it—photos taken, perhaps, when the two actors were co-starring in "The Last Metro," and were gorgeous. Mr. Ozon rests his movie on our memories: That Ms. Deneueve sings at the end of the film might not be a salute to "Cherbourg." But it can hardly be a coincidence that the factory makes umbrellas.

Several worlds away from "Potiche," yet in the same era, is writer-director John Gray's "White Irish Drinkers," an emotional coming-of-age story with one foot in '70s Brooklyn and the other in the '40s of Cain-and-Abel crime dramas and urban sociology à la Warner Brothers. Produced independently by Melissa Jo Peltier and Mr. Gray, who created TV's "The Ghost Whisperer," it is built on archetypes: Brian Leary (Nick Thurston) is a sensitive kid with an artistic gift; his brother, Danny (Geoffrey Wigdor), is a small-time criminal and Brian's tormentor; their mother (Karen Allen) is a martyr; their father (Stephen Lang) is a drunk. The storyline involves a one-night-only show by the Rolling Stones that Brian's boss, Whitey (Peter Riegert), has somehow arranged in order to save his failing movie house. There's also a loan shark (Broadway vet Ken Jennings) with his eye on the gate. All the moving parts—including Brian's gang of boyos, who can't decide whether to join the Civil Service or have another drink—are in place for well-oiled melodrama 

What gets in the way of all this formulation is honesty. Mr. Gray's bareknuckle take on tribal Bay Ridge would hardly have flown in the '40s. Maybe not the '70s, either. Alongside Brian's fears of his own talent, and fears about leaving home, is a great deal of casual brutality, disappointment and drink. As the bewhiskered patriarch, Patrick, Mr. Lang is a domestic terrorist, ruling his household through fear, beating his older son and drowning his own unhappiness. Although this is a young man's movie—Mr. Thurston is particularly good, and his exchanges with romantic interest Leslie Murphy sparkle—it's the older actors who deliver the dramatic gravity. 

Frequently enough at the movies, an isolated scene can take place in which an actor who may or may not be the lead steals the whole film through naked emotion, or power, or eloquence. Mr. Lang certainly has one here. He's a menacing presence throughout the film; he's the picture of fatherly tyranny and manly despair. But he has one particular moment, with dialogue written wonderfully by Mr. Gray, wherein he makes the fearsome, broken, brutish man he plays in "White Irish Drinkers" the most beautiful thing in Brooklyn. 

The last thing propaganda should do is make its audience work. "Miral" is a lot of work. A slog through four decades of Middle Eastern conflict, it concerns four women who have all been on the receiving end of Israeli cruelty: The real-life Hind Husseini (Hiam Abbas), who will found the Dar al-Tifel home for Palestinian orphans; Nadia (Yasmine al-Masri), a victim of sexual and other abuse who is imprisoned for smacking an Israeli woman on a bus; Fatima (Ruba Blal), a would-be terrorist bomber serving three life sentences (one for defiance); and Nadia's daughter, Miral (Freida Pinto, of "Slumdog Millionaire"). Named, we are told, for a flower found by the side of the road ("You've probably seen millions of them," says a subtitle, implying that her story is legion), Miral is used to personify the Palestinian struggle—not just between two peoples, but within herself: She doesn't want to be a terrorist, the film seems to argue, but what choice does Israel give her? 

It takes a certain amount of chutzpah to tackle the history of Israel from a Palestinian perspective, and then deliver something as disjointed and dramatically inert as this intergenerational agitprop tirade. It's not as if the subject hasn't been covered. Yes, there is considerable suffering and injustice portrayed by Mr. Schnabel, who has made admirable movies ("Before Night Falls," "The Diving Bell and the Butterfly"). But his style doesn't fit the material of this film; he tells us too much and not enough. Ultimately, the sense that one gets, wading through the self-righteous mush of "Miral," is of a movie that doesn't deign to explain, or convince, or convert, because anyone who doesn't already share its point of view is unworthy of the effort. Even those predisposed to the Palestinian cause will be pushed away, an ungenerous spirit being contagious.

A refreshing lack of sugarcoating and a real feel for the trials of 7th grade makes this second adaptation from the popular book series family friendly in a genuine way—parents won't just tolerate it, they'll enjoy it, as Greg (Zachary Gordon) suffers through middle-child-hood, and life with his chief antagonist, older brother Rodrick (Devin Bostick). Young Mr. Gordon is a lovable Everykid and his crises—a crush on the lovely Holly (Peyton List), a war of nerves with his officious schoolmate Chirag (Karan Brar)—are fairly minor league, until the parents (Steve Zahn, Rachael Harris) leave town and Greg throws a party. Will they be found out? Older viewers will be more baffled as to why Mom looks so much like Sarah Palin. It probably means nothing, but it will give them something to ponder while the kids sweat the big stuff. 

"Everybody has an angel," the voiceover tells us at the beginning of Zack Snyder's "Sucker Punch." And yet, mine let me wander into this movie. Mr. Snyder has created a name and a fan base for himself with the computer-driven action adventures "300" and "Watchmen," and this is the first original story he's brought to the screen. What becomes clear is that "story" means different things to different people: To viewers, it probably means a fictional construct in which something is at stake (characters, causes, emotions, etc.). For Mr. Snyder, it means another excuse for releasing the hounds of animated mayhem. "Sucker Punch" features a group of very attractive young actresses in hooker-wear imprisoned in a combination lunatic asylum/brothel, who are forced to dance for local power brokers, to unspecified ends (it's PG-13 after all). Everything changes upon the arrival of Babydoll (Emily Browning), whose dances conjure up, for the movie audience at least, epic battles against dragons, biplanes and evildoers of every stripe. The action sequences are interminable, the acting is a joke, but "Sucker Punch" is a movie for people who prefer video games and who may be playing them during the movie.

Catherine Deneuve was 19 when she and Nina Castelnuovo were paired in Jacques Demy's deliriously romantic musical, in which the entire story is sung (to the music of Michel Legrand) and young love takes its not-atypical turn into the tragic. Geneviève, who sells umbrellas with her mother, is in love with Guy, who has been drafted and is about to ship out for a two-year tour of duty in Algeria. In his absence, the pregnant Geneviève marries someone else; Guy returns to find everything changed. All to the strains of Mr. Legrand's now-classic "I Will Wait for You."

Seen by some as Roman Polanski's answer to "Psycho," this is a mental breakdown on film, made all the more morbidly fascinating by the way Ms. Deneuve's dreamy blond facade contrasts with her character's evident weirdness, which devolves into rampaging schizophrenia. Left behind by her sister in their shared apartment, Ms. Denueve's Carole gradually goes insane, commits several murders and fantasizes about rape and entrapment. Although Ms. Deneuve is terrific, it is through Mr. Polanski's masterful use of sound, editing and music that "Repulsion" attains its supreme level of psychological horror, and the reason it has become the celebrated, and notorious, film it is. 

François Ozon's hybrid of the MGM musical and the Agatha Christie-style drawing-room mystery was an all-star game of French femmes fatale—Fanny Ardant, Emmanuelle Béart, Ms. Deneuve, Isabelle Huppert, Virginie Ledoyen and Ludivine Sagnier, all suspects in a whodunit with musical interludes. The film might have been played straight, but certainly isn't: It's colorful and campy, and slightly ridiculous. For devotees of divahood, the highlight has to be the sequence featuring Ms. Deneuve and Ms. Ardant, dressed to the nines and wrestling on the floor.

—John Anderson contributes film criticism and coverage to a variety of publications. Joe Morgenstern returns next week.

 Correction & Amplification 

Catherine Deneuve starred in the film "Belle de Jour." A review of her film "Potiche" incorrectly gave the title as "Belle du Jour" in a previous version of this article.