BANGKOK—The Bank of Thailand raised its benchmark policy rate as expected on Wednesday and foreshadowed further increases as it warned about rising inflation. 

The central bank's Monetary Policy Committee unanimously agreed to lift the rate by a quarter of a percentage point to 2.25%, the second-straight increase after it surprised markets with a similar increase on Dec. 1. It raised the rate by a total of three-quarters of a point in the second half of 2010. 

Bank of Thailand Assistant Gov. Paiboon Kittisrikangwan told a media briefing that the central bank will continue to normalize rates, as pressures on headline and core inflation will keep rising. 

He specifically warned about negative real interest rates, or rates that trail the increases in inflation, blunting the governments efforts to tame price growth. 

The bank "must have broken tradition by stressing that today's decision was embraced by everyone within the committee. That is another way of saying: Look, each and every one of us is wearing the inflation hat," said HSBC economist Wellian Wiranto. 

Thailand is among several Asian nations grapping with rising inflation even as the U.S. and Europe cope with sluggish growth. Capital inflows from global investors have charged up their economies, but they have also sparked inflation fears, leading to worries about prices and stability at home.

Expectations of another rate increase swelled after annual inflation climbed to 3% in December, with the core reading—which excludes volatile energy and food prices—rising to 1.4%, though it was still within the central bank's target range of 0.5% to 3%. 

Ten of 13 economists surveyed by Dow Jones Newswires predicted the central bank would increase its policy rate by one-quarter of a point, while three had forecast the bank would hold steady. 

"We expect another 50 basis points for this year, and that would probably come in the first half of this year as long as the baht is still [accommodative]," said Pornthep Jubandhu, macroeconomic analysis manager at Siam Commercial Bank, referring to the potential for a half percentage point increase.

He added that any sharp appreciation of the baht against the U.S. dollar in the coming weeks would be the only thing preventing the central bank from raising rates at its March 9 meeting. Rate increases tend to lead to stronger currencies. 

 Write to  Phisanu Phromchanya at phisanu.phromchanya@dowjones.com 