A modern, glass-walled condominium situated amid the pre-war co-ops on Park Avenue on the Upper East Side seemed like a winner at the height of the real-estate boom. 

But now the first of five translucent duplex and triplex apartments in the building at 1055 Park Ave. has just gone into contract at what brokers say was a distressed price for the prime location—less than $1,850 a square foot.

The contract price totaled just under $4 million for an apartment on the corner of East 87th Street, brokers said. It was less than half the original asking price of $9.3 million a few years ago. 

The developer,  Trevor Davis, has been struggling with financial issues for the project since 2009. He also filed for personal bankruptcy protection last month, and a few weeks ago  Bank of America
BAC


2.95
%




 sued him to foreclose on his 5,623-square-foot, five-bedroom apartment at the Empire, a condominium on East 78th Street, court papers show. 

The foreclosure filing seeks to link Mr. Davis's Park Avenue development with his personal apartment, but Mr. Davis said there was no connection between the two. Claims against Mr. Trevor have been put on hold because of the bankruptcy filing. 

Mr. Davis said that he had "a substantial investment" in the Park Avenue project, and would take some losses on it. "Given the market conditions," he said, "unless they change dramatically, there will be less than full recovery."

Among its features, the condo building has translucent glass staircases and motorized window shades and views of Central Park and Park Avenue.

Why the project has struggled so much may be debated for some time. Neighbors complain that the design didn't fit in on an avenue of brick and limestone buildings. 

Some brokers blamed the awkward, 19-foot-wide building lot, in which space for an elevator, two emergency staircases, and an internal apartment staircase had to be squeezed. 

Still others cited unrealistically high prices or bad luck and poor market timing. 

Mr. Davis said that the market was "extremely challenging and I am not the only one experiencing it." He added, "The good thing is the building has been completed and is now ready for occupancy. That is a big deal."

A marketing campaign for sales at a second condominium with a glass facade and limestone details is about to begin a few blocks south on Park Avenue, just below East 82nd Street.

At that building, at 949 Park Ave., the duplex apartments are smaller, and are priced at or above the current asking price per square foot at 1055 Park. A lower-floor two-bedroom is listed for $4.68 million, or $2,350 per square foot. 

  Karen Mansour, who oversees new developments for Prudential Douglas Elliman, including both Park Avenue projects, said the critical different between the two was that the new project was "priced to market" from the beginning. 

She said the asking prices at 1055 Park had been unrealistically high despite the views and the glass curtain wall construction. "The views of Park Avenue are amazing," she said. 

When Elliman took over the project during the summer, the asking price that just went under contract had already been reduced in stages to $6.1 million and then was cut to $4.3 million in October. 

Mr. Davis bought the site for $12 million in 2005. In a court filing, he said that in 2007 he borrowed $15 million for building and project loans on the development. But, in a dispute the lender stopped funding the project in 2009, and the project stalled for 10 months. 

In court documents, he said he then put $4 million of his own money into the project and in March obtained a second loan for $6 million that gave the new lender the rights to seize his ownership in the project in the event of default. The new owners moved to do just that in November, and Mr. Davis filed for a bankruptcy reorganization in December to block that move. 

The price for the apartment under contract is about $1 million below the minimum sale price set in mortgage documents signed last year, and lawyers said can't close unless the lenders go along.

In the meantime, Mr. Davis said several other buyers had made offers. "The building has momentum," he said, "and we are doing what we are supposed to do. Try and close sales."

 Write to  Josh Barbanel at josh.barbanel@wsj.com 