A key difference between amateur and great chefs: To home cooks, seasoning means adding salt and pepper. To chefs, it means adding salt, (sometimes) pepper and acid—in the form of vinegar, more often than not.

"Salt makes everything round—acid brings the flavors into focus," says David Kinch of Manresa in Los Gatos, Calif. "I usually add a drop of wine, verjus, lemon juice or vinegar. There is such a wide palate with vinegars." 

That palate usually starts with a few basics: Chefs keep wine vinegars—red, white and Champagne—on hand for vinaigrette, and cider vinegar for poaching and pickling. Many chefs keep close to the stove a well-aged sherry vinegar, which adds both balanced acidity and depth of flavor to soups and sauces. For finishing dishes, a syrupy, aged balsamic is a valuable part of the tool kit. 

Amid growing appreciation for the culinary power of vinegar, a plethora of new options is hitting the market, as artisans roll out handcrafted varieties flavored by everything from quince to cucumber to beer. These vinegars let chefs balance acidity and perk flavor while also highlighting a dish's star ingredient.

So act like a chef and invest in a few great vinegars, then get into the habit of adding a final dash of salt, (sometimes) pepper and, yes, acid. 

—Katy McLaughlin

 WHITE BALSAMIC VINEGAR  Chef fan: Tyson Cole of Austin's Uchi and Uchiko says when he creates new dishes, he first thinks about what type of acidity he will use, "and I work backwards from there." Flavored white balsamics make everything "brighter, fresher and give food that extra pop," he says.  Best uses: Mr. Cole recently used a white balsamic at home on a salad of tomato, cucumber, fresh herbs and jalapeño. Alessi White Balsamic, 17 ounces for $7, vigo-alessi.com 

 QUINCE VINEGAR  Chef fan: A big fan of flavored vinegars, Manresa's Mr. Kinch also uses sweetand-sour honey vinegar by artisanal maker Jean Marc Montegottero (find his rare vinegars at mikuniwildharvest.com). The chef makes his own red wine, Douglas fir pine needle and nasturtium flower vinegars.  Best uses: Mr. Kinch uses quince vinegar with pureed celery root and on dishes with sunchokes or chestnuts. Huilerie Beaujolaise, 8½ ounces for $20, gigachef.com 

 BEER VINEGAR  Chef fan: Jesse Schenker, chef and owner of Recette in New York, tops a beef carpaccio with buratta and watercress salad with three parts olive oil to one part beer vinegar. It's light, with just a hint of malty fermentation.  Best uses: "It's a finishing vinegar," Mr. Schenker says, because of its high price and delicate flavor. Sprinkle over any vegetables, meats or salads; the maker says it's great on soft cheese. Gegenbauer Beer Vinegar, 8½ ounces for $20, epicurepantry.com 

 LEMON VINEGAR   Chef fan: Just before sending a kampachi tartare out to the table, chef Eric Ripert hits it with this vinegar to brighten the fish's subtle flavors. "It basically tastes like pickled lemons," he says.  Best uses: Anywhere where a squirt of lemon would be appropriate, such as over fish, on a salad or a white meat such as roast chicken. Lemon juice is "a bit aggressive," Mr. Ripert says, whereas this vinegar is a "very refined and subtle." Huilerie Beaujolaise Citron, 16.9 ounces for $34, cubemarketplace.com 

 BLACK RICE VINEGAR  Chef fan: David Myers, of Sona and Comme Ça in Los Angeles and Las Vegas, discovered black rice vinegars (he's not loyal to a brand) from a Chinese chef colleague. "It's got the color and sweetness of aged balsamic, with a distinct smoky flavor," says the chef.  Best uses: Mr. Myers suggests adding drops to bowls of chicken and rice soup, or to the reduced sauce of a braised meat dish. Mr. Myers also sears scallops, then adds a couple of spoonfuls of the vinegar to the pan to glaze the scallops. Chinkiang, 21 ounces for $8, ethnicfoodsco.com 