Not long ago, paying for something by phone meant calling a retailer or catalog merchant to place an order with a credit card. Today, your smartphone is a shopping mall and wallet in one.

But for all that high-tech convenience, people using their cellphones as an alternative to credit cards may be giving up some basic protections and risking financial damage.

Here's a look at the main forms of mobile commerce -- and what to watch out for:

 Apps. Apps already available from major retailers, like  Amazon.com,
AMZN


-0.46
%




 are similar to shopping via web browser, and are likely to become more prevalent as phone screens get bigger and browsers improve, says  Larry Joseloff, vice president of content for Shop.org, the National Retail Federation's e-commerce arm.

Other types of apps, like the one from  Starbucks,
SBUX


0.13
%




 generate scannable barcodes for gift cards in lieu of a physical card. In November,  Discover Financial Services
DFS


0.39
%




 and mobile-commerce developer Firethorn launched the free app Swagg, which does the same for more than 200 stores including  J.C. Penney
JCP


-0.11
%




 and American Eagle.

Financial pitfall: If you set your account to log in automatically, anyone with your phone can make purchases. Amazon and PayPal say none of your account information is stored on the phone, and accounts are password protected. But  Troy Bernard, the director of chip payment technology for Discover, acknowledges that a lost handset could result in unauthorized spending.

 Phones as plastic. Discover also has rolled out stickers that attach to a handset and can be tapped or swiped at participating stores -- what the industry calls "contactless payment."

Financial pitfall: The risks are the same as carrying a credit card. Losing either opens the door to unauthorized charges.

Text-to-Buy: People who don't own smartphones can use text-to-buy technology, which links a phone number with an account -- and credit or debit card -- on file. Amazon offers TextBuyIt, a text-message-based service that bills items to an Amazon account. Start-up Subports links your credit card to your account for texted purchases of goods from its partner small businesses.

Financial pitfall: In addition to all those text-message fees, billing accuracy could be a problem, if the charge goes to your cellphone, rather than a credit card, says  Bob Egan, an independent technology analyst. And federal laws and bank regulations covering credit- and debit-card transactions won't apply.

—Kelli B. Grant  SmartMoney.com 

When 85-year-old  Al Green was ready to make his last move, he settled on a residential community that offered tiered care -- independent, assisted and nursing -- near his alma mater, Penn State.

But it wasn't as easy as picking a place and packing up. Mr. Green faced many decisions: Did he want unlimited health care at a relatively fixed monthly cost? Should his upfront fees be refunded to his heirs upon death?

Each decision has a price. And prices vary widely from one facility to another. A 10-year stay at one facility might cost well over $1 million; at another it might be $300,000. Even within a single facility, the primary costs -- the entry and monthly charges -- can be structured in many different ways.

The biggest charge is usually a move-in fee that's roughly equivalent to the price of buying a house in the same area, but often with all the money required upfront.

Then there's a monthly fee, which might cover basic health care but adds high daily fees for the use of comprehensive care services. The monthly charge at one facility might also include a generous meal plan, for example, while another residence charging about the same could offer a stripped-down plan with the option to upgrade at a higher cost. What's more, each level of care -- independent, assisted, nursing -- may have its own set of amenities, services and prices.

Would-be residents should ask for a detailed list of services covered by the monthly fee for each level of care, a history of fee increases for the past five years and a description of the fee adjustment policy, recommends a December report by the American Institute for Economic Research.

Then, have both your lawyer and accountant review the documents. And make sure that a facility is accredited by the Continuing Care Accreditation Commission, which helps ensure the community has solid financials.

—Catey Hill  SmartMoney.com 

When shopping for a car or truck, conventional wisdom says that the smart move is to buy used. A new car loses one-fifth of its value the moment you drive it off the lot. The decision is not quite so easy, however.

Edmunds.com, the auto-shopping website, now maintains an intriguing list of cars, SUVs and trucks for which you could end up paying less per month for a brand-new model than if you bought a typical one-year-old used one -- assuming you are buying the vehicle with a loan.

The main reason for this bizarre turn of events: interest rates. Loan rates have collapsed on new-vehicle purchases, thanks to the plunge in interest rates. The average rate on an auto loan fell to just 4.16% last month, Edmunds reports. Overall, 15.4% of auto loans charge no interest at all. Edmunds analyst  Jessica Caldwell says the typical rates on used cars remain at 8% or higher.

—Brett Arends  WSJ.com 

—The Aggregator features news and commentary from The Wall Street Journal and other publications. Email: cristina.lourosa@wsj.com 