The Allman Brothers Band has undertaken lengthy stays in New York City since 1989, outlasting even "Law & Order" as a local institution. In 2009, it marked its 40th anniversary as group at the Beacon Theatre, where it has performed multi-night stands nearly every March for more than two decades. Last year, when that venue on Broadway and 74th Street was booked for a Cirque du Soleil extravaganza, the group moved north to the United Palace Theater in Washington Heights —though not without expressing its discontent to executives at MSG Entertainment, which runs the Beacon. Official apologies ensued, and the band says it's been told it can come home to the Beacon for years to come. It'll start with 13 shows at the theater beginning Thursday.

Unless the band members are recording, the annual New York residency is likely the longest period of time they are in the same place in any given year. Which isn't to suggest they goof off. The Allmans settle in throughout the city. Gregg Allman, Butch Trucks and Jaimoe Johanson, who have been with the group since it formed, stay in hotels on the Upper East Side with apartment-style rooms and kitchenettes. Younger members Derek Trucks and Oteil Burbridge prefer the Upper West Side, where restaurants tend to stay open a little later. Warren Haynes takes a car service back to his apartment in Alphabet City, while Marc Quiñones drives home to New Jersey. Crew members stay in a hotel close to the Beacon.

As befits the reputation of one of the first jam-bands—one of the legendary live shows captured on the 1971 album "At Fillmore East" ended at 6 a.m.—in the off-hours some of its members and their families play other gigs. Iridium, the club on Broadway and 51st Street, is offering what it calls its Brothers Midnight Concert Series. Mr. Burbridge will sit in with the Yonrico Scott Band on March 12, and Mr. Johanson's project, Jaimoe's Jasssz Band, will perform on March 19. Mr. Allman's son Devon will appear with his band Honeytribe on March 11, while Duane Trucks, Derek's brother (and Butch's nephew), will appear with Bruce Hampton and Pharoah Gummitt on March 25. 

Mr. Haynes, who also owns a home in Westchester County, says the band benefits from its Beacon run, as it's known among band members and fans. For one, it means the group is off the road for nearly three weeks.

"It's nice not to have to travel," he said by phone. "You get to go to dinner, see some other shows. Sit in with other bands. Normal-life things."

The Allmans tour by bus, which is far from the glamorous life some fans may envision for a group of its status and longevity.

"You've got to understand what it's like for these guys," said band manager Bert Holman. "It's, 'Hurry up, get the bags, get on the bus, go to the theater, get on stage.' Then it's back on the bus and drive for eight or nine hours, check into a hotel, unpack and try to sleep. The fact that in New York you can go some place and hang up your clothes and leave stuff in the room, it's a much calmer experience. And you sleep in the same bed every night. The guys are not as tired, not as beat up physically."

The residency also allows the band and crew to settle in at the venue. With the exception of the guitars, the equipment stays on stage throughout the run. And once the sound settings are established, they can remain constant. Mr. Haynes said the band decided long ago that it would prefer to play an intimate venue like the Beacon for many nights rather than one or two shows at Madison Square Garden. 

"But it's not only the size of the audience, but the audience itself," he said, adding that the band is aware many fans attend several shows during the run. "We give them something different every night. We vary songs, of course, but over the course of three hours, we stretch out and improvise."

Mr. Haynes was reluctant to say whether settling down in one place improves the band's music. But, he said, "The first night is usually really great. By the second or third night, you feel comfortable. The bar is raised for the Beacon shows. We try to top ourselves every night."