BRUSSELS—A decision by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization alliance to enforce a no-fly zone in Libya would require a new United Nations Security Council resolution, NATO's civilian head said, adding to skepticism about the likelihood of such a move.

Anders Fogh Rasmussen, secretary-general of the 28-nation alliance, said NATO planners were examining "all eventualities" including the imposition of a no-fly zone. But he emphasized that "NATO has no intention to intervene if not requested."

The alliance's defense ministers will discuss Libya at a scheduled meeting next week in Brussels.

Several NATO governments, including Turkey and Italy, have made clear their view that military action by the alliance would require at least a U.N. mandate. Since the alliance operates by consensus, that would appear to rule out intervention by the alliance unless the U.N. Security Council backs it.

President Barack Obama said Thursday that a no-fly zone—which U.S. defense officials say would require a pre-emptive strike on Libyan air defenses—is "one option" under consideration. But U.S. officials have said imposing such a measure would depend on allied support.

NATO allies could act individually, but if they were denied access to NATO facilities, such as air bases in Italy, this would make the task of imposing a no-fly zone much harder, military analysts say.

The NATO chief, a former Danish prime minister, said the Security Council resolution on Libya passed unanimously last weekend raised issues that "require attention," including humanitarian assistance and an arms embargo. Individual allies were already responding to requests for humanitarian assistance, he noted.

But he said: "Let me stress that the U.N. Security Council resolution as it stands does not authorize the use of armed forces…A no-fly zone would definitely require a U.N. Security Council resolution."

"A no-fly zone is quite a comprehensive task. It takes a lot of assets," he added, noting that the Arab League and African Union had indicated that they might support a no-fly zone if the regime of Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi attacks its own people."

Mr. Rasmussen, who described the behavior of the Gadhafi government in attacking its own people as "outrageous," declined to go into specifics about NATO's planning process, only saying that the alliance has command and coordination structures, surveillance capabilities, while NATO member states "have at their disposal a broad range of assets."

As a matter of "prudent planning," the alliance should be preparing for a rapidly evolving situation. But he said any future action should also be carried out in coordination with the Arab League and African Union, with which he had been in touch. "We are very much aware of the sensitivities in the region as regards interference from abroad," he said.

He expressed optimism about the future of the region. "What we are witnessing now is a new era in man's history. New media makes it hard for autocratic systems to shelter themselves from new information coming from abroad." 

 Write to  Stephen Fidler at stephen.fidler@wsj.com 