Federal safety regulators, finalizing stepped-up structural inspections of more than 1,300 jetliners, on Friday released safety mandates covering many older Boeing 757 and 737 models.

The separate rules, made public by the Federal Aviation Administration, had been expected for months in order to prevent hazardous fuselage cracks that could result in reduced structural integrity and even rapid aircraft decompression. But the documents contain new details about the extent of the dangers, including references to discovery of cracks that extended more than 10 inches on certain fuselage sections on a pair of older 757 jets. 

Boeing previously issued nonbinding safety bulletins covering both widely-used models. The mandatory FAA rules—slated go into effect in the next few weeks—cover more than 630 older 737 models and an additional 680 older 757s.

The 757 rule was prompted by a sudden rupture and rapid decompression suffered by an American Airlines 757 in October, while it was cruising at 31,000 feet from Miami to Boston. Nobody was hurt and the  AMR Corp. unit's plane returned safely to Miami, despite a one-foot tear in its aluminum skin above the left front cabin door. But the FAA's mandate, which the agency considers "interim action" pending further moves to resolve underlying safety issues, entails repetitive inspections ranging between 30 and 300 flights.

The 737 rule calls for certain structural checks ranging from every 3,000 to 4,500 flights, and it also spells out a repair that would terminate such repetitive inspections. 

In finalizing the 737 requirements, the FAA specifically rejected a request by  Southwest Airlines Co.
LUV


-0.77
%




, which asked for an extended deadline for the initial round of inspections. Southwest told the agency that the rule is expected to result in "a significant burden" for the airline because a large portion of its 737 fleet would "require an out-of-sequence maintenance visit." The FAA said Southwest failed to provide data "proposing alternative inspection thresholds to maintain an adequate level of safety."

 Write to  Andy Pasztor at andy.pasztor@wsj.com 