NEW DELHI -- India's industrial output growth slowed sharply to a 20-month low in November, a sign the economy is cooling, but economists said the data won't deter the central bank from continuing to raise interest rates in its struggle to tame inflation.

Output of mines and factories rose 2.7% in November from a year earlier, down from a revised 11.3% rise in October. The main reason was a steep fall in manufacturing output growth, data from the Ministry of Commerce and Industry showed Wednesday.

The reading was far below the median estimate of a 6.0% rise from a Dow Jones Newswires poll of 15 economists. But economists say the data is misleading as it fails to capture production trends across sectors, especially in capital goods, where growth has fluctuated wildly in recent months.

"There is concern over the quality of data itself, as the wide swings in capital goods and sometimes in the consumer goods sector are mostly unexplainable," said N.R. Bhanumurthy, an economist at the National Institute of Public Finance and Policy think tank. "We shouldn't get carried away by these readings."

Indian government bond prices rose only marginally after the data, as traders still expect the Reserve Bank of India to hike rates at its Jan. 25 policy review. The 8.08% bond due in 2022, the most-traded in-session, rose to 99.25 rupees from 99.21 rupees before the release.

Local shares turned negative on the news. The Bombay Stock Exchange's benchmark Sensitive Index, or Sensex, was last down 0.4% at 19,125.18.

With inflation continuing to run rampant, analysts said the print isn't likely to sway the RBI. The RBI has raised rates six times since March, making it one of the world's most aggressive central banks in rolling back monetary stimulus enacted during the global financial crisis, before pausing in December to assess the impact of previous increases.

"The RBI should not change its monetary tightening stance [based on the industrial production data] because inflation remains sticky," said Indranil Pan, chief economist at Kotak Mahindra Bank. "The factory output data was expected to be lower, but this drop should not translate to any major surprise to economic growth."

Finance Minister Pranab Mukherjee said it will take some time to draw conclusions from Wednesday's report, but that measures are needed to boost industrial activity.

A major driver of India's economy, industrial production surged in the middle of last year, reaching a 15.2% growth rate in July before slowing to 6.92% in August and 4.4% in September.

Concerns about the data have been raised for some months now. Authorities acknowledge that the data can be problematic and are working on a new index, which may be launched later this year.

Analysts say taking the industrial production index together with the purchasing managers index and gross domestic product data gives a fuller picture of the economic reality.

Economists attribute the swings in the industrial production index to capital goods output. Capital goods output rose 12.6% in November from a year earlier, after rising 22.0% on year in October.

Wednesday's data showed manufacturing output, which has an 80% weighting in the industrial production index, rose just 2.3% from a year earlier, compared with an 11.3% rise in October.

Mining output grew 6.0% in November from a year earlier, compared with 6.5% in October, while electricity output grew 4.6%, compared to 8.8% in October.

Industrial output grew 9.5% during the April-November period, the first eight months of the current financial year till March, faster than the 7.4% rise in the comparable period last year.

 Write to  Mukesh Jagota at mukesh.jagota@dowjones.com and Anant Vijay Kala at anant.kala@dowjones.com 