Heading into the Grammy Awards Feb. 13, one-time bad boy of rap Eminem has 10 nominations and the top-selling album of 2010, with 3.4 million copies sold. Now 38 years old, Eminem describes his tailspin with lyrics that sound like quotes from group therapy, turning his infamous verbal machine gun on himself: "I'm wallowin,' self-loathin' and hollow. Bottoms up on the pill bottle. Maybe I'll hit my bottom tomorrow," he raps. It may be the biggest album ever to deal explicitly with getting sober. 

The record, called "Recovery," is the latest in a time-honored musical category: the rehab album. Just as drugs and alcohol have fueled much of popular music, so, more quietly, has getting straight. Many artists have flourished, commercially and artistically, after they got clean. Critics who dismissed Eminem's previous album, the aptly titled "Relapse," include the rapper himself, who pronounced it "ehhh" on "Recovery." Eminem declined to comment.

When Eric Clapton finally kicked alcohol and heroin once and for all, just before making "Journeyman," his solo career really hit its stride. The Red Hot Chili Peppers' commercial breakthrough came in 1991 after lead singer Anthony Kiedis had emerged from narcotics addiction, recalled in his anthem "Under the Bridge." After Metallica (nicknamed "Alcoholica") went through a group therapy regimen that included rehab for singer and lyricist James Hetfield, the band issued "Death Magnetic" in 2008, widely noted as a return to form. Bonnie Raitt and Steve Earle struggled in mid-career, dismissed their demons, then enjoyed remarkable resurrections.

Intoxicants continue to course through music culture, of course, but there's a difference: The fans are hearing a lot more about it. They can closely track an artist's behavior, from public overconsumption to rehab stint to public mea culpa. Also in the running at the Grammys is R&B singer El DeBarge, nominated for the song "Second Chance," a reference to his comeback effort after serving jail time on a drug charge. Such redemption stories can double as marketing messages. Last fall, just after the release of a new album, "Get Closer," Grammy-nominated country star Keith Urban rehashed the details of his addiction—and how his wife Nicole Kidman helped him break it five years ago—with Oprah Winfrey.

Among those not buying into the "Celebrity Rehab" school of repentant confession: Keith Richards of the Rolling Stones, whose iconic status for nearly half a century has been inextricably—and often glamorously—linked to his dissolute lifestyle. Riding high on the bestseller list, his "Life" memoir opens in 1975 with the guitarist holding a varied stash (marijuana, peyote, pharmaceutical-grade cocaine) and getting arrested in Arkansas, only to walk away in time for a concert in Dallas. 

Throughout the book he is largely unapologetic about his drug intake, chalking up his longevity to his expertise as a user: "It's not only to the high quality of the drugs I had that I attribute my survival. I was very meticulous about how much I took." 

Despite Mr. Richards's improbable example, there's no doubt that abstinence has brought focus to many music careers. How sobriety (or lack thereof) connects to the creative process itself is a more complicated question. "After 35 years in the studio, I don't know any examples of people who made better records from being high," says producer Don Was. However, he says, "The good stuff people made while being high was going to be good no matter what—it just took them longer." 

For last year's splashy reissue of the Stones' much-revered "Exile on Main St" from 1972, Mr. Was combed through 200 hours of unreleased recordings. The sessions, many of which occurred at a chateau in the south of France, are synonymous with rock 'n' roll debauchery. But Mr. Was thinks the legend is overstated, that behind the revelry lay a serious musical rigor. He said some 40 songs left off the original still hold up. The Stones "were taking care of business. You can't be that successful, artistically and commercially, and not be on the case," says Mr. Was, who adds that he himself is seven years sober. 

Mr. Was produced the album "Nick of Time," which gave guitarist and singer Ms. Raitt career lift-off and scored three Grammys in 1989, not long after she purged herself of drugs and alcohol. 

Ms. Raitt, who marks 24 years of sobriety next month, says she was no train wreck. She'd picked up some bad habits after years on the showbusiness night shift, aspiring to the weathered voice of Etta James. But her decision to go straight was part of a broader action plan, to rebound from a failed romance and a cancelled record contract. Plus, she was overweight and in no state to appear next to Prince in a music video that was in the offing, she says. "It was about vanity and good business sense." Just as important: a kind of reverse peer pressure. "I saw [recently sober friends] John Hiatt, Stevie Ray Vaughn and Little Feat just being much more productive, and they didn't lose their edge. All my excuses for wanting to be the last bastion of the blues mama went out the window." 

A year after taking her last drink, she retreated to a cabin in northern California to work on music. The first song she wrote there would eventually become the title track to "Nick of Time." The song begins by describing battered veterans of romance and life, but the last verse—including the line "You came along and showed me how to leave it all behind"—is about "a redeeming love, a bigger kind of love," she says. "It's completely a sobriety song."

 For every artist who has shared a recovery story, there are others whose exact history is private and murky. Relapses come and go. Rockers generally don't send out press releases when they backslide.

Though artists have certainly written good songs while in recovery, writing songs about the recovery process itself is a trickier matter. "They get very cheesy very fast. With that language you're dealing with a bunch of clichés," says singer-songwriter Justin Townes Earle, 29.

A few years ago, after a stretch in rehab that capped a spiral of homelessness and drug abuse, Mr. Earle started tinkering with a song about the experience. At the time he was staying with his father, the singer Steve Earle, who cratered in the mid-1990s with heroin and jail, then after cleaning up went into a prolific creative rebirth. Steve's advice about the song: Don't go there. If songwriting and recovery don't remain separate, he counseled, "they can both suffer," Justin says. "It was one of the very few suggestions from a father you pay attention to right off."

Now the younger Earle broaches the subject in lyrics more obliquely. On his most recent album, "Harlem River Blues," he sings, "Why do I try my luck? I should never touch the stuff" on the woozy blues tune "Slippin' and Slidin.'" 

"That was my realization song," Mr. Earle recalls. It was written last summer when he was touring continuously, had already fallen off the wagon and was on his way to cutting the album in full relapse, marked by a diet of "vodka for breakfast and cocaine for dessert." He had to keep his head, relatively speaking, in order to write and record the songs on "Harlem River Blues," working on them during daylight hours when he was pacing his vodka intake. His productivity would cease around 5 p.m., "Usually by that time I was what most people call drunk, then I'd go out and get what I consider drunk." 

Last September, when Mr. Earle was touring in support of the album, his mounting alcohol and cocaine abuse erupted in a violent altercation with a club promoter in Indianapolis. He was arrested, spent the night in jail and soon after was packed off to a rehab facility in Tennessee. 

Even in recovery, artists find vice irresistible, lyrically speaking. Country star Joe Nichols, known for hits such as "Tequila Makes Her Clothes Fall Off," included a song on his most recent album about his struggles called "An Old Friend of Mine." (Sample line: "I heard freedom ring when that bottle hit the floor.") He dealt with the topic in more typical country fashion on the next track, "Let's Get Drunk and Fight." 

Stars who go straight often bump up against the expectations of fans in thrall of glorious victims such as Jimi Hendrix and Janis Joplin. When Courtney Love, widow of rocker Kurt Cobain, staged a comeback for her band Hole, sobriety formed part of the narrative. Some found the theme a bit contrived. "Teetering on train-wreck territory is part of Love's appeal as a rock star," wrote music critic Greg Kot in the Chicago Tribune of the album containing such songs as "Loser Dust." But he also complained that she sometimes sounded like "a domesticated folk rocker. "

Countless hit songs have dealt with getting addicted, sometimes gleefully. Eminem's Grammy-nominated single "Not Afraid," is the rare hit about emerging on the other side. "I'm strong enough to go to the club or the corner pub/and lift the whole liquor counter up/cause I'm raising the bar," he raps. 

But the rapper doesn't get too preachy. Most of "Recovery" is devoted to his stock in trade: vivid trash talking. "Frankly, that's more interesting," says Ken Zambello a professor at Berklee College of Music. He adds that sobriety probably benefits most artists physically more than artistically. "Sometimes their success had to do with the fact that they were able to live another 20 years and have a larger body of work," he says, referring to enduring acts such as Johnny Cash, Judy Collins and Tom Waits. 

Twenty years ago, the music industry moved to install a safety net. A foundation of the Recording Academy, MusiCares, now operates a fund that helps place financially-strapped members of the music business in addiction treatment programs. About 200 people, from songwriters to roadies, join that program annually. Each year, the fund mounts a benefit concert that could double as a star-studded Alcoholics Anonymous gathering. Past benefits have featured Mr. Hetfield of Metallica and Guns N' Roses guitarist Slash. Other former casualties of the rock lifestyle, including Ozzy Osbourne, have targeted their peers with video messages. 

"Don't buy into the bulls— that dope makes you more creative, because it does not. I'm not dead, but I'm damaged goods," Mr. Osbourne says in one clip.

The artistic challenges of recovery can be complicated by the pressures exerted by managers, agents and record label executives who have a financial stake in keeping their acts on the road or in the studio. "We sometimes hear, "'He has 10 days free. What can he do in 10 days?' And to that we say, 'Slow down,'" says Debbie Carroll, executive director of MusiCares, who oversees the addiction-related MAP Fund. 

 Justin Townes Earle's slowdown came abruptly. "I woke up with my girlfriend, my lawyer, my booking agent and some guy I've never seen before sitting around my bed getting ready to take me off to treatment," Mr. Earle recalled in a telephone interview from Belfast in Northern Ireland. Following his September dust-up, he spent about a month in rehab. There, Mr. Earle wasn't allowed to play guitar. Such rules are common in facilities where the goal is to strip away elements of outside life that may be associated with abuse.

Now Mr. Earle is back on tour. He recently performed on David Letterman's show. He says he is sober, but maybe not for good. "I'm never going to say it's not going to happen again. I'm smart enough to know that." 

 Write to  John Jurgensen at john.jurgensen@wsj.com 