Like everyone on the planet, I take pride in most inane bits of self-trivia. Take my cell phone number. It sports a 718 area code, and that makes me feel like  Spike Lee, Archie Bunker and  Barbra Streisand rolled up in one. When I give out my number, I imagine I see a tiny glimmer in the recipient's eyes. And you know what that glimmer is? Respect. 

My status is only going to rise now that the world's supply of 718 is officially kaput. From now on, most folks requesting phone service in the boroughs other than Manhattan will either get the dreaded 347, or, come April, a brand new area code: 929. Soon, 718 will take on all the status of 212, only with a street-cred edge that says, "I raised my own organic chickens on a rooftop garden sponsored by the Crips." 

Not that 929 is so bad. It's curvy, symmetrical—and it spells out YAY. I like to think that the phone gods gave 929 to New York because they know we deserve something special. But in truth, there are no phone gods. There is only  Thomas Foley, an Orlando database administrator who picks all the new area codes. Mr. Foley works for Neustar, the company that administers the nation's phone number system for the FCC, and he is very good at delivering disappointing lines. Sample: "There is no magic in why we chose 929." 

Turns out, area codes are assigned on a random basis. Neustar even downplays the importance of area codes, claiming they've lost their potency as signifiers. But that is just a huge lie. In a highly scientific email poll I did of 22 overly opinionated friends, a definite consensus emerged. New York's 212, 718 and 917 are widely regarded as kosher, while 646 and 347 are embarrassing and shameful. 

The attraction of 212 is obvious: It's the original New York number, launched in 1947. If you've got one, it says you've not only arrived, you arrived a long time ago, when it was still cool to arrive. Meanwhile, 917 gets kudos for being the original NYC number for pagers and cell phones, around since '92. And 718? It's also an old-school badge of pride.

On the other side, New Yorkers reserve special scorn for 646, calling it "fru-fru" and a "212 wannabe." And 347 (the ugly number on my home line) is regarded with pity. It's a number for kids and the dirtiest of the great unwashed. While it's been around since 1999, it still doesn't say "New York." As one pal put it, "What country are you calling from?" 

Getting a 212 or 718 isn't easy. While Neustar doles out 347s and 646s to phone carriers in blocks of 1,000, 212s and 718s come up only when an existing customer cancels his service.  Jack McKiernan, a local telecom consultant, says landline customers might have a better shot with Verizon because there's more legacy numbers in its system, but Verizon won't cop to that. Spokesman  John Bonomo says the company assigns area codes randomly, and you get up to three "dips" in the database if you don't like the result. 

At  Time Warner Cable,
TWC


-0.93
%




 meanwhile, spokeswoman  Suzanne Giuliani says her company tries to provide your desired area code for broadband phone service, but the 212s and 718s go fast. You can wait a few days and try your luck again, "but there's no guarantees."

No wonder some New Yorkers go to great lengths to get a desirable area code. When PR man  Steven Hall moved his firm nine blocks last year and nearly got stuck with a 646, he sacrificed his 212 home number and had it ported to his business line "so it would prove we're not newbies." 

  Charles-Eric Gordon, an investigative attorney who specializes in missing persons, signed up for call-forwarding service and snared four 212 numbers that ping-pong his calls to various devices in New York and Long Island. And he didn't stop with the area code. While his office is on the West Side, he schmoozed with Verizon reps to get a number with a 686 prefix—it corresponds to Midtown East, where the most prestigious law firms are located. "I knew it was a number that carried something with it," he says.

Some smaller carriers buy 212 numbers on the secondary market or inherit them in acquisitions.  Monica Haley, spokeswoman for phone-service provider VoicePulse, says her outfit has plenty of 212s available if you call in a special request. The outfit used to offer the numbers online but had to stop because people "would grab blocks of them and port them away." 

You can even buy a number. While it's a legal gray area (numbers are considered a public resource, like parkland), there are entire businesses thriving on 212 scarcity.  David Day, manager of 212areacode.com, which currently charges anywhere from $45 for a pedestrian number to $1,500 for something really fancy (like 212-754-4000), says his typical customer is a Manhattanite who wants a 212 for her cell phone; but he also sells blocks of numbers to firms establishing a presence in the city. 

If you're really embarrassed about your area code, there's always a third option: leave town.  Shaun Spellman, a TV ad salesman from Binghamton who lives in Buffalo and travels from Cleveland to Syracuse, used Google Voice, a free call-forwarding service, to get a 646 area code to replace his Binghamton 607. Now, he finds, "people are more apt to pick up the phone." Outside the city, it seems, 646 looks pretty good. And who knows? You might even impress them with your 929.

—Ms. Kadet, who writes the "Tough Customer" column for SmartMoney magazine, can be reached at anne.kadet@dowjones.com 