BERLIN—International talks with Iran over its nuclear program are set to resume in Istanbul on January 20, a spokeswoman for the European Commission said. 

The participants—Russia, China, the U.S., U.K., France, Germany and Iran—are still working on an agenda for the discussions, which are scheduled to begin the evening of Jan. 20 and last at least through Jan. 21, the spokeswoman said. 

The goal of the international powers going into the talks is to convince Iran to take steps toward abandoning its nuclear ambitions. The U.S. and its allies believe Iran is using what it claims is a civilian nuclear program to secretly build an atomic weapon, something Tehran has repeatedly denied.

A spokeswoman for Catherine Ashton, European Commission high representative for foreign affairs and security policy, said agreement on an agenda is important because a structured discussion is needed for the second meeting of the parties. Ms. Ashton is expected to moderate the talks.

The parties met for an initial discussion in Geneva in December, but no agreements in substance were achieved.

A Western diplomat who attended the Geneva talks with Iran said the benchmark for success in the Istanbul talks will be measured by the level of "substantive results." 

Diplomats from two Western nations that will participate in the Istanbul talks said they are wary, because talks and even tentative agreements have broken down in the past. 

In an October 2009 meeting with world powers in Geneva, Iranian representatives proposed a set of confidence-building measures including the export of much of its low-enriched nuclear fuel abroad in exchange for fuel elements required to power a medical research reactor. Iran never followed through on the proposal, which will likely again be discussed in Istanbul.

Any agreement will be difficult because in 2010 Iran greatly increased its stockpile of low-enriched uranium and began enriching some of its low-enriched fuel from 3.5% purity an even higher level. Iran says this is justified because 19% purity is required in order to power the medical-research reactor with domestically produced nuclear fuel. Low-enriched nuclear fuel, when purified to more than 90% purity, can be used to build a nuclear weapon.

Iran says its nuclear program is solely for peaceful purposes.

Parallel to preparations for the Istanbul meeting, the U.S. is working with its allies to tighten sanctions against Iran. Diplomats from two participating countries say U.S. and European Union officials are continuing discussions aimed at closing loopholes created by two different sets of sanctions against Iran. 

At the same time, U.S. Treasury officials are meeting with their Indian counterparts to thwart an Iranian proposal to route payments for Iranian oil shipment to India via the European-Iranian Trading Bank in Hamburg, an official familiar with the talks said.

The bank, known under its German initials EIH, is sanctioned in the U.S. but not in the EU. 

A spokesman for the bank said EIH continues to provide banking services. The bank says it operates in accord with German law, and isn't involved in proliferation transactions. A spokesman for the German Bundesbank, which oversees EIH, said payments to Iranian institutions must be individually approved by oversight agencies. 

Iran is also continuing a diplomatic effort to win international support for its nuclear program. Last week, Iran invited representatives of several nations to visit its nuclear sites prior to the Istanbul talks. Iran didn't invite representatives of key nations that have criticized Iran's nuclear programs, including U.S., Germany, the U.K. and France. 

In a statement in Friday in Budapest, Ms. Ashton said site inspections should be carried out by International Atomic Energy Agency. 

 Write to  David Crawford at david.crawford@wsj.com 