There's such variety of image and perspective in Stéphane Compoint's dazzling book of archaeological photography, "Buried Treasures: Uncovering Secrets of the Past" (Abrams, 80 pages, $19.95), that children may want to scrutinize the pages in the manner of archaeologists themselves. Taking young readers to sites on five continents, the French photographer introduces wonders uncovered by men and women who, the author says, sometimes "dig for thirty years before their hunches and determination yield a lost treasure." Along with familiar places such as Pompeii and Easter Island, we visit the sunken city of Zeugma in Turkey, glimpse newly discovered Celtic sites in France and Italy, and dive beneath the waters off Alexandria, Egypt, where archaeologists found the colossal statue of Ptolemy II that once stood at the mouth of the city's harbor. There are also arresting photographs of 2,000-year-old mummified Egyptian peasants disinterred from an oasis in the Sahara. If the mummies elicit fascinated gasps, one photograph is bound to make children titter: A section on Hellenic artifacts includes a wide-angle shot of men sprinting across a dusty stadium, buttocks bared, during a 2004 re-enactment of the original, classical Olympic games.

Turning to picture books, Arthur Geisert's latest wordless diversion begins on a tiny sun-baked island. To the left stands a mysterious circular brick fortification; to the right a boat, beached, with its sails furled. In between lie dwellings protected from the fierce heat by canvas marquees. Who lives here? Why is the boat on land? And what goes in the brick thing? "Ice" (Enchanted Lion, 28 pages, $14.95) is the answer to the last question; "industrious pigs" is the answer to the first. As for the boat, well, you will need to wait and see. Mr. Geisert creates his illustrations with etching, a process that produces great delicacy and fineness of line, and here he gives us porcine problem-solving in action: It seems that the brick tank is down to mere watery dregs, so after a late-night conference (where a leader-pig points to a spot high on the globe), the adventurous creatures prepare their sailing vessel. A moment later, in a witty touch that feels like something out of "Monty Python's Flying Circus," the ship heads off not into the waters but into the skies, toward northern realms and a fresh supply of . . . ice.

The formulaic blandness of the old "Dick and Jane" early readers seems to make them an irresistible target for ironic hipsters. There's been "Yiddish With Dick and Jane" and "Dick and Jane With Vampires," as well as less savory spoofs. With "Dude: Fun With Dude and Betty" (Harper, 40 pages, $14.99), Lisa Pliscou has turned the familiar style into something hilarious by applying it to surf culture. We meet Dude, a blond kid of about 12, on his way to the beach: "Dude is a way cool guy." Dude waves at us, and already we're smiling. With his pal Betty ("a righteous surf bunny") and his dog Bud ("a most excellent dog"), Dude hits the gnarly waves. Later, when the friends stop at a taco stand, hungry Bud takes advantage of Dude's momentary distraction and gobbles his lunch: "Uh oh. Bud has chowed Dude's burrito. Most heinous, Bud! Bud is harshing on Dude's mellow." But, phew, things improve: "Betty shares her nachos. What a non-bogus babe Betty is." Tom Dunne's sunny, retro illustrations perfectly match the good-natured tone of the text. Young readers may need help puzzling out words like "bodacious" and "cruisemobile," but their chuckling parents won't mind.