NEW DELHI -- Oil & Natural Gas Corp. Sunday said it won't block  Cairn Energy
CRNCY


3.92
%




 PLC's proposed stake sale in an India unit to Vedanta group, but sought early resolution of a royalty payment on crude oil output from a key joint venture production asset.

The decision of India's state-run explorer removes a roadblock in Cairn Energy's proposed stake sale in Cairn India Ltd. to miner Vedanta group and paves the way for the federal oil ministry to give its pending decision on the transaction.

"Though we have right of first refusal, yet we are not exercising that right," Chairman  R.S. Sharma said at a news conference Sunday, after its board met Saturday to discuss ONGC's stand on the deal. "We are very much with the deal and we are very much supportive of the deal."

ONGC, which holds 30% stake in Cairn India's key producing asset in the western state of Rajasthan and most other blocks, earlier maintained that it had pre-emptive rights in the blocks jointly held with Cairn and that the deal needs its consent.

ONGC will, however, inform the oil ministry Monday that the royalty it pays on crude output from the joint venture Rajasthan block is cost recoverable, and will seek a meeting with Cairn India to resolve the contentious issue, Mr. Sharma said. Cairn India is the operator of the Rajasthan block and holds a 70% stake.

Despite holding 30% stake in Rajasthan block, which accounts for about 17% of India's oil output, ONGC has to pay 100% royalty on production as a part of government's earlier scheme to give incentives to private companies to attract investment in the exploration sector.

Vedanta group proposed on Aug. 16 to acquire 51% to 60% of Cairn India for about $8.5 billion to $9.6 billion in cash, partly by buying Cairn Energy's stake and partly by acquiring shares through an open offer.

Edinburgh-based Cairn Energy owns a 62.36% stake in Cairn India.

The deal has, however, got stuck due to regulatory approvals. On Thursday, Cairn Energy said it expects to conclude the deal by April 15, a few weeks later than earlier guidance of deal closure.

Cairn India shares, which have risen in line with rising global crude oil prices, have fallen since the deal was announced mid-August, as investors were concerned about the deal's fate. Cairn India's shares closed at 326.15 rupees Friday after touching a 52-week high of 368 rupees Aug. 16 when the deal was announced.

Chairman Sharma said that over the lifecycle of Rajasthan field, ONGC will have to pay 140 billion rupees ($3 billion) as share of Cairn's royalty payment under the existing regime, where it bears the entire royalty burden.

"ONGC pays the royalty on behalf of the operator. We have done our thorough analysis of various contractual provisions and we are of the opinion that royalty is cost recoverable," Mr. Sharma said.

An even sharing of royalty will help ONGC improve its returns on its investment on the Rajasthan project.

 Write to  Rakesh Sharma at rakesh.sharma@dowjones.com 