INDIANAPOLIS—Like any good pass rusher who cares about his craft, Robert Mathis studies the idiosyncrasies of his opponents, poring over game film in search of even the smallest advantage.

Maybe the quarterback, whenever a defensive lineman gets too close, reflexively stops looking downfield for a receiver and starts probing the wall of linemen in front of him for an escape route. Maybe the right tackle offers a subtle signal that he's about to retreat into his pass-blocking stance. Sooner or later, the film will reveal a pattern. The film always reveals a pattern.

"You digest and dissect it every way you can—mannerisms, body language, whatever you can to get some kind of read," Mr. Mathis said. "We try to use everything we can."

Mr. Mathis is one of the Indianapolis Colts' starting defensive ends. Dwight Freeney is the other, and the two are by both reputation and evidence the most dominant pair of pass rushers the NFL has seen in the past 28 years. They've spent this week boning up on the strengths, weaknesses and tendencies of Jets quarterback Mark Sanchez and his offensive line in preparation for Saturday's AFC wild-card game—a contest whose outcome could come down to whether the Jets can keep the duo at bay.

Over the eight years that Mr. Freeney and Mr. Mathis have been teammates, they have made a habit of hogging the Colts' sacks. They have combined for at least 20 in a season five times, and since 1982, no two NFL teammates have accounted for a higher percentage of their team's single-season sack total than Mr. Freeney and Mr. Mathis, according to Stats Inc., a firm that tracks statistical trends in sports. In fact, they set the top three marks within the last three years: 73.3% in 2008 (22 of 30), 70% this season (21 of 30) and 67.6% (22 of 34) in 2009.

"Tell Bill Polian," Mr. Mathis said, referring to the Colts' president.

Mr. Freeney said that opponents routinely used max-protection packages against the Colts all season. That is, instead of sending more players out on pass routes, offenses kept those players in to block. Usually, teams deploy such packages against defenses that blitz frequently, but according to Stats Inc., the Colts blitzed on only 16.5% of opponents' pass plays this season—the lowest percentage in the league. The average NFL team blitzed 35.2% of the time, more than twice as often as Indianapolis.

Those statistics attest to both the Colts' reliance on Mr. Freeney and Mr. Mathis to generate pressure and the respect and fear that the pair has engendered around the league. But the Jets, with two stout offensive tackles in D'Brickashaw Ferguson and Damien Woody and a mobile quarterback in Mr. Sanchez, are well equipped to fend them off.

In the Colts' 30-17 victory in last year's AFC Championship Game, the Jets contained Mr. Freeney and Mr. Mathis. Neither of them sacked Mr. Sanchez as the Jets employed various strategies—including using their tight ends and running backs to "chip" Mr. Freeney and Mr. Mathis and having Mr. Sanchez throw several short, quick passes—to mute Indianapolis's pass rush. And this season, the Jets allowed just 28 sacks, the eighth-lowest total in the NFL.

That Mr. Sanchez is now a year older and wiser also means he doesn't make as many "young-boy mistakes" (in Mr. Mathis' words) as he did last year, when he threw 20 interceptions. But in trimming his interception total to 13 this season, Mr. Sanchez has shown a tendency to hold on to the football for a long time when he doesn't immediately recognize a defense's coverage scheme, Mr. Freeney said. "That could be a good thing or a bad thing for him," he said.

The Colts drafted Mr. Freeney, who played collegiately at Syracuse, in the first round of the 2002 draft. The following year, they selected Mr. Mathis, from Alabama A&M, in the fifth round.

 The irony of the pair's productivity as defensive ends is that because each player is relatively small for a lineman—Mr. Mathis is listed at 6-foot-2 and 245 pounds and Mr. Freeney at 6-foot-1 and 268—other NFL teams that considered drafting them wanted to convert them into linebackers.

Mr. Ferguson, for instance, who as the Jets' left tackle will be responsible for handling Mr. Freeney, stands 6-foot-6 and weighs 310 pounds. The presumption was that neither Mr. Freeney nor Mr. Mathis was big enough to take on a blocker of such size. But each man's low center of gravity and leg strength often allow him to gain leverage on an offensive tackle, undercutting and driving through the blocker toward the quarterback. 

"I've always said we're not grabbing rebounds or trying to block shots," said Mr. Freeney, who has 94 sacks over his nine-year career. "We're just trying to get to Point B from Point A."

 Write to  Mike Sielski at mike.sielski@wsj.com 