CAIRO—Tens of thousands of migrant workers have streamed across Libya's borders in the past week as fighting in the country continues. 

More than 100,000 migrants have crossed into neighboring countries from Libya in the past 10 days, according to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and international aid workers said the flow is likely to continue. Most of the migrants had been living in Libya's rebel-held eastern region, particularly the area around Benghazi.

Though the majority of the returnees are Egyptian migrant workers, a growing proportion of those arriving in Egypt are third-country nationals. International refugee agencies and the Egyptian government now face the daunting task of managing a refugee crisis from a nation that hosts a globalized work force.

"The problem is that there are a number of them arriving at the border without proper documents and without a visa to enter Egypt," said Roberto Piteo, a regional research officer at the International Organization for Migration's Cairo office who is helping organize transit to third-country destinations. 

Resident foreign laborers in Libya often are required to forfeit their passports to their employers as part of their contracts, so a large number of those who have left Libya lack the proper identification even to enter Egypt or Tunisia, much less board international flights to their countries of origin. 

Some of the third-country migrants are receiving documentation and travel assistance from their Cairo-based embassies, their Libyan employers or worker recruitment agencies, said Mathieu Luciano, a representative for the IOM reached by phone in Sallum, Egypt, on Libya's eastern border.

The IOM reported that 73,206 people had crossed the Libyan border into Sallum as of midnight Monday. Between 5,000 and 7,000 migrants are camped at the Sallum border post, Mr. Luciano said.Bangladeshis made up more than 60% of the 1,645 non-Egyptian, non-Libyan migrant workers at the Sallum border crossing, the IOM said in a statement Wednesday, while 16.5% were from Ghana and 13.1% from Vietnam.

The IOM has coordinated two charter flights that each carried 174 Bangladeshis directly from Marsa Matrouh, a coastal Egyptian city between Cairo and the Libyan border, to Dhaka, the South Asian country's capital, said Mr. Luciano. Another flight is scheduled for Thursday.

Track events day by day.

See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

A look at the economic and political status of selected countries facing unrest in North Africa and the Middle East.

Egypt and Tunisia, fresh from their own revolutions in the past two months, have so far shouldered the bulk of the arriving migrants. There could be as many as 1 million to 1.5 million Egyptian nationals residing in Libya, according to Ahmed Abul Gheit, Egypt's minister of foreign affairs. The Egyptian government has arranged free transportation for Egyptian returnees to any destination in Egypt from Sallum. The ministry also has organized 11 flights to return Egyptians from Tunisia. Ten of the flights have already reached Cairo, according to the ministry's Twitter account.

"The immigration compound is managed by the military. It's quite well-organized when it comes to distribution of food and water and management of the facilities," Mr. Luciano said. "It's clear that it's overcrowded which means that the people are facing a difficult situation. All of them are quite eager to leave as soon as possible."

Large groups also are crossing from Libya into neighboring Tunisia, to the west, and Niger, to the southwest. Tunisia is struggling to cope with an influx of as many as 90,000 migrants since civilians began leaving Libya in earnest Feb. 20, according to the UNHCR. 

Most of the migrants are in good health, with only two requiring referral to on-site medical treatment in Sallum, Mr. Piteo said.

The European Union said it has increased its aid to handle the refugee crisis in Libya, and will mobilize extra funds to help member countries such as Italy maintain border control, the president of the European Commission said. 

José Manuel Barroso said the EU must reshape its relationship with North Africa to support democracy, and provide more resources to the region. 

The EU is increasing aid for the crisis to €10 million ($13.8 million), and providing medical and food aid to refugees at Libya's borders with Egypt and Tunisia. 

—Laurence Norman contributed to this article.