A Pablo Picasso in love adds romance to benchmark impressionist and modern art auctions in London next month.

Sotheby's evening sale Feb. 8 will be led by "La Lecture" (1932), a sensuous painting of his lover Marie-Thérèse Walter blissfully asleep in a chair, a book open on her lap.

"Picasso's iconic paintings of Walter reign supreme as the emblems of love, sex and desire in twentieth century art," enthuses Sotheby's catalog, about the bright, happy, colorful images.

The artist first saw Walter on the streets of Paris in 1927 when she was 17 years old and Picasso was 45. As she later described their encounter, he took her by the arm and said, "I am Picasso. You and I are going to do great things together."

As Picasso was married to the Ukranian-Russian dancer Olga Khokhlova at the time, he met secretly with Walter for many years. Khokhlova separated from Picasso in 1935. Picasso ended his relationship with Walter after meeting photographer Dora Maar in 1936. Maar, who became his new lover, inspired dramatic, sad and distorted paintings very much in contrast to those of Walter. 

"La Lecture," which is expected to fetch £12 million-£18 million, is a "wonderful celebration of lyrical feeling," says Philip Hook, Sotheby's senior director of impressionist and modern art. Although it is appreciably smaller than "Nude, Green Leaves and Bust" (1932)—a work also featuring Walter that, at $106.5 million, brought the highest price ever for an art work at auction last May at Christie's New York—the estimate "is on the cautious side, but we prefer it that way," Mr. Hook says, adding that works from the 1930s are probably the "most desirable" of Picasso's long career.

Sculpture at auction did well in 2010, led by Alberto Giacometti's "L'homme qui marche I" (1960), a bronze figure of a lonely man walking, which last February at Sotheby's London, fetched a record £65 million for sculpture. In Sotheby's sale next month will be a bronze male bust by Giacometti from 1957, which is estimated at £3.5 million-£5 million. It is part of a celebrated series of sculptural portraits of the artist's younger brother Diego, who acted as his primary model for head and bust sculptures in the 1950s and 1960s.

Another sculptural highlight at Sotheby's will be Marino Marini's "L'Idea del cavaliere" (1955), one of the artist's famous depictions of horse and rider. Monumental in scale at a height of 220 centimeters, it is hand-painted (estimate: £3.7 million-£4.5 million).

Giovanna Bertazzoni, Christie's London director of impressionist and modern art, points out that seven of the top 10 prices paid at auction last year were in the impressionist and modern art sector. Of those, she notes, six sold for more than $50 million. "The category continues to engage new collectors," says Ms. Bertazzoni. "There is tremendous demand for the rarest and the best."

Heading Christie's impressionist and modern art sale Feb. 9 will be a still life with sunflowers by Paul Gauguin, estimated at £7 million-£10 million. Painted in Tahiti in 1901, the sunflowers have a wild yet decadent feel. The painting has been exhibited at more than 20 major museum exhibitions, including the artist's first landmark retrospective at the Grand Palais, Paris, in 1906.

Meanwhile, a wonderfully colorful and tranquil scene of boats on the water, "Bateaux à Collioure" (1905) by Fauve painter André Derain is estimated at £4 million-£6 million. This vibrant piece has been in the same collection since around 1960.

Christie's will follow its impressionist and modern art sale with a 31-lot surrealist auction with a total pre-sale value of £18.8 million-£27.5 million, the highest pre-sale estimate for any auction of surrealist art at Christie's. Olivier Camu, who heads the sale, says surrealism is a "vibrant collecting category" due to a new appreciation of it by traditional collectors of contemporary art.

A leading highlight will be René Magritte's "L'aimant" (1941), or "The Magnet," a beautiful nude with long, blond hair leaning on a rock flanked by a curtain, estimated at £3.5 million-£5.5 million. 

 Write to  Margaret Studer at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 