LISBON—Portuguese President Aníbal Cavaco Silva will begin meetings Friday with the leaders of all the political parties represented in parliament, the first step of a process that is expected to lead to early elections after Prime Minister José Socrates handed in his resignation Wednesday when opposition parties voted down an austerity package.

The failure to pass the measure pushed already high government borrowing costs to unaffordable levels and threatened to force Portugal to follow Greece and Ireland in seeking an international bailout. 

 Late Thursday, Fitch Ratings downgraded Portuguese debt two notches. Fitch said it assumes Portugal can't maintain affordable market access and sees a higher risk of the country needing multilateral support. Fitch cut Portugal's sovereign credit rating to single-A-minus from single-A-plus.

The leader of Portugal's main opposition party Thursday said it is impossible to say whether Portugal will need a bailout, but that fresh elections could bring a stronger government that is better equipped to resolve the country's fiscal crisis. 

"I hope Portugal will be free of a bailout," Pedro Passos Coelho from the conservative-leaning Social Democratic Party, said in Brussels ahead of a meeting of leaders from the European People's Party. 

Mr. Passos Coelho stands a good chance of becoming Portugal's new prime minister if new elections are held, according to recent opinion polls. 

He and Mr. Socrates, who is also in Brussels, are both expected to meet with EU leaders, where they will likely discuss the possibility of a financial bailout for Portugal.

Mr. Socrates has full powers until President Cavaco Silva accepts his resignation, and then will stay on as a caretaker until a new government can be sworn in. Mr. Cavaco Silva is expected to start consulting with the parties to determine if a new government can be formed without holding new elections. In the event the parties can't agree on a new government, the president will then dissolve parliament and call new elections, which can take place after a minimum period of 55 days. 

The political uncertainty will make it more difficult for Mr. Socrates to deal with the country's financial woes, and to negotiate a bailout agreement with the European Union and the International Monetary Fund, analysts said. 

Prices of Portuguese government bonds plunged Thursday, and the yield on the benchmark 10-year Portuguese bond surged 10 basis points, or 0.1 percentage point, to an euro-era record high of 7.74%, a level most market participants deem unsustainable. The extra yield demanded by investors to hold 10-year Portuguese bonds instead of safe haven German bunds widened by 10 basis points to 452 basis points. 

Market participants are nervous about Portugal's ability to meet €4.90 billion of bond redemptions in June. However, the country is widely expected to have enough cash to meet €4.23 billion in bond redemptions plus additional coupon payments in April, after it made progress cutting its deficit and raised funds through a bond syndication last month. 

A senior euro-zone government official Thursday said that Portugal is expected to seek a bailout loan of about €80 billion ($112.85 billion). That would make Portugal the third among the 17 nations that use the euro to apply for help from other members of the EU and the IMF. Greece and Ireland have both received joint EU-IMF bailouts. 

"The prime minister will need a parliamentary agreement to ask for international help," said  João Duque, economist at Lisbon's Superior Institute Of Economics and Management. "On the day that international help is needed to pay government salaries, parliament will provide authorization." 

Any bailout agreement would probably be hotly debated during an election. Opinion polls have given the Social Democratic Party, or PSD, the lead over the governing Socialists, though the PSD falls short of an absolute majority in the surveys. The party has governed in coalition with the Democratic and Social Center, or CDS, in the past. 

Mr. Socrates has governed with a minority in Parliament since the last election in 2009. He passed the budget law for this year and got parliamentary approval for previous austerity plans with the votes or abstention of the PSD, the biggest opposition party in parliament. 

Mr. Socrates and Finance Minister  Fernando Teixeira dos Santos announced a fresh austerity plan, the fourth in two years, on March 11, without consulting the other political parties or the president. PSD leader Mr. Passos Coelho rejected the plan within hours, and all five opposition parties in Parliament voted against the plan on Wednesday. 

The PSD has so far given few details about what its reform program would be if it were elected, though Mr. Passos Coelho said Wednesday after parliament voted to reject Mr. Socrates' plan that his government would have a more thorough strategy than the current administration. 

On Thursday, Mr. Passos Coelho rebuffed criticism by German Chancellor Angela Merkel that the rejection of Mr. Socrates's austerity measures was "regrettable" and that all those speaking for Portugal now needed to make clear they are committed to the aims of that program. 

"I hope that European leaders, who are also politicians, understand that the worst thing that can happen in a country is a weak government," he said, adding that Portugal needed a government that is more committed to reforms

The PSD's reform and budget-cutting plan probably won't be very different from Socrates' new measures, said  António Costa Pinta, a political science professor at the University of Lisbon. 

"They're afraid to threaten Portuguese society with less health care, fewer benefits," Mr. Costa Pinta said. "Their challenge is to do what they haven't done in the past, to use the crisis and austerity measures to implement some of the reforms that Portugal needs for the long term." 

—Alex MacDonald, Neelabh Chaturvedi and Emese Bartha contributed to this article

