TOKYO—Just hours after a massive earthquake and tsunami struck Japan on Friday, government officials, the Bank of Japan and usually warring politicians promised to do what they can to figure out how to pay for the reconstruction work that will be required and to deal with the possible economic fallout from the disaster.

Soon after the earthquake hit, the central bank quickly announced that it has set up a disaster management team, headed by BOJ Governor Masaaki Shirakawa, at its head office in Tokyo and moved to ease any market worries by announcing that it was standing by to supply adequate liquidity to the money markets. 

"The Bank will continue to do its utmost, including the provision of liquidity, to ensure the stability in financial markets and to secure the smooth settlement of funds, in the coming week," it said in an emergency statement.

The central bank "will continue to assess possible impact of the earthquake on financial markets as well as on financial institutions' business operations, and stand ready to take action as necessary," it said. 

The Finance Ministry said that it will be looking at the necessary spending to rebuild from the quake, including a possible extra budget.

"We won't be counting money when people's lives are in danger," a finance ministry official told Dow Jones Newswires, emphasizing that the government will spend as much as needed to help quake-stricken victims. 

The government will likely first use roughly 200 billion yen ($2.41 billion) in emergency funding left in the budget for the current fiscal year ending March 31, several Finance Ministry officials told Dow Jones Newswires. They said the proposed budget for the new fiscal year contains another 350 billion yen for natural disasters and 810 billion yen in emergency funding for economic measures that can be called upon.

The quake hit as government and opposition politicians have been carrying out an escalating battle that has brought all economic legislation, including bills to allow the borrowing needed for the new fiscal year, to a virtual halt.

Both sides appeared ready to cast aside their differences, however, in light of the tragedy. The head of the largest opposition party, the Liberal Democrats, said the party was ready to cooperate with the government. 

Attention will also be focused on how the markets open Monday as the full scale of the crisis becomes clear. The quake hit when the markets were still operating Friday but details of the damage were not clear until after their close for the week.

If the markets see any instability when they reopen, the BOJ could inject a larger amount of funds into the short-term money market via regular open market operations to help reassure financial players.

"One of the loosening measures of the BOJ could be to injecting funds into the money market," said  Simon Wong, an economist at Standard Chartered. 

In the past emergency cases, such as when European sovereign debt fears pushed up the yen steeply and weighed on Tokyo shares last year, the BOJ injected approximately 2 trillion yen in what is known as same-day funding, which pushes the cash into the market immediately.

The quake hit just three days before the BOJ is to begin a policy board meeting. Due to the crisis, it announced late Friday that the meeting would be shortened to one day.

Another potential step would to expand the Y5 trillion asset-purchase facility to buy government and private bonds that is part of the "comprehensive monetary easing" package announced in October. Mr. Shirakawa has repeatedly said the bank could expand the buying if it appeared necessary. 

History suggests that the expenditure needs for the next few weeks will be limited. Following the Kobe earthquake in January 1995, spending on such measures as lifesaving efforts and temporary houses for victims came to only around 15 billion yen.

The longer-term needs will dwarf that figure and the government is already discussing an extra budget, an issue that should transcend the political gridlock that has delayed the measures necessary to implement the proposed budget for the new fiscal year starting April 1.

But the MOF official said that any extra budget will likely be some time away since it could take several months to determine the extent of the damage and put together a reconstruction program.

