A special year in sartorial history, 2011 marks an important anniversary for the tuxedo, a revolutionary style that modernized formal wear by inspiring men to replace traditional tailcoats with more casual shortened dinner jackets. 

The story of how the tuxedo made its initial debut in American society dates back to the Gilded Age, when the founders of the posh Tuxedo Park resort in Orange County, N.Y., are thought to have introduced the coat at their exclusive sporting club. This fall, current residents of the Park, along with the local historical society and the distinguished Savile Row clothier Henry Poole & Co. plan to celebrate the legacy of the tuxedo in a manner befitting its eminent birth. But significant questions linger, like when and where the coat was truly born, or even why it's called the tuxedo. 

For generations, one account eclipsed all others as the creation myth of choice.

This version of events credits young Griswold Lorillard, the son of Tuxedo Park developer and tobacco magnate Pierre Lorillard IV, with inventing the dinner jacket on a whim, after getting frustrated that his tails were interfering with sitting and dancing. In October 1886, at Tuxedo Park's Autumn Ball, an annual gala honoring debutantes, Griswold and a few of his friends emerged in tailless dress coats and scarlet satin vests. Their unconventional attire was enough to turn heads, not to mention ruffle the feathers of the old guard. Town Topics, the leading society magazine of the day—and the only major publication known to have recorded the incident at that time—compared the boys to "royal footmen," adding that they "ought to have been put in strait-jackets long ago." 

In recent decades, however, Griswold's stunt and its relationship to the tuxedo's development have come under increasing scrutiny. Lifelong Tuxedoite and resort historian Chris Sonne, who knows the Park's romantic folklore better than anyone, dismisses assertions that Griswold invented the tux as "false history." The tailless satin coat described in Town Topics, Mr. Sonne believes, was a variation on the classic British naval mess coat, a uniform Griswold and his pals observed officers wearing earlier that summer at the Cowes sailing regattas. 

Instead, Mr. Sonne recognizes James Brown Potter as the man who rightfully brought the dinner jacket to Tuxedo. Mr. Potter, a co-founder of the Park's club and a member of the Brown banking family, of Brown Brothers Harriman notoriety, is presumed to have originally encountered the style in England on the Prince of Wales, who pioneered it in 1865. While travelling abroad, Mr. Potter and his wife, a great beauty of the era, were invited to visit Prince Edward VII at his country estate, Sandringham House. As legend has it, the notoriously unchaste Prince wished to get to know Mrs. Potter in a more intimate setting, but first he encouraged Mr. Potter to order an avant-garde tailless dinner jacket especially for the trip. The outfit was to be purchased at Henry Poole & Co., the same London tailor the Prince had used for his own jacket of that design. 

This is the point, however, where the details of Mr. Potter's role in the convoluted tuxedo saga become difficult to verify. Henry Poole & Co., the family-run bespoke shop that once made military uniforms during the Napoleonic Wars, does, in fact, have Mr. Potter's file on their ancient books. But according to Simon Cundey, the seventh-generation operator of the Poole business, the log doesn't reveal which styles Mr. Potter acquired. The books simply indicate that he commissioned several garments. To complicate matters, the records also show that a number of other early Tuxedo Park men placed orders with Poole around that time, including a member of the Lorillard family, though it isn't clear which. Griswold, perhaps? Mr. Cundey can't say. 

Plus, there's the additional problem that one of the logbooks of interest has disappeared from the Poole archives altogether. 

What is of importance is that Henry Poole & Co.'s archives seem to show the Prince of Wales, above either Griswold or Mr. Potter, deserves recognition for commissioning the tailless dinner jacket earliest—in 1865. Mr. Potter's presumed copy dates back to the summer of 1886, which marginally precedes Griswold flaunting his scarlet satin dress coat at the Autumn Ball in October 1886. Mr. Sonne contends that a reasonable explanation for how the dinner jacket finally made it to Tuxedo Park is that Mr. Potter began to wear his coat at the resort after returning from his visit with the Prince of Wales. But when exactly the dinner jacket became fashionable among the Park's elite, or at what stage people started calling it the tuxedo, remains a mystery. 

David Mortimer, whose preeminent status as a Tuxedoite can be measured by the many club tennis trophies that carry his family name, says, "I was brought up believing that no one called it a tuxedo. It was always called a dinner jacket." Mr. Sonne agreed, saying that well into the 20th century it was still being referred to as the dinner jacket, even in Tuxedo. But 92-year-old Alice Lorillard, who married into the Lorillard clan and never spent much time in Tuxedo, remembers using both terms and laughs off questions about the topic in general. "You hardly ever see a tuxedo or tails today, anyway," she said. "It's not formal at all any longer, and I think that's too bad." Of course, these days practically everyone uses the term tuxedo, both in the U.S. and across the pond. The style has evolved from its select place in the fashion-forward prince's wardrobe to the global standard for formal evening attire. According to the Tuxedo Historical Society, the term was most likely spread to the world during WWII by American officers fighting overseas.

Curiously, few even know what the word "tuxedo" means anymore. Far from being of patrician descent, it is a name Native Americans gave to the lake that stands at the center of the Tuxedo Park resort—an unlikely origin that seems to underscore the ambiguities still clouding the coat's biography.

Despite all the historical unknowns and false trails, a celebration will take place this fall in Tuxedo Park. Everyone there will be feting the 125th anniversary of both the Autumn Ball and the appearance of the tuxedo. Actually, if you honor the Prince of Wales's date, it's really the 146th birthday of the garment. Or if you prefer the Potter narrative, or even the more fabled Griswold tale, the number comes out somewhere around 125. Either way, it's a cunning story with just the right balance of romance and mystery. And a worthy cause for commemoration. The London College of Fashion is teaming up with Henry Poole & Co. to create an international exhibition that will debut as a pop-up shop at Harrods and eventually travel to Tuxedo Park in time for the big honorary bash. Mr. Cundey is planning to attend the festivities himself with the Prince of Wales's original pattern for the coat, and he says he'll be ready to measure anyone wishing to order an anniversary model of his very own.

—Mr. Johnson is a documentary filmmaker and designer of the clothing line Black Sweater.