Q. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for taking time from your busy schedule to join us on set today. 

A. I'm chivalrous. I'm a nobleman. 

Q. You certainly are! You've also been trying to do a better job of explaining your decisions to the public. 

A. I'm answering a higher calling. 

Q. Ah. Now, you've been under fire at home and abroad for your aggressive program of low interest rates and big Treasury bond purchases. Is that policy misplaced at this point? 

A. I've been kicked around, I've been criticized. I've been this "aw, shucks" guy with this bee-atchin' econometric life. And I just decided I'm going to completely embrace it and defend it, violently, through violent hatred. 

Q. Violent hatred?

A. It's Hayek, keep up with me. Or maybe it's Nietzsche. Look, people misinterpret my passion as anger. You borrow my brain for five seconds and you'd be like, dude, can't handle it. It fires in a way that may not be from this terrestrial realm. 

Q. But isn't your $600 billion bond-buying program excessive? The Europeans and Chinese seem to think so. 

A. Right, and look where they live: Europe and China. What can I say, I'm me, I'm a rock star, I got tiger blood, I got 12 regional Fed banks to support and love, and people a lot more important than me are relying on that money to fuel the magic. 

Q. Have you exposed people to risk?

A. I've exposed people to magic. I am on a drug called Ben Bernanke, and it's not available, because if you try it once, you will die, your face will melt off, and your children will weep over your exploded body at an undercatered M2 symposium.

Q. Is inflation building up in the domestic economy?

A. Not that I know of. If I find it, I'll throw it out. It's not a big deal. Ooooh, inflation in the domestic economy. 

Q. Are you using the productivity index to detect it?

A. Using? I use a blender. I use a vacuum cleaner. I use Black-Scholes. That's all I'm "using." What I'm harnessing now is absolute focus. It's exciting. I'm clean. I don't need to be shuttling to that pimped-out Swiss clusterbleep in the mountains anymore. I'm from Mars. I blinked and I cleared my brain. 

Q. Does that represent a shift in the Federal Open Market Committee's stance? If so, how does it compare with what you were doing before?

A. I was banging seven-gram rocks and finishing them, because I have one speed: go! The run I was on made Sinatra, Jagger, Friedman, all of them look like droopy-eyed armless children. 

Q. Armless children?

A. You heard me, Chaim. May I call you Chaim?

Q. So you do have a new strategy, then.

A. I have a couple of rules. I don't know if it's a strategy.

Q. Some of your own Federal Reserve Bank presidents have openly questioned these "quantitative easing" operations. Why?

A. Because they're contaminated little maggots whose tin cans I have magically and effortlessly converted into pure gold for years. I'm sorry if I offended them. I didn't know they were going to strap on their diapers and go home. If necessary, they will taste my wrath. It is a terrible wrath, and highly efficient.

Q. So you're confident you can encourage more productive investing without risking an inflationary backlash?

A. I'm bi-winning. I win here, and I win there. 

Q. And you're content to go on the record with that?

A. Sure, you got a cup? 

 Write to  Peter Jeffrey at peter.jeffrey@wsj.com 