 Goldman Sachs is excluding U.S. clients from its offering of Facebook shares, saying the level of media attention might not be in keeping with "proper completion" of a private placement under U.S. law. The firm said the move wasn't requested by any other party, including the SEC.  

 Moody's raised its credit rating of Indonesia's debt by one notch to just below investment grade, in an endorsement of the country's progress in fostering growth.  

 China's property prices rose in December, though at a slower pace, indicating that efforts to cool the market will take time to have an effect.  

 BP won rights to drill in four deepwater exploration areas off Australia, the latest sign the U.K. company's role in last year's Gulf spill isn't stifling its expansion.  

 Germany said it is against speedy increases in the lending volume and scope of the EU's government bailout fund.  

 The euro fell as investors worried that European finance ministers might not agree to expand the financial-stability fund.  

 U.S. stocks have risen for seven weeks in a row, leading to concern among those who study the market's patterns to predict where it is going.  

 Tata Consultancy's third-quarter profit rose 30%, as the Indian software exporter benefited from cost controls and demand for outsourcing services.  

 Larsen reported an 11% rise in third-quarter profit, despite higher costs hurting margins at India's largest engineering and construction company by sales. 

 Airbus landed the first firm contract for an updated version of its A320 from U.S. upstart carrier Virgin America, helping push the European plane maker's order total for 2010 past rival Boeing. 

 Permira chose Henry Chen and Alex Emery to lead the private-equity firm's development in Asia.  

 India's ONGC appointed six investment banks for its share sale as the government proceeds with a plan to divest a 5% stake in the oil company.  

 Glaxo will record a charge of $3.49 billion in the fourth quarter to cover the cost of settling legal disputes regarding Avandia and an investigation into marketing practices in the U.S.  

 Corning won the first major equipment contract for Australia's $35.6 billion national Internet broadband-network project.  

 Singapore's nonoil export growth slowed to a 13-month low in December.  

 China's growing military influence will top the agenda when British Foreign Secretary William Hague and Defense Secretary Liam Fox visit Australia this week.  

 Australian officials have begun tapping bankers for advice on how to meet flood costs that could total $14.8 billion in Queensland.  

 Israeli Defense Minister Barak said he is leaving the center-left Labor Party, casting clouds over the stability of Netanyahu's government and the prospects of restarting the peace process.  

Taiwan's top China negotiator said the two sides will sign a deal to provide legal protection for Taiwanese investments on the mainland early this year.

The death toll rose to 640 in landslides and flooding near the Brazilian city of Rio de Janeiro. 