FRANKFURT—The European Central Bank's governing council will welcome one new friend and confront two old enemies when it meets for the first time this year Thursday. 

Sadly for Bank of Estonia Governor  Andres Lipstok, his debut is certain to be overshadowed by the twin problems of Europe's debt crisis, and, for the first time in more than two years, inflation. 

The ECB has already told the world that its interest rates will stay effectively unchanged for the first quarter, the Irish debt crisis having forced the bank to back off from an evident desire to end its unconventional policy measures as soon as possible. 

More than half of the economists polled by Dow Jones Newswires expect the continuing threat of default to stop the ECB from tightening policy at all this year. 

ECB President  Jean-Claude Trichet's press conference is therefore certain to focus on the debt crisis, with investors looking for signals as to how long and how far the ECB is willing to support a situation that many economists now think is unsustainable. 

The sense of crisis receded temporarily Wednesday, after the Portuguese government managed to sell all of the €1.25 billion in bonds that it had said it would offer. 

But most analysts say it is still only a matter of time before Portugal loses the trust of the bond market and is forced to follow Ireland in going to the European Financial Stabilization Fund for help. 

"It's a question of momentum, rather than direction," said  Lena Komileva, head of market economics for the Group of Seven leading industrialized nations at Tullet Prebon in London, adding that, given the vanishing appetite for Portuguese credit, most of the bonds sold at Wednesday's auctions would probably be either bought outright by the ECB or be deposited there as collateral for loans within a week. 

Mr. Trichet argued all last year at his press conferences that the ECB's purchases of government bonds—which rose to more than €74 billion last week—were a temporary measure justified only by technical considerations, a way of making sure that banks' lending rates at home weren't higher than the ECB thought they should be. 

But with more and more voices saying that the countries whose bonds it has been buying are insolvent, that argument looks likely to be challenged increasingly aggressively this year. 

For the first time since the collapse of U.S. investment bank Lehman Brothers in 2008, Mr. Trichet now also has a problem with inflation. Consumer prices rose 2.2% in the year to December, breaching the bank's target of "close to, but below, 2%" against a background of surging commodity prices and a sharp drop in the euro's exchange rate, which makes imports more expensive. 

The ECB has argued that a number of isolated effects, such as indirect tax increases and commodity prices, will keep inflation around this level for some months before it moderates in the second half of the year. But if inflation stays above the tolerance threshold, the ECB will find itself under intense pressure to raise interest rates, a move that would create problems at many of Europe's shakier banks. 

The pressure on the ECB to contain inflation will come first and foremost from Germany, which, after posting 3.6% growth in 2010, has less spare capacity than the suffering economies of the euro zone's periphery, as well as being historically less tolerant of inflation in the first place. 

However,  Axel Weber, leader of the ECB's inflation hawks, struck a reasonably dovish note Tuesday in a New Year's address, leaving out any mention of inflation and saying only that he expects the recovery there "to continue powerfully" this year, albeit at a slightly slower pace than 2010. 