Richard Nixon usually gets credit for ending China's isolation with his state visit in 1972, the so-called "week that changed the world." But between 1949 and this opening, China did allow a few businessmen and travelers behind the bamboo curtain; Brits enjoyed an advantage, the United Kingdom having recognized the People's Republic in January 1950.

Patrick Wright chronicles one such mission, comprising political and cultural luminaries who came from the U.K. on the invitation of Foreign Minister Zhou Enlai. Though the delegates made no claim to changing the world, their visit in 1954 was a landmark of a different sort, a snapshot of foreign perceptions of a new society still shrouded in secrecy and ignorance.

By Patrick Wright  (Oxford, 591 pages, $34.95) 

Some among the several planeloads of Britons who embarked from Heathrow that summer had more compelling reasons for going than others. Clement Attlee, the former prime minister, led a delegation of Labour MPs and trade union bosses; a second Labour commission brought along more MPs, unionists and scientists, plus at least one "old-fashioned right winger." The philosopher A.J. Ayer joined a passel of intellectuals who, asked about their purpose in China, replied dryly that they were representing the "goodwill" of British arts and sciences.

The delegates' impressions of the new China ranged from reverence to deep mistrust. The Communists' progress toward reducing economic inequality and preserving China's history impressed, while their love of autocratic spectacle left some cold. The architect Hugh Casson found his attentions drifting while watching "the military ironwork clattering by" in the National Day parade, though the physicist J.D. Bernal wanted "to go on seeing this kind of thing forever."

Opinions of Zhou and Mao Zedong as leaders were much more aligned, and could charitably be called "awed": Lincoln, Cromwell and Robert E. Lee were recurrent comparisons. The delegates also applauded the resurgence of the Chinese people, wearied by so many decades of war. Edith Summerskill, a physician and MP, wrote that "the bustle and enthusiasm for work there today are their practical answer to the over-fat and lazy sages of the past."

Such optimism may hardly seem surprising coming from such a bookish, liberal bunch. Yet China seemed to exert a seductive influence, such that even staunch anti-Communists like Attlee softened once they found themselves toasting with maotai under red tasseled lanterns. After the trip, Attlee told reporters in Hong Kong that he was "impressed" by the Chinese government's "incorruptibility" and great energy in "applying the general principles in which it believed."

The deference in part reflected a strong desire within the British left to see the new China succeed. After the brutality and corruption of Chiang Kai-shek's regime, Mao's "agrarian reformers" looked like the poster children of socialist virtue. Mr. Wright also detects an unease about siding too eagerly with postwar U.S. policy; it was not only leftist Britons who wanted to feel that their country "still had a leading and independent role to play in the wider world." Peaceful coexistence with China offered a middle road between appeasing the Soviets and joining in the Americans' panic about Communist contagion. 

But to their detractors, the British mission had simply been duped by the Communist Party's distortions. The Daily Mail heaped scorn on "British gullibility"; American observers accused Attlee of being "played for a sucker." The delegates seemed to be another set of "useful idiots," visitors to the Soviet Union in the 1920s who were taken in by the new regime's rosy propaganda.

Mr. Wright suggests, though, that the Brits were not quite so naïve about what was going on behind the curtain. Their preparatory briefings had detailed Mao's vicious pogroms against "bandits" and "reactionaries." One report compared the Communist Party's engineering of such popular movements to turning on and off a tap.

Why the confident praise then? Some of the delegates simply seemed taken by the exoticness of their Oriental adventure. Others, like the early admirers of the Russian or French Revolutions, were caught up in the very fact that this experimental new society had come to exist at all—in the success of ideas willed into reality. 

Yet there is another factor to consider. Today it is easy to forget that in 1954 China's policy direction appeared much more moderate than the Soviet Union's. During Mao's first five years in office, curbing inflation and reforming land ownership were his main undertakings, and he had succeeded reasonably at both. 

So even as the iron curtain continued to fall across Eastern Europe, there were real signs that China's might be an exceptional case. If Casson and the other skeptics had any foreboding of how monstrous Mao's government would become, it was as speculative as the more sanguine predictions.

Of course, it did not take long after the delegates left for the monster to appear. In 1956 Mao launched the Hundred Flowers campaign, under which he offered to hear out his critics; the following year he changed his mind and began systematically liquidating them. During the Great Leap Forward, from 1958-61, over 36 million Chinese died of starvation. 

For many of the British visitors, their wishful idealizations of Mao's China would come down in the ensuing years as quickly as they had gone up. Their jottings leave a bittersweet picture. Mr. Wright's book is a reminder that there was a moment, before the sky darkened and the earth opened up, when the People's Republic seemed full of possibility.

 Mr. Zhong is a Princeton-in-Asia fellow at The Wall Street Journal Asia's editorial page. 