LONDON—Is it possible to get to the essence of Mozart and his librettist Emanuel Schikaneder's opera "Die Zauberflöte"? Peter Brook's bare-boards adaptation, "A Magic Flute," at the Barbican, does just that; it strips away the Masonic lore, the sets—reduced to a forest of freestanding flexible poles—and even the orchestra. 

There is no chorus, only a couple of sinuous, loose-limbed actors (William Nadylam and Abdou Ouologuem), who move the poles around the stage, and give the narrative a polite shove when it needs to move on. Papageno's bells are reduced to a tiny orchestral triangle. The symbolic Masonic threesomes of the original (Boys, Ladies, Slaves and Temples) are gone, leaving only the three flats of E-flat major (the opera's tonic key). And the orchestra is replaced by a single grand piano, played unspectacularly but with splendor by Matan Porat (in the first of the doubled castings). 

Mr. Brook's (and his co-adaptors Franck Krawczyk's and Marie-Hélène Estienne's) "Flute" is a tale of anger quelled, love found, courage shown and differences reconciled, in only two hours, with singers who can really act. Otherwise they wear lovely but simple costumes, and rely on wonderful lighting effects and a few conjuring tricks with the flute itself. 

The international cast I saw boasted some terrific acting. The Tamino-Pamina love story, in Mr. Brook's version, is credible and not at all wimpish, thanks to Antonio Figueroa's Tamino and Agnieszka Lawinska's outstandingly sung Pamina. Leila Benhamza's Queen of the Night was musically accurate, and I was moved at the end when she took the hand of her former arch-enemy, Sarastro. This owed something to the fact that she is petite, and Patrick Bolleire is astonishingly tall—which feels reassuringly right for his firm, solid lower bass register. 

Virgile Frannais winningly sings Papageno, and his comic acting is far more subtle—and funny—than is usual in this role. A lovely production. 

 Four more performances, March 25-27, including an extra matinee on March 26 

  www.barbican.org.uk  

 Write to  Paul Levy at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 