MUMBAI -- The Indian central bank's move to grant new bank licenses is to create more capacity and competition in the system, but the "right size" of a bank remains a debate for the industry, a deputy governor of the Reserve Bank told a conference Wednesday.

"Competition [in the banking system] also has many benefits. As we are moving further down the [financial] inclusion agenda, which is to try and get banking services at a very basic level, perhaps new banks are one way of achieving that,"  Subir Gokarn said in a speech.

The RBI in August released a discussion paper on issuing a limited number of new bank licenses--a move keenly being watched by India's top corporates.

But the central bank in late December said that the issues the paper addressed on the entry of new private banks didn't get any consensus from the various stakeholders.

Mr. Gokarn said in the speech that there wasn't any consensus on the right size of a bank since there were several variables involved.

"There is benefit from scale economies and the ability of banks to deliver services more efficiently as they grow in size," he said.

Still, in the wake of the global financial crisis, it was emphasized that large banks aren't necessarily safe banks and that the larger they get, "the more of a risk they pose to the system as a whole," he added.

In their feedback to the discussion paper, industry bodies asked the RBI to cap the minimum initial capital requirement to start a bank at 10 billion rupees ($222.2 million), which could be raised over time to 15 billion rupees-20 billion rupees. But non-bank finance companies and microfinance institutions preferred a lower start-up capital of 3 billion rupees to 5 billion rupees.

Mr. Gokarn said banks should avoid greater exposure to infrastructure and that a greater fiscal consolidation by the government was needed to meet funding needs of the industry.

"If banks rely predominantly on short-term funds, their increasing exposure to long-term assets is not necessarily a good thing from an asset-liability viewpoint," he said.

Mr. Gokarn said policies have to be tuned to generate more foreign money in infrastructure. The government recently raised the investment limit in corporate bonds to $20 billion from $15 billion, and said the additional limit can be invested only in bonds issued by infrastructure firms.

India needs to double infrastructure spends to $1 trillion in the five years through March 2017 to achieve an annualized growth rate of 10% and this would require new funding sources, Prime Minister Manmohan Singh said earlier in 2010.

"We clearly have to be very strictly adhering to the fiscal roadmap that the government has drawn up....because if governments don't do this, the challenge to financing the kind of infrastructure that we want is going to be that much more significant," Mr. Gokarn said.

The government aims to cap its fiscal deficit at 5.5% of GDP this financial year that ends March 31, and lower the number to 4.8% next year.

 Write to  Bijou George at bijou.george@dowjones.com and Subhadip Sircar at subhadip.sircar@dowjones.com 