 Berlin 

In the center of the Escada store here, a low shelf with colorful sweaters and T-shirts greets shoppers long before they see, in the back of the store, the glamorous evening gowns that made the German fashion brand famous in the glitzy 1980s.

Under new ownership after filing for bankruptcy protection in 2009, Escada is moving past the gilded opulence, gold buttons and big shoulder pads that once defined its style. It is complementing evening dresses with more everyday clothes and adding toned-down shades to its signature bold colors. It is also changing the look of its stores, in an effort to woo a new generation of shoppers who don't associate Escada with the days of Princess Diana and the television show "Dynasty."



The label showed its casual Escada Sport line rather than the more elegant main line on Wednesday at Berlin fashion week—the company's first appearance there—in an effort to highlight its new, broader image. 

"We want women to come into our stores five times a week, not just three times a year when they need a big dress for a big event," Chief Executive Officer Bruno Sälzer said in an interview before the show. Mr. Sälzer came to Escada from Hugo Boss AG in 2008 and, the following year, saw Escada through the insolvency—and the rescue purchase by Megha Mittal, daughter-in-law of London-based steel magnate Lakshmi Mittal. 

"We want more 'buy now, wear now,' for all occasions—parents' night at school, business lunches, shopping trips or places like this," said Mr. Sälzer, pointing at the chic clientele around him at the Soho House Berlin.

Founded in 1976 and named after a race horse, Escada became a global household name alongside German fashion houses such as Jil Sander, Joop and Hugo Boss. Its embrace of bling, long before that word existed, made it a staple at red-carpet and black-tie events from Paris to Palm Beach. After Escada's heyday, the brand's link to a distinct look kept it alive in consumers' minds. Yet today, Escada's reputation for old-world glamour also poses a challenge as the label moves toward more contemporary and affordable everyday styles.

"Many people still associate Escada with a world that doesn't exist anymore and that people no longer want—a superficial world of showing off what you have," said Peter Littmann, owner and founder of Brandinsider, a marketing consulting firm in Hamburg, Germany. 

Escada's problems started with the death in 1992 of company founder and designer Margaretha Ley. Her husband, co-founder Wolfgang Ley, who had created the company's international expansion, couldn't stem its decline. The label failed to keep up with changing tastes, amassed debt and slid into crisis—well before the global financial crisis.

Fashion history shows that brands can come back from the near-dead. In the past, Gucci and Burberry have shed poor images, overexposure and the wrong clientele to roar back into fashionistas' favor. In both cases, the turnaround benefited from an infusion of fresh capital but was built on a radically new design direction. 

Escada's savior, 34-year-old Ms. Mittal, is a mother of two who lives in London and visits Escada's headquarters outside Munich every few weeks. A graduate of the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School who briefly worked at investment bank Goldman Sachs before attending an interior-design school, Ms. Mittal said she is "very involved" in the business. Speaking after the show, Ms. Mittal said she didn't view her investment in Escada as an immediate springboard for further business interests. "I am not thinking about it right now," said Ms. Mittal, clad in a short, black and white dress from Escada's current cruise collection. "But who knows what the future may hold?" 

Ms. Mittal has given Mr. Sälzer long reins to revive Escada, executives say. Over the past two years, in an effort to add new customers, Mr. Sälzer cut Escada's prices by 20%. To focus on the new look, he reduced the size of the collections by a third, while increasing the number of daywear pieces. While past collections featured two daytime dresses, today's typically have 15. To showcase more casual looks with leather, denim or knits—the amount of knitwear in the collections has doubled—Escada boutiques carry "significantly more" merchandise than in the past, he said.

The company is spending almost $27 million to change the look of the stores, opening 40 new boutiques and renovating 30 others. New stores, like the ones in Munich and Shanghai, have a lighter, fresher feel than older boutiques. 

Escada's department-store customers seem to be embracing its new look. Marigay McKee, fashion and beauty director at Harrods in London, said day dresses were its strongest sellers in Escada's autumn/winter collection, helped by the label's lower prices. In addition, Harrods continued to sell what she called "premium, show-stopping gowns." 

"Escada is a brand that encapsulates high glamour, luxury and opulence," she said. "It continues to perform exceptionally well and has an extremely loyal following."

For some, the company's new focus on daywear isn't altogether new. "Escada was one of the first fashion houses in the eighties to embrace the idea of luxury sportswear," said Ken Downing, fashion director of Neiman Marcus, Escada's biggest retail client. 

Rather than the top-to-toe looks of the past, Mr. Downing said, shoppers now look for individual pieces to jazz up well-stocked wardrobes. Escada, he said, is infusing its collections with fashionable highlights such as a $1,150 pair of leather leggings from the last autumn/winter collection that was popular with Neiman customers. 

Escada's design team meets with Neiman buyers at least four times a year and creates a range of 12 to 15 pieces only for Neiman Marcus. Escada also sells at Saks Fifth Avenue. 

At Wednesday night's show, models showed rolled-up jeans, sparkling knit dresses, and a quilted vinyl coat to an audience including German celebrities and buyers from Lord & Taylor. Escada generates 90% of its sales outside of Germany. The U.S., the company's biggest market, accounts for over 20% of its business. The Berlin show, Mr. Sälzer said, was meant as a gesture to its home market. "Today's show demonstrates that our re-orientation is accomplished," he said. 

Escada's turnaround has benefited from the recovery of the luxury-goods industry. At Escada, closely held since the Mittal acquisition, 2010 sales were unchanged from the previous year, largely as a result of the lower prices. In volume terms, sales grew by more than 10%. Mr. Sälzer said 2010 figures hadn't been finalized, but "it looked like" earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization were back in the black.

For all the suits, shirts and jeans now in Escada's stores, Mr. Sälzer said, he still loves its colorful, feminine dresses. In the current spring catalog, his favorite is a long gown with a pattern in blue and turquoise. More flowing than formal, the $4,995 dress is shown on a model with a prominent tattoo on her ankle.

Escada is "not a brand to slip into the room unnoticed," said Mr. Sälzer. "Perhaps in some places, Escada evokes outdated clichés such as gold buttons, but then it's all the more surprising when something new takes their place."

 Write to  Cecilie Rohwedder at cecilie.rohwedder@wsj.com 