TOKYO—In a sign that many Japanese corporations are bracing for a big dent in earnings following the March 11 earthquake, a growing number of companies are cutting or even omitting dividend payments for the fiscal year ending in March. 

With technology giant  Hitachi Ltd. and department-store retailer  Isetan Mitsukoshi Holdings Ltd. already expressing uncertainty about their dividend payments, analysts say earnings prospects are grim for Japan Inc. as the country scrambles to contain the fallout from the earthquake, tsunami and nuclear crisis that has led to power outages and disruptions to global supply networks. 

"Companies had initially expected little or no impact on their earnings for the current fiscal year. As the extent of the damages become clear, they will need to reassess their entire scenario for the next fiscal year," trading information provider Investrust Inc. chief executive Hiroyuki Fukunaga said. 

The crippled Fukushima Daiichi nuclear-power complex and radiation leakage have created problems for companies that go far beyond the physical damage on their plants and production lines. Utility firms are carrying out rolling blackouts that have reached the wider Tokyo area while the nuclear crisis is also expected to take a toll on already weak consumer spending. 

Isetan Mitsukoshi had earlier planned to distribute an annual dividend of ¥10 (12 U.S. cents) a share, but that plan is now put on hold as the company grapples with the damage of its department store in the quake-ravaged city of Sendai. Stores in other locations have also been temporarily shut down due to power outages in Tokyo and surrounding areas. To save electricity, operating hours have also been shortened. 

"We are still examining the impact on our earnings, but there is a strong sense of uncertainty regarding the consumer mind and the effect on sales," a company spokesman said. 

Shares in Japan's  NEC Corp. skidded 5.5% to close at ¥171 Friday, underperforming the broader market's rise after the electronics company said Thursday it will skip paying out its year-end dividend for the fiscal year ending this month citing earthquake-related impairments to its manufacturing facilities, partners and transport system. 

"A broad range of impact to the business, such as material supply is expected," the company said in a statement. 

Nomura Securities Co. estimates that electricity supply could fall around 5%-10% short of demand in the areas covered by  Tokyo Electric Power Co. and  Tohoku Electric Power Co. during fiscal year 2011 that ends March 2012. A 10% shortfall in those areas could dent pretax profits of Japanese companies by 4.7%, according to the brokerage. 

"Electricity shortages will have an undeniable impact on the Japanese economy and on corporate earnings, while supply chain problems…may pose an even larger risk over the short term," Nomura analysts said in a recent report. 

BNP Paribas chief economist Ryutaro Kono also forecasts two more quarters of negative growth for Japan due to the bottleneck of insufficient electrical power and disrupted supply chains. 

On Wednesday, Tepco, the operator of the Fukushima nuclear power plants, withdrew its earlier plan to pay a year-end dividend of ¥30 and said it hasn't decided whether the company will deliver the dividend payout. If no payment of the annual dividend is carried out, it will be the first time in 59 years for Japan's largest utility. 

Citing quake-incurred damages on multiple manufacturing facilities, Hitachi and its 51%-owned subsidiary  Hitachi Cable Ltd. also retracted their earlier plans to pay a year-end dividend. Japanese papermaker  Nippon Paper Group Inc. reached a similar decision with production suspended at six of its plants in the Tohoku region of northern Japan. 

Some have already begun to cut their earnings estimates. 

Earlier this week, medical equipment maker  Terumo Corp. surprised some market players after it revised down its full-year net profit outlook to ¥32.1 billion ($396.4 million) from an earlier projection of ¥36.3 billion. The company partly attributed the revision to lower factory operating rates from the power cuts and damage to production equipment. Following the announcement, shares dropped 4.1% on Wednesday. Since then, shares have recovered 1.8%. 

"Considering the short span of time since the quake, this downward impact is far bigger than expected," Toshiyuki Kanayama, a market analyst at Monex Inc., said.

 Write to  Yoshio Takahashi at yoshio.takahashi@dowjones.com and Hiroyuki Kachi at hiroyuki.kachi@wsj.com 