  Walt Disney Co.
DIS


-0.17
%




 is discussing making video from some of its television networks available on sets embedded with  Yahoo Inc.
YHOO


-0.34
%




's Internet-TV software, people familiar with the matter said.

Such new offerings would propel Yahoo into a broader battle to use the Internet to bring premium content to digital TVs, amping up the competition with traditional cable-TV and satellite operators. 

Companies including  Apple Inc.,
AAPL


-0.04
%




 Google Inc., and  Cisco Systems Inc.
CSCO


0.86
%




 have entered the race to combine Internet video and conventional TV in a variety of ways, including selling separate devices that attach to cable boxes and building software into cable boxes and new TV sets. 

Yahoo Connected TV software is built into a wide array of TV sets and allows media companies to create applications known as widgets, which people can use as they watch TV. But so far Yahoo's widgets don't offer much free video from TV networks. 

Media companies have been torn over delivering content directly to Internet-connected TV sets. 

Disney, for instance, is eager to test the water with new digital models for distributing video, according to the people familiar with the matter. And  News Corp. is talking with companies including Samsung Electronics Co. about licensing TV shows and movies from 20th Century Fox's library for use on tablet computers and Internet-connected TVs, according to people familiar with the matter. (News Corp. also owns The Wall Street Journal.) 

But TV networks also fear upsetting the traditional TV ecosystem, which generates tens of billions of dollars a year in advertising and cable subscription fees. Several major networks, including Disney's ABC and News Corp.'s Fox Broadcasting, have gone so far as to block users of Google's new Internet-TV service, Google TV, from free episodes that are available on the networks' websites. 

"We're in the early stages of Google TV and are excited to see new products bring the Web to the living room," Google said. "As the market and the products continue to mature, we're confident that all content owners will see the value of Web-enabled TVs for the consumer and the promise they hold." 

For Yahoo, Disney is looking to create widgets for its ESPN, ABC, and Disney networks that could pipe video content over the Internet to Yahoo Connected TV sets, the people familiar with the matter said. The widgets haven't been made yet, nor has a final decision been made to use the widgets to transmit video, as opposed to other content, the people said. 

The ESPN widget could include short clips with scores and statistical information, while the Disney widget could include items such as movie trailers or clips from Disney Channel, the people said. The ABC widget could offer limited content from TV shows, they said, but it remained unclear if the network would offer full episodes. 

Any video offering could be limited, in part because Disney is wary of piracy and of upsetting cable distributors, the people said. 

  Ron Jacoby, chief architect of Yahoo Connected TV, said the company is working with networks to help them create "innovative applications, with video-on-demand being one aspect of that." 

"We're working with our network partners on a business model that works for networks and advertisers, not a model that deteriorates existing revenue streams," he said. "We think that's a big differentiator." 

Google and Yahoo are styling their software as platforms for content companies and others to develop TV applications, just as Google's Android software and Apple iPhone and iPad products have spawned marketplaces for mobile-device applications. 

Mr. Jacoby said about 6 million sets in 135 countries have Connected TV software, a figure he expects to climb to 8 million by March. TV manufacturers such as Vizio Inc., LG Electronics Inc., and  Sony Corp. have embedded the software in more than 100 models since it became available two years ago. The sets often aren't marketed under the Yahoo name. 

More than 100 free applications have been created for Yahoo Connected TV by Internet companies such as social-networking site Facebook Inc., micro blogging service Twitter Inc., and  Amazon.com Inc.
AMZN


2.20
%




's paid video-on-demand service. Yahoo also has created apps that carry content from its sports, finance, weather and photo-sharing sites. 

Yahoo also is wooing advertisers to its TV software. The company said Wednesday that  Ford Motor Co.
F


1.16
%




,  Mattel Inc.
MAT


-1.09
%




 and  Microsoft Corp.
MSFT


0.18
%




 are working with Yahoo on interactive TV commercials so, for example, viewers watching a Lincoln car or Barbie commercial would be prompted to click on a widget for more information and online videos. 

Yahoo also said that several television networks, including CBS, NBC, Showtime and Home Shopping Network are creating apps that let viewers get breaking news and stock quotes, find out about actors and athletes and purchase merchandise. Mr. Jacoby said Yahoo will open a store this quarter for applications that cost money and the company will share revenue with developers.

The new Disney widgets would be free to consumers, the people familiar with the matter said. One of the people said the widgets would be part of a broader advertising agreement with Yahoo. 

Mr. Jacoby said Yahoo was consulting with its network partners about potential models.

 Write to  Sam Schechner at sam.schechner@wsj.com and Amir Efrati at amir.efrati@wsj.com 