Gold certainly is cheaper these days, having fallen 5.7% in 2011 alone. But investors who rush in now could be setting themselves up for disappointment. 

Classically a hedge against inflation, gold morphed into a hedge against economic collapse during the financial crisis and rallied strongly last year as fears mounted of a double-dip recession in the U.S. and a debt crisis in Europe. Those fears have largely eased, though gold did rally Friday on turmoil in the Middle East. By and large, investing in gold is once again a bet on global inflation. 

While there are signs of higher costs for raw materials in the U.S. and abroad, prices might not be rising fast enough to justify gold's current price of $1,340.70 an ounce, say some strategists. Emerging-market central banks, meanwhile, are raising interest rates to tackle rising prices.

"For gold to rise there needs to be demand for a safe haven, a weak U.S. dollar and inflation fears," says  Pierre Lapointe, a strategist at brokerage firm Brockhouse Cooper. "We don't see any of these in 2011."

The price of gold largely reflects investor sentiment rather than fundamental demand, which is one reason it kept rising for most of the past 10 years. But speculators already have cut their bullish bets on gold to the lowest level since 2009. Heavier selling, in turn, could beget still more selling. 

Exchange-traded funds are particularly worrisome: Big redemptions there could force enormous amounts of the metal into the marketplace, further pressuring prices. The amount of gold held by ETFs has dropped by about 2.8% since the beginning of the year, according to Brockhouse Cooper, bringing it to the lowest level since June.

Another recent source of buying—by gold producers unwinding hedges used to protect profits against price fluctuations—also has nearly come to an end. That is because most of the hedges were put in place at much lower price levels, forcing companies to sell well below market prices and damping profits. On Jan. 13, AngloGold Ashanti Ltd. said it had closed its hedge book, becoming the last of the major gold companies to do so.

"Financial demand propelled gold higher over the past few quarters," Mr. Lapointe says. "We doubt more is on the way."

How far could gold fall in the short term? Technical measures suggest that gold's current price is close to its near-term "support" level—the price at which investors, attracted by a perceived bargain, are expected to rush in. If it falls below $1,320 and stays there, the next price where buyers would be expected to cluster would be near $1,280.

Over the longer term, too, the case for gold seems less compelling, say some analysts. While the metal has traditionally been seen as a buffer against runaway inflation and a collapsing dollar, at these prices gold may have less value as an insurance policy than investors might think. 

Take inflation. From 1968—when investors started to price in the possibility of the U.S. dropping the gold standard—to 2001, the price of gold rose 5.6% a year, while the Consumer Price Index gained 5.1% annually. That hasn't been the case recently: Since 2001 gold has surged 18.8% annually, while the CPI has risen just 2.3%. 

To restore their historical relationship, inflation would have to rise by 8.3% a year for the next 20 years to justify current prices. If inflation were to rise by its average since 1968 of 4.7%, gold would have to drop 3.6% a year for the next 20 years, according to  Tim Courtney, chief investment officer at Burns Advisory Group. "This latest gold craze is way overdone," he says.

Even assuming the price of gold now includes a premium for protection against a falling dollar, a collapse in the stock market and inflation, gold still looks expensive, says  Vadim Zlotnikov, chief market strategist at Alliance Bernstein Research. He calculates that the current price reflects fears of a 20% decline in stocks, a 20% drop in the dollar and an inflation rate above 4%, based on historical performance. (The inflation rate is currently 1.5%.) If investors think any of those outcomes is likely, gold may still be a buy. Otherwise, they are better off waiting for a lower price.

"Gold is an insurance policy, and the cost of insurance has been going up," Mr. Zlotnikov says. "A decline to $1,100 would be reflecting a more-benign market environment."

Of course, critics have been saying gold has been expensive for years, and past pullbacks have been buying opportunities for much of the past decade. During 2010 alone, gold twice dipped more than 7% before rallying to new highs. 

On Friday, gold rose 1.8% as protests in Egypt turned deadly, destabilizing global markets. If the turmoil there spreads, or new fears of European defaults, raging inflation or U.S. economic deterioration emerge, gold could spike further. 

So what's an investor to do? If you have a large position in gold, now may be a good time to take profits, says  John "Launny" Steffens, founder of Spring Mountain Capital, an investment-management firm in New York.

Yet despite gold's high cost, Mr. Steffens says it still has a place in a portfolio and that investors should devote 5% to 7% of their portfolios to the metal to hedge against the unexpected. "Just don't expect it to go up 30% every year," he says.

 Write to  Ben Levisohn at ben.levisohn@wsj.com 

