As China's government was trying to cool its hot real-estate sector by clamping down on construction last year,  UBS AG analyst Mick Mi tipped the stocks of cement and backhoe makers.

The counterintuitive view proved smart, landing Shanghai-based Mr. Mi at the top of The Wall Street Journal's Asia's Best Analysts 2010 ranking for China.



"(This view) could be a surprise for some investors," says the 31-year-old Mr. Mi. "Investment is still a very important driver for the economy." 

His best call was Shanghai-listed cement producer  Sinoma International Engineering Co.
600970


-9.96
%




 Ltd., which almost doubled in 2010 by returning 99% even as the overall market was slumping 14%. Another leading performer was  Sany Heavy Industry Co.
600031


-10.01
%




, which jumped 86%.

Mr. Mi, an analyst at  UBS Securities Co. Ltd. in China, says he took the view that despite Beijing's best efforts to cool the real-estate sector, cement demand "won't change overnight." Indeed, China's decision in late 2008 to pump 4 trillion yuan ($586 billion)into the economy continued to support infrastructure development last year.

Mr. Mi also recognized how the industrial structure was changing: Consolidation among cement producers was creating giants like Hong Kong-listed  Anhui Conch Cement Co.—a pick that gained 47% in 2010—that had more pricing power thanks to reduced competition.

In construction equipment, Mr. Mi says he recognized that the quality of locally made excavators, backhoes and other machines was nearing that of foreign brands, earning them market share where it counted—in booming China.

When the Nanjing native, who became a stock analyst in 2006 after working as an accountant, isn't kicking the soccer ball around as a midfielder in UBS's football league, he says he is likely to be in the Chinese hinterland visiting construction companies he covers—as well as others that he doesn't cover but that might alert him to trends. "We make very frequent calls with the industry guys," Mr. Mi says.

For 2011, he's sticking with last year's bullish view on construction materials. "We expect social housing to become a new driver and an important driver for cement demand," says Mr. Mi, predicting the cement price in some parts of the nation could rise 20% this year, closing in on 600 yuan ($92) a metric ton.

— James T. Areddy 