Chinese financial institutions are pushing into Europe, opening bank branches, scouting for deal opportunities and even attending German banking classes, in the latest illustration of China's growing global economic clout. 

China Development Bank, a giant government-owned lender, is one of four final parties eyeing a big stake in troubled German bank WestLB AG, according to people familiar with the matter. 

Another huge bank,  Industrial & Commercial Bank of China Ltd., this month is opening branches in Paris, Brussels, Amsterdam, Milan and Madrid. Last week, it agreed to buy as much as 80% of a U.S. banking company. 

Bankers and government officials say this could be the tip of the iceberg. Chinese banks and investment funds are on the prowl for banking deals in several European countries, including Germany and Spain. 

With foreign-exchange reserves that have grown to $2.85 trillion, a large proportion of which is invested in U.S. Treasury bonds, China is seeking to diversify its assets. Its companies have been on a global investment binge in recent years, snapping up everything from real estate to mining companies to premier global brands like  Volvo— even a 7% stake in Club Med. 

The "go out" push, as it is called in China, is backed by the government, which owns many of these companies and wants them to play a bigger international role, consistent with China's growing stature and the needs of its enormous economy.

One area where China recently has held back: investments in Western banks. Its banks made an initial push abroad in 2007, but the deals soured. Among them: Sovereign wealth fund China Investment Corp. bought multibillion-dollar stakes in  Morgan Stanley
MS


0.24
%




 and Blackstone Group LP, while China Development Bank agreed to invest billions in British bank  Barclays
BCS


0.42
%




 PLC.

The stakes plunged in value as the financial crisis intensified, fueling public criticism in China and making the government wary of further deals. In 2008, Beijing denied approval for a China Development Bank bid to buy Germany's Dresdner Bank.

China Development Bank's interest in West LB is the latest sign that reluctance is starting to fade. It comes as ICBC agreed this month to purchase 80% of the U.S. unit of  Bank of East Asia Ltd.
BKEAY


7.04
%




 for $140 million—a deal that would make it the first Beijing-controlled financial institution to acquire retail bank branches in the U.S.

Chinese banks are eager to establish presences around the world partly because of the recent proliferation of Chinese companies with global ambitions. As those companies set up outposts in Europe, the U.S. and Africa, Chinese banks are looking to follow them so they can meet their banking needs and help finance their growth. 

That helps explain one of China's biggest forays into international banking so far. In 2008, ICBC paid about $5.5 billion for a 20% stake and two board seats in Johannesburg-based Standard Bank, Africa's largest lender. 

The deal marked a significant step in facilitating China's ambitions in sub-Saharan Africa, where Chinese companies are pumping vast sums into energy, infrastructure and other development projects. ICBC and Standard Bank subsequently have partnered on dozens of ventures, arranging loans to help companies like  China Oilfield Services Ltd. and China Electrical Equipment Corp. to finance their expansion in Africa and to win deals serving African governments that are clients of Standard Bank. 

Investment bankers who work with Chinese financial institutions say ICBC's deal with Standard Bank is likely to serve as a model for future deals involving Chinese banks moving into Europe. Wary of provoking political controversy, Chinese banks are likely to seek minority ownership stakes rather than full acquisitions, bankers say. 

Across Europe, there are plentiful opportunities for eager acquirers or investors to pick through the wreckage of the continent's banking boom and bust. Some European governments are actively courting outside aid. 

Chinese banks could be well positioned because not many big European banks are likely to be ready to pounce. They are generally trying to mend their finances and conserve capital, or are looking to move into faster-growing markets.

In Ireland, the central-bank governor wants a foreign bank to buy or partner with one of the country's crippled lenders. The Spanish government is rushing to shrink and fortify its network of savings banks known as cajas. Spanish officials have told investment bankers that they would welcome a foreign savior, whether with an outright purchase or through capital injections. Chinese institutions are closely scrutinizing possible deals there, although nothing appears imminent, bankers say. 

In the U.K.,  Royal Bank of Scotland Group PLC and  Lloyds Banking Group PLC have informally sounded out officials with Chinese sovereign-wealth funds about the possibility of them buying significant stakes in the partly nationalized British banks, according to people familiar with the matter. 

And in Germany, the sector is ripe for consolidation. Many of the country's Landesbanks, controlled by regional governments, are ailing due to their reckless lending and investing during the boom. The government is pushing for a reduction in the number of banks. 

In bilateral meetings over the past year, Chinese officials have told their German counterparts that they are interested in a bank purchase, according to a senior German official. It is still unclear how a deal for WestLB would be structured, and whether the bidders would buy the whole bank or just make a significant investment, people familiar with the matter said.

European governments were until recently wary of investments in the Continent by Chinese state-controlled companies. Germany even passed a law in 2009 that allows its government to block takeovers of local companies that raise concerns about possible political interference in the economy by foreign governments. The measure reflected disquiet about the growing financial clout of state-controlled investment funds and companies from China, Russia, and nations belonging to the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries. 

But China has worked hard to overcome European suspicions. Chinese leaders have won praise from European officials for their pledges to support and invest in struggling euro-zone countries such as Greece, Portugal and Spain. Concrete Chinese help for the euro zone, such as major government-bond purchases, has been slower to materialize. 

Still, political analysts say Europe's need to attract greaterforeign investment is making it steadily more open to China's real goal—to build up a portfolio of investments in European business, industry and infrastructure. 

In one indication of China's interest in German banking, Frankfurt University's Goethe Business School is running a leadership program for managers of China Development Bank. Reinhhard H. Schmidt, a professor of international banking, teaches them about the German banks, as well as the country's financial system, economy and financial crisis, while other teachers tackle issues ranging from leadership to risk management.

The school, which offers degree programs and in-house training for various companies, regularly trains 20 to 30 high-ranking CDB staff members in various fields, including leadership and risk management, with as many as six groups coming per year. Instructors include both university professors and management members from companies including Deutsche Bank and Deutsche Telekom, as well as Germany's central bank, the Bundesbank. Mr. Schmidt said CDB is one of the school's largest clients.

The fear of foreign takeovers "in the German banking world is over," said Mr. Schmidt.

—Marcus Walker and Stephen Fidler contributed to this article.

 Write to  David Enrich at david.enrich@wsj.com, Jason Dean at jason.dean@wsj.com and Laura Stevens at laura.stevens@wsj.com 