Will the city of Glendale, Calif., raise the issue of eminent domain to expand a booming local mall?

Developer  Rick Caruso's Caruso Affiliated Inc. wants to add as much as 150,000 square feet to the Americana at Brand mall by building on two acres adjacent to the shopping center. The trouble is, the owners of a small warehouse and the GoldenKey hotel there don't want to sell.

Now the City Council is involved, instructing all interested parties to submit redevelopment plans for the parcel by Jan. 27 so that it can decide the parcel's fate as early as Feb. 8. 

The land is in an area designated in 1972 as a "redevelopment project area," which allows the city to consider any plans to redevelop the site, according to  Philip Lanzafame, Glendale's chief assistant director of community development.

Whether Glendale will use eminent domain to seize the property at market rates has yet to be determined. "That's not where we are in the process," Mr. Lanzafame said. "That's way down the line."

Mr. Caruso already has made a pitch to get the city to side with him, arguing that expanding the Americana won't require city financing and would deliver an estimated $800,000 in additional city taxes annually. The Americana now includes 475,000 square feet of shops such as  Tiffany
TIF


-0.06
%




 & Co. and  J. Crew Group Inc., 238 rental apartments and 100 condominiums. Caruso estimates the mall will post sales of $1,100 a square foot this year.

Mr. Caruso says he has offered $6 million to the GoldenKey's local owner, who hasn't accepted. Submitting his redevelopment plans to the city "is part of the process," Mr. Caruso said. "I'm confident that we're going to get through it."

Eminent-domain actions have long been opposed by property-rights advocates. But in its most recent decision on the subject, the U.S. Supreme Court in 2005 upheld the rights of local governments to seize property for commercial uses. In that case, Kelo v. City of New London, Conn., the justices found it was constitutional for a city economic-development corporation to seize private homes and businesses to build condominiums and shops adjacent to a Pfizer Inc. research campus. 

Commercial-real-estate values in the Washington area have risen to the point that investors who bought a few years ago can sell for a quick profit. 

Late last month, for example, a venture of Angelo, Gordon & Co. and MRP Realty sold an Arlington, Va., office building to Chicago-based investment firm Heitman for $112 million, according to the property's brokers at Jones Lang LaSalle. In 2009, the venture bought the 212,000-square-foot property, named the Hartford Building, for $71.5 million. 

Investors regularly turned quick profits in so-called flips in 2006 and 2007, occasionally reselling a property even before closing on its purchase. The practice went into hibernation with the economic downturn, as values fell nationwide. But the situation may be ripe for a change in Washington, where job growth has outpaced growth in the rest of the country, and investors have been bullish on the market's future, particularly in the past year. 

—Eliot Brown