SÃO PAULO—Brazil's main consumer-confidence index dropped sharply in March as rising prices and higher interest rates began to affect public expectations about the economy, the Getulio Vargas Foundation, or FGV, said Monday. 

FGV's Consumer Confidence Index, or ICC, dropped to 120.1 points in March from 122.6 in February. The index runs from 1 to 200 points, with 100 considered neutral. 

It was the biggest monthly fall in the index since November of 2008, when Brazil's economy was skidding from effects of the global credit crisis. 

Still, the figure was well above the historical average of 107 points, according to FGV. 

But respondents were less optimistic about Brazil's economic prospects over the next six months than they were in February. In March, just 29% of respondents said they expected "improved" economic conditions six months from now, down from 31% a month ago. 

Brazilian consumers are concerned about inflation, said FGV economist  Aloisio Campelo. "I would say that Brazilian consumers are now moderately pessimistic. They are anticipating a slowdown in the economy." 

Much of the problem has to do with inflation. Brazil's inflation rate has risen from 5.9% at the end of 2010 to 6.1% currently. 

"Rising inflation is going to mean higher interest rates. There is no escape from this," according to  Paulo Faria-Tavares, managing director of São Paulo's PTX Lending consultants. 

Respondents to the FGV consumer-confidence survey agreed. In the March survey, 69% said they expect higher interest rates in the next six months, up from 65% in February. 

Brazil's central bank has already hiked its Selic base rate once this year, by a half percentage point, to 11.75%. At least one more rate increase, in April, is seen as likely by economists. 

Meanwhile, most economists have also pared back their forecasts for 2011 economic growth to about 4.0%, down from a torrid 7.5% expansion in 2010. 

The ICC index is based on interviews with 2,000 families in Brazil's seven largest cities. The ICC measures the willingness of families to make purchases of various types of consumer goods and gauges expectations about employment, income and economic opportunities. 

 Write to  Tom Murphy at tom.murphy@dowjones.com 