It's been more than two decades since F. Murray Abraham won an Academy Award for his performance as Antonio Salieri in "Amadeus," and the trophy is a little worn. He's had it regilded, but it still has a small chip on its right shoulder.

Mr. Abraham might be forgiven for sharing the trait, given a recent twist of theater fate, but he's staying upbeat. Friday, roughly two weeks after Al Pacino ended a hit Broadway run as Shylock in "The Merchant of Venice," another version of the Shakespeare play will open featuring Mr. Abraham in the same role. While Mr. Pacino's play grossed more than $15.3 million, Mr. Abraham appears under more modest circumstances Off Broadway.

The 71-year-old actor said he'd committed to this "Merchant" long before he knew that Mr. Pacino's Shylock was going to Broadway. "If we had known, I don't think we would've jumped in right now," he said.

Mr. Abraham, who is reprising his role in a critically acclaimed version of the Shakespeare play that sold out in New York in 2007, praised Mr. Pacino's work while noting that his own Shylock was hardly a footnote. "I think it's probably the best work I've ever done in my life," he said from a rehearsal room near Times Square. 

The two actors have met before. Mr. Abraham said Mr. Pacino helped him land a role in the 1983 film "Scarface," in which Mr. Abraham's character was hanged from a helicopter. Both men also played Roy Cohn in "Angels in America"—Mr. Abraham on Broadway and Mr. Pacino in a television miniseries.

Mr. Abraham's "Merchant," directed by Darko Tresnjak, runs at Pace University's Michael Schimmel Center for the Arts until March 13 before touring Chicago, Boston and Los Angeles.

Mr. Abraham, who is of Syrian and Italian descent, was raised an Orthodox Christian in El Paso, Texas (he currently attends a Presbyterian church in New York). To play Shylock, he has shaved his head—so his yarmulke will stand out against his skin—and tried to stay in physical shape. In the play's climactic trial scene, in which Shylock seeks his pound of flesh, Mr. Abraham rubs spit on his enemy's face and collapses into a ball on the floor. He asked Mr. Tresnjak if he could get kicked off the stage into the audience, but the director found the move too dangerous. "He's fearless," Mr. Tresnjak said.

On a recent day, Mr. Abraham brought his Oscar to rehearsal. He planned to hide it on the set of "Merchant" as an inside joke, something he's done in his plays since winning the award. 

The actor, who now does most of his film work in Europe, said the statuette taught him a lesson about hubris. After winning, he decided he was a leading man and wouldn't accept anything less. But the starring roles were elusive, and he recalled rejecting wonderful supporting parts. "Maybe that was a mistake," he said, "but I did it, that's who I was, and that's that." 

 Write to  Ellen Gamerman at ellen.gamerman@wsj.com 