It began, as these affairs often do, with a frisson of illicit excitement. Here was an opportunity to trade up, to live for one glittering night beyond one's means. Six women in The Wall Street Journal's Washington bureau leased designer gowns -- think Escada, Halston, Badgley Mischka -- from Rent the Runway, to wear to the White House Correspondents' Dinner on April 30. 

It ended, as these affairs often do, with designer finery flung everywhere, and days of pain on the road to redemption. 

It's important to grasp the fashion significance of the "nerd prom" in a Lands' End catalog town like Washington D.C. 

In addition to President Obama and  Michelle Obama, the dinner has drawn designers  Donatella Versace, wearing an elegant sausage casing, and  Jason Wu, who designed the first lady's inaugural gown and wore a Jil Sander tux.

 For the six of us, from the national daily least associated with fashion, it was a chance to release our inner Wintour. And Rent the Runway would do it for us at 10% of retail — cheaper than the wedding-wear most of us rock at this thing. 

RtR's pitch: order one gown at regular price (about $100-$300) and get a second option for $25. You also get an additional size gratis. Jewelry and bags are available for rental too. After the event, you stuff the ensemble into the postage-paid envelope, and drop it in the mailbox. 

High-strung reporters ordering formalwear online is inherently risky, and on the day before the gowns were due to arrive last week, the system went haywire. 

According to RtR CEO  Jennifer Hyman, the company shipped 1,000 orders in a single day, more than any day since its founding in late 2009 (thanks, sorority and prom brats). Fifteen orders were fouled up, she said—and four of those involved our reporters. 

Backup sizes in several of the gowns we had reserved weren't available. So the company substituted what they had, not what we ordered, in those sizes. When those substitutions didn't fit or didn't work, they sent more. The apparel piled up as the clock ticked down toward Saturday. 

We decided to document the silken chaos. That drew a call from Ms. Hyman. "There are growing pains in any great company," she said. "We're not going to stop until you feel amazing." 

I told her that at this rate we'd have to bring all the dresses to the office for a Loehmann's fitting room-style mass try-on. "Hopefully in a more elegant, Cinderella, aspirational type way," she said.

Our aspirations grew more humble by the hour. 

Over three days, and after a dozen deliveries by overnight mail and messenger, some 30 extra dresses and a score of no-charge accessories, all was resolved. (Was that because we are reporters? You make the call.)

Health reporter Janet Adamy got a call Wednesday from a RtR rep telling her the second size in her first-pick Halston Heritage gown wasn't available. She chose two new backups, and RtR agreed to send them, with no upcharge, though one replacement cost more than three times the price. 

Banking reporter  Victoria McGrane's backup size in each of the two dresses she ordered weren't available. A RtR stylist helped her choose two more dresses, including the one she wound up wearing—a violet  Lela Rose gown that was three times more expensive than the dress she chose, at no extra charge. 

The stylist also sent two more dresses just in case, plus complimentary earrings and a bracelet. 

Regulatory reporter Alicia Mundy's first dress order was a bust. Literally. "The cavernous gap at the low neckline in the dress posed the possibility of numerous post-party reports of "costume malfunctions" (and lost hors d'oeuvres)," she said. Two more gowns later -- Nicole Miller finally won -- Alicia was saved "from having to put on the stretchable black jersey number that I have worn nine years in a row." 

On Wednesday, I checked my order online: I had requested two Nicole Miller gowns, sizes 4 and 6. But there was no size 6. A Rent the Runway stylist sent three others: two 'Bride of Dracula' black cocktail dresses and one Easter Egg-lavender Bridesmaidzilla.

As reporters we deal with looming deadlines with somewhat less stress than most, and we're pretty good at demanding what we want. But faced with the possibility of our sole night of high style swirling irretrievably toward dog-fight fashion show, we divided. Two of us would do Rent the Runway all over again. Two of us found the uncertainty -- and the stress of keeping people's feet off the train of a $3,500 dress -- too much to bear. 

On Friday, four more dresses arrived for me by messenger, along with a batch of accessories that included a dog chain bracelet and rhinestone earrings as big as a baby's head. Plowing through the pile, I retrieved my first choice, the size four Nicole Miller navy sequined number. 

Held my breath, zipped up. Perfect. 

I wore my own jewelry.

 Write to  Elizabeth Williamson at elizabeth.williamson@wsj.com 