WARSAW—Poland's central-bank governor hinted that interest rates could start climbing here soon, while Romania held rates steady Wednesday as central bankers across the region weigh the contrasting risks posed to their countries' fragile economies by hot money and mounting inflation.

Inflation has been climbing in central Europe, as energy, food and commodity prices all have risen, buoyed by a flood of liquidity from central banks in the U.S. and other developed countries trying to bolster economic growth. That has put pressure on rate-setters to act in an effort to keep prices stable.

But higher rates have their own dangers. In addition to raising the cost of borrowing for businesses and households, they also stand to attract large inflows of speculative money that could push up the value of emerging markets' currencies, making their exports more expensive and potentially hurting growth.

National Bank of Poland Governor Marek Belka told Reuters Tuesday that the country's currency, the zloty, must be "helped" to strengthen as a way of keeping inflation in check. His remarks pushed the zloty to an eight-week high against the euro on Wednesday as investors anticipated a rate increase this month.

Hungary has raised rates twice since November, as the central bank there moves to contain inflation that is already above the bank's target of 3%. In November, inflation rose 4.2%. Andras Simor, the head of Hungary's central bank, has said he won't "tolerate divergence" from the strict inflation goal.

But analysts say another motive for the National Bank of Hungary's rate increases is a desire to assuage some international investors' concerns about the risks of Hungarian assets due to questions about the government's economic policies. 

In Romania Wednesday, the central bank held its main policy rate steady at 6.25%, despite inflation of 7.7% in November, well above the 4.5% upper limit of the bank's target range. Given the weak economy, which contracted last year and remains in the doldrums, the bank is reluctant to raise rates. Some analysts expect a rate cut if inflation starts to ease.

The Czech Republic's central-bank governor, Miroslav Singer, has said the bank is deliberately keeping interest rates lower than those in the neighboring euro zone to prevent an inflow of money that would push up the value of the Czech currency, the koruna. A stronger koruna could hurt exports and growth, he has said. Still, Mr. Singer has said that tightening is coming, but the timing remains uncertain. The bank's key interest rate is 0.75%, a quarter of a percentage point below the 1% benchmark rate in the 17-nation euro zone. 

Poland's ten-member monetary-policy council—which has kept its main policy rate at a record low of 3.5% since 2009—for months has wrestled with the pros and cons of tightening. Opponents have argued that raising rates could attract unwanted "hot money" from portfolio investors.

Those in favor have said that an increase would keep inflation in check and, by boosting the value of the zloty, would ease the debt burden on the government and households, which have foreign-currency loans.

The language of the council members shifted somewhat toward tightening in December, when the council's statement for the first time in many months left out any mention of the risks of hot money.

A consumer-price inflation estimate for December—of 3.1%, above the 2.5% target—and robust indicators of manufacturing strength, helped boost the value of the zloty in the first days of January.

Poland's rate setters will meet again on Jan. 19, and many in the markets are expecting an increase. But such a move isn't a foregone conclusion, others warn.

"Obviously, the zloty's strengthening means the market has started to price in a January rate increase," said  Maja Goettig, senior economist at Bank BPH in Warsaw. "On the other hand, a stronger zloty may make some members of the Monetary Policy Council more reluctant to hike—it's a kind of a vicious circle."

—Joe Parkinson in Istanbul and Sean Carney in Prague contributed to this article.