Americans like to tax the rich. As a nation, we rely more on progressive taxes—and less on regressive ones—than any other developed country. We impose no broad-based consumption tax, standing firm against the global popularity of value-added levies. But we make ample use of corporate and individual income taxes—touchstones of progressive politics for more than a century. 

Our national penchant for progressive taxation has deep roots in American history. It can be found in the revenue debates of the Civil War, when Union leaders imposed the nation's first income tax to quiet complaints about "a rich man's war and a poor man's fight." Or in the Gilded Age, when Populists built a grass-roots movement for taxes to check monopoly and slow the nation's surging inequality. 

It's one thing to say that American politicians have been taxing the rich for more than 200 years, but what were they trying to achieve? Were they seeking to redistribute wealth, to recast society along more egalitarian lines? Or were they simply trying to ensure that rich people paid their "fair share"? The answer, predictably, is both.

In the early years of the American republic, Congress relied on tariffs for about 90% of federal revenue. Import taxes were well-established and well-tolerated, but they were also regressive. To help balance the scales of fiscal justice, lawmakers experimented with other taxes, including a direct property tax (considered a decent proxy for taxing wealth) and excise taxes on luxury goods like carriages and snuff. Ultimately, none of these innovations proved successful, and after the War of 1812, Congress largely abandoned them.

During the Civil War, lawmakers tried again to tax the rich. Facing a huge revenue crisis in 1861, Union leaders turned first to the tariff and then to a range of excise taxes. But in a bid to bolster fairness, they also enacted a new federal property tax. While intended to burden the rich, the new levy drew scorn from a different group: farmers. Rep. Schuyler Colfax, Republican of Indiana, spoke for many rural legislators: "I cannot go home and tell my constituents that I voted for a bill that would allow a man, a millionaire, who has put his entire property into stock, to be exempt from taxation, while a farmer who lives by his side must pay a tax." 

Chastened, Congress adopted the nation's first income tax: a flat 3% levy on high-income individuals. Over the course of the war, the tax grew in scope and scale, eventually reaching 10% of Union households, according to economic historian Elliot Brownlee. And it raised a lot of money—about 21% of total revenue in 1865. 

But the tax also raised hackles. Critics insisted that it was inquisitorial and un-American, requiring an "army of officials" to assess and collect it. Federal direct taxes were simply not part of the cultural DNA of 19th-century America, so it came as no surprise when Congress let the income tax expire in 1872. 

Yet farmers continued to agitate for progressive tax reform, spurred on by rapid industrialization and rising inequality. Democratic leaders, newly converted to the cause, defended the income tax as a means to reallocate the cost of government. 

In 1894, Congress approved a new income tax, only to have the Supreme Court overturn it the following year. Then in 1913, the states ratified the 16th Amendment, making the country safe for income taxation. The new income tax looked a lot like the old one. With low rates and a high exemption, it dipped gently into the pockets of the top 2% and left everyone else unscathed. Critics, however, were despondent. "When men once get the habit of helping themselves to the property of others," warned the New York Times in 1909, "they are not easily cured of it." 

During World War I, lawmakers lowered exemptions and raised rates, making the income tax a fiscal workhorse. But they kept it focused on the rich. 

When Franklin Roosevelt entered the White House in 1933, he inherited a tax system still heavily dependent on consumption taxes. But he resisted calls to cut regressive taxes, choosing instead to raise progressive ones. 

Roosevelt's decision was emblematic of the way American political leaders have used progressive taxation. He understood that big government required big revenue. But he also knew that taxes on the rich would never pay all the nation's bills. If poor and middle-class Americans were going to be asked, of necessity, to shoulder much of the fiscal burden, then they needed assurance that the rich were paying their share.

The tax policies of the New Deal provided exactly that assurance. Higher income and estate taxes bore heavily on the nation's economic elite, and World War II intensified the pressure. In 1944, marginal income tax rates topped out at an all-time high of 94%.

Roosevelt's tax regime proved durable, beginning their long steady decline only during the Kennedy administration. Why did they last so long? In part to fund the Korean conflict and the Cold War, but also to grease the skids of modern politics. Lawmakers were able to blunt the effect of high statutory rates by handing out tax preferences to their friends, constituents and contributors. Steep rates preserved the appearance of progressivity (and, to be fair, some of the reality), while supplying politicians with their stock in trade: favors.

Ultimately, however, the New Deal tax regime survived because it served an even more vital political function. Heavy taxes on the rich provided political cover for the vastly expanded income tax that emerged from World War II—a levy transformed from a "class tax" to a "mass tax" by the exigencies of war. Steep rates also balanced FDR's most regressive addition to the tax system: the Social Security payroll tax.

And that, after all, is what progressive taxation has always been about: balance. Critics have seen darker motives. "What these people want to do is to take away the money of the rich," warned Republican Sen. Elihu Root in 1913, "and then pass laws distributing it among their people at home." 

More often, however, American political leaders have defended progressive taxation on narrower grounds, using it to remake the tax system, not society. No one made the case more succinctly than Rep. Cordell Hull, legislative father of the 1913 income tax. "I have no disposition to tax wealth unnecessarily or unjustly," he explained in his memoirs. "But I do believe that the wealth of the country should bear its just share of the burden of taxation and that it should not be permitted to shirk that duty."

—Mr. Thorndike is the director of the Tax History Project at Tax Analysts and the author of "Their Fair Share: Why Americans Tax the Rich," to be published later this year. 

Taxation has been around since at least 3000 B.C., when Egyptian pharaohs taxed many items, including grain, imported goods, livestock and beer. 

Citizens also had to pay a tax on cooking oil, and tax collectors (known as scribes) searched homes for used oil, trying to make sure that everyone was using new cooking oil—and thus paying the tax.

As part of his drive to modernize Russia—and to spur Russian men to look more like clean-shaven European men—Peter the Great introduced a beard tax in 1705. 

Any man who wanted to wear a beard, with the exception of priests and peasants, had to pay a tax of as much as 900 rubles. He then had to wear a special medallion around his neck as proof of payment. 

One of the grievances that fueled the French Revolution of 1789 was the salt tax, also called the gabelle. 

The tax varied by region, and in some areas, residents also had to buy a minimum amount of salt. The result: lots of smuggling and unrest. In India, the British salt tax became a focus of Mahatma Gandhi's nonviolent protest against English rule.

Enacted in England in 1696 after the short-lived hearth tax on fireplaces, the window tax was based on the number of windows in a house. (That made assessments easier, since windows, unlike hearths, could be counted from the outside.) 

Many chose to block some of their windows to pay a lower fee. The tax was eventually repealed in 1851, on public health grounds.

Following similar laws in other states, Tennessee passed the "crack tax" in 2005, which mandated that drug dealers pay taxes anonymously on illegal substances. 

If a dealer was caught without proof of payment, the state collected taxes, with penalties. Around 3,000 people were eligible for refunds after the law was struck down in 2009; a revised law soon followed.

In Alabama, computer solitaire has one advantage: Anyone buying a deck of playing cards there must pay a 10-cent tax. (And retailers must obtain a "playing card privilege license.") 

Other states and cities have their own special charges. Maine has a blueberry tax, New York City taxes sliced (but not whole) bagels, and Minnesota has a fur clothing tax.