WASHINGTON—President Barack Obama, in his most pointed comments yet on the anti-government unrest sweeping Egypt, said he spoke with Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak this evening, telling him to refrain from violence. He said he urged the Egyptian leader to keep his promises for democratic reform and better economic opportunities for his country.

"What's needed right now are concrete steps that advance the rights of the Egyptian people," Mr. Obama said Friday evening from the State Dining Room in the White House. "This moment of volatility has to be turned into a moment of promise," he said.

Mr. Obama said he spoke with Mr. Mubarak after the Egyptian leader gave his own televised address, saying his government would be dismissed but indicating he would stay. He also pledged to continue on "the path of reform." A White House official said the call, from the Oval Office, lasted 30 minutes.

In his White House remarks, the president stopped short of calling for new elections in Egypt or other specific steps, instead urging calm. He called for Egypt to remove limitations on Internet access that the government had imposed during the upheaval, and in a nod to the youthful element of the protests said, "A new generation of citizens has the right to be heard." 

Earlier Friday, the Obama administration threatened to cut off its $1.5 billion in annual aid to Egypt if security forces in the world's largest Arab nation continue to use violence to crush the anti-government protests, White House press secretary Robert Gibbs said.

The threat capped a day when administration officials began toughening their tone toward the long-standing U.S. ally. The White House struggled to stay ahead of what Mr. Gibbs called "a fluid and dynamic situation," saying publicly the administration's position is clear and consistent, but privately acknowledging that officials are responding to unfolding events.

Mr. Gibbs said a review of aid to Egypt had begun. "We are watching very closely the actions of the government, of the police, of security forces and of all the military," he said.

His remarks came on the heels of similar comments Friday from Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, who said the "Egyptian government needs to engage immediately with the Egyptian people in implementing needed economic, political and social reforms." That came just two weeks after she gave a high-profile speech in Qatar chastising Arab regimes for their poor record of embracing political change.

Friday's stance from the administration was markedly more pointed than just one day earlier. Vice president Joseph Biden said in a television interview Thursday night that "Mubarak has been an ally of ours in a number of things…I would not refer to him as a dictator." Obama administration officials Friday avoided naming President Mubarak, referring always to the "Egyptian government." 

Asked if President Obama stood by the 81-year old Egyptian strongman, Mr. Gibbs said: "This is not about picking a person, or the people of a country." 

The U.S. tone, while shifting to acknowledge the fast-moving situation in Egypt, remained studiously cautious, suggesting they saw one last chance for Mr. Mubarak to address protesters' concerns, and also perhaps an acknowledgement that the alternatives to his rule were either uncertain, unknown or unpalatable.

Those words may not satisfy Egyptians rising up against decades of autocratic rule backed largely by the U.S., said Shadi Hamid, an expert of Arab politics and democracy promotion at the Brookings Institutions Doha Center in Qatar. Arabs perceive Mr. Obama as de-emphasizing democracy promotion after George W. Bush tried to make it a centerpiece of his second term, Mr. Hamid said.

Expressions of "concern" should be condemnation and outrage, Mr. Hamid said. "We are watching history, and Obama is on the wrong side of it."

White House officials bristled at such criticism, noting President Obama's comments on Middle East democracy starting with his speech to the Muslim world in Cairo less than six months into his term. On Thursday, during an interview on YouTube, the president spoke of "legitimate grievances" in Egypt and said "violence is not the answer."

White House officials say privately the administration has toughened its tone to keep up with unfolding events. Mr. Obama was briefed for 40 minutes Friday morning on the Egyptian situation. A second meeting of deputies in the government's security and diplomatic agencies was convened at 12:30 in the White House situation room to hear from the U.S. ambassador to Egypt, Margaret Scobey. The president was then briefed on that meeting, Mr. Gibbs said.

It is no longer clear the administration can shape events in Egypt, said Jon B. Alterman, director of the Middle East program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. The protests are not a response to any actions by this administration or the last one, said Mr. Alterman, who travels frequently to Egypt.

"The perception is the U.S. government is with the [Egyptian] government and against the street," he said. "I don't think there's anything the U.S. can say or do that would change that perception."

The U.S. has been trying to jumpstart a gradual democratic movement in Egypt for years, channeling tens of millions of dollars in State Department funds to non-governmental organizations inside and outside Egypt, but few groups have emerged that appear to have the kind of structure that could benefit from or lead the current protests.

U.S. democracy funding has for years been a source of tension with the Egyptian government. Gamal Mubarak, the president's son and presumed successor, told the U.S. ambassador in 2009 about warnings he had delivered six years earlier that such support could be counter-productive, according to diplomatic cables acquired by whistle-blowing site WikiLeaks and published by a Norwegian newspaper.

Friday, for the first time, the Muslim Brotherhood took part in street protests, sparking fears in some quarters that a largely secular protest against economic and political repression could assume religious overtones. Obama administration officials declined to speculate on the Muslim Brotherhood's role. Mr. Gibbs said the administration has not been in touch with the Muslim Brotherhood, an outlawed political group which advocates a hard-line, but non-violent, Islamic agenda.

Analysts said the administration will likely have to figure out how to accommodate a movement that is openly hostile to Israel, even if it is also a sworn enemy of violent groups like al Qaeda.

"If there is change in Egypt, then the Muslim Brotherhood will be part of it, so we must accept it as part of any representative government," said Bruce Riedel, a scholar at Brookings Institute who briefed the Obama administration on counter-terror policies. 

He said that the Muslim Brotherhood's more extreme tendencies—such as open support for Hamas, considered a terrorist group by the U.S.—would likely be tempered inside any future coalition government. "It will not be easy, especially on Israel, but the Muslim Brotherhood cannot be excluded from the process," he said.

Nobel Peace laureate Mohamed ElBaradei has sought to rally around him disparate opposition groups that fall outside the country's established opposition. He returned to the country Thursday. State department officials also mention Omar Suleiman, Mr. Mubarak's head of intelligence, as a possible leader, one who might act as a bridge until elections could be held. But the current roster of opposition figures might not accept him, in part because of his close ties to the Egyptian military.

Egypt has been a pillar of U.S. security policy in the Middle East since the Carter administration, especially for Arab-Israeli peace talks. Egypt has also been a staunch critic, as have many Arab countries, of Iran's goal of acquiring nuclear weapons. A friendly Egypt is important for U.S. access to the Suez Canal, which links the operating areas of two U.S. Navy fleets.

 Write to  Jonathan Weisman at jonathan.weisman@wsj.com and Keith Johnson at keith.johnson@wsj.com 