There's little question that  AT&T's
T


-1.12
%




 planned $39 billion buyout of T-Mobile looks to be a big win for both businesses. But its impact on consumers could be pricey and painful, according to a number of analysts and research groups.

Consumer groups contend that the combination would create a super-AT&T that would drive up prices as it closes off competitors and stifles innovation. Policy makers say they'll scrutinize the union and its impact on competitiveness.

Here's what to expect, if the deal goes through, according to consumer groups:

 1. Less competition, higher prices. AT&T customers aren't likely to see their data packages change much, but T-Mobile customers should brace themselves. "T-Mobile is often the leader in rates and the concern is, as it merges with AT&T, those plans will eventually revert to AT&T plans, which aren't as cheap," says  Paul Reynolds, electronics editor at Consumer Reports magazine.

That's not likely to happen until T-Mobile contracts expire. If you're worried about costs, either re-up your T-Mobile plan in the next few months or find another low-cost carrier.

 2. Service may suffer. AT&T ranked last in Consumer Reports' December survey of network plans. T-Mobile customers were mostly satisfied with the carrier. "Typically, the larger company absorbs the smaller one," says  Sascha Segan, lead analyst for mobile at PCMag.com. "Consumers will lose the great T-Mobile service."

 3. Innovation gets a hit. Smaller, more nimble companies tend to create better packages or offer a broader selection of handsets. "I'm worried that when AT&T eats up T-Mobile, that kind of small-company, underdog innovation inspiration is going to go away," Mr. Segan says.

AT&T CEO  Randall Stephenson said in a conference call that the aggressiveness for customers will continue.

 4. Improved coverage. Both networks use global system for mobile communications, or GSM, technology that will enable T-Mobile customers to get better broadband reach while allowing consumers in rural areas to have more choices.

—Jennifer Waters  MarketWatch.com 

Getting divorced after age 50 is plenty complicated, with rules and pitfalls that younger couples never have to consider. Here are some mistakes particularly common to the over-50 set:

 Ignoring taxes on retirement funds. Because money in 401(k)s and other pretax retirement accounts is taxed upon withdrawal, the real value of the account may be only about 65% of what the statement says.

This miscalculation can hurt, especially in community-property states like California, Texas, Arizona and Nevada, where divorcing couples often split assets evenly. Lawyers suggest negotiating for a larger portion of other shared savings to make the trade more equitable.

 Overvaluing alimony, undervaluing Social Security. Banking on monthly alimony payments from an ex-spouse gets riskier every year after 50, as the chance of death increases.

If the couple were married for at least 10 years, one ex-spouse is entitled to, at full retirement age, a spousal benefit that's 50% of an ex's Social Security benefit -- as long as the recipient remains unmarried. A person will want to see if that benefit is better than claiming benefits on his or her own earnings record.

 Forgetting the kids. Make a plan to ensure that the assets being passed along to the children are set up appropriately so they, rather than, say, your ex's future spouse or a kid's new spouse, get the money.

—Catey Hill  SmartMoney.com 

Earlier this month, after the Federal Reserve said some banks could once again increase dividend payouts, investors scrambled to buy shares of blue-chip financials. But when  Foot Locker
FL


-0.54
%




 announced in February it was raising its dividend, investors barely noticed.

Maybe they should have: Investing pros say midsize companies that pay dividends may be a better bet than the giants.

About 244 midsize companies -- those with a market value of $750 million to $3 billion -- pay dividends, compared with 384 dividend payers in the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index. But those that do so possess many of the same appealing traits as their larger counterparts -- strong cash flows, stable business models and less volatility than non-dividend-paying stocks, says  Mitch Schlesinger, the chief investment officer at FBB Capital Partners.

There's also added potential for faster growth, traditionally a reason investors like midcap stocks in general.

Mr. Schlesinger recommends investing only in midcaps with stable earnings and cash flow to support their dividend. He recommends clothing maker  VF Corp.
VFC


0.51
%




 (VFC), owner of the Nautica and North Face brands. It pays a 2.6% dividend and has an estimated 2011 earnings growth rate of 9.9%.

Don Wordell, who runs the dividend-oriented RidgeWorth Mid-Cap Value Equity Fund (SAMVX), likes  Ingersoll-Rand
IR


-0.43
%




 (IR), a heating and air-conditioning systems maker that has a 0.6% dividend and is expected to grow earnings 30% this year.

—Sarah Morgan  SmartMoney.com

—The Aggregator features news and commentary from The Wall Street Journal and other publications. Email: cristina.lourosa@wsj.com 