Earlier this week on the Wall Street Journal's website, I read with great interest the piece by James Gattuso of the Heritage Foundation entitled "Jobs, Regulations and Broken Windows."

As the administrator for the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), I understand that when OSHA considers a new regulation to protect workers' lives and limbs, many employers fear that compliance will cost too much.

I also understand that economists must always question the opportunity cost of spending money on a "broken window" (or regulation) versus spending the money on more productive pursuits.

As a scientist I look for evidence to get at the truth of things. And there is clear evidence that OSHA's common-sense regulations don't kill jobs; they stop jobs from killing workers. 

Better yet, our regulations don't just prevent worker injuries and illnesses; they also drive technological innovation, making industries more competitive.

Surprised? The most comprehensive study to date on the economic impact of OSHA regulation was conducted by Congress' Office of Technology Assessment. 

The study found that in almost all cases, "industries that were most affected achieved compliance straightforwardly, and largely avoided the destructive economic effects" that they feared most.

In addition, OSHA has reviewed the impact of several rules on small businesses. The conclusion: on the whole, OSHA regulations have protected workers without having detrimental effects on U.S. business. In general, production, revenue and profits have increased in the regulated industries, and small businesses continue to compete successfully. 

As OSHA administrator, I am committed to assuring that our agency's regulatory efforts are based on common sense and the real world experience of industry. We know that efforts to reduce risk often lead to innovation. New thinking and the latest in technology can be harnessed to create better, safer ways of doing what we have always done. 

But are employers just spending money to fix a "broken window?" The answer is clearly no. Just keeping workers alive and healthy benefits our society and our economy. Developing better ways to produce goods and services and improving productivity is an added bonus that everyone should welcome.



 Mr. Michaels is assistant secretary of labor for the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 