In a normal year, when NFL clubs can address their roster holes at will through free agency, it's a little easier to figure out which improvements a team needs to make via the draft.

But this offseason has been anything but normal. And because of the continuing labor dispute (we, too, are confused with all the back-and-forths about whether it's a "lockout"), the league-wide draft happened before free-agent negotiations were allowed to begin.

As a result, no one knows which players will ultimately re-sign with their respective teams, and in some cases, it was difficult to say what certain teams—like the Jets—had to do to address their needs.

Still, the team's draft appeared to spell out how the Jets will approach free agency, whenever it happens. 

In a sign that the Jets may push hard to re-sign their top two free-agent receivers, Santonio Holmes and Braylon Edwards, the two-time AFC runners-up used their first two picks to reinforce an aging defensive line.

The Jets used their first selection, the 30th overall, to take Temple defensive lineman Muhammad Wilkerson, a 6-4, 305-pound athlete who coaches hope will improve the team's pass rush. While it's unclear how much Wilkerson will play right away—Coach Rex Ryan seemed to be most excited about his potential—the pick undoubtedly addressed one of the club's needs.

The Jets, who didn't own a second-round pick (they used it last year to trade for cornerback Antonio Cromartie), then took another lineman in the third round. In selecting Hampton nose tackle Kenrick Ellis, the team got a load. That characterization pertains to both his size and his ability, but also his off-the-field problems.

Ellis, who goes 6-5, 345 pounds and runs a sub-5.2 40-yard dash, has often drawn favorable comparisons to three-time Pro Bowler Shaun Rogers at nose tackle. But for all the skill he possesses, there are still ample questions about Ellis and his character.

According to news accounts out of Virginia, Ellis broke a man's jaw and nose last year during an altercation, and potentially faces a July trial date on charges stemming from the incident. Also, before starring at Hampton, which he transferred into, Ellis was kicked off the team at South Carolina after repeatedly violating team rules.

Ellis acknowledged making mistakes, but said he couldn't address the pending legal matter. General manager Mike Tannenbaum said Ellis was upfront and honest about his situation, which made the team comfortable about taking him. Assuming he's not hindered by the legal matter, Ellis could be a huge boost for the team's line and be a perfect replacement for former nose tackle Kris Jenkins.

While the Jets' picks clarified some offseason questions—the team appears ready to re-sign at least some of its free-agent defensive backs since it took none in the draft—they also seemed to prompt a few more.

By taking two lower-tier wideouts later in the draft, was the team signaling preparing for life without Wildcat extrordinaire Brad Smith? TCU's Jeremy Kerley, taken in the fifth round, does many of the same things Smith—a free agent—does.

The team's fourth-round selection of Louisville running back Bilal Powell begs the question of whether the Jets will keep all their rushers. If not, could it spell the end of future Hall-of-Famer LaDainian Tomlinson's time in New York? Tannenbaum said the team saw an opportunity to add wealth to the already stocked position. But with Tomlinson, 32, having one year left on his deal, one can't help but wonder.

 Write to  Chris Herring at chris.herring@wsj.com 