SINGAPORE—With more countries detecting radioactive contamination in food imported from Japan, efforts to prevent it spreading through the global food chain have gained a new urgency.

On Friday, Taiwan and South Korea joined the list of countries that have banned the import of food produced in the provinces worst-hit by the crisis at the Fukushima nuclear plant. 

Taiwan was among the first to detect mild levels of radiation in a shipment of fava beans, but decided to ban imports only after radiation was also found in a batch of imported Japanese clams, tested Thursday. 

In South Korea, the prime minister's office said the import of food products from Fukushima, Ibaraki, Tochigi and Gunma prefectures in Japan have been banned with immediate effect. The ban mainly involves products such as spinach, parsley, broccoli and milk. 

The country's Food and Drug Administration will continue testing produce coming from Japan and will keep the public informed of its findings, the office said. 

Separately, Singapore said it found radioactive contamination in four samples of vegetables imported from Japan and has extended the ban to food from two more Japanese prefectures. 

Singapore's Agri-Food & Veterinary Authority said radioactive contamination was found in Mitsuba (Japanese wild parsley), Nanohana (rapeseed plant), Mizuna (Japanese mustard) and perilla leaf samples. 

The New Zealand Ministry of Forestry and Agriculture is also testing some Japanese food items for signs of nuclear contamination. 

South Korea on Monday expanded checks to include dried and processed foods imported from Japan. On Friday, Korea said it would ban imports of produce from radiation-affected areas with immediate effect. Thailand has expanded the scope of its tests and asked traders to avoid importing fruits and vegetables from Japan's Honshu island. 

Other countries that have imposed restrictions on food imports from Japan include Australia and the United States. 

While countries are stepping up efforts to stay vigilant, the potential for danger to human life through imported food is still considered limited as these are very mild levels of radiation. 

Singapore's AVA said in a statement that an adult will need to consume 3.5 kilograms of contaminated vegetables to receive a comparable level of radiation that is present in an X-ray. An adult individual will need to consume 184 kgs of contaminated vegetables to be exposed to as much radiation as a normal human being receives a year from direct sunlight and other normal sources. 

Moreover Japan is only a niche exporter of food and ships food products worth about $3 billion a year. 

Yet, fears of contaminated food may have an outsized impact on Japanese fresh-food exporters even though contamination risk is currently restricted to the prefectures of Fukushima, Ibaraki, Tochigi, Gunma, Chiba and Ehime. 

If the crisis continues, it could be bad news for apple and strawberry exporters of Japan's Aomori and Miyagi prefectures and seafood and milk products exporters in general. 

Despite efforts by authorities to reassure people that the potential for contamination remains limited for now, the nuclear crisis is having a psychological impact on patrons of Japanese cuisine in Asia. 

"We used to get a lot of our fish and ingredients from Japan. Now we're faced with a situation where people don't want to eat food from Japan," Howard Lo, a sushi bar owner in Singapore, said on his blog. 

He said sales at his restaurant have dropped by half since the tragedy struck, even though for those food items that aren't stockpiled, he has already turned to supply from non-Japanese sources.

 Write to  Sameer Mohindru at sameer.mohindru@dowjones.com 