Some professions are known for larger-than-life personalities—show business, politics, high tech. Supermarket checkout clerks aren't typically among them.

But in a job whose practitioners are often more famous for avoiding eye contact than brightening your day,  Linda Cummings, employed at the D'Agostino's on Lexington Avenue and 83rd Street, is a total customer satisfaction army of one. 

"Isn't she wonderful," said shopper  Anne Trattler, as Ms. Cummings bagged her order. "And I'm not easy to please.

"And she never makes mistakes," Ms. Trattler added under her breath.

My mission isn't to cast aspersions on the other capable employees at the supermarket. It's just rare to find someone in any profession, let alone one without performance bonuses, stock options and golden parachutes, whose good cheer isn't market-testing driven.

One may wonder what, in particular, makes Ms. Cummings a veritable hero to her finicky Upper East Side clientele. After all, there's only so many ways to scan a jar of Mott's Apple Sauce. It starts with her personality. She's never in a sullen mood. Or if she is, it never shows. "People tell me that," she said. "It's who I am. I just can't see being nasty. I can't walk around with that negative feeling inside me every day."

Ms. Cummings, 57 years old, has worked at this D'Agostino's, and only this D'Agostino's, since 1991. It's actually only a part-time job—four days a week from 4 p.m. to 9 p.m., or sometimes from 4:30 to 10:15. Her full-time job, often seven days a week, is working as a home health aide.

"Working is difficult," she said, drawing little distinction between her two jobs; on some days she works both. 

You wouldn't know that to see her in action. It would probably be an exaggeration to say she projects a joy for supermarket work; it's more unwavering competence combined with a perennially pleasant disposition. Any Type A personality customer who finds himself or herself on Ms. Cummings's checkout line will quickly appreciate her focus, as well as the absence of interruptions such as when a question between two clerks about the price of a head of lettuce can devolve into a five-minute conversation about their nails. In a city where finding fault is a blood sport, shoppers can ease into something resembling calm, never flagellating themselves for having picked the wrong line. 

"A lot of customers ask for her," said customer-service representative Marlisa Insixiengmay. "They say, 'No, I want to wait for Linda.'"

She walks with a slight limp—the result of arthritis, she said. Yet there's agility to the way she goes about her job; no wasted motion as she positions your potato chips or Ben & Jerry's Phish Food over the scanner just right so that it registers the item on the first try; she also knows the price of all produce. 

Ms. Cummings's skill isn't just my opinion: There's empirical data to support it. D'Agostino's keeps a record, on a sheet posted at the front of the store, that shows how many customers each clerk has handled over the course of his or her shift, and the number per hour. The supermarket also runs colored markers through the results of the best and worst performers—green for fast, pink for slow. Needless to say, Ms. Cummings often comes out on top, her name highlighted in green. A recent performance sheet showed her with 179 customers over the course of her shift, an average of 48 an hour, and 18.38 items scanned per minute.

By comparison, another employee clocked only 136 customers over the same period, an average of only 30 an hour.

Ms. Cummings, who is divorced, has a 31-year-old son and lives in the Bronx, where she grew up. She has worked at this D'Agostino's for so long she's gotten to know many of her customers. Though it may be more accurate to say they've gotten to know her—at least to the extent that anyone can get to know someone else over a transaction that usually takes no more than a minute or two to complete, where conversation occurs around the edges, and with the next customer breathing down your neck. 

However, Ms. Cummings does notice when regular customers fail to appear. "Some move away; some die," she stated matter-of-factly. 

She thought of an older woman who lived in the building where the supermarket is situated, though she said she was reluctant to ask the doorman what had become of her. "They're not supposed to give out information," she said. "She had a housekeeper. The housekeeper stopped coming to the store. I don't know what happened to her."

Ms. Cummings said the key to the job is creating a flow. She finds ways to keep that flow going even when business is slow, such as by combining paper and plastic bags for delivery orders. "I love it when it's busy," she said. "I don't think about standing. The busier the better."

— ralph.gardner@wsj.com 