Photographer Lewis Baltz found his subjects in warehouses, stucco walls and empty billboards. As a student in San Francisco between 1967 and the early '70s, he identified beauty, geometry and symmetry in the suburban landscapes of postwar industrial America.

Now these pictures are on view for the first time as a complete series in "Lewis Baltz: 'Prototypes / Ronde de Nuit,' " at the National Gallery of Art in Washington. They show how the onetime San Francisco Art Institute student became one of the key figures in the New Topographic movement of the late '70s. A key moment in conceptual landscape photography, the movement, which included Robert Adams, was defined by a stark, detached and stripped-down style.

"It was the most interesting time to have been a photographer," recalled Mr. Baltz in an email, "because for the first time in its history, photography was becoming self-aware. The world in my pictures was the world I saw each day." 

In addition to the 53 black-and-white photos shown in "Prototypes," the exhibit features "Ronde de Nuit," a 35-foot-long installation on the subject of surveillance, composed of 12 photographs printed on aluminum-mounted cibachrome panels. The piece is named after Rembrandt's 1642 painting "The Night Watch." 

To create the installation, originally shown in a darkened passageway of the Centre Georges Pompidou in Paris, Mr. Baltz gained access to a rural French police station. Melding surveillance footage with his own images of cables, computers and imaging machinery and toying with focus, Mr. Baltz forces his viewer to move both closer and further away. The piece dates from 1991-92. 

The exhibit includes nods to Mr. Baltz's artistic peer group, including pieces by Richard Serra, Sol LeWitt and Donald Judd who, like Mr. Baltz, focused on minimal conceptual art throughout the '70s. 

"I never met Sol LeWitt, and met Richard Serra only once," Mr. Baltz says, "but admired their works immensely. Yet for all of the amazing innovation in sculpture, performance, conceptual art, I never doubted that photography—if it would just wake up—could make its own unique contribution to the discourse."

 The show opened this week after a run at the Art Institute of Chicago, and will continue until July 31. 

—Katherine Clarke