There's a temptation to liken the novelist and screenwriter Rudy Wurlitzer to one of his great anti-protagonists, like the gearheads in the 1971 film "Two-Lane Blacktop," lost to white-line fever in the vast expanse of a country that doesn't seem to exist anymore. Or like Elmore Silk, the elusive, near-mythic guitar maker of "Candy Mountain," the 1988 film that the New York native wrote and co-directed with his friend, the artist Robert Frank. Like Silk (played by Harris Yulin) and his fabled instruments, Mr. Wurlitzer won regard for his distinct tone, then slipped far off the radar, often retreating to Cape Breton, Nova Scotia, "to look out at the big empty and have some silence return to my cracked head."

Now 73 years old, Mr. Wurlitzer will trek into Manhattan on Friday from his remote outpost—actually, he lives mostly in Hudson, N.Y, with his wife, the photographer Lynn Davis—for the start of a weeklong tribute to his work at Anthology Film Archives. The retrospective doesn't only feature Mr. Wurlitzer's celebrated collaborations with maverick directors like Monte Hellman ("Two-Lane Blacktop"), Sam Peckinpah ("Pat Garrett and Billy the Kid") and Alex Cox ("Walker") It's a bit of an extravaganza, as well. 

The opening evening will find Mr. Wurlitzer onstage, beneath projections of Ms. Davis's photographs, with songwriter and actor Will Oldham and musician Ben Chasny of the psychedelic-folk act Six Organs of Admittance. The group will read from the novelist's 1984 book "Slow Fade," which has been newly published as a five-CD audiobook (with Mr. Oldham reading) by the indie-rock label Drag City.

"Usually it's painful for a writer to go to a bookstore and read his own work," said the reclusive Mr. Wurlitzer, speaking by phone. "It doesn't have much juice. There's a few old ladies in the back who are there for other reasons. But Will [Oldham] charges in with two or three other people, including me, occasionally, and a guitarist if things get a little slow. It reminds me of the old days when I would do a happening with [sculptor] Claes Oldenburg."

New appreciation for Mr. Wurlitzer—named for his great-grandfather, who founded the Rudolph Wurlitzer music company in 1853—has been slowly gaining momentum. In 2008, the small San Diego-based publisher Two Dollar Radio released "The Drop Edge of Yonder," Mr. Wurlitzer's first book in 19 years, a Western based on the unproduced screenplay "Zebulon." Reprints of the long-lost novels "Flats" (1969), "Nog" (1969) and "Quake" (1974) followed, as new completist DVD editions of "Two-Lane Blacktop" and "Pat Garrett and Billy the Kid" made the rounds.

"It's kind of like reading my obit," said Mr. Wurlitzer of the backward glances at his efforts. "It's a little weird. I know I'm an old geezer but, hey, I'm still on this side of the grass. All of these things, they fly up and hit your windshield unexpectedly. When they first appeared, you can't say they were widely applauded. But now they seem to be more accessible in some ways. The chord they struck still resonates over time. We're in an intensely corporate culture now. so maybe there's a sense of what went before—a longing for something."

What also abides is Mr. Wurlitzer's versatility and his deep commitment to the craft. "Anyone who can write the Peckinpah movie and also the love scene in 'Coming Home' has got some range," said Robert Downey Sr., the writer and director ("Putney Swope," "Greaser's Palace") who will moderate a Q&A session at Anthology Film Archives with his old friend on Saturday. "Hal Ashby asked him to write that scene. It's a pretty tough scene. How do you write it? But Rudy pulled it off."

Mr. Wurlitzer confessed he wasn't much for war stories—"I have too many arrows in my back"—but mention of Mr. Peckinpah prompted an anecdote about a chance encounter with the old rogue, who died in 1984.

"The last time I saw him, I was driving from Albuquerque to Santa Fe and I passed a line of trucks on the side of the road and recognized a lot of people I knew from the film business," he said. "I pulled over and Sam was doing a film called 'Convoy.' So I walked into the trailer to see if I could find him, and he was in the back of a trailer getting a vitamin B-12 shot from a very pretty young girl. I said, 'Sam! How are you, man?' He looked up and me and took a pistol out from a pillow and said, 'Where the f— have you been?' And that's the last time I saw him."