Just for a moment, as they strolled out of the Brattle Theater, Harvard boys could feel they were Humphrey Bogart, squinting over cigarettes at a weary world, their faces alive with the tics of hangover and heartbreak. 

If they'd seen a Cary Grant movie, they'd have felt blithe and beguilingly innocent, but after watching Bogie they were scarred and savvy. They were tough guys with too much past and not enough future, sidewalk existentialists, gentleman gangsters out on the spree, damned from here to eternity. They were stoics who weren't good at being noble but knew that their problems didn't amount to a hill of beans in this crazy world . . . until they remembered their medieval French poetry exam the next day and their Bogart moment was over.

Something like that. 

It was April 1957, about three months after Bogart died of esophageal cancer in Los Angeles, and the Brattle had just started showing the 15-year-old "Casablanca." For years to come, the theater would keep playing Bogie films, and Harvard's manifold elites would buy tickets to savor the odd combination of honor, thuggery and grudging idealism that Bogart represented.

Perhaps they sensed, without knowing it, that he'd been raised as a member of the elite himself—a Manhattan townhouse boy, a surgeon's son who went to the best private schools and hated them all until Phillips Andover threw him out in 1918 and he joined the Navy. 

Freedom! From the point of view of Harvard boys and Radcliffe girls who went to see him, Bogart represented an escape from the confinement of elite obligations and codes. He was also authentic where elites were confectionary, tough where they were protected, manly where they were merely entitled. He was a grown-up Huck Finn, the savvy vagabond with a heart of gold, one who knows mankind is hopelessly corrupt but finds hope and glory where he can.

Stefan Kanfer's Bogart biography, the latest in a long line, is called "Tough Without a Gun: The Life and Extraordinary Afterlife of Humphrey Bogart." It's the afterlife that matters, and the best part of Mr. Kanfer's account is his analysis of Bogart's role as what cultural historians call a "modal personality" of his time—and what a long time it has been. 

The cult that started at Harvard spread to other campuses, other countries. Hipsters and philosophers quoted lines from "The Maltese Falcon," "The Big Sleep," "The Treasure of the Sierra Madre." As an image opposed to both the gray deceits of the Cold War and the consumerist orgies of postwar prosperity, Bogart took up residence in the Western world's psyche.

In December 1957, French writer Albert Camus won the Nobel Prize in literature. Herbert Lottman, in his biography of Camus, describes him as looking "dapper in his Bogart trench coat (looking very much a Bogart clone, and enjoying the notion when told so)." In French cinema, Jean-Paul Belmondo and Yves Montand would learn from Bogart's attitude and posture—the knowing cool, a casual rejection of the phonies that drove J.D. Salinger's Holden Caulfield crazy.

And women: is it possible that they loved him so much because he had no neurotic need of them? As Sam Spade in "The Maltese Falcon," Bogart spurns the love of Brigid O'Shaughnessy (Mary Astor) and sends her to prison for the murder of his partner, Miles Archer, saying: "Don't be silly. You're taking the fall." 

Spade had disliked Archer, had even cuckolded him, but he explains that "when a man's partner's killed, he's supposed to do something about it. It doesn't make any difference what you thought of him. He was your partner and you're supposed to do something about it." Duty, honor and business come before dames.

In 1964, Time magazine sent a reporter to the Brattle, and the cult was still growing (a new room had been added, named "The Blue Parrot" after Sydney Greenstreet's café in "Casablanca"). The reporter spoke to a Radcliffe student: "Bogie's direct and honest," she said. "He gets involved with his women but he doesn't have an identity crisis every five minutes."

How strange. She was speaking after a decade in which the new male idols had been making movies about identity crises: Marlon Brando, Montgomery Clift, James Dean. The feminist-approved male virtue had moved from sincerity to sensitivity, from scars to tears. Yet Bogie, who rarely (or maybe never) said as much as "I love you" or even "I hate you" to women on screen, endured.

Now we have fine leading men such as George Clooney and Brad Pitt but there's something generic about them, no wounds, no despising death in the manner of Bogie in "Casablanca" saying to Ingrid Bergman: "Go ahead and shoot – you'll be doing me a favor." In the '60s and '70s we had Steve McQueen, a man of tics and scars. Jack Nicholson got about half of Bogart but he had his own job being Jack Nicholson. And then . . . Tom Cruise? Leonardo DiCaprio? Matt Damon?

Except for Clint Eastwood, who may owe a debt to Bogart, the post-Bogart guys have so little personal identity that stage impressionists can't even imitate them, the way they once imitated Bogart, Cagney or Kirk Douglas. Still, as Mr. Kanfer notes, Bogart lives on in theme bars, movies ("Play It Again, Sam"), plays, academic papers, a comic book and even interior decoration—see the "Bogart Collection" from Thomasville Furniture.

Before getting to the afterlife, though, Mr. Kanfer does a dutiful chronicling of the much-chronicled life. A seasoned show-biz biographer, he has previously done Marlon Brando, Lucille Ball and Groucho Marx. Now, Bogart.

Born on Christmas day, 1899, Humphrey DeForest Bogart was the son of a doctor who would become a morphine addict and a distant mother who was one of New York's top magazine illustrators. He had two younger sisters, who would later struggle with alcohol and depression.

At Trinity School, in Manhattan, the headmaster said: "This endless flouting of authority. Why do you do these things?" After his ejection from Andover in 1918 he enlisted in the Navy, which recorded him at 5 feet 8 inches, 136 pounds, conveniently settling those annoying arguments about movie stars' heights. 

Honorably discharged and back in New York, Bogart drifted. A family friend who was a Broadway producer gave him an office job, and soon he had bit parts, often as a young gentleman with white pants and very few lines. Mr. Kanfer knocks down the story, however, that Bogart was the actor who actually said the fabled phrase: "Tennis, anyone?" For cash between parts, Bogart hustled chess games.

After the crash of 1929 dimmed a lot of lights on Broadway, he shuttled between Hollywood and New York, playing small parts in forgettable productions. Unlike most leading men in Hollywood, Bogart spent years playing a heavy. He couldn't sing, dance, fake an accent or do much in the way of comedy either. He was killed in 27 movies before he was offered a major romantic role. 

Then, on Broadway in 1934, he was cast as desperado Duke Mantee in Robert Sherwood's "The Petrified Forest." In the film version of 1936, he was called "brilliant" and "superb." Five years later, at 42, he made it big, playing the lead in "The Maltese Falcon." That same year, 1941, he triumphed as the complex and doomed gangster in "High Sierra."

The next year came "Casablanca." Two years later was "To Have and Have Not," where he met 19-year-old Lauren Bacall and broke a run of three bad marriages to ill-tempered actresses. The last of these, Mayo Methot, had been a drunk, a dish-smasher and a knife-wielder who Kenneth Tynan once said was "a dead shot with a highball glass across a crowded room." 

Bogart's own drinking would be constant and heavy, but he showed up at the set on time and knew his lines. He possessed a paramount virtue of that era—he could "hold his liquor," a virtue not recognized nowadays by breathalyzers.

By 1950 Bogart had done "The Big Sleep," "The Treasure of the Sierra Madre" and "Key Largo," among a lot of lesser-noted vehicles. He got in trouble with the House Un-American Activities Committee for defending friends—whom he then rejected, he said, for having neglected to tell him they were, in fact, reds. 

 Bogart worried he could slide back into oblivion—a favorite movie, one that always made him cry, was the original "A Star Is Born," in which a matinee idol played by Fredric March collapses into drunken failure. These worries persisted even while he was making "The African Queen," "Beat the Devil" and "The Caine Mutiny," winding up in 1956 with "The Harder They Fall."

 By Stefan Kanfer  Knopf, 288 pages, $26.95

In March of that year surgeons took nine hours to remove his cancerous esophagus. Hollywood gossips got ready for a funeral. They were right, but first Bogart got tired of reading about his imminent death. He kept drinking. He smoked his Chesterfields. He issued a statement: "I have read that I couldn't live another half hour . . . that my heart has stopped and been replaced by an old gasoline pump from a defunct Standard Oil station."

He died on Jan. 14, 1957. On April 19 the Brattle Theater put up "Casablanca." The legend was fully rehearsed, ready to go on. Even Bogart had bought into it. Dave Chasen, of Chasen's restaurant in Beverly Hills, once said that "Bogart's a hell of a nice guy until around 11:30 p.m. After that, he thinks he's Bogart." 

Of course, many other public figures of the era also seemed to share that delusion. Mr. Kanfer avoids naming Bogart's many imitators, but I can recall that even before his death Bogart's spirit glimmered in Edward R. Murrow (the trench coat, the cigarette); in Jack Kennedy (Irish toughness, Harvard wit); in old white-shoe veterans of lonely World War II parachute drops with the OSS; in the writer Lillian Hellman, until she was revealed as a sanctimonious liar not long before her death. He would at times seem to inhabit droll economist John Kenneth Galbraith, Daniel Patrick Moynihan (who could go either Harvard or Hell's Kitchen on you) and a whole generation of tough liberals—slammers of phones, rollers-up of shirt sleeves, smokers of small, good cigars, vacationers at the tough/chic Oloffson Hotel in Haiti.

Here's looking at you, kids.

Mr. Kanfer concludes: "From time to time columnists dub some young actor the new Clark Gable, the new Jimmy Stewart, the new Marlon Brando. No one claims to have discovered the new Humphrey Bogart." In Hollywood, as in political and intellectual circles, the cult of authenticity was destroyed by postmodernism; Bogart's kind of drinking and smoking went out of fashion, and neurotic victims and losers began to be foisted on us as protagonists by gossip magazines and television.

Still, the old Bogart persists, like Hamlet's ghost, beneath the politically correct battlements of America and its whining, psychotherapeutic opportunism and puritanism. I'd like to think that, in the manner of the ghost, his best side still drives American psyches. As Dooley Wilson sings in "Casablanca," "The fundamental things apply, as time goes by." 

—Mr. Allen, a former writer and editor for the Washington Post, won the Pulitzer Prize for criticism in 2000.