FRANKFURT—The euro zone's current-account deficit in Nov. 2010 was close to a two-year high as the deficit in goods widened, data from the European Central Bank showed Wednesday. 

The current-account deficit widened to €11.2 billion ($14.99 billion) in November from a revised deficit of €9.6 billion in October. That is the largest shortfall since the €11.6 billion deficit in December 2008. The data are adjusted for seasonal effects and take account of the number of working days in each month. 

The ECB said that deficits in goods, current transfers and income were only partly offset by a surplus in services. The deficit in the trade of goods widened to €4 billion in November from a €2.4 billion shortfall the previous month, while the surplus in services increased to €3.5 billion from €1.6 billion. 

"The current-account balance will weaken further in the coming months," said  Zach Witton, an economist at Moody's Analytics in London. "Economic growth will moderate towards the middle of the year, and there is a high risk that the recovery will stall, as major fiscal consolidation throughout the euro zone weighs on demand." 

Weaker activity across the region will damp demand for exports, Mr. Witton said, adding that "the current account balance, however, will get some support as weaker domestic demand weighs on imports." 

In the euro zone's nonseasonally adjusted financial account, combined direct and portfolio investment showed net inflows of roughly €38 billion in November. 

Investors withdrew a net €13.1 billion from the currency area's equity markets in November, but increased their holdings of debt instruments by a net €26.2 billion. 

"The net inflows in debt instruments resulted both from net purchases of euro-area securities by nonresidents and from net sales of foreign securities by euro-area residents," the ECB said. Separately, the ECB published data on the euro zone's international investment position at the end of the third quarter of 2010. 

It said that gross external debt of the euro zone amounted to €11 trillion, or about 121% of the region's gross domestic product. That means that investors outside the euro zone, including governments and private funds, hold €11.0 trillion in euro-zone debt instruments. 

At the end of the third quarter, the international investment position of the euro zone recorded net liabilities of €1.2 trillion with the rest of the world, which equals roughly 13% of euro-zone GDP, the ECB said. 

 Write to  Nina Koeppen at nina.koeppen@dowjones.com 