HAMMAMET, Tunisia—The palatial seaside homes in this resort city owned by relatives of former Tunisian President Zine al-Abedine Ben Ali were targets Friday of the pent-up rage felt by many citizens after 23 years of repressive rule. 

On a sunny Sunday morning, the charred remains of one such residence—its windows broken and facade disheveled—had become a symbol of Mr. Ali's changing legacy in this North African country.

More than 400 people poured through the opulent grounds of the residence owned by Mr. Ben Ali's nephew, Soufian, that until Thursday had been gated and guarded by security police.

The 10-foot walls surrounding the property are now defaced with graffiti reading: "This property is now a national museum for the Tunisian people."

"We came to see what became of our national wealth," says Wafa Izzidine, a middle-aged woman who brought her daughter to stroll through the two-story mansion. "We wanted to know what became of it."

Other parts of the country were still tense after a weekend of political unrest. Since Friday, a state of emergency has been in effect throughout the country. Security services and the army have been called into major municipalities to secure the peace, but looting became one of the biggest worries for regular Tunisians.

The former Ben Ali weekend home stands out on a street of expensive residences, with its clean lines and minimalist flair. The villa's lush grounds planted with tropical plants and a sweeping green lawn gives way on the back of the house to blue mosaic-tiled infinity pool overlooking the crescent-shaped Mediterranean bay.

Inside, the white walls were charred with burn marks, stretching up to the open-plan, second floor ceilings. The Carrera marble floors were littered with broken glass. The living room had been stripped of all furnishings, including chandeliers and electric switches on the walls.

Furniture, even toilet fixtures, had been whisked out by local residents on Friday, neighbors said.

The property hadn't always been so exclusive. Bashir Ghabsi, 72 years old, says that for generations, the seaside plot had been part of his family's land holdings. Years ago, they grew oranges and garden vegetables, he said. In the 1980s, the patch had become a soccer field for the neighborhood children.

Three years ago, however, security police erected a fence across the property and told the family they no longer could have access to the land. "They told us it had been expropriated for government use. The next thing we knew, the construction workers started building and the president's family started throwing parties here," Mr. Ghabsi said.

Across the resort town, multiple relatives of Mr. Ben Ali became owners of waterfront property in mysterious circumstances, according to neighbors. Riad Murad, whose family, like the Ghabsis, have lived in Hammamet for generations, said that in 1996 he received notification that the government needed two of his waterfront properties for official business. Two of Mr. Ben Ali's relatives later moved into the homes there.

"Can you imagine losing your family inheritance or a nest egg worth $3 million overnight? That's what happened here," said Mr. Murad, who arrived with three friends at the former Ben Ali home.

Other residences owned by the former president's family located across Hammamet's bay haven't been touched by looters. Residents say it's because their anger against the regime has turned to jubilation that the president is now gone. At the town's Nov. 7 Square, named after the day that Mr. Ben Ali took office in 1987, a group of men took a sledge hammer to the marble plaque, demolishing it to bits of dust.

"He's gone, he's gone," the group chanted, breaking into applause.

At the seaside villa, several Ghabsi relatives were among the throngs of onlookers strolling the grounds and plucking souvenirs from the stripped interior of the house.

Mr. Ghabsi said he was hopeful that the new caretaker government would pass laws offering landowners compensation for the former government's expropriations. "That would be right. That would be just," he said.

 Write to  Margaret Coker at margaret.coker@wsj.com 