Blogress Ann Althouse, a university of Wisconsin law professor, is half of the husband-and-wife team that has done a better job than any journalist of reporting on the skirmish in Wisconsin over government union privileges. Yesterday she posted a link to a bizarre threat against her and hubby Laurence Meade that was posted on Scirbd.com:

It goes on at much greater length, but that gives a taste. It's threatening, eliminationist and unhinged, and it includes what appears to be Althouse and Meade's home address.

BigGovernment.com's Dan Riehl managed to snag an "exclusive interview" with the author, Jim Shankman, who sounds (and looks--the photo is quite something!) considerably less threatening than his rant:

So he's a passive-aggressive twerp, an uncredentialed Brian Leiter. 

To judge by his Facebook profile, he is a sort of Big Labor groupie: a "volunteer" for both the AFL-CIO and WEAC, the Wisconsin teachers union, along with Ian's Pizza, a Madison parlor that cashed in on the controversy by delivering pies to protesters and thugs at the Capitol, paid for by "supporters from all 50 states--as well as Bosnia, China, Egypt, France and 20 other countries," according to the New York Times. (Incidentally, do labor unions really use "volunteers"? That seems a bit exploitive and hypocritical.)

Althouse herself does not seem to feel threatened, and she notes that Shankman has hurt himself more than her. "I really do feel sorry for these young people who screw up their internet reputation," she wrote this morning:

But this is far from the only threat to come from government unions and their supporters in recent weeks. The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reports that "the office of Sen. Dan Kapanke (R-La Crosse) said the senator has been subjected to damage of personal property and has received threatening statements in the wake of mass protests in recent weeks over Gov. Scott Walker's budget-repair bill."

 Vickie McKenna, a Wisconsin talk-show hostess, posts on her Facebook page a threatening letter to a man named Randy, apparently a private citizen who supports Gov. Walker:

The writer of the note claims to have a criminal record and certainly seems more menacing than Shankman. BigGovernment.com has a compilation of "20 days worth of the death threats, vandalism, and intimidation practiced by pro-union thugs" in Wisconsin.

"Why isn't the mainstream media talking about the death threats against Republican politicians in Wisconsin?" asks Lee Stranahan, a self-described "pro-choice, pro-single payer, anti-war, pro-gay rights independent liberal" who has also worked with conservative publisher and provocateur Andrew Breitbart.

Indeed, it was less than three months ago that the attempted murder of Rep. Gabrielle Giffords prompted the New York Times and others to lecture the country about the dangers of "incivility" on the right--even after it was known that the suspect had no recognizable ideological motivation. To quote the infamous Times editorial:

Here is the concluding line from another Times editorial, published one month ago today, denouncing Gov. Walker for proposing to curtail government union privileges:

"Push back hard" is not literally a call for violence, but it's not much of a stretch to say that Jim Shankman and the others were following the Times's exhortation. Not only does the Times act with disregard for the truth, it does not even follow the standard of civility it falsely accuses conservative media figures of violating.

 Off, Wisconsin!  It's not over yet in Wisconsin. Although the Legislature a week ago enacted a ban on so-called collective bargaining by government unions, the new law is not effective until it is "published" in the Wisconsin Statutes and Annotations. That is the job of the secretary of state, and the man who has held that office since 1983, Doug La Follette, is a Democrat.

On Monday the Associated Press reported that "La Follette said Monday he decided to delay publication of the law until the latest day possible, March 25, to give those local governments as much time as possible to reach agreements" locking in generous contract terms. That is, he is using his discretion to benefit a favored Democratic constituency at the expense of taxpayers--an action that is completely legal but far from public-spirited.

La Follette's dilatory move made another one possible. This morning, as the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reports, the delightfully named Judge Maryann Sumi issued an injunction ordering La Follette not to publish the law until she rules on a legal challenge. Madison's Wisconsin State Journal reported earlier in the week that Sumi will be on vacation all next week, so that unless a higher court throws out her restraining order, the earliest the law can be published is March 28.

The basis of the legal challenge, the Journal Sentinel reports, is procedural. The district attorney of Dane County, which includes Madison, alleges that "a legislative committee violated the state's open meetings law in passing the measure." Sumi agreed, at least tentatively: "It seems to me the public policy behind effective enforcement of the open meeting law is so strong that it does outweigh the interest, at least at this time, which may exist in favor of sustaining the validity of the [law]."

"The open meetings law requires 24 hours' public notice of meetings, or two hours in emergencies," the Journal Sentinel reports. Dane County argues that there was no emergency and that lawmakers didn't give two hours' notice anyway.

The state plans to appeal, but lawmakers could also cut the process short: "Sumi said that, if the Legislature wanted to come back to re-enact the bill, they would have the right to do that." That would give her one less thing to worry about when she returns from spring break.

  Who Is Gohn Jalt?   The strike against the Puffington Host is expanding "with a call to arms released by the national Newspaper Guild," the Daily Caller reports:

Has anyone noticed a drop-off in either the quality or quantity of Puffington Host material? Seems to us the former is so low and the latter so enormous that it would take a lot to make a dent. It's just like the strike in "Atlas Shrugged," only no one cares who John Galt is because the only thing he ever produces is words.

Come to think of it, even Ayn Rand's biggest fans will admit that the Galt speech toward the end of the book is way too long. He must've been paid overtime to deliver it.

  America Has a Leader, and Her Name Isn't Obama   Politico reports that Secretary of State Hillary Clinton waged a "fierce internal battle to push President Barack Obama to join the fight to liberate Libya from Muammar Qadhafi." Yesterday she succeeded:

The Washington Post reports that "the Libyan government declared an immediate cease-fire Friday in a bid to head off Western military intervention." The U.S., Britain and France, all of which supported the resolution (five Security Council members, including Russia, Germany and Red China, abstained), "reacted cautiously to the declaration, saying they will judge Gaddafi by his actions."

It does seem that Gadhafi, as we at The Wall Street Journal spell it, is more pliant than,say, Saddam Hussein was, in the face of a credible threat of force. Too bad the threat didn't come a couple of weeks ago, before he recaptured most of the country.

 How's That Hopey-Changey Stuff Workin' Out for Ya? 

 Metaphor Alert 

  Honest, We Just Read It for the Photos   "Helen Thomas Is Playboy's April Interview"--headline, Playboy press release, March 17

  The Man Who Knew Too Much   "Hideo Chiba firmly believes that hard work can be uplifting. So the 70-year-old baker has busied himself with a smile, cleaning up his house and shop ravaged by the killer tsunami. 'Whatever will be will be,' Chiba says with cheerful confidence."--Agence France-Presse, March 17

 Life Imitates the Onion--I 

 Life Imitates the Onion--II 

 Life Imitates the Movies 

  God Save Our Gracious--Oh, Look! A Squirrel!   "Prince Charles: We Must Save the Squirrel"--headline, Daily Telegraph (London), March 18

  People in Glass Houses . . .   "Crystal Cathedral Sex Covenant Stirs Controversy"--headline, Los Angeles Times, March 17

  That's Because It Distracts Their Classmates   "Breastfed Children Do Better in School, Study Suggests"--headline, University of Oxford press release, March 17

  They're All Cheeseheads Now   "NFL Owners Try Wedge"--headline, The Wall Street Journal, March 18

  100%, the Lowest It's Ever Been   "U.S. Death Rate Hits Record Low"--headline, WebMD.com, March 16

  Except for Really Young Ones   "Age Affects All Primates"--headline, TerraDaily.com, March 14

 Hey, Kids! What Time Is it? 

  Questions Nobody Is Asking   "Is panelization the future of residential construction?"--subheadline, Residential Architect Magazine, March 17

  Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking   "Why We Hate Duke"--headline, CNN.com, March 18

  Latvia Accompanying Estonian Hires Through Finnish Doctoring--Now That Would Be News   "Finland Hiring Latvian Doctors Through Estonian Company"--headline, Estonian Public Broadcasting website, March 15

  Too Much Information   "Hannity and Bachmann Crush Weiner: 'Put Your Pants On!' "--headline, FoxNews.com, March 17

  Breaking News From Exodus 17:8   " 'Biblical Exodus' From Africa Feeds Anti-Immigrant Rhetoric"--headline, Bloomberg, March 16

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  Thinking to Excess   Frank Bruni of the New York Times, formerly the paper's top restaurant critic, describes a typical day at the office:

This must be a function of corporate culture more than geography. Our office is also in the greater Times Square area, and when we want a drink, we get one. From time to time, it is true, we sit around staring blankly, but only after we've already downed a few. 

Really, Bruni ought to work for a think tank for all the time he spends thinking about getting tanked.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to John Bobek, Joe Perez, Steven Platzer, Michele Schiesser, Steve Prestegard, Hillel Markowitz, James Foster, Dan O'Shea, Ed Thompson, George Lenz, T. Young, Ed Lasky, David Gerstman, David Hallstrom, Kyle Kyllan, Edward Himmelfarb, Robert Godwin, Brian Pleshek, Dov Fischer, Frank Free, Marty Stephens, Stuart Sullivan, Ethel Fenig, Bruce Goldman, Leonard Peirce, Daniel Foty, John Sanders, Patrick Lamasney and Jillian Melchior. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)