LONDON—Stocks in Spain and Greece surged 5%, leading a European market rally, as a successful Portuguese bond auction allayed near-term fears about the spread of the euro-zone debt crisis. 

A top European official said the region's bailout fund should be strengthened, further boosting sentiment. 

The Stoxx Europe 600 Index rose 1.4% to end at 285.79, hitting its highest level since September 2008. 

Spanish, Greek and Italian stocks posted particularly strong gains after Portugal successfully sold €1.25 billion ($1.62 billion) of government bonds. The auction was seen as a test of investor sentiment. 

"It's one of those days where there's been a wave of euphoria passing through the market," said  Justin Urquhart Stewart, co-founder of Seven Investment Management. 

The financial sector rallied across the Continent. 

In Athens, the ASE Composite stock index soared 5%.  National Bank of Greece rose nearly 8%. 

In Madrid, the IBEX 35 index surged 5.4% to 10101.20, driven by financials.  Banco Santander and rival  Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria each soared 10%. 

Italy's FTSE MIB index rose 3.8% to 21116.30. Banking giant  UniCredit rallied 9.7% and  Intesa Sanpaolo soared more than 10%. 

Analysts said the aggressive buying of Portuguese debt by the European Central Bank, as well as recent comments from Japan and China on making purchases of European debt, all contributed to Wednesday's gains. 

The stock rally also came after Olli Rehn, the European commissioner for economic and monetary affairs, said the lending capacity of the European Financial Stability Facility should be "reinforced" and the scope of its activity widened. 

The Wall Street Journal reported Tuesday that European governments are debating a proposal to significantly increase the bailout fund. 

Despite Wednesday's rally, analysts expressed caution.  Oliver Gilvarry, head of research at Dolmen Stockbrokers, said the underlying problems for indebted euro-zone nations remain. 

"Portugal is paying 4% on its two-year debt when underlying growth this year is likely to be negative. That's unsustainable," Mr. Gilvarry said. 

Seven's Mr. Urquhart Stewart was also cautious, saying that tying 17 different economies to one central-bank policy is still the core problem. 

In Portugal, the PSI 20 index rose 2.6%, helped by a 3.3% gain for retailer  Jeronimo Martins SGPS, which reported a 19% increase in annual sales.  Banco Espirito Santo rallied 5.8%. 

Another strong performer was aerospace group  EADS. Its shares rose 2.1% in Paris after its Airbus unit announced a record-breaking order for 180 aircraft from Indian budget carrier IndiGo. The order was worth $15.6 billion at list prices. 

The gain helped lift the French CAC 40 index, which ended up 2.2% at 3945.07. 

In Germany, the DAX 30 index gained 1.8% to 7068.78, led higher by a 4.3% rise for  Deutsche Bank. Rival  Commerzbank gained 5.3%. 

The U.K.'s FTSE 100 index closed up 0.6% at 6050.72.  HSBC Holdings rose 3.8%. 

Analysts at J.P. Morgan Cazenove said they now prefer European investment banks to their U.S. counterparts, in part because of a tougher-than-expected implementation of the Volcker Rule as part of Washington's push to place restrictions on speculative trading. 

Also in the financial sector,  Henderson Group jumped 9.3% after the U.K. fund manager agreed to buy smaller rival  Gartmore Group Ltd. in an all-stock deal. Gartmore's shares rallied nearly 14%. 

Among the decliners,  Lafarge dropped 1.3% in Paris after the cement maker was downgraded to neutral from outperform at Credit Suisse. 

Supermarket chain  J Sainsbury dropped 2.2% in London after a trading update. 

Analysts at Seymour Pierce said the figures appeared to confirm that Sainsbury achieved the fastest growth of the major food retailers. However, the broker stuck to its sell rating, saying the growth is already reflected in what it called the company's premium valuation. 

 Write to  Simon Kennedy at simon.kennedy@dowjones.com 