 U.S. President Barack Obama has decided not to release photographs of Osama bin Laden taken after the al Qaeda leader was shot dead by U.S. forces, the White House said. 

Obama consulted with his defense and national security team and determined that releasing the photos would create a national security risk, said White House spokesman Jay Carney. 

Officials have worried that releasing the photos would be inflammatory and could produce a backlash that would outweigh any benefits of providing evidence of bin Laden's death.

 The minute U.S. troops reached bin Laden's compound in Pakistan, they set in motion not just the takedown of the world's most-wanted terrorist, but also the largest potential intelligence coup of the post-9/11 era. 

The intelligence find is a jolt to bin Laden's network that could force its terror operatives to move into areas or initiate communications that make them more easily detectable.

 The Pakistani town where bin Laden was killed had come to the notice of Pakistani intelligence as a suspected hiding place for al Qaeda leaders as long ago as 2003, a piece of information Pakistani officials say they passed to their American counterparts.  



 Dissident Republicans in Northern Ireland are trying to emerge from the shadows by raising money in the U.S., people familiar with the matter say.  

These people say the groups have held dinners in New York, Boston, Chicago and other cities to raise money for small dissident groups—which go by names like the Real IRA, Continuity IRA and Oglaigh na hEireann and are explicitly banned from raising money in the U.S.



 The €78 billion ($115.7 billion) bailout package for Portugal imposes new austerity measures on the debt-burdened country but offers gentler terms than earlier financial rescues for Greece and Ireland. 

The three-year deal with the European Union and the International Monetary Fund is likely to carry an interest rate of between 4.3% and 4.7%—about half of what private markets would have charged Portugal for long-term borrowing.

On the back of the deal, Portugal successfully sold €1.117 billion in three-month Treasury bills, albeit at high interest rates. 



 Divisions in the euro zone are deepening over how to handle Greece's suffocating debt burden, with German officials open to a voluntary restructuring of Greek bonds but a majority of euro-zone policy makers fearful of the consequences. 



 The European Union opened the door to allowing countries to reintroduce national border controls in order to police illegal immigration, in response to growing fears about whether it can handle an influx of North African migrants.  

Bringing back border checks would be allowed only under exceptional circumstances, but the measure would nonetheless be a step toward reversing unhindered travel across most of the bloc's internal borders, one of the EU's signature achievements.



Growth in the euro zone's private sector strengthened in April as French output growth surged to a 10-and-a-half-year high, but prices charged rose at the fastest rate since mid-2008, a survey showed.

Meanwhile, retail sales in the euro zone fell sharply in March, underscoring the weakness in consumer demand even before the European Central Bank began raising its key interest rate.



European Union agricultural exports jumped 21% in value to a record €91 billion ($135 billion) in 2010, data published by the EU's executive arm showed, making the bloc a net exporter for the first time in four years. 



Bank of England rate-setters began a two-day policy meeting as poor lending data, falling house prices and a slowdown in construction activity underscore the weakness of the U.K.'s economic recovery. 



British police say they have released without charge five men arrested Monday under terrorism laws near a nuclear plant in northwest England. Police had also searched four addresses in East London. 



A Russian court has ordered the arrest in absentia of an investment executive who was a colleague of lawyer Sergei Magnitsky, who died from neglect in prison amid a controversial tax-evasion case. The arrest order for Ivan Cherkasov, now living in Britain, adds new complications to a long-running case highlighting Russian corruption. 



Private-sector payrolls in April advanced below expectations, according to a report published by payroll giant Automatic Data Processing and consultancy Macroeconomic Advisers, another sign of only gradual improvement in the U.S. labor markets. 



The White House told Congress it is ready to begin talks on passage of trade agreements with South Korea, Colombia and Panama, after Colombia complied with the first stage of an action plan to improve labor rights. 



 Jurors were ordered to begin their deliberations from scratch in the federal insider-trading trial of Galleon founder Raj Rajaratnam after a juror was dismissed for "medical reasons."  



The trustee recovering money for Bernard Madoff's victims moved for the first time to distribute money he's collected in his investigation of the multi-billion dollar Ponzi scheme. 



U.S. Commerce Secretary Gary Locke—picked to be the next ambassador to China—warned the Asian nation is backtracking on promises to make its economy more friendly to foreign companies, citing recent proposals to review and restrict investments. 



 China announced a potentially powerful new agency to supervise the Internet, underscoring the evolving regulatory environment in the country just as interest in Chinese Web companies is soaring among global investors.  



North Korea confirmed it has detained two Japanese men since March and would charge them with drug-trafficking violations, creating another diplomatic problem with a country it regularly criticizes. 



 World Bank President Robert Zoellick raised the prospect of providing more aid to Tunisia's economy as it recovers from the destabilizing effects of its own revolution and the turmoil in neighboring Libya. 



 Syria's widespread and deadly crackdown on anti-regime protesters has emboldened a new set of voices, including students in Syria's two largest cities who are protesting the crackdown itself. 

As many as 8,000 Syrians are now missing, according to Insan, a Europe-based human-rights and pro-democracy group that focuses on the Middle East. 



The Arab Spring appears to be changing the political landscape in the Palestinian territories, triggering the signature of a high-profile re-unification deal between the two main Palestinian factions and creating tough choices for Israel. 



 The U.S. and its allies are discussing the creation of a fund to finance the operations of Libyan forces opposing the regime of Col. Moammar Gadhafi, according to people familiar with the matter. 

The potential €3 billion ($4.5 billion) fund would be guaranteed by assets of the Gadhafi regime that were frozen in the wake of the dictator's violent crackdown on protesters this year, these people said. 

Libya's Benghazi-based opposition group, the National Transitional Council, would be able to draw on the fund, these people added. 

In the rebel-held port of Misrata, a rescue vessel evacuated about 700 migrants, 50 wounded Libyans and 20 journalists amid heavy shelling by Gadhafi's forces.

Four people in a camp for migrant workers and their families were killed in the shelling, the Associated Press reported.

 The International Criminal Court's chief prosecutor told the U.N. Security Council he is seeking arrest warrants against three members of Gadhafi's regime on suspicion of committing crimes against humanity in Libya. 



An Algerian court sentenced the former head of state oil giant Sonatrach to jail in a corruption case that rocked the key crude and natural-gas exporter.