German Chancellor Angela Merkel endorsed Mario Draghi for the presidency of the European Central Bank, likely handing stewardship of one of the world's most powerful financial institutions to an Italian central banker who is expected to pair flexibility in dealing with Europe's debt crisis with a tough anti-inflation stance.

Mr. Draghi's appointment would place the continent's monetary policy in the hands of an official from one of Europe's weaker economies, which has one of the biggest public debts in the euro zone. Italy's past bouts of high inflation had at first been considered a handicap for the Italian central banker's chances at the top ECB spot.

Mr. Draghi, a 63-year-old economics professor, former World Bank official and Goldman Sachs executive, got France's backing last month to succeed Frenchman Jean-Claude Trichet, who steps down in October. Italy's government late on Wednesday officially submitted his name as a candidate for the job. Though the 17 nations that share the euro currency have until the end of the next month to make the appointment and other countries may present their own candidates, Mr. Draghi is now considered a shoo-in. 

His ascendancy comes as Europe enters a newly dramatic phase in its two-year debt crisis. There are growing concerns that Greece, which just a year ago received a €110 billion ($158.5 billion) bailout from its euro-zone partners, is incapable of stabilizing its finances, as it has promised. Across Europe's southern rim, countries are bracing for tough cutbacks to public-sector jobs and welfare privileges. 

There is no sign, however, that the politically savvy Italian economist will soften the bank's anti-inflation stance to help the euro-zone's economic stragglers. Despite wide disparities among strong and weak economies in the euro bloc, the ECB has a single charge: to keep average inflation just under 2% over the medium term. Inflation is currently 2.8%, meaning the ECB must balance the serious problems in Greece, Ireland and Portugal with its mandate to keep inflation from taking root.

Economists believe Mr. Draghi is likely to cement his reputation early on by taking a tough line on both inflation and interest rates, almost certainly continuing the rate-hike cycle started last month under Mr. Trichet.

"He would probably be bending over backwards to disabuse concerns that he might be leaning too much to the dovish side on things," said Peter Hooper, the New York-based chief economist of Deutsche Bank Securities. "My sense is that he would follow pretty closely in the mold of Trichet in terms of not wanting to do anything to squander the ECB's credibility in dealing with inflation risks."

According to colleagues on the ECB's board, Mr. Draghi last month forcefully advocated the ECB's first interest-rate increase in nearly three years, even though Italy's economy could be the most negatively affected by higher interest rates. Similarly, during the ECB's last tightening monetary cycle, which occurred mostly in 2006 and 2007, Mr. Draghi was in the minority faction pressing for more aggressive rate increases, several colleagues say.

Kenneth Rogoff, a Harvard University professor and former chief economist at the International Monetary Fund, says the biggest problem for the next ECB president will be dealing with fiscal problems in the euro-zone's peripheral countries. 

For example, the ECB has already taken large amounts of debt from countries such as Ireland, Greece and Portugal as collateral for short-term loans to banks. As the fiscal crisis worsens, Mr. Rogoff says, the central bank could face political pressure to do more, perhaps by printing money to buy large additional amounts of debt outright. That could threaten its reputation and its independence.

"The big question really is: How is he going to balance maintaining the ECB's independence with dealing with the ongoing financial meltdown in the periphery," Mr. Rogoff said. "The ECB is coming to a crossroads. It is going to be getting more and more difficult to avoid getting gamed into being a fiscal solution to the problem, essentially absorbing a big chunk of the debt."

Despite his anti-inflation credentials, Mr. Draghi is seen, even within Germany, as someone who isn't an ideologue and will embrace extraordinary measures if necessary. German officials believe he has shown the necessary flexibility in the past, in particular by endorsing the central bank's decision last year to stabilize markets by buying some government bonds of troubled periphery countries. 

Mr. Draghi, from Rome, built his economic chops as a Ph.D. student at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the late 1970s. A young student named Ben Bernanke was two years behind him. 

 "Mario was no different then than he is today," recalled Olivier Blanchard, who was one class behind Mr. Draghi and is now the chief economist of the International Monetary Fund. "Urbane, physically and intellectually elegant, careful in his approach, and focused on facts."

After teaching at the University of Florence and then spending six years as executive director of the World Bank, Mr. Draghi, the father of two, returned to Italy in the early 1990s. He was a key figure at the Italian Treasury when Italy was knocked out of the European exchange-rate mechanism, devalued its currency and lost the confidence of the bond markets. The country came to the brink of debt default, a position similar to the one Greece faces today.

"The key lesson we learned then, that's pertinent today, is how markets can exacerbate national situations," said Lamberto Dini, an Italian senator and former prime minister who was a top Bank of Italy official at the time.

In the years that followed, Mr. Draghi would spearhead one of the biggest privatization drives seen in Europe—the sale of stakes in banks, energy concerns, telecommunications firms and highways equal to some 10% of Italy's economic output. The Italian press nicknamed him "Super Mario." 

In 2002, he left Italy to enter the private sector, serving for three years as vice chairman of the international arm of investment bank Goldman Sachs Group Inc. in London. That stint at Goldman—one of the banks most in the public eye during the recent global financial crisis—initially raised doubts, including among some French officials, about the appropriateness of his leading the ECB.

Mr. Draghi returned to Italy in 2005 to lead the country's central bank, bringing what many characterize as a wave of modernity to the institution. He ordered that top executives get BlackBerrys, for example, so he could communicate with them more easily. Within a year, Mr. Draghi's leadership of the Bank of Italy was overshadowed by a bigger international role, at the helm of the so-called Financial Stability Forum—a group of top officials in charge of remaking the world's financial rules. 

As he juggled three positions—at the Bank of Italy, on the board of the ECB and at the FSF—he would often duck out of meetings to answer his mobile phone or send text messages, colleagues say.

From the FSF, he helped shape some of the early planning for financial regulatory reform after Lehman Brothers failed in September 2008. In April 2009, the group's responsibilities were expanded, and its name changed to the Financial Stability Board, to include members from emerging-market countries. The group was given more formal authority and has since made recommendations that have led countries to tighten rules on bankers' bonuses and bank capital requirements.

One critic says the FSB hasn't gone far enough on the key issue of increasing banks' capital buffer. "I see no evidence that Draghi played a leadership role in trying to move us toward having significantly more capital," says Simon Johnson, the former chief economist with the International Monetary Fund, and a vocal critic of central banks in the wake of the financial crisis.

The FSB, colleagues say, was a litmus test for Mr. Draghi's diplomatic skills. At the group's inaugural meeting in 2009, a dispute broke out when Saudi Arabia and other emerging-market countries complained they weren't getting enough say in the group's responsibilities, according to several people familiar with the meeting. 

To smooth the tensions, Mr. Draghi cracked a joke that he had once heard uttered by former U.S. Secretary of State George Shultz. "Why do the French kiss a woman's hand?" Mr. Draghi asked the bickering group, according to two people present. "You have to start somewhere." 

His point, colleagues say, was that the group couldn't afford to get bogged down on technical disputes so early in the game. 

Last year, as the European debt crisis raged, he played a key role in the ECB's decisions. On the critical weekend of May 8 and 9, 2010, the bank was weighing whether to purchase bonds of vulnerable European countries, such as Greece. 

Like others at the ECB, Mr. Draghi was loath to take that dramatic step, say officials involved in the talks. Axel Weber, president of Germany's Bundesbank, would later say publicly that he himself had opposed the move. 

But the officials say Mr. Draghi believed that doing nothing risked jeopardizing the ECB's central role in maintaining its control over interest-rate policy. His position helped sway others, these people say. Despite criticism, many economists now say the decision to go ahead with bond-buying prevented a wider crisis from spreading throughout the euro bloc.

 Write to  Alessandra Galloni at alessandra.galloni@wsj.com, Brian Blackstone at brian.blackstone@dowjones.com and Jon Hilsenrath at jon.hilsenrath@wsj.com 