Recessions can be good for wine hunters. Individuals looking for a bargain bottle have the opportunity to seek out something under the radar, off the traditional wine route that offers the consumer pound for pound or euro for euro or dollar for dollar, depending on where you are, the chance to pick up something of above average quality for a distinctly average price. 

This might mean looking to places such as New Zealand's south island for midpriced Pinot Noir as opposed to top-end red Burgundy. Both Chile (Cabernet Sauvignon) and Argentina (Malbec) are worth trawling for reasonably priced bottles, and countries such as Australia (think Shiraz) can be very competitive, particularly if they have overproduced and are trying to sell through a vintage. South Africa is a great place to scour for Bordeaux blends (predominantly Cabernet Sauvignon and Merlot) that will not break the bank. While in Europe, the wise buyer might look to Central or Eastern Europe in countries such as Hungary or Southern France, where there is a plethora of bargains. 

 Pessac-Léognan, Bordeaux, France  Vintage: 1998  Alcohol: 13%  Price: Around £19.95, or €20

The counterintuitive buyer has always looked to Bordeaux for crisp, dry, zesty white wines. There are plenty of bargains to be found at the lower end but this is something a little rarer—a hand made, aged white Bordeaux. Sourced by online merchants FromVineyardsDirect (www.fromvineyardsdirect.com) it is a rich, hedonistic, summer wine. A blend of 60% Sauvignon Blanc, 30% Sémillon and 10% Muscadelle, it sits heavy in the glass with a translucent, polished golden color. The nose has an inviting lemony character with notes of unctuous fruit. In the mouth the wine has a pleasing oily feel and a dry, long finish that feels like it lasts forever. 

I guess at the top end the Bordeaux 2008 vintage is the most famous example. Released just months after the collapse of Lehman Brothers and the subsequent economic fallout, with retrospect, its prices are an absolute steal when compared with the wines from the 2009 Bordeaux vintage.

One country I have increasingly championed is Portugal, which is emerging from a past dominated by the production of port to produce a swathe of wines from opulent reds in the Douro valley, to dry whites with a distinctive mineral core even further north in the Minho, to wines with a distinctly Portuguese character in the southern province of Alentejo.

This enormous area to the south of Lisbon is best known for the production of wheat and the considerable volume of cork that is harvested from its forests, the most famous of which surrounds the Roman city of Evora. Sparsely populated with vast horizons, it stretches from the upper valleys of the Algarve north to the southern plains of the river Tejo around two hours drive from Lisbon. 

In the past two decades, the region has begun to forge a reputation for its wines from predominantly indigenous grape varieties such as the floral Aragonez and white variety Roupeiro. 

Consumers should look out for the eight subregions of the "Denomination of Origin of Alentejo," a mark of quality. These are: Reguengos, Borba, Redondo, Vidigueira, Évora, Granja-Amareleja, Portalegre and Moura. 

According to the World Atlas of Wine, Alentejo first began to attract international interest through the considerable renovation of the Herdade do Esporão estate in Reguengos de Monsaraz in the heart of the region and its appointment of Australian winemaker David Baverstock in 1992. Mr. Baverstock, who used to be the winemaker at the Douro's port estates Quinta do Crasto and Quinta de la Rosa, quickly established modern winemaking practices such as temperature control fermentation and ageing the wine in new oak. After this came the investment by the owner's of Lafite Domaines Barons de Rothschild in Quinta do Carmo, now famous for its predominantly Syrah and Cabernet Sauvignon based wines.

Today the region has around 22,000 hectares under vine and has forged a reputation for providing Europe with a touch of New World character. Its Terras D'Alter estate is a case in point. Overseen by Australian wine maker Peter Bright, its 2010 Viognier is a joy, bursting with attractive subtropical notes on the nose such as apricot and ripe fruit, while the palate has a notable freshness and acidity. The 2010 Verdelho is a burst of lime and passion fruit, an attractive summer wine with a real citrus tang. 

The arid plains are also well suited to the planting of the Alicante Bouschet grape variety, which at its best produces wonderful, hedonistic, brooding wines dark in color with an earthy, fat, rich character. João Portugal Ramos, Dona Maria, Quinta do Mouro, Malhadinha Nova and Quinta do Centro, made by Englishman Richard Mayson, are well worth watching for.

 Write to  Will Lyons at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 