European stocks finished slightly higher Friday after a volatile session, with German software group  SAP and French bank  Crédit Agricole among the biggest blue-chip gainers. 

The Stoxx Europe 600 index closed up 0.1% at 276.02 after swinging between gains and losses for most of the session. The index rose 3.1% for the week. 

U.S. stocks were solidly higher by the close of European trade, underpinning sentiment. Late afternoon in New York, the Dow Jones Industrial Average was up 67 points, or 0.6%, at 12237.

At a summit in Brussels, European Union leaders agreed on funding for the European Stability Mechanism, the new bailout fund that will replace the current European Financial Stability Facility in 2013. However, final agreement on a plan to increase the EFSF's lending capacity to €440 billion, or about $625 billion, was delayed until June. 

  Stephen Pope, managing partner at Spotlight Ideas, said European markets continue to juggle concerns over Japan, the Middle East and European debt, but he predicted buying in the run-up to the quarter-end next week. 

"I want equity markets to get back to asking what does the world need and which companies can provide for the needs," he said in emailed comments. "Those are what should be bought so I am looking for markets to improve and while jittery, I expect a rush of window dressing for month, quarter and, for some, year end." 

In Fankfurt, the DAX 30 index gained 0.2% to 6946.36, finishing the week with a 4.2% gain.

SAP rose 1.9% after an upgrade to "overweight" from "neutral" at HSBC. It also got a lift after rival  Oracle late Thursday posted a sharp rise in profit, topping Wall Street forecasts. Also, outsourcing technology group  Accenture reported quarterly earnings that exceeded forecasts and raised its current-year forecast. 

In London, the FTSE 100 index rose 0.3% to 5900.76 and snapped a four-week losing streak with a 3.2% gain.

Household- and personal-care products firm  Reckitt Benckiser Group rallied 3.1% after Bank of America Merrill Lynch upgraded the shares to "buy" from "neutral." 

Technology and controls group  Invensys climbed 3.5%, rebounding from losses posted on Thursday. 

Software firm  Autonomy Corp. fell 3.4%, the biggest loser on the FTSE 100. Analysts at J.P. Morgan Cazenove said that earnings quality is "poor and deteriorating." 

In Paris, shares of banking group Crédit Agricole rose 2%, boosting the CAC 40 index, which closed up 0.1% at 3972.38, for a weekly gain of 4.3%. 

Exane BNP Paribas issued an "outperform" rating on the stock, citing "significant value." It also gave  Société Générale a "neutral" rating and  Natixis an "underperform" rating. SocGen was little changed and Natixis slipped 0.7%.

Cosmetics group  L'Oreal gained 1.1% after an upgrade to "buy" from "neutral" at UBS, which said the shares were the worst-performing in the sector since results in February. UBS said L'Oreal is "better positioned to deliver solid organic top-line growth and margin expansion in the current environment." 

In Lisbon, the PSI 20 stock index fell 0.2%, in a tumultuous week for Portugal. 

Portugal's woes increased with a fresh downgrade from Standard & Poor's overnight that reduced its sovereign-debt rating two notches to BBB and kept it on negative watch. The agency said that the government's loss of a key vote on its austerity package and subsequent resignation of Prime Minister Jose Socrates could "hurt market confidence and heighten Portugal's refinancing risk." That came on the heels of a downgrade by Fitch Ratings. 

Speculation that Portugal may need a bailout has intensified. 

"A bailout may total as much as €70 billion, as credit-rating cuts threatened to deepen Portugal's debt woes," said Mr. Pope. Portugal's bonds were under pressure on Friday. Clearing house LCH.Clearnet said those bonds would no long be eligible for delivery in any of its RepoClear baskets beginning on Monday.