Byron Janis and Leon Fleisher, both born in 1928, belong to a seemingly cursed generation of American pianists, one marked by early deaths and smothered prospects. Fairly early in their promising careers, each pianist was crippled by a disabling hand problem. Mr. Janis suffered from an unrelenting arthritis. Mr. Fleisher's right hand became lame, the result of what would later be diagnosed as focal dystonia, a neurological condition.

The careers of other members of their generation were equally blighted, or tragically short-lived. William Kapell (born 1922) was killed in a plane crash, at age 31. Ruth Slenczynska (born 1925) was a child prodigy who barely survived horrendous mental and physical abuse from her father, abandoning performance for years before returning to it much later. Julius Katchen (born 1926), the finest Brahms player of his generation, succumbed to cancer at age 43. Gary Graffman (born 1928) lost the use of his own right hand around the age of 50. Paul Jacobs (born 1930) died of AIDS at age 53; Glenn Gould (born 1932) slowly injured his health with various pills until a stroke took him at age 50. Another set of this generation's victims were the winners of piano competitions, such as the Cold War hero Van Cliburn (born 1934), the first winner of the Tchaikovsky International Piano Competition in 1958. After years of playing the same few concertos, Cliburn suffered burnout, feeling that the piano and its endless burden of practice were too much. 

As might be expected, the memoirs of Mr. Fleisher and Mr. Janis chronicle both the travails of their abbreviated performance careers and their endless quests for cures. But they also poignantly portray the physical and mental turbulence of being a prodigy. As the literary critic Terry Eagleton has written: "To be pre cocious is to tip the balance between nature and culture firmly on the side of the latter, to live your childhood as if you were already an adult."

 My Nine Lives  By Leon Fleisher and Anne Midgette  Doubleday, 326 pages, $26

 Chopin and Beyond  By Byron Janis  Wiley, 270 pages, $26.95

A true talent for the piano usually makes itself evident at about 5 years old, with the child picking out tunes that he has heard and exhibiting total recall when he tries to play them back by ear. Soon it is discovered that the child has absolute or perfect pitch—that is, an ability to recognize the names of notes immediately upon hearing them; this innate, fine-tuned hearing is often accompanied by excellent reflexes. Parents may be gleeful, lessons are begun and watched for progress. From the time of Mozart's father, Leopold, to the present, "owning" a child prodigy has proved a powerful stimulant: Parents find their mission in developing and displaying their offspring's gift, frequently moving the family (or simply the child) to wherever there may be a great or fashionable teacher.

Mr. Janis's and Mr. Fleisher's training was similar to that of many of their contemporaries, in that they were taught by the previous generation of European pianists. From his first season at Lake Como, with the great pianist Artur Schnabel, the 10-year-old Mr. Fleisher felt that he had found the teacher of his mind and heart. He recalls writing, after a lesson, "I felt transported out of myself, it was a high far beyond anything else in my experience." Schnabel showed Mr. Fleisher the path to becoming a servant to the art of music. In Mr. Janis's case, the influential teacher was none other than Vladimir Horowitz, whom he went to study with when he was 16, becoming his first pupil and heir apparent.

Mr. Janis was born in Pittsburgh; Mr. Fleisher in San Francisco. Before they were out of their teens, they had both been drawn to New York, which had become the center of world pianism and teaching. By the 1940s, the city was home to many of the great "Golden Age" pianists, such as Josef Lhévinne (an early teacher of Mr. Janis's), Percy Grainger, Leopold Godowsky, Josef Hofmann, Alexander Brailowsky, Sergei Rachmaninoff and the younger Rudolf Serkin, as well as Horowitz and Claudio Arrau. Carnegie Hall, as well, was buzzing with foreign visitors—the likes of Myra Hess, Arthur Rubinstein and Ignacy Paderewski.

Gradually this long-hair generation gave way to a crew-cut generation. These pianists were generally Jewish-American (in an era before certain professions were open to them) and were highly motivated careerists; they had to be, as the great halls were already packed with stars. Collectively, the new generation cleared away the excesses of their highly romantic forebears and honed a sleek style of pianism, exemplified by Mr. Janis's performances of Rachmaninoff, Gould's of Bach and Mr. Fleisher's of Beethoven.

Both Mr. Fleisher and Mr. Janis are very much "modern" American pianists. Paramount for these artists was a scrupulous respect for every dot and dash of the score— every thing was clean, note-perfect and in good taste. Mr. Janis veered to the Slavic repertory, and Mr. Fleisher to the Germanic. Schnabel exclaimed, "I only play works that are better than they can be performed," while Horowitz drove Mr. Janis to ever more sonority and color. Paint in oils, he told him.

The chapter of Mr. Janis's memoir called "Working With Horowitz" will delight any pianist, with its descriptions of learning from such a master. There are also chapters on Mr. Janis's Carnegie Hall debut and on his legendary tours of the Soviet Union in 1960 and 1962, where he initially was greeted with hostility but soon became a favorite. In all, the book is a heady account and, once begun, is difficult to stop reading—just as it is difficult to stop listening to one of Mr. Janis's passionate performances of a Rachmaninoff concerto.

That said, the title of Mr. Janis's memoir, "Chopin and Beyond," hints that we are not in for a normal memoir. The author's thoughts about (and experiences with) synchronicity, reincarnation, extrasensory perception, clairvoyance, telepathy and paranormal phenomena will astonish some and titillate others. Mr. Janis tells many strange stories. He describes witnessing the sudden materialization of objects, in the company of (among others) mentalist Uri Geller. He also says that, one evening at his home, the Chopin death mask in his possession wept real tears. 

Early in Mr. Janis's memoir he reveals that his first heated love affair, at age 15, was with a beautiful language teacher who was twice his age and who found his pianism irresistible. (Today she could be in prison.) After a failed marriage, he met his second wife, Maria Cooper, the daughter of high Hollywood royalty (her father was Gary). Her foreword to "Chopin and Beyond" is a song of praise to her husband.

In a chapter titled "Wanda," we learn that, in his early 20s, Mr. Janis had an affair with Wanda Toscanini Horowitz, his teacher's wife. After 60 years, do we need this footnote to the tortured Horowitz marriage? I knew Mrs. Horowitz well, and I think she would have been horrified to have such information made public. Fortunately, Mr. Janis is likely to be remembered less as a famous lover than as a pianist. 

The most wrenching pages in Mr. Janis's book concern the depressions caused by his arthritis and the courage he summoned to face them. "The disease crept up on me, like a vampire trying to suck the music out of my hands," he writes. No para normal solution ever appeared for this nemesis. Mr. Janis would, though, go on to become a spokesman for the Arthritis Foundation, make a film about Chopin and teach many pianists. 

A parallel moment in Mr. Fleisher's memoir comes in the chapter called "Catastrophe," which opens with his feeling "a sense of laziness in my right index finger, a slight sluggishness in its response." This was 1964, when a critic had just called him "the finest all-round pianist before the public today." But now the fourth and fifth fingers of his right hand became crippled, the fingers literally turning in upon him. In the beginning, he writes, "I kept playing the piano every day. Even without the use of ten fingers. I didn't know how to stop. Music had always been the thing I used to make sense of my life." The years moved slowly, and the hand got ever worse.

While seeking advice and treatment, Mr. Fleisher entered other areas of the art, becoming a teacher, conductor, left-handed pianist and the artistic director of Tanglewood, the Boston Symphony's summer home. Periodically he made short-lived comebacks. Finally, in the past few years, with the help of botox treatments, he has regained the use of his right hand and re-established his two-handed playing. By now, his right hand has been so ravaged by his various ailments that his cartilage has all but disappeared. "When I move," he writes, "it's basically bone on bone. It hurts like hell." 

Mr. Fleisher's autobiography is as restrained as Mr. Janis's is extra vagant. Deeply felt, well-structured and often somber in tone, it has been written in collaboration with music critic Anne Midgette of the Washington Post. The title, "My Nine Lives," has no paranormal implications; it simply refers to Mr. Fleisher's many careers.

For the musical layman, Mr. Fleisher's memoir will be a delight. An unpedantic teacher, Mr. Fleisher takes the time to explain even such basic terms as "cadenza" while also providing gems of artistic analysis and history. He effortlessly gives us a master class on the Brahms D-minor concerto and the Ravel "Concerto for the Left Hand," among other works. He also shares his thoughts about the challenges of interpretation, the pitfalls of competitions, the terrors of the stage, the hazards of conducting, the virtues and defects of his many collaborators and the subtle aspects of teaching the piano. 

"My Nine Lives" is a great rarity—a book that tells the story of a personal and public triumph and also conveys an artist's all-pervading love for the instrument that has been with him for a lifetime.

—Mr. Dubal is a professor of piano performance at the Juilliard School and the author of "The Art of the Piano" and "The Essential Canon of Classical Music." His radio program, "The Piano Matters," can be heard world-wide on wwfm.org.