I like to think my kids have had happy childhoods. But in one distinct area I believe my own single-digit years were vastly superior to theirs—the time I spent sledding in Central Park. Some of my happiest memories involve barreling down the hill just inside the entrance to the park at 72nd Street and Central Park West on my Flexible Flyer.

There are probably a couple of reasons they've lived deprived lives in this regard. It feels as if it has snowed less during their childhoods than when I was growing up in the '50s and '60s. And because my wife and I were so keen about getting out of the city on weekends, especially when there was fresh snow upstate, their sledding memories were forged on the modest hill in front of our house there.

People who have their own sledding hills shouldn't complain. But as I entered Central Park Wednesday morning, after Tuesday night's storm, and witnessed the happy mayhem of dozens of kids, and parents, sliding down Cedar Hill at Fifth Avenue and 79th Street, I realized that one of the key elements of the ultimate sledding experience is a critical mass of sledders beside you on their flying saucers, toboggans, sleds, snowboards and, when all else fails, flattened cardboard boxes. 

Pilgrim Hill, at Fifth Avenue and 72nd Street, is considered Central Park's premier slope, and for good reason. It could qualify as the bunny hill at a respectable ski resort. The initial descent is steep, allowing you to build up terrifying speed (all distances, speeds and measurements in this story are in relativistic kid terms), and that's followed by a long ride and a smooth finish. 

It's the finish that makes Pilgrim Hill superior to nearby Cedar Hill, where there are several obstacles that could interrupt your journey, not to mention land you in the emergency room at Lenox Hill Hospital, conveniently located only a few blocks away. The Parks Department has thoughtfully stacked hay bales around the lampposts at the bottom of the ride, hopefully preventing any Ethan Frome-like situations. But an ideal sledding hill is one where your mom or dad would have no excuse to hector you about slowing down, staying to the right, etc. 

I'm not suggesting that a modicum of risk isn't desirable in any self-respecting little kid's sledding experience. That's the whole point. Come to think of it, sledding might be one of a childhood's earliest and most memorable tastes of freedom and independence. 

The first time or two you head down the hill as a toddler, one of your parents or your sitter will want to be along for the ride. That's perfectly understandable. (And there's nothing better than having someone else schlep your sled back to the top.) But once you get the hang of it, and certainly with a couple more years under your belt, and you're allowed to descend on your own, well, let me tell you… Neil Armstrong didn't feel any more puffed up or amazing setting foot on the moon. Maybe a little, but not much.

I can't speak about Pilgrim Hill from personal experience. I grew up on the West Side. Pilgrim Hill and Cedar Hill, for that matter, may as well have been Vail or Aspen, so remote did they seem. Not that we felt inferior. As a matter of fact, I'll put my hill, the nameless one just south of 72nd Street, against the best the East Side has to offer. 

Here's why. It's actually two hills, or at least a double-elevation hill. The summit is a rock outcropping (watch those heads, kids!) where children can aim through a space in the rocks that leads onto a short plateau. With any luck your momentum will carry you to the top of the main hill, and your principal descent. 

I also decided to visit my old sledding grounds after Tuesday's storm, to see whether it remains popular. There was a smattering of preschool- and kindergarten-age sledders and their moms and caregivers, but nothing like the crowds when I was growing up. 

Part of the reason may be that the majority of the small field at the bottom of the run has been fenced off, depriving sledders of the unbridled euphoria and sense of accomplishment that comes with knowing you milked the trip for every last ounce of speed, duration and distance.

I'm all for the good work the Parks Department and the Central Park Conservancy have done over the years to bring the park back from its decrepit condition of my youth. I'm not even against all the fencing that's gone up to protect reseeded areas of grass. But who reseeds grass in the dead of winter? And at the cost of depriving kids of one of the seminal experiences of childhood?

Central Park after it snows has a magical way of turning the city into a small town, of bringing nature to the forefront. The only way to improve the experience is zooming down a hill at supersonic speeds knowing that a hot bath, dinner and a warm bed await at the end of the ride.

— ralph.garder@wsj.com  