You don't have to scour the front pages for long to find a bullish commodity story. The bombing of Libya and political unrest in the broader Middle East and North Africa region increases fears over oil-supply security and pushes up the price of crude. 

Oil topped $106 a barrel Thursday before pulling back, with crude for May delivery settling down 15 cents a barrel at $105.60 on the New York Mercantile Exchange. The futures contract closed Wednesday at its highest level since Sept. 26, 2008.

Inflation worries, in turn, boost the price of gold, the classic inflation hedge. The return of European sovereign-debt jitters, most notably over Portugal, don't do such haven investments any harm either. Spot gold hovered just below the record peak of $1,444.40 in Europe on Thursday.

Then there is the prospect of rebuilding in Japan. Homes, factories and infrastructure have been destroyed by the earthquake and tsunami. Now Tokyo estimates the total damage at ¥25 trillion ($309 billion). Getting back to normal is going to take an awful lot of steel, base metals and lumber.

For each story, it seems, there is at least one commodity potentially heading higher. However, there are signs that investors are bullish on commodities for the longer term, not simply as a result of current news flow.

Indeed, 80% of institutional investors either maintained or increased their investment in commodities over the last twelve months, according to an annual survey Barclays Capital released Wednesday

The survey, conducted as events in Japan and the Middle East unfolded over the past three weeks, found that 83% of investors expect to maintain or increase their investments in commodities over the next three years.

This chimes with research from Société Générale. The bank said Tuesday that the net outflow of cash from emerging-market equities, which has been a feature of 2011, was continuing. Rather than finding a home in developed-market stocks, this money has headed into bond and commodity funds instead in the last four weeks.

It is easy to see why the idea of commodities as an asset class is attractive. There is the comfortable back story of strong demand from emerging economies on one side, and the fraying of more traditional investments on the other. Developed-market equities, after all, have seen two horrible bear markets since 2000. Bond yields often aren't enticing in these days of ultraloose monetary policy.

Investors should remember, however, that commodities can bite, and none harder than oil.

Crude was scaling all-time price peaks back in 2008. It got up to $147 a barrel, from $95, in the first six months of that year. The markets were looking for $200 oil and a big payday. Sadly for them, the final demand just wasn't there. Oil was smashed back to around $40 by the early months of 2009.

An extreme tale, for sure, but a cautionary one, too.

 Write to  David Cottle at david.cottle@dowjones.com 