  Yasser El Halaby is passing on his love of squash to Harlem teens and, in the process, helping them achieve their college dreams.

StreetSquash, a nonprofit founded in 1999, provides an after-school program combining academics and squash to about 150 boys and girls in Harlem, grades six through 12. Teens in the program, who all come from low-income families, are required to spend four days a week playing squash and participating in reading immersion, homework tutoring and college preparatory classes. On Saturdays, there are cultural outings, community service projects and, for the older students, visits to college campuses.

Mr. El Halaby, a 26-year-old New Yorker, became involved with StreetSquash in 2007 when he signed on to become a mentor. Since then and while on the group's young leadership committee, he has contributed more than $1,000 and hosted events that have raised more than $25,000.

For the organization's annual StreetSquash Cup fund-raiser to be held on May 21, Mr. El Halaby will serve as co-captain of the Princeton team, made up of alumni and friends helping to raise as a team just over $17,000 for the event.

The Cairo-born athlete has played squash since childhood, going on to win the NCAA individual title in the sport yearly during his time at Princeton University. He played professionally before taking a job in the financial-services industry. For the fund-raising event, Mr. El Halaby called on his friends and professional squash players to attend and play alongside the teens and "hang out," he says. "We're trying to encourage the kids and tell them that we're here for you."

Through the organization, he coaches on the court during the year, but the classroom mentoring process has, for him, been the most meaningful part of his involvement. "I see it like being an older brother," says Mr. El Halaby. "Just being there and showing support, which is necessary."

His squash coaches taught him how to be disciplined, professional and to work hard, and he is hoping to pass on those traits to students. The program provides the students with daily structure, he says, but the sport itself is a lesson about, "working hard for something that you enjoy," and the "qualities of sportsmanship and being fair."

This year he helped guide a student through the college-application process. That student will go on to Bates College this fall and will play squash. StreetSquash participants have a 100% acceptance rate into college and receive a small scholarship from the group. "It's a very cool experience," he says of the college mentoring. "I graduated five years ago, but I remember the application process and know that it can be very daunting."