 In Libya, government opponents in the oil city of al-Zawiya repelled an attempt by forces loyal to dictator Col. Moammar Gadhafi to retake the city closest to the capital of Tripoli, and rebels in two other opposition-held cities also held off pro-Gadhafi forces, witnesses said. 

Anti-regime forces have been fighting to consolidate their gains as the international community weighs new moves to isolate the longtime Libyan leader, including the possibility of creating a no-fly zone over the country.

 Tensions escalated in Iran as the biggest anti-government protests in two weeks erupted across the nation in reaction to the arrest of two opposition leaders. Witnesses said the rallies, scattered across several locations in Tehran and other big cities, were some of the largest and angriest to date.  

Tuesday's demonstrations come a day after the families of Mir Hossein Mousavi and Mehdi Karoubi said the opposition leaders were arrested along with their wives. 

 Yemeni President Ali Abdullah Saleh accused U.S. President Barack Obama of fomenting unrest in the Arab world, in a speech on a university campus here, as around 10,000 protesters nearby called for his resignation. 

Saleh told his audience of around 500 students and academics that he would "reveal a secret" that there is an "operations room in Tel Aviv with the aim of destabilizing the Arab world." He said the White House ran the operations room. 

Protests in Oman's second-largest city of Sohar lost steam, but not before spreading unrest to the mouth of the world's most important oil thoroughfare—the Strait of Hormuz which controls access to most of the energy produced in the Persian Gulf.

At Sohar's main roundabout, only about 50 protesters remained of the hundreds who had blockaded the area on previous days demanding higher pay, more jobs and the departure of several senior ministers.

Egypt's stock exchange, shut since Jan. 27 due to political unrest, has further delayed the resumption of trading to March 6 as it works to soften the fallout from the likely wave of selling. The exchange had been expected to open Tuesday, after it had been originally scheduled to open Feb. 13.

 The European Union's highest court declared illegal the widespread practice of charging men and women different rates for insurance, roiling the industry and setting in motion an overhaul of how life, auto and health policies are written across Europe. 

The euro-zone's annual inflation rate rose to a 28-month high of 2.4% in February—above the European Central Bank's medium-term target of just below 2%. 

 A U.K. Parliament committee has said the U.S.-led coalition's military efforts in Afghanistan aren't working and the U.S. and Britain have failed to gain essential leverage in Pakistan, in a report that criticizes Prime Minister David Cameron's justification for continued U.K. involvement in the war. 

 The Bank of England's governor is calling on U.K. lawmakers to act more quickly to transfer financial-regulatory powers to the central bank, a handover currently planned for the end of 2012.  

U.K. house prices rose modestly in February, but are likely to be stable or perhaps a little weaker over the year as a whole, the Nationwide Building Society said.

 German Defense Minister Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg resigned after revelations that he plagiarized his doctoral thesis sullied the career of one of the country's most promising political stars.  

Germany's labor market improved sharply in February and unemployment declined by much more than expected, owing to the country's solid economic upswing. 

Sweden's gross domestic product surged in the fourth quarter of 2010, rising the most since records began, offering further support to the Riksbank's plans to raise interest rates during 2011. 

Spain met its overall 2010 budget deficit target, an important milestone in its efforts to repair its battered finances, though most of the country's powerful regions posted budget overruns. 

Spain's Interior Ministry says police arrested four suspected members of the armed Basque independence group ETA and seized explosives during raids in the northern Basque province of Vizcaya. Reports said the detainees are wanted for attacks that include the killing of anti-terrorism officer Eduardo Antonio Puelles in 2009 and the car-bombing of a Civil Guard barracks in the northern city of Burgos the same year.

Italy's economy grew 1.3% last year as it recovered from the recession in 2009 and its budget deficit shrank to 4.6% of gross domestic product, statistics said. 

 Hungary's government said it plans to lower its public debt, the highest in central and eastern Europe, to between 65%-70% of gross domestic product by the end of 2014 through fiscal restructuring and the transfer of private pension-fund assets to the state.  

 Manufacturing activity in the U.S. turned in its best performance since May 2004 last month, as factory operators faced a big jump in raw materials prices, raising fears about rising inflation. 

Separately, spending on construction projects fell a second month in a row during January, pulled down by declines in hotels, roads, and other non-residential projects.

 The former head of McKinsey & Co. provided improper tips to Galleon Group founder Raj Rajaratnam about companies in which he was a board member, according to a Securities and Exchange Commission proceeding in which he was charged with insider trading.  

 Russia plans to install modern antiship and antiaircraft missiles on the Kuril Islands, a move likely to raise tensions with Japan, which claims the islands as its own. The military plans are the latest in a series of moves by the Kremlin in the past few months to shore up its presence on the disputed islands amid increasing criticism from officials in Tokyo.  

Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan passed his first full-year budget through parliament, but is far from securing the survival of his government beyond the next few weeks. 

Japan's unemployment rate was steady in January at 4.9% of the work force, the government said, while the closely watched ratio of the number of jobs available to the number of applicants rose sharply to 0.61, its highest level since January 2009. 

One of China's most prominent corruption probes in years widened to include a senior Ministry of Railways engineer directly involved in the country's $300 billion high-speed rail project.

 China appeared to reinstate some restrictions on foreign journalists that were lifted in the run-up to the 2008 Beijing Olympics as the government tried to stifle online activists' calls for a "Jasmine Revolution."  

A well-known Vietnamese pro-democracy dissident was freed on bail after calling for a revolution inspired by the Middle East protests, state-run media said.

In India, a court handed down a death sentence to 11 Muslims convicted of setting fire to a passenger train in the western Indian state of Gujarat nine years ago, and gave a lesser sentence of life imprisonment to 20 others also convicted of participating in the same massacre that left nearly 60 Hindus returning from a religious pilgrimage dead. 

A large mob torched the house of a businessman suspected of ordering the killing of a tax inspector in southern Kyrgyzstan, police said, raising fears of a new outburst of violence in the former Soviet republic.

 A Danish family captured by pirates in the Indian Ocean will suffer the same fate as four American sailors slain last week, if any rescue attempt is made, a Somali pirate reportedly said.  

The Reserve Bank of Australia signaled it is likely to leave interest rates unchanged for months to come, sending a message that the inflation outlook for 2011 is largely benign. 