An onslaught of digital technologies has laid waste to traditional media. The new year will bring a clearer picture of what will emerge from the rubble. 

Online games that piggyback off social networks are thriving. Publishers are increasingly chipper about the profit potential for digital books, newspapers and magazines, one example of how the historic rivalry between media and tech companies, while still intense, may be softening. 

Some sectors, like television, may have their toughest days ahead of them. There, a digital tide is rising as new ways to watch TV over the Internet begin to push aside traditional habits. How will TV networks and cable companies make up for the cash they will lose if viewers "cut the cord" and look for shows on the Web?

Advertisers, anxious about how technology is undermining their business, will likely continue to flee from sluggish mediums like print to fast-growing ones, like mobile. But they'll face the watchful eye of regulators concerned they aren't doing enough to protect consumers' digital data.

For media chiefs, 2011 will bring more gambling, as executives weigh how much to invest in emerging businesses directly cannibalizing their traditional ones. As usual, they'll be watching each other, and consumers, closely.

Here's a look at the pieces:

In the coming year, social media will hasten their expansion beyond cyberspace. 

Until now, the industry has been defined by legions of websites that allow people to share videos, photos and musings. More of that content now is coming from traditional media companies seeking new promotional outlets for television shows and cover stories. The days of amateur videos of dogs on skateboards overwhelming your Facebook page are gone. 

One big trend to watch in social media is the crop of new businesses trying to infiltrate the physical world, developing services that allow people to connect with real-world advice givers, buy real stuff and accomplish real tasks. 

Take a start-up named TaskRabbit. The TaskRabbit website allows people to post chores, like grocery shopping or a dry-cleaning pickup, to be fulfilled by "runners" who state the price they'd accept for doing the errand. Airbnb, which connects people looking for a place to stay with people willing to offer their homes or a mattress, says its nightly bookings grew 750% in 2010 and it has booked nearly 800,000 guest-nights in total. 

These businesses have aggressive growth plans and others are waiting in the wings. (Need a car ride? Help deciding what to wear?) Many rely on help from social-media kingpin Facebook, tapping the lists of friends people create through the service to limit them to doing business with friends or friends of friends. 

Mobile phones will help drive the next phase of the online-offline conversion, analysts say, helping people forge a real connection on the fly while in a specific location. 

Of course, not everyone is ready to broker real deals with strangers. But history suggests people could get there. "People probably felt uncomfortable about buying stuff online years ago or uploading photos," said Airbnb chief executive  Brian Chesky. The reluctance, he notes, clearly passed. 

Hollywood needs to make up the ground it's losing as consumers shift from buying DVDs to renting movies from Netflix and Redbox. 

Expect some degree of experimentation with what is known as "premium VOD"—for video on demand—in which home viewers get a chance to watch movies earlier than they can now, for higher prices. 

Details of what will reach the market, and when, remain unclear. Last year,  Time Warner Cable circulated a proposal to make its films available on its VOD systems just 30 days after they hit theaters, for $20 to $30. The idea faced stiff resistance from theater owners, who fear that earlier home-video releases will undermine ticket sales, which are already under pressure. 

"There's obviously a natural tension between the exhibitors, who are trying to protect their turf, and content owners" like movie studios, says  Amir Malin, managing partner at Qualia Capital, an entertainment and media focused investment bank. Mr. Malin views a shortened VOD window as inevitable, even if the players are still finding their way. 

"There is no one answer today because I don't think there is a correct answer," Mr. Malin says. "It's really going with your gut." 

One prediction he makes with confidence: Earlier video on demand will push DVD releases earlier. Currently, DVDs usually hit stores about 100 days after a movie opens in theaters—a time frame that has shrunk from six months several years ago. 

Revenue at the North American box office in 2010 was flat and attendance down 6%, after surging in 2009 thanks to premium-priced 3-D tickets. Box office is a small piece of a given movie's overall financial performance, but the number is a benchmark for TV licenses and other deals.



Television networks are focusing on how to make money from online video, as evidence mounts that some young consumers are watching their favorite programs on the Web rather than on TV. 

So far this TV season, the number of people between ages 18 and 49 watching on traditional TV sets was down about 1.3% from the previous fall, according to Nielsen Co. That is the biggest decline in at least four years. Those estimates include all live and recorded viewing. 

Some TV executives believe more viewers are getting their television fix elsewhere. "Alternative platforms are taking a significant number of viewers away from the traditional TV screen." says  Alan Wurtzel, president of research at General Electric Co.'s NBC Universal. While he said it's a new phenomenon, he added, "I don't think any of us have appreciated how quickly behaviors are changing."

The stakes of keeping up are enormous. TV networks still make the vast majority of their money from viewing on traditional TV sets—both through selling advertising and skimming $30 billion per year from monthly cable and satellite bills. 

The number of overall cable subscribers fell quarter-to-quarter twice last year, according to SNL Kagan, the first such declines since the dawn of cable. Pay-TV operators blamed the drop on the stumbling economy, rather than on people switching to Web video, a practice dubbed "cord-cutting." But some analysts believe there also may be a generational shift, with fewer young people signing up for cable in the first place. 

That may push media companies to dial back further on what shows they offer free on the Web soon after airing on traditional TV, some TV executives say. Instead, expect paid options to proliferate. 

"Nobody ever promised Internet TV would be cheaper," just more flexible, says Jim Lanzone, chief executive of web-video guide site Clicker. "For some shows, the genie is going to be put back in the bottle." 

The good news for the newspaper and magazine industries is that the precipitous print-advertising declines of the recession have leveled off. The bad news is ad-revenue growth in 2011 will remain elusive, particularly as readers continue to migrate from print to the Internet, tablets and other places where ads cost significantly less than they do in print. 

That leaves publishers figuring out how much revenue they can squeeze out of readers without driving too many of them away.

Tablets are creating another dilemma. The optimism that spread with the launch of the iPad has given way to unease about the intentions of the technology companies. Some publishers are unhappy with the terms under which  Apple Inc.
AAPL


-0.04
%




 sells their digital editions on the device. Publishers are hoping a new crop of e-reading devices creates real competition, leading to more flexibility in how they price their titles and how much they get to know about their customers. Central to those hopes is  Google Inc., which is why media companies are scrambling to create digital editions for devices that run on the search giant's Android software. 

A big test of consumers' willingness to pay for online news comes some time in the first quarter when the New York Times begins charging readers who exceed a certain number of visits per month to the paper's website. The Times is trying to pull off the delicate task of creating a healthy subscription-revenue stream without cannibalizing its online audience and the advertising it attracts. 

All those e-readers stuffed into Christmas stockings this past holiday season will make this a record year for e-book sales as physical book sales head south.

Tech heavyweights Apple and Google jumped into the e-book market in 2010, giving publishers new opportunities to sell their digital titles in addition to  Amazon.com Inc.
AMZN


2.20
%




 and  Barnes & Noble Inc.
BKS


1.86
%




 

A variety of other new tablet devices are expected to roll out in coming months, further broadening the reach of digital books.

"I expect e-books to be the fastest-growing segment that publishing has ever seen," said  Brian Murray, chief executive of  News Corp.'s HarperCollins Publishers Inc. News Corp. also owns The Wall Street Journal. 

E-book sales will nearly triple to more than $2.8 billion by 2015 from just under $1 billion in 2010, says Forrester Research Inc. "Given recent growth, our forecast will likely be conservative," said  James McQuivey, a Forrester analyst.

The impact of increasing digital book sales—which some major publishers estimate now account for 8% to 10% of annual revenue—on physical book sales is still unfolding. But it appears likely that e-books are cannibalizing hardcover sales, and brick-and-mortar retailers are feeling the pain. 

Last year, in a presentation to shareholders, Barnes & Noble cited a report that found consumer spending on new physical books will decline to $19 billion in 2014 from $20.5 billion in 2009. Those initiatives include the Open Data Partnership, set to be launched this month by a group of online tracking rivals that will allow consumers to edit information collected about them and elect not to be tracked at all.

Internet and advertising industries faced intense scrutiny in 2010 over tracking consumers online. Now they're scrambling to fend off government regulation with efforts to self-regulate.

In a privacy report released in December, the Federal Trade Commission called for an official "Do Not Track" system. The Obama administration said Americans should have a "privacy bill of rights" to regulate the collection of consumer data online and set up a privacy office in the Commerce Department to encourage companies to adopt those rules.

Legislation also is brewing on both sides of Capitol Hill. Rep. Ed Markey (D., Mass.) has said he will introduce legislation that would prohibit companies from tracking children on the Internet without parental consent. And Sen. John Kerry (D, Mass.) has said he will propose a bill that will enact the administration's proposed "privacy bill of rights." Rep. Cliff Stearns (R., Ohio), has also indicated that he may revive privacy legislation he drafted last year.

Expect advertising industry advocates to rally against the "Do Not Track" system in particular. The Interactive Advertising Bureau has said that a "Do Not Track" system would "require a re-engineering of the Internet's architecture" and would restrict the ability to offer free content that is paid for by advertising.

  Dan Jaffee, executive vice president of governmental relationships for the Association of National Advertisers, says it will "work to see that the self regulatory program is widely adopted throughout the Internet ecosystem."

Technology companies that were barely in the videogame industry a couple of years ago are changing all the rules in the business.

Apple, a company that once largely shunned games, will continue to reshape mobile gaming with the iPhone, iPod Touch and iPad, all of which give players novel new ways of playing games with the touch-sensing screens. Its biggest innovation in the business, though, is the App Store, through which consumers can instantly download games directly to their devices, often paying a few dollars or less.

The App Store is a big disruption to the old-fashioned way of selling games in stores and the relatively low-price of its games is causing worry about the impact on prices of games for more established game gadgets, like Nintendo Co.'s Nintendo DS and Sony Corp.'s PlayStation Portable. Nintendo, for one, will try to excite gamers this year with innovations that Apple and other mobile gaming upstarts haven't yet matched, including 3-D games that don't require special glasses.

Traditional games will compete for the attention of players with "social games" like CityVille and FarmVille, hit games from Zynga Inc. that spread through friend connections on Facebook. Zynga doesn't charge a penny for people to play those games, but commands fees for virtual goods like tractors to till the imaginary fields of a FarmVille plot of land. Established game companies will have to adapt their titles to these new methods of making money from games if they don't want to be left in the dust.

The concert business is looking to bring back fans in 2011, after concluding it can no longer rely on rising ticket prices to offset stagnant attendance. 

In 2010, collective attendance for the world's top 50 concert tours plunged 15%. A 4% increase in average ticket prices did little to cushion the financial blow, as the total grosses for the tours declined 12%. 

Concert promoters and others in the business recognize that they need to retool their industry, which was long viewed as a bastion of financial stability for performers whose record sales have been decimated by online file sharing and other problems. 

At the top of the list: lowering average ticket prices. "If you want to sell tickets in 2011, you're going to have to be aggressive from the beginning on pricing it right," says  Michael Rapino, chief executive of Live Nation Entertainment Inc., the concert-promotion giant that now includes Ticketmaster. 

Last year, Live Nation attempted to counter high ticket prices by offering last-minute discounts, a move that led many to complain that loyal fans were effectively punished for buying early. Mr. Rapino says the company recognizes the problem and is planning "some great promotions to reward the early buyers." such as discounts on groups of four or six tickets. 

To offset lower prices in the back of the house, Live Nation is also exploring setting more price levels than the traditional three, a setup Mr. Rapino calls "inefficient." Another new approach could include raising the prices for the front couple of rows, bringing them in line with the sky-high prices scalpers now command. The goal, Mr. Rapino says, is to let performers earn roughly the same amount of money from concerts, but in a way that is accessible to more fans. 

"Every conversation with artists now includes ticket price," he says. "What's the average ticket price? Keeping the back of the house right."

—Jessica E. Vascellaro, Sam Schechner, Ethan Smith, Jeffrey A. Trachtenberg, Russell Adams, Nick Wingfield and Emily Steel