LONDON—Britons expect consumer prices to rise more quickly over the next 12 months than they did three months ago, but that is unlikely to push the Bank of England into raising interest rates before the summer. 

Higher inflation expectations can lead workers to demand higher wages, setting off a second round of price rises as businesses cover their increased labor costs. That prospect unsettles policy makers because it can trigger a self-perpetuating surge in the inflation rate, as happened in the 1970s. 

But few British workers are getting bumper pay rises, and with the devastation in Japan threatening the global economy—and the U.K.'s own recovery far from assured—investors have reassessed when they expect the BOE to start tightening monetary policy. 

A survey published Thursday by pollsters GfK NOP found Britons' expectations of future inflation increased in February, as rising commodity prices and a rise in a sales tax pushed up prices for everyday purchases. 

Inflation, as measured by an index of consumer prices that now includes mobile-phone applications and online dating-agency fees, stood at 4% in January. The Bank of England expects inflation to remain between 4% and 5% for much of 2011, before falling back to its 2% target in 2012. 

However, people surveyed expect prices to rise 4% in the year ahead and 3.4% the year after. When the survey was last conducted in November, respondents said they expected prices to rise 3.9% in the year ahead and 3.2% during the following 12 months. 

Longer-term inflation expectations also rose. Asked where they expect the inflation rate to be in five years, Britons said 3.5%, on average. That is the highest rate since this question was first asked in the survey in February 2009. 

"The message ... is that inflation expectations, even over a medium-term horizon, are edging upwards, and are now significantly above the Bank of England's target," said economists at Barclays Capital. 

Meanwhile, U.K. consumers became even more pessimistic about the outlook for the economy and their job prospects during February, and less willing to spend, according to a monthly survey commissioned by the Nationwide Building Society set to be released Friday. 

The lender's overall measure of consumer confidence fell to 38 from 48 in January, making it the third straight month of substantial decline. The measure is now at a record low, with Britons more worried about the future than during the dark days of the global financial crisis and the recession that followed.

Although the rise in inflation expectations will concern policy makers at the Bank of England, there is little sign that a wage-price spiral is taking off.

Fewer than one in 10 Britons surveyed by GfK NOP said they would demand higher wages to compensate for rising prices. The majority said they would shop around for a better deal or cut spending instead. 

Recent pay surveys suggest Britons are getting pay raises, but they are still well below the 4% rate of inflation. The U.K.'s Office for National Statistics said Wednesday that average pay, excluding bonus payments that skew the figures, rose 2.2% in the 12 months to January. 

The Bank of England voted to keep its benchmark interest rate at a record low of 0.5% on March 10. There are divisions among its nine policy makers between those who advocate keeping monetary policy loose to nurture a fragile recovery and supporters of tightening policy to head off future rises in inflation. 

The minutes of the Monetary Policy Committee's March meeting will be published on March 23, and investors will be watching keenly for hints on the timing of the next rise.

Investors have reassessed their expectations following the devastation wrought by an earthquake in Japan and its possible consequences for the global economy.

Where previously overnight lending rates pointed to a rise in the benchmark interest rate in May or June, investors are now only fully pricing in the first rate increase in August, according to prices for a key rate provided by interdealer broker  ICAP
IAPLY


0.24
%




 PLC. 

The rise in the public's inflation expectations is unlikely to push the Bank of England into raising interest rates in the near term, said  Howard Archer, chief U.K. and European economist at IHS Global Insight. 

Policy makers will be more concerned about the strength of the U.K.'s economy, he said. 

Ultimately, there is still a question mark over how important public expectations of inflation are, especially if they're not feeding into wage settlements. 

A recent study by the Bank for International Settlements found the U.K. public's expectations of price rises vary widely and frequently bear little resemblance to either the official rate of inflation or the bank's forecasts.

After all, the public don't have the resources or the expertise of a central bank and probably pay too much attention to day-to-day fluctuations of prices at the supermarket and the gas station, the BIS report said. 

It is an issue that's been picked up by Bank of England policy makers.  Adam Posen, the arch-dove on the Monetary Policy Committee, said in a recent speech that Britons simply don't have the bargaining power with employers that they once had when trade unionism was stronger. He added that while it is important to take the public's views into account, policy makers shouldn't respond with knee-jerk reactions whenever their expectations of price rises suddenly leap. 

"Putting the welfare of British citizens foremost does not imply taking them seriously as macroeconomic forecasters," Mr. Posen said. 

 Write to  Jason Douglas at jason.douglas@dowjones.com 