DENVER—Players come and go. The nameplates in the front office change. But the Mets' penchant for injuries endures, like a curse they cannot shake.

Three days after they lost pitcher Chris Young to a season-ending shoulder injury, the Mets placed first baseman Ike Davis on the 15-day disabled list Thursday with a sprained left ankle and a bone bruise. They did not give an estimated timetable for his return, beyond the automatic two weeks he will spend on the DL.

"We hope it's not too much longer than that, but right now it's too early to predict," assistant general manager John Ricco said.

The loss of Davis came as a severe blow to a team that had no shortage of problems already. In his second major-league season, Davis has emerged as one of the best young hitters in the National League. Entering Thursday, he led the team in home runs (7), RBI (25), on-base percentage (.383) and slugging percentage (.543).

With Davis out, Daniel Murphy will move from second base to first and Justin Turner will start at second.

"His production is going to be sorely missed," manager Terry Collins said. "We're going to miss the power."

Davis injured his ankle during the fourth inning of Tuesday's game against the Colorado Rockies when he collided with David Wright as the two converged on an infield fly in front of the mound.

The Mets initially called the injury a strained calf muscle, but Ricco said the pain in Davis' calf was actually radiating upward from the bone bruise in his ankle. After Davis flew back to New York on Wednesday, an MRI revealed the sprain and bone bruise.

"Each injury on its own wasn't too bad, but the combination of them, it's clearly a DL," Ricco said. "I don't think it's good news. We were hoping it would not be a DL and be a few days."

Dr. Kenneth Mroczek, a foot and ankle specialist at the New York University Hospital for Joint Diseases, said the recovery time for sprains and bone bruises of the ankle depends on the precise location and severity of the injuries.

 But he said the bone bruise generally takes longer to heal than a simple sprain.

"It could be a few days longer or a few weeks longer," Mroczek said. "It really depends on how bad it is."

The term "bone bruise" may sound particularly ominous to the Mets, who saw Carlos Beltran suffer bone bruises in his right knee in 2009. That injury kept Beltran out more than two months.

But Dr. Jonathan Glashow, co-chief of sports medicine at Mount Sinai, said bone bruises in ankles are generally less troublesome.

"It's not as ominous as a knee," Glashow said. "The Beltran bone bruise in the knee, that's a different animal."

For the Mets, though, that is little consolation.

 At 16-20, they entered Thursday in last place in the National League East, eight games behind the first-place Philadelphia Phillies.

Dillon Gee will take Young's spot in the starting rotation. To fill Davis' roster spot, the Mets called up outfielder Fernando Martinez.