KAMPALA—In a music video that's gone viral, Uganda's hottest new rapper whips up crowds with his chant: "You want another rap?" The crowd responds: "Ye Sebo!" or, Yes, sir!

Grinning, the rapper lays it down in a local Ugandan language: "I was given a knife/ I gave it to the people who harvested millet and they gave me the millet. I gave the millet to the cattle keepers, who in exchange gave me a cow."

Dressed in a suit and tie as he delivers his lines from a podium, this video sensation isn't exactly Jay-Z. But then most rappers aren't seeking to woo voters—in this case, the combined farmer and youth vote in Uganda, an agrarian-based nation where nearly nine of 10 people are under 40 years old.

The rapper is Ugandan President Yoweri Museveni, up for re-election, who is trying to strike a chord with youth. 

The popular leader has been in power for 24 years, during which the country has enjoyed prosperity and relative stability. That wasn't the case in the dictatorial regimes of Milton Obote and Idi Amin, the latter who famously declared himself the last king of Scotland, among other titles. 

To reach the farmer-youth vote bloc of this east African nation, Mr. Museveni, 65 years old, has channeled his inner MC: He has crafted his own brand of agri-rap to show he's hip to young people's concerns. 

To get out the message, he taped a crude video for YouTube, in which he repeatedly brushes his hand against his nose. People chant "Whoa!" and "Yeah!!" as Mr. Museveni blithely sounds the lyrics. He remains stiff at his presidential podium—there's a bit of a shoulder sway, a few finger flourishes. 

Those who have seen him perform live at rallies, however, say he loosens up a bit, and manages to shift with the rhythm. Cheers erupt. 

Other world leaders have put on a show for supporters. Bill Clinton wailed on his saxophone. And Japan's former prime minister Junichiro Koizumi once burst into an Elvis impersonation during a tour of Graceland. Few listeners, though, would say these politicians missed any musical calling. 

Despite his unlikely rapping role, Uganda's president does appear to have a genuine following. 

Mr. Museveni wasn't available to be interviewed about the rap. He did, however, release a lengthy statement titled "The Confluence Between the New and the Indigenous," explaining his love of music and the reasoning behind his rap.

The president's own musical preferences lean towards church music and military tunes. He said that he first became aware of rapping when a Ugandan youth group gave a concert at the State House, Mr. Museveni's residence. Someone explained to him that rapping was mixing music with "recitals," or rhymes. 

Michael Mugisha, a 28-year-old performer, suggested that the president allow them to record a track and blend it with some beats.

Thus began Mr. Museveni's now-famous rhyme. The rap lyrics he intones are "ancient," the president said, and are considered a kind of children's song, intended to teach young people to do things step by step. 

After getting the green light, Mr. Mugisha and his team huddled over turntables with music producers at a studio in Kampala. The president recorded voice and video takes ahead of time because he didn't have time to visit the studio. Since artists normally spend weeks in a studio to get the perfect mix, that made the process a little more complicated, says producer Alex Ntaro.

"His reluctance to visit the studio—or even dance—made the work of producing the video even harder," Mr. Ntaro says. "In the end we came out with what we could." 

Mr. Museveni's rap plays on radio stations in Uganda, with his video garnering tens of thousands of views on YouTube in a single day. Ugandan telecom companies have made the song into ringtones. 

In a campaign where the president's reelection is pretty much a foregone conclusion, the song has injected some excitement into the race.

At Kisseka Market in downtown Uganda, where vendors sell spare car parts, Dennis Mubiru, a 28-year-old shop owner, is a fan. He says he's been busy installing the tune as a ringtone on people's phones, or burning it onto CDs.

Nearby, Charles Sewanyana waits for a newly burned CD of the president's rap, which he pronounced "marvelous." But that doesn't mean Mr. Museveni has his vote. 

"I don't want him to be the president anymore," says Mr. Sewanyana, a 36-year-old grain salesman. "He has governed Uganda for so long. Let someone else have a chance."

Mr. Museveni's rivals share this view. They have tried to turn the rap against him, spinning their own remixes to critique the president. Norbert Mao, a rival candidate who's running on a health and education platform, chants his own version at his campaign rallies.

"He says, You want another rap?

We answer by saying, No, Sir! We want better schools.

And then, he says, You want another rap?

And we say, No, Sir! We want an end to corruption."

On a recent afternoon rally outside Kampala, Mr. Museveni relied on a surrogate to perform the rap for him. A local comedian known for his impersonations of the president took to the stage in military fatigues. "You want another rap?" he asked, to screams of delight from the crowd.

Supporters surged toward the stage, dancing and waving banners in the trademark yellow of the ruling party, the National Resistance Movement. 

When Mr. Museveni arrived, standing through the sunroof of his campaign car in a navy blue suit, he was greeted by wild cheers. 

Some of Uganda's young, however, aren't so impressed.

"We expected something crucial, that would bring hope. Instead he sings something meaningless," said Benjamin Odda, a 22-year-old student who says he probably won't vote for Mr. Museveni. If the president's rap had been better, he says, he might have been swayed. 