The recession's grip on small-business owners has loosened, but unemployment remains stubbornly high and access to credit is still tight. To fight the effects of flat sales and weak profit, Small Business Administration chief  Karen Mills has been focused on getting smaller firms the capital they need to survive until demand picks up. 

"We decided to be very bold in getting money out into the hands of small business as quickly as possible. As a result, tens of thousands of businesses were able to get credit in a market where the banks had really frozen them out," says Ms. Mills. Throughout the downturn, the agency backed more than $40 billion in loan guarantees for small businesses. "That's a pretty good bang for the taxpayers' buck," she says.

In the two years since she was tapped for the job, the 57-year-old former venture capitalist has overseen the allocation of $2 billion in stimulus funds into the agency's loan programs, boosted guarantees and lowered fees on SBA-backed loans. Ms. Mills also has led efforts to spur job growth through a mix of tax credits, federal contracting and a cross-country tour to promote small-business exporting. 

Ms. Mills is the former president of MMP Group, a Brunswick, Maine-based private-equity firm, and was a founding partner of Solera Capital, a New York venture capital firm that invests in women-owned companies. She has also managed a string of small manufacturing firms, producing hardwood flooring to refrigerator motors, and was once a product manager at General Foods. 

We spoke to Ms. Mills about the agency's efforts since taking over in April 2009. Here are edited excerpts from that conversation:

 The Wall Street Journal: You came to the SBA during the nation's worst economic crisis since the Great Depression. How did your background help prepare for this role?

 Ms. Mills: I grew up in small business. I've been involved in owning and growing a number of businesses over the years. So I'm a big believer in small business and in American entrepreneurship. I saw the potential for the Small Business Administration and its programs to really be critical lifelines in the 2008 credit crunch for small businesses. 

 WSJ: Still, small-business lending declined sharply over this period. Did banks decide smaller firms were too risky for loans, or were small businesses too hammered by the recession to take on debt? 

 Ms. Mills: We know demand was there, because we were providing billions in loan guarantees. We know there were small businesses with needs for expansion and they just didn't have access. The banking market was recovering from great stresses and was not available to many of these businesses, despite better credit scores. We were able to step in and allow them to stay in business, and in many cases, create jobs.

 WSJ: Emergency loan provisions boosted the volume of SBA-backed loans, an effort that was extended five times. What's going to happen as these provisions unwind? 

 Ms. Mills: Right now, we've transitioned to the next phase of the recovery where we know the small-business lending market is coming back, though there are gaps. We've rolled out two programs…designed to fill those gaps. The first is called Small Loan Advantage, which, without increasing risk and reducing our underwriting activity, we've been able to streamline the paperwork for both the borrower and the bank so that smaller loans now become more profitable and more accessible. 

The second is Community Advantage, where we're opening our highly successful 7(a) program to community development financial institutions and certified development companies so that we can have credible points of access in underserved communities to reach down into those small-business segments. 

 WSJ: Has the recession turned the SBA into a full-time disaster response agency?

 Ms. Mills: We have a very robust and important disaster-response capability. But it is one piece of the many things that we do. We talk about our capabilities as the three C's: capital, contracting and counseling. We run a contracting program that delivers $100 billion into the hands of small businesses, which is like oxygen to them. We run a counseling operation with over 900 small business development centers, 110 women's business centers, and special veterans centers that provide advice and guidance to small businesses. It's not just the capital they need. We know from our data that business owners involved in a long-term counseling relationship have better sales, better profits, more longevity and they can hire more workers. 

 WSJ: What will it take to get small businesses hiring again?

 Ms. Mills: We were able to pass the Small Business Jobs Act, the most significant piece of small-business legislation in ten years. We've been able to deliver 17 separate tax cuts over this period of time, each of which puts money right in the hands of small business. As we see them coming out of the recession, getting these tax cuts, accessing credit and seeing markets expand, they're now prepared to take the next step and hire.

Two years ago, small businesses were saying 'I need a loan because I'm worried about my business.' Today they're saying 'I need a loan because I want to expand, buy that new piece of equipment and hire that next person.' It's not government that creates jobs, it's small business.

 WSJ: Health care is a key issue for small-business owners. How does the Affordable Care Act affect them and why are so many against it? 

 Ms. Mills: The first thing that happened with the Affordable Care Act is that a number of businesses became eligible for tax credits in 2010. Right now, as those business are preparing their taxes, they're finding out that many of them—perhaps as many as four million out of the six million small businesses with employees—may get a 35% tax credit if they meet the criteria and provide health care. The second thing that is going to happen is that, in 2014, states will be providing state-based exchanges where insurance companies will compete for small-business insurance policies. 

One provision of the health-care bill that everybody is united in wanting to be repealed is the 1099 provision. Small businesses have been vocal about their concern about the excess paperwork. I came out early on with this concern, as did the president as early as last August, and we are working with Congress to repeal that provision.

 WSJ: Recently, efforts were launched to promote small-business exporting. Why are so few small U.S. firms doing business in global markets? 

 Ms. Mills: When you ask small businesses why they don't export, the first thing they say is fear. They're afraid that they don't understand the complexities of the regulations or they fear that they won't get paid. We have developed a robust set of tools in collaboration with the Department of Commerce, the Department of State, and our embassies overseas that deliver to small businesses information about export regulations, including trade missions and connections with potential buyers overseas. They can begin by registering at export.gov, which is an integrated one-stop portal for all of the federal government assistance on small-business exporting. 

There's opportunities across America for small businesses, whether it's through their website or by being part of a global supply chain, to sell their goods in markets that are opening up and we're providing assistance in that effort.

 Write to  Angus Loten at angus.loten@wsj.com 