 Singapore 

Although this city-state, dominated by the People's Action Party (PAP) for the past half-century, holds general elections regularly every four or five years, the results have long been one-sidedly in favor of the ruling party. In the last election held in 2006, the PAP secured 82 out of 84 parliamentary seats. Saturday's election may prove different at long last. While the PAP still is likely to win a majority of seats, it no longer looks quite so unbeatable as before, for several reasons. 

First is the rise of the Internet, and especially blogging. Bowing to inevitability, the government liberalized rules on the use of this medium for political campaigning several months ago. In 2006, use of the Internet by political parties was severely limited, while the government reminded citizens—especially bloggers and other new media—of a law barring "election advertising" except by political parties. That prohibition effectively covered anything urging voters to support a candidate, party or cause.

This year, the red lines have been redrawn to rule out only "distortion" and misrepresentation. This creates new opportunities for opposition parties. One of them, the Singapore Democratic Party (SDP), has exploited the medium to good effect. The party's website is full of videos of rally speeches, allowing more voters to see its candidates in action. This "multiplier effect" makes up for the SDP's relative weakness in door-to-door campaigning.

The effects are magnified by broader changes in how Singaporeans get political information. A recent survey of voters aged 21 to 34 by the Straits Times newspaper found that 36% relied on the Internet as their chief source of political news, pipping newspapers with 35%. This rebalancing may prove momentous since political content in Singapore's digital space is strongly pro-opposition, in marked contrast to mainstream media where the tone is one of deference to the PAP and the government.

The second trend is the surprising emergence within opposition ranks of prominent politicians who might otherwise be considered part of the privileged elite. For the Workers' Party there is Chen Show Mao, the managing partner in Beijing of international law firm David Polk and Wardwell, who was involved in the world's largest initial public offering, that of the Agricultural Bank of China. From other opposition parties there are Tony Tan, Hazel Poa and Benjamin Pwee, who had benefitted from government scholarships and served in the Administrative Service. Then there is Tan Jee Say from the SDP, who was the principal private secretary to then-Deputy Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong in the 1980s.

These politicians' track records boost the credibility of opposition parties, especially since the PAP's pitch has traditionally rested in part on the perception that it would be more competent in government than any of the opposition parties, whose candidates typically had not held important leadership posts before.

The third trend is demographic change. The older voters who came of age alongside the PAP's rise and forged their political loyalties during the prime of Lee Kuan Yew in the 1960s are passing from the scene. The voters under 40 who replace them may be far less likely to identify with the PAP.

All that said, the PAP's day is not yet over. Opposition parties still struggle to win over voters in the face of highly restrictive rules on party organizing, communication and fund raising. 

Meanwhile, the PAP itself is relatively nimble for a hegemonic party that has held power for so long. It manages to spot public grievances, even if a little tardily, and quickly steers policy to deal with them. 

In recent months it became obvious that the chief election issues would be the cost of living, rising housing prices, congested public transport and immigration. So the government has adopted a steady appreciation of the Singapore dollar to counter imported inflation; announced a ramping up of the building program for public housing, together with financial penalties for property speculation; promised more investments in the metro rail network; and proposed a slowdown in immigration approvals. It also gave away significant cash handouts to lower- and middle-income earners in its 2011 budget announced in February.

Yet despite the PAP's short-term success neutralizing some of these issues, such challenges offer a longer-term opportunity to the opposition. All these complaints can be traced to the fundamental economic philosophy pursued by the PAP government over the last few decades. Its leanings are more corporatist than capitalist, trying to spot industrial winners and heavily investing in them. The bias has long been toward investment rather than consumption.

The result has been a widening income gap as wages for low-skilled work are depressed by the influx of cheap migrant labor from India, Bangladesh and China while salaries and bonuses for higher earners climb up to levels matching developed countries. GDP growth and immigration have fuelled property price increases. Cost of living is a concern for more than half the population. Large numbers of foreigners in an already crowded city have put a strain on infrastructure.

Opposition parties are capitalizing on mounting discontent with the PAP economic model. But to turn that into electoral wins they'll need to refine their strategy. One problem is that the opposition seems to prefer whipping up anger against the PAP, rather than explaining how PAP policies created this situation. 

Neglecting a reasoned discussion of policies, the opposition parties find themselves offering quick fixes. But voters do not believe that any opposition party is going to win enough seats to form the next government, so those promises count for little. It would be better for them to broach broader policy topics and use this campaign season to bolster the public's faith in the opposition's ability to understand Singapore's problems at a deeper level than simple political point-scoring.

Singapore's opposition now has opportunities like never before to reach voters and field compelling candidates. That already is an impressive achievement, even if they're highly unlikely to win on election day. Now is not too soon to think about the next election. The best way to prepare for that is to use new communication avenues to start a real debate about Singapore's future.

 Mr. Au writes the Yawning Bread blog in Singapore. 