WASHINGTON -- President Barack Obama will address rising energy prices at a news conference on Friday, but he is not expected to call for releasing oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve. 

Unrest in the Middle East and North Africa has driven up gasoline and heating oil prices in the United States. Republicans in Congress have raised the volume on their criticism of Mr. Obama's energy policies, and some Democrats have called for Mr. Obama to release oil from the strategic reserves in an attempt to moderate prices by increasing supply. 

White House officials would not say what steps Mr. Obama would put forward, if any, during his press conference. But an administration official said Thursday evening not to expect an announcement on drawing oil from the strategic reserve. 

On Thursday, White House Press Secretary Jay Carney reiterated White House confidence that the global system can deal with any disruptions in oil supply caused by turmoil abroad. 

"We remain confident that the global system has the capacity to deal with a major disruption," Mr. Carney said. He added that Saudi Arabia and other producers had made clear their willingness to make up for any shortfall in supplies. 

The White House is facing attacks from Republicans for not doing more to increase energy supply and, in their view, allowing gas prices to rise. 

"The Obama administration has consistently blocked American energy production," House Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio) said at a news conference Thursday. 

Mr. Carney replied that domestic oil production was higher last year than in any year since 2003. "This president is committed to responsible production of energy, including oil, in this country," he said. 

A group of House Democrats led by Rep. Ed Markey (D., Mass.) introduced legislation to release at least 30 million barrels of oil from the reserve. 

Disputes over when to release oil from the reserves have raged for years in Washington, with some lawmakers seeing it principally as a national security device and others seeing it a means for calming jittery markets. 

—Stephen Power contributed to this report.

 Write to  Laura Meckler at laura.meckler@wsj.com 