HELSINKI—The European Central Bank's anti-inflation resolve remains firm despite recent comments by ECB President  Jean-Claude Trichet signaling that an interest-rate rise is unlikely in June, a top member of the ECB said in an interview.

In a press conference after the ECB's monthly meeting Thursday, Mr. Trichet said inflation risks are tilted to the upside, but he opted against saying that "strong vigilance" is needed to combat them. ECB watchers interpreted that as a signal that the next rate increase won't occur before July, because "strong vigilance" usually signals that higher rates are imminent. The euro slid and German bonds rallied on Mr. Trichet's remarks.

However, "I think you should not interpret this as a dovish stance," Austrian central bank governor  Ewald Nowotny said in an interview with The Wall Street Journal, referring to the term used to describe a soft-on-inflation attitude.

"What Trichet wanted to avoid was to give a clear signal of a rate hike in June, but that doesn't mean we don't take the inflation perspective seriously," Mr. Nowotny said on the sidelines of a conference in Helsinki one day after the ECB had its monthly meeting here.

Rather, the ECB wants another month to gauge the inflation outlook for 2012, Mr. Nowotny said. At the June ECB meeting officials will also have staff projections for next year. "It would have been rather strange to make a clear announcement before you have all the facts," Mr. Nowotny said.

Last month, the ECB raised its key policy rate for the first time in nearly three years, by one-quarter percentage point to 1.25%. At Thursday's meeting, ECB officials voted unanimously to keep that rate steady. Financial markets widely expect the next rate increase to occur in July, and for one or two more increases to follow by the end of the year.

Consumer prices are moving unevenly across the world. See inflation rates across 50 countries.

Mr. Trichet has said repeatedly that last month's rate increase wasn't necessarily the start of a series. But Mr. Nowotny suggested that as the euro zone economy stabilizes, interest rates will move higher.

"We are still to a large extent in crisis-mode both with regard to interest rates and with regard to liquidity policy," Mr. Nowotny said. "The clearer we have a normalization in the economy, the more it becomes obvious we will to react on the monetary-policy side."

Mr. Notowny said he isn't concerned about the euro's value against other major currencies such as the U.S. dollar. "If it's a short-term development it has no effect, if it becomes longer term it would have effects," Mr. Nowotny said.