NEW DELHI—Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh on Friday denied the country's ruling Congress party offered bribes to win a crucial vote in Parliament on the U.S.-India nuclear deal in 2008, a day after the leaked U.S. diplomatic cable containing these allegations was released. 

"I have no knowledge of any such purchases and I am absolutely categorical, I have not authorized anyone to purchase any votes. I am not aware of any acts of purchase of votes," said Mr. Singh speaking at a conference in New Delhi on Friday. 

Later Friday, speaking in the lower house of Parliament, Mr. Singh said his government "absolutely and firmly" rejected allegations of bribery. "I wish to make it clear that no one from the Congress Party or the government indulged in any unlawful act during the trust vote in July 2008," Mr. Singh said.

Thursday, the whistle-blowing website WikiLeaks made public a U.S. Embassy cable, dated July 17, 2008, that reported on a conversation between senior Congress party leader Satish Sharma and then-U.S. embassy official Steven White about the government's efforts to secure support in Parliament for the nuclear deal. Had the government lost the vote, it would likely have fallen. The allegations come at a difficult time for Mr. Singh, whose government is already is besieged by allegations of corruption and fast-rising prices.

Mr. Singh also expressed doubts over the legitimacy of the diplomatic correspondence mentioned in the leaked cables. "The Government of India cannot confirm the veracity, contents or even the existence of such communications. I may point out that many of the persons referred to in those reports have stoutly denied the veracity of its contents," he said in Parliament. 

The cable from Mr. White said Mr. Sharma's aide, Nachiketa Kapur, told a different U.S. Embassy employee that members of a regional political party had been paid to secure their support.

"Sharma's political aide Nachiketa Kapur mentioned to an embassy staff member in an aside on July 16 that Ajit Singh's Rashtriya Lok Dal had been paid about $2.5 million for each of their four MPs to support the government," the cable said. Despite the alleged payments, the regional Rashtriya Lok Dal party opposed the government in the vote. In the end, the deal went through.

Mr. Kapur, the aide, also showed the U.S. Embassy employee two chests containing cash and added that there was as much as $25 million in cash "around the house for use as pay-offs," the cable said. It isn't clear in the cable where the cash came from.

Ajit Singh, the RLD party leader, said in an interview he had no connection with any such deals. "I have three and not four members of Parliament; so the facts in WikiLeaks are wrong," he said in a telephone interview.

Mr. White, the secret cable's author, wrote further that he was informed by "another Congress party insider that Minister of Commerce and Industry Kamal Nath is also helping to spread largesse." Mr. White has since left the foreign service, the U.S. Embassy in New Delhi said. 

Mr. Nath, now India's minister for urban development, couldn't be reached to comment. Neither could Messrs. Sharma and Kapur, though both reportedly denied the allegations. "I've never had, nor do I have now, any political aide as claimed by WikiLeaks," Mr. Sharma told television news channels Thursday. Mr. Kapur said on television: "I deny all malicious allegations by WikiLeaks. There was no cash for vote." 

A Congress party spokesman declined to comment. A spokeswoman at the U.S. Embassy in Delhi said: "The Department of State does not comment on materials, including classified documents, which may have been leaked. We cannot speak on the authenticity of any documents provided to the press."

The U.S.-India nuclear deal, signed by U.S. President George W. Bush and Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh in July 2005, offers India access to Western technology and cheap atomic energy in return for New Delhi's allowing U.N. inspections of some of its nuclear facilities. The vote did overturn a three-decade ban on civilian nuclear trade with New Delhi. The left-wing Communist parties who were allies of the Congress party-led government in power in 2008 were against the deal and even pulled out of the alliance over the issue. Hence, the government allegedly resorted to bribery to secure votes for the nuclear deal.

The Congress party-led government won the vote in July 2008 with 275 votes in favor and 256 against in the 543-member lower house of Parliament. There were 10 abstentions.

The WikiLeaks report seems to back earlier charges by the main opposition Bharatiya Janata Party that the nuclear vote had been bought. Before the vote, the BJP waved stacks of Indian rupees on the floor of Parliament, claiming the cash was a down payment on a larger bribe to its party members in exchange for abstentions. The government and its parliamentary allies denied any wrongdoing at the time.

"This is the worst kind of crime in the history of parliament. The Congress will have to pay a heavy price for manipulating democratic practices," BJP spokesman Prakash Javadekar said Thursday.

D. Raja, leader of the Communist Party of India, said: "It is appropriate for the prime minister to explain. He has lost the moral responsibility to continue in power." 

The WikiLeaks's cable follows allegations of corruption relating to the run-up to October's Commonwealth Games in Delhi, revelations of alleged impropriety in a 2008 telecom spectrum allotment and a firestorm over high inflation.

 Write to  Vibhuti Agarwal at vibhuti.agarwal@wsj.com 