To reach the pinnacle of his profession,  Dennis Anderson relies on innovation, risk-taking and a methanol-alcohol-fueled 1,500-horsepower engine and 66-inch-tall tires.

Mr. Anderson is a legend on the monster-truck circuit, a hugely popular sport featuring vehicles with names like "Maximum Destruction" and "Madusa." The drivers race and compete in freestyle events, hurling their 10,000-pound trucks over ramps and turning junk cars into crushed metal slabs. Known to his friends and fans as the "Grave Digger," Mr. Anderson, 50, said that he's learned what works by trial and error, but he has done well enough to earn $15 million during his career.

To become one of the most dominant drivers the sport has ever known, Mr. Anderson relies less on unbridled machismo than on careful analysis. First, there's the track itself: Mr. Anderson has a canny ability to study a track and understand how it could be attacked. He calls it "reading the dirt." 

 During the freestyle events—in which judges award points based on a driver's ability to achieve "big air," execute wheelies and "cross-thread" jumps—Mr. Anderson, the fan favorite, often goes last, giving him time to plot his moves. He patiently studies his rivals to determine what he can do to push the creative envelope. 

"A bunch of the guys don't like watching everybody," Mr. Anderson said. "They like watching just a couple.... You psych yourself up and go, 'Oh, my God, I got to beat that, I got to jump higher than that,' and you go out and over-drive the truck." Instead, "what I look for is stuff that the other guys haven't done." 



So if rivals haven't tried a doughnut—that is, spinning the truck in a tight circle—he'll do one himself, zigging if others have zagged.

It may not look like it, but monster-truck driving is about balance—play it too safe and risk losing, go too crazy and risk flipping your truck or burning up your transmission. In his early years, Mr. Anderson had a reputation for the latter, often crashing early. But now he's learned to rein himself in when needed. His mantra: "Keep your cool. Keep your cool." 

He's highly innovative, constantly on the lookout for new things to try. Once Mr. Anderson, who basically invented freestyling two decades ago, introduces a new jump, rivals soon copy him, forcing him to find a new trick.

Mr. Anderson understands that to win, he has to win over his audience. A veteran showman, he starts his freestyle by driving the length of the arena floor to signal his fans that they are in for a real performance. "I like coming out really fast and loud and mean," he said. "So I'll take off, ripping it all the way across the floor to wake everybody up."

Though he drives on gut feeling, he freely uses technology. Once, when driving through a 70-foot-long mobile home as a stunt, he mounted a video camera in his cab so his friends could get a sense of the experience. That gave him the idea to clamp video cameras under his truck so he could later study the suspension system and learn how to adjust his shocks. In his headset, he has his crew tell him when he has 15 seconds left in the bonus round, giving him the window he needs to go for even riskier jumps. "I like to close big," he said.

The son of a pipefitter who worked at a local shipyard, Mr. Anderson grew up in Chesapeake, Va. One day he got tired of taking guff about his old truck from a rich farmer's kid with a souped-up truck. Mr. Anderson told his rival, "I'm going to take that junk and dig you a grave." The name stuck.

A father of four, Mr. Anderson started with tractor-pull competitions in Kentucky and Ohio. In the early 1980s, he began competing. A big burst of popularity came in the mid-1980s when he defeated a popular truck called "Big Foot." Today, a crew of 40 work at a facility at Mr. Anderson's home in Kill Devil Hills, N.C. There, the crew moves quickly to repair Mr. Anderson's truck and eight others that also compete on the monster-truck circuit.

Last Saturday, on a cold evening in Syracuse, N.Y., some 36,000 fans piled into the concrete Carrier Dome, home to Syracuse University's basketball and football teams. On this night, the floor was packed with dark dirt for another stop on the Advance Auto Parts Monster Jam monster-truck circuit. It's a multimillion-dollar tour for the show's producer, Feld Motor Sports Inc.

Fans, many of them kids, wear earplugs to protect themselves against the noise of ear-piercing engines. The aging legend cranked up his famous $250,000 truck with red headlamps and graveyard-scene paint job. Its specially designed chassis with seamless metal tubing helps prevent the truck from snapping in two. Custom axles help turn the tires.

"I've got that nervous excitement inside of me," said Mr. Anderson. "I want to beat everybody here. I want to get the old 'Wow' factor going on in my freestyle."

He won the racing competition, then it was on to the freestyle. When his turn was up, Mr. Anderson's theme song—George Thorogood's "Bad to the Bone"—began to play inside the arena. 

After about 70 seconds, a jump didn't go so well, and his truck landed upside down, preventing him from achieving a "double down"—winning both the race and the freestyle competition in one night. He emerged from his upside-down truck unhurt. 

"I nosed in and hit another obstacle and the wheel broke off, and it tripped the truck up," he said. "You don't know which way is up."

 Write to  Carrick Mollenkamp at carrick.mollenkamp@wsj.com 