The Year of the Rabbit, which technically kicks off in February, looks set for a brisk start. The trick will be keeping up the pace. 

The first week of 2011 should bring encouragement. On Monday, the Institute for Supply Management is expected to report a pickup in U.S. manufacturing activity in December. Wednesday, the ISM is likely to report higher service-sector activity last month, too. And, on Friday, economists expect the Labor Department to report the U.S. added 140,000 jobs in December, after just 39,000 the month before. 

Upbeat reports will be needed to confirm recent strength seen in other economic indicators, from jobless claims to regional manufacturing activity, and to support the view of those who see the U.S. growing at about 4% in 2011. 

Such growth would lead to a far stronger recovery, helping to boost consumer and business confidence, spur hiring and stoke spending. The Federal Reserve could begin thinking about normalizing interest rates again, and states would have an easier time filling budget holes. It wouldn't quite be a get-out-of-jail-free card, but would come close. 

Achieving that level of economic activity, however, isn't as easy for the U.S. today as it was a decade ago. Thanks in large part to slowing growth in the U.S. population, which is also aging, Bank of America Merrill Lynch estimates potential gross-domestic-product growth, after inflation, is now only about 2.3% annually. By comparison, GDP grew by 3.8% on average in the 1990s and 2.7% during the last expansion from 2002 through 2007. 

Even if the year does start off with annualized growth near 4%, it may prove difficult to sustain. Stronger growth carries side effects, like higher interest and mortgage rates, at a time when the fragile housing market can ill afford them. It boosts the dollar relative to other currencies even as policy makers look to bolster exports. It puts upward pressure on food and fuel costs before consumers can fully absorb them.

All told, the more likely outcome is that GDP growth remains closer to 3% in 2011, matching the pace estimated for 2010. Considering the nation's myriad economic challenges, that would still be a worthy achievement.

As readers of Aesop's fables know, there is nothing wrong with being the tortoise instead of the hare. 

—Email: tape@wsj.com 