In many ways, William Heinecke never left his peripatetic childhood behind. Born 1949 in the U.S. but raised in Asia—his father was with the U.S. foreign service; his mother was a journalist—Mr. Heinecke spent years in Japan, Hong Kong and Malaysia before settling in the Bangkok, where he dabbled in motor racing, journalism and a smattering of entrepreneurial schemes. In 1967, he established food and lifestyle brand company Minor Holdings. Today the Minor Corporation, has a portfolio of 1,100 food outlets and 31 hotels in Asia, Middle East and Africa, including the company's own Anantara brand. Although comfortably settled in Thailand for 47 years—Mr. Heinecke became a Thai citizen in 1991—the 61-year-old has a keen nose for "special destinations that get the heart pumping," he said. "Travel's got to have a bit of excitement, otherwise it's just another day."

 Bali, Indonesia 

Indonesia's celebrated tourist hot spot has "so much to offer; you've almost got five destinations in one place. You've got great diving, and it's rich in culture. There's also incredible shopping when you get up to Ubud," says Mr. Heinecke, referring to Bali's famed arts and cultural center.

 Maldives 

"If you love the water, the Maldives has more shades of blue than anywhere else in the world. Fantastic diving; there's everything from mantas to whale sharks." 

 Mauritius 

The island nation, located off continental Africa's southeast coast, boasts world-class diving attractions, But Mr. Heinecke goes for the fishing: "Fishing is very big. I fish whenever I get a chance. It's a bit like golf; you get to spend a day out."

 Sri Lanka 

"Sri Lanka's an island destination that has got great beaches...mountains, combined with a very rich and deep historic culture," he said. "That sets it apart from somewhere like Phuket, which has got great beaches…but not a lot of culture in Phuket itself."

 Tanzania 

East Africa gets Mr. Heinecke's heart pumping. "Africa's got all the excitement of the game," he said, but added he hunts only with a camera. "It's always fascinating. You never know what you're going to run into." He and his traveling companions often do a sort of air safari: "We have our own plane, and we tend to fly to the destinations."

—Chun Han Wong