ROME—Italians have suddenly become more pessimistic about their ability to maintain their legendary savings skills, raising doubts about the country's main line of defense in the sovereign debt crisis. 

Consumer confidence in the euro-zone's third-largest economy unexpectedly plummeted in January, driven entirely households' fear of the future, a monthly survey published by national statistics agency Istat showed Friday. 

The headline confidence index fell to 105.9 from 109.1 in December, but the alarming component was the 14-point drop in people's belief they can save for the future. The reading sank back to the levels of the summer of 2008, when the global financial crisis first dawned on public awareness. 

The dented savings prospects are a critical point for Italy, where high household wealth levels—more than five times gross domestic product—have helped shield the country's government bonds from the sovereign-debt crisis engulfing the rest of southern Europe. 

Now, some 35% of Italian households—and half the population in the poorer southern regions—find making it to the end of the month without tapping savings, said  Gian Maria Fara, president of the Eurispes think tank in Rome. 

Strains on private savings also reflects talk about the need for a wealth tax. 

  Giulio Amato, who as prime minister presided over the drastic budget cuts of 1992 when the country was forced to devalue the lira, has called for tapping Italy's estimated €8 trillion in private wealth to cut Italy's €1.8 trillion in public debt represents. 

Prime Minister  Silvio Berlusconi rejected the idea of a wealth tax as a form of "intellectual and strategic paralysis" that would only spark capital flight in an interview Friday with Il Foglio, a newspaper he finances. 

"We are perfectly able to safely cope with even the most scabrous aspects of the international financial crisis," he said. "Growth is around the corner." 

Senior debt and central bank officials are nervous about rolling over more than €500 billion in Italian government and bank bonds this year given political stability caused by scabrous allegations regarding Mr. Berlusconi's self-described "spicy" private soirees. 

The International Monetary Fund, the Bank of Italy and the Italian Treasury itself all expect Italy's economy to expand at only half the 2% annual pace that businesses say is needed to generate new jobs. 

Mr. Amato's suggestion has triggered debate over a wealth tax that would cut Italy's public debt burden to 80% of GDP from its current 120% level. That would require €10,000 from each of Italy's 60 million residents. 

Mr. Amato, who held senior government posts in the 1980s when Italy's public debt ballooned, has suggested a temporary levy on the richest 10% of Italians. 

Such a expropriation has elicited a chorus of predictable boos from business leaders. But in private conversations, even dealmaking investment bankers quietly acknowledge it might be necessary and even a good idea. 

Italy would immediately be able to slash spending on interest payments and be on course for budget surpluses that would boost its credit rating. 

Moreover, Italy's unusual high level of tax evasion—officially estimated at 17% of GDP or a third of all private-sector national income—gives a fillip to the usual horror at the idea of confiscation. 

"Evaded taxes are transformed into wealth," noted  Mario Sarcinelli, a former director-general of the Bank of Italy and now chairman for Italy of Dexia-Crediop, the public and project-financing bank. "To rebalance this asymmetry I wouldn't be theoretically against a wealth tax, although clearly it would depend on how it was executed," he said. 

Currently, Italian income taxes on declared labor income are the highest in the euro area, while those on capital income are among the lowest. That, coupled with widespread cheating, has caused an unusual gap in the so-called Gini coefficient—a measure of inequality—which is twice as high for Italian wealth distribution as it is for the income distribution, according to the Bank of Italy. 

A major tax initiative "would require strong political leadership and a broad consensus, neither of which appear to be on the horizon," said  Stefano Micossi, head of Assonime, a corporate lobby that recently endorsed the idea of 

 Write to  Christopher Emsden at chris.emsden@dowjones.com 