More European companies continued to make plans to relocate staff in Japan Wednesday as the country battled to prevent further damage to nuclear reactors five days after a devastating earthquake and tsunami. 

A slew of multinationals now have given expatriate workers and their families in Japan the opportunity to return home or relocate temporarily to other countries in the region, while local employees have been offered the chance to move away from areas under threat to safer parts of the country. 

Swedish truck maker  Volvo AB said that 48 of its 66 expatriate employees in Japan have chosen to leave the country. "Those who are still in the country have chosen to stay," said Volvo spokeswoman  Karin Wik. "They are executives in high positions and, therefore, crucial to running the company on site." 

UD Trucks, Volvo's Japanese unit, said limited operations had resumed at three of its plants and employees in charge of recovery activities had returned to work. It said that work would resume Thursday at its sales office, in parts supply and the back office. 

Volvo announced on its website Wednesday that two UD Trucks employees had been found dead following the tsunami. The two were mechanics at a dealer in Sendai. 

France's PSA Peugeot-Citroen, Europe's second-largest car maker by volume after  Volkswagen AG
VLKAY


-2.40
%




, has about 230 employees in Japan, including a few dozen expatriates, mostly French, who were being repatriated, a spokeswoman said. The company sold 8,423 cars in Japan last year. 

For now, there is no immediate problem with the flow of mechanical and electronic components that are sourced in Japan, as most are shipped by sea and there are sufficient supplies en route to keep European assembly plants turning over. However, the company was assessing the potential impact of the Japanese disaster on second- and third-tier local suppliers, the spokeswoman said. 

Tire maker  Compagnie Generale Des Etablissements Michelin SA
MGDDY


-1.49
%




 has closed its offices in Japan and its 780 employees in the country have been told to take time off until March 21, which is a public holiday. It no longer has any manufacturing activity in Japan since it stopped making tires at a plant at Ota, near Tokyo, last summer. Most of the employees are in a research and development center. Michelin has about 30 expatriate employees, French and other nationalities, who have been told they can return home if they want, but thereis no plan to evacuate them for now. 

Renault SA has about 40 expatriate employees in Japan, most of whom work with alliance partner  Nissan Motor Co. at Nissan's headquarters in Yokohama. Including families and staffers on business trips, the total is about 150. It is offering to repatriate expats if they choose, but there is no evacuation plan. Both companies say staff members can move to safer areas in Japan if they want. 

Sweden's Ikea, the world's largest furniture retailer by sales, has offered to help its Tokyo staff of around 1,200 and their families to move to the Kansai region, some 300 kilometers south of the Japanese capital, spokeswoman Charlotte Lindgren said. 

"We are helping the staff and families who chose to relocate both with travel and lodging," she said. "The safety of our staff is most important right now."

Ikea, which has around 2,000 mostly Japanese employees in the country, shut down its three warehouses in the Tokyo region following last week's earthquake as they sustained "lighter" damage. 

The earthquake and tsunami have been followed by continuous aftershocks, leaving possibly more than 10,000 people dead or missing, disrupting communication and transport, and triggering power outages. 

Finland-based mobile phone giant  Nokia Corp.
NOK


-0.45
%




 said it is still trying to obtain up-to-date information about the safety and well-being of Japanese suppliers and partners. 

"Thankfully, we can account for all Nokia employees living and travelling in the affected area," said Nokia spokesman  Tomi Kuuppelomaki, adding that the commercial impact on the company's business in terms of direct manufacture and component supplies is still being determined. 

Nokia's direct presence in Japan consists of only a small number of administrative staff. It has no manufacturing units there but does source components from subcontractors in the country. 

Swedish network equipment vendor  Telefon AB L.M. Ericsson
ERIC


-1.28
%




 said so far it had no reports of injured or missing employees, and is analyzing the broader effects from the disaster on the telecom industry and its own business. 

Japan is a large supplier of components such as semiconductors for industries including telecommunications, and component sourcing is likely to be affected, though it is too early to tell to what extent, Ericsson said. 

German semiconductor company  Infineon AG
IFNNY


-0.08
%




 said it doesn't expect any significant short-term effects on its business from the crisis. "In the short term we don't expect any large impact," Chief Executive  Peter Bauer said on the sidelines of a media event in Munich. It is hard to assess what impact power blackouts and planned power cuts will have, he added. 

The company is still exporting products to Japan and said there has been no dramatic impact on the supplier side except for a few materials. 

"We have decided this morning at our emergency conference that we will still export goods to Japan via open airports of the south, where production is continuing," Mr. Bauer said. 

Infineon has around 100 employees who weren't affected by the earthquake. The company is offering support to those employees who wish to leave the country or relocate to the south. Infineon doesn't consider its Japanese rivals as being hard hit by the current crisis. 

"We have a relatively good picture about our rivals and there's no big impact," Mr. Bauer said. Most semiconductor factories are located in the south of Japan, he noted. Also, the companies have "very good emergency plans" and are quick in restoring damaged plants. 

German industrial conglomerate  Siemens AG said late Tuesday it was closely monitoring the situation. "Our employees also have been offered the possibility to leave the country together with their families, and since the weekend employees are taking advantage of this offering. The company is coordinating the planning for the employees and is also doing the flight bookings for them," it said. 

Siemens has around 2,500 staffers in Japan. It couldn't say how many of its 90 foreign staffers, of which 34 are German, had already left the country. 

Swedish industrial company  Atlas Copco
ATLKY


-3.70
%




 AB is offering its employees and their families in Tokyo and north of the capital a choice to relocate to Osaka or Nagoya further south, spokesman  Daniel Frykholm said. 

"We're trying to maintain capacity and continue operations, and to keep essential staff working," Mr. Frykholm said. "But we don't want to get into a situation with captains on a sinking ship." Atlas Copco has around 400 staff in Japan with about 180 working in Tokyo and further north. 

Fashion retailer  Hennes & Mauritz
HMB


0.03
%




 AB, which on Tuesday closed its nine stores in the Tokyo and Yokohama area, has offered to help its staff in the region to move out to other areas in Japan, said spokesman  Hacan Andersson. 

The company closed the stores for the sake of personnel, he said, adding that power blackouts in the area had made it hard for them to get to work. 

Hennes & Mauritz, the world's third-largest clothing retailer, has around 2,200 stores world-wide, of which 10 are in Japan. Most of its 900 staff in the country are Japanese. 

Scandinavian airline  SAS
SAS


-0.65
%




 AB said it has created a temporary base in Beijing for its flights between Copenhagen and Tokyo, where aircraft can refuel and change crew. SAS made the decision for safety reasons and due to the supply situation in Tokyo, said spokeswoman  Malin Selander, adding that the temporary solution might become permanent. 

Meanwhile,  Swiss Re is offering its Tokyo-based employees relocation within Japan, but stressed that its office in Japan's capital remains open. 

The Zurich-based reinsurance company's 56 employees can decide if they want to take the option of moving within Japan to a city that's around five hours away from Tokyo by high-speed train, spokesman  Tom Armitage said. 

The option has been made available today, meaning that the Zurich-based press office had no indication yet on the take-up. 

—Jens Hansegard and Christina Zander in Stockholm, David Pearson in Paris, Matthias Karpstein in Frankfurt and Anita Greil in Zurich contributed to this article.