WITTENHEIM, France—Jean-Paul Burget, an animal-rights activist, has risked his life posing as an ivory dealer to catch elephant poachers in Africa.

But the quest closest to his heart is saving the Great Hamster of Alsace, which has forever roamed these pretty hills but whose population in the wild here has dropped to 500. He vows to "fight till the last hamster."

The black-bellied golden rodent, he says, is Alsace as much as Riesling white wine and onion pies. "Of course, my African friends ask why I care so much about a rat," says Mr. Burget.

 Cricetus cricetus—10 inches long and weighing a bit over a pound—is very different from its captive cousins. It hibernates five months a year. It is omnivorous, eating mice and sparrows as well as corn and potatoes. When attacked, it stands on its hind legs and roars. Mating is a dangerous game: A female in heat can kill a male she doesn't like.

The species, it must be emphasized, roams farms and fields, under different names, all the way to central Russia. In the Netherlands, for example, it is called koerenwolf, or cornwolf.

Still, Mr. Burget and fellow activists have taken their fight to the European Court of Justice. In a 23-page opinion released Jan. 20, the ECJ, in Luxembourg, said a 1992 law guarantees protection to endangered species and subspecies like the hamster. 

The court blamed urban sprawl and the dominance of corn crops. Maize, with its short growing season, offers little protection for hamsters. Wheat and alfalfa are around longer and provide hamsters with cover to hide from foxes and birds of prey.

In 1979, a census registered 4,000 hamsters in Alsace. Last year, that number was down to 500. The land devoted to planting corn in Alsace increased to 342,735 acres in 2009, from 225,409 acres in 1989, according to French government figures.

The final ECJ ruling, which usually follows the preliminary opinion, will be released in April. France could face fines up to €17 million ($24 million). It might have to adjust how it spends European Union farm subsidies, offering farmers more money to grow wheat and alfalfa. The EU is currently debating how its $75 billion per year farm subsidy program will be administered between 2013 and 2020. One key issue: How much autonomy to give governments in fulfilling environmental and wildlife goals.

Local farmers question that logic. "Our economy around here should be wine and corn, because that's what makes money," says Christian Schmidt, a neighbor who farms 250 acres, mostly corn. "Why would you mess with the economy for a small animal?"

Mr. Burget, now 53, has been campaigning for hamsters since the late 1990s. He worked at a zoo until five years ago, when he quit to have more time for hamsters. He now works as a street sweeper from 5 a.m. to 12:30 p.m., so he can work on the animals in the afternoon, and has a foundation called Sauvegarde Faune Sauvage. "If people want to save elephants, gorillas or hamsters, send me money," he says, days after returning from a two-week trip to Cameroon where, he says, he helped authorities arrest five poachers.

He keeps boas, iguanas, tortoises and hedgehogs in the basement, wild cats and birds in the backyard. Colorful rocks, all from Alsace, are glued to the ceiling. He might have to sell his house to climb out of debt, he says.

Ten years ago, Mr. Burget secured €140,000 a year from the French state to set up three conservation sites, which now hold roughly 1,000 captive hamsters. He shows off the biggest, with 450 animals, in a nearby village called Eisenheim. 

"I never thought I'd work for the hamster, but the job came up," says Julien Hoffman, a 29-year-old shark and crocodile expert, tending to a year-old female. "This is not about making money, it's about saving the species," he says. What do crocs and hamsters have in common? "Well, a crocodile would eat a hamster, but otherwise, nothing."

Mr. Hoffman's colleague, 31-year-old Julie Ledit, has been working on hamsters for 10 years. "Something to celebrate, I guess," she says. "We started in 2001, with 25 hamsters."

March, breeding season, is their toughest month. If a female in heat rejects a male dropped in her cage, she fights. In the wild, the male can usually run away. In a closed environment like a cage, the combat can mean death. Every year, a dozen hamsters die this way.

Mr. Hoffman is toying with a double cage that puts hamsters next to each other, with only a wire fence between them. The researchers check if the pair is compatible before lifting the fence. "It's a lot of work, just the two of us, managing hundreds of couples," says Mr. Hoffman.

Every April, the activists release a few hundred tagged couples into a field surrounded by an electronic fence that gives them an electric shock if they try to leave. Typically, the parents, bred in captivity, are unable to survive in the wild, but their offspring, born outside, are ready for the world.

Mr. Burget's campaign has created a local buzz. One Friday night, 140 residents and hamster activists, including Mr. Burget, packed a nearby Natural History Museum .

Christophe Oehrle, a pony-tailed 41-year-old, delivered a long lecture on hamster history, going back to the year 1250. Mr. Oehrle quit his job in a chemical plant two years ago after he was diagnosed with a life-threatening illness. One hamster nugget: It was once called Barmaus, because it resembled a mouse rising on its hind legs like a bear.

Then it was time for a hamster town hall meeting. "Can I put hamsters in this field I own?" asked a woman. No, she was told, her field's dirt is too moist. 

One listener, Mailys Bosshardt, 24, is working as a researcher for Electricité de France, the energy giant. Her dream, though, is to work as an animal-rights researcher. "I'd like to help the people here," she said. "Then I'd get to work for the hamster, too." 

 Write to  John W. Miller at john.miller@dowjones.com 