Airbus said it signed a preliminary agreement with Indian budget carrier IndiGo for 180 of its A320 airliners with a catalog value of $15.6 billion, which Airbus says is the largest-ever order for jetliners in terms of number of planes and one of the biggest by value.

Airbus, a unit of European Aeronautics Defence & Space Co., said it expects to finalize the contract in several weeks. Major customers normally receive discounts from list price of around 40%, industry officials say.

  John Leahy, Airbus's chief operating officer for customers, said the company had researched commercial jetliner contracts going back decades and not found an order for more planes. 

IndiGo, India's largest low-fare carrier, began life with a similarly flamboyant announcement: In June 2005, even before the airline began operations, it ordered 100 Airbus A320s. Since then, it has capitalized on the country's fast economic rise and booming middle class to expand rapidly. India in recent years has been one of the world's fastest-growing airline markets.

IndiGo now operates 32 planes from the initial order, according to Airbus data. The large new order "will allow IndiGo to continue to offer low fares," said IndiGo co-founders Rakesh Gangwal and  Rahul Bhatia in a statement issued by Airbus.

IndiGo has expanded even as other big Indian carriers have struggled with fast growth and overtaxed infrastructure. National carrier Air India and up-market rivals Jet Airways and Kingfisher Airlines have all experienced very public turbulence with their finances, staff and regulators.

The order is Airbus's first for the new version of the single-aisle A320 model that Airbus last month started offering with more efficient engines. IndiGo plans to buy 150 of the "New Engine Option" A320s, which Airbus says will offer 15% lower fuel consumption and greater range than the current version. Deliveries of the new-engine planes to IndiGo are slated to start in 2016. 

The planes will be delivered over many years, so the huge sticker price will be spread over an equal amount of time. For its previous order, IndiGo has financed airplane deliveries through a combination of loans and leases. 

Like many carriers, Indigo essentially mortgages its planes in an increasingly common practice known as sale-leaseback.The airline's strong track record has facilitated financing, aviation bankers say. 

India's airline market expanded rapidly around 2005 following deregulation, and it quickly outstripped the country's antiquated aviation infrastructure. Airports and air-traffic control systems became overloaded with passengers and flights, while airlines faced a shortage of qualified pilots. The sector suffered even more in 2007 and 2008, when fuel prices surged. 

Several carriers scaled back growth plans, and the industry caught its breath during the global economic crisis, which affected India much less than many developed countries.

As a result of the breakneck growth, Indian aviation has suffered several serious accidents and incidents. The deadliest crash world-wide last year occurred in India, when an Air India Express Boeing 737 crashed on landing in Magalore, killing 158 people on May 22.



 Write to  Daniel Michaels at daniel.michaels@wsj.com 