A Turkish film in which the hero takes revenge on Israel for last year's clash at sea between Israeli soldiers and Turkish aid activists, won't be able to open in Germany as scheduled on Thursday—an annual day of remembrance of the Jewish Holocaust, the German movie-rating agency said.

"Valley of the Wolves, Palestine" is an offshoot of a wildly popular televised Turkish action series that has portrayed Israeli soldiers as wanton killers. The series, which began airing before the flotilla incident, triggered a diplomatic row between the two countries last year.

The movie's Facebook page says it will be released in more than 100 countries. With more than three million ethnic Turks estimated to live in Germany, the movie has a substantial potential audience there.

Tensions over the Mavi Marmara clash, which brought relations between Israel and Turkey close to rupture, had started to calm by last fall, but began to boil again recently. This week, the former allies released competing fact-finding reports that come to diametrically opposed conclusions as to who was to blame.

On Tuesday, Germany's movie-ratings agency said it won't clear the Turkish movie in time to permit its planned opening there on Thursday, a day earlier than in other countries, saying its submission came too late to complete a review.

Pana Film, the Istanbul-based production company that made the movie, said the ratings agency was violating "law, democracy and freedom of thought," by failing to classify the movie in time for Thursday's release.

The Auschwitz-Birkenau concentration camps were liberated from Nazi control on Jan. 27, 1945. Germany has commemorated the date since 1996.

A spokesman for Germany's Voluntary Control of the Film Industry agency, known as Freiwillige Selbstkontrolle der Filmwirtschaft, orFSK, said, Tuesday that the cause of the delay was purely technical."They gave us the film very late. We didn't have time to complete the examination," the spokesman said. 

A meeting to rate the film is scheduled for Thursday, meaning it won't be cleared to show that day. Any theater that shows it would risk being fined, the FSK spokesman said. The movie was set for release a day earlier in Germany than elsewhere because movie-theater cycles in Germany start on Thursdays, said an official at Pera Films, the Cologne-based company distributing the movie in Germany.

The FSK spokesman said the agency earlier rejected the movie for viewing by youth, and that Thursday's meeting to finalize the process was being held on the earliest possible date. On Thursday, the movie could get a more adult classification, or none at all, the spokesman said.

"Valley of the Wolves, Palestine" deals with the storming of the Mavi Marmara passenger ferry when it was sailing 72 nautical miles off the Gaza Strip as part of an aid convoy in May. Israeli soldiers shot and killed nine passengers in that clash—eight Turkish citizens and one U.S. national from Turkey.

In the new movie, the series' James Bond-like hero, Polat Alemdar, goes to Gaza to avenge the Turkish deaths by killing the Israeli commander who led the operation. The script is unabashedly political. A trailer for the film shows Israeli officials planning to create a Greater Israel. When the Turkish special agent arrives at the Gaza land border from Egypt, an Israeli soldier asks him why he is coming to Israel. "I didn't come to Israel. I came to Palestine," he answers.

Turkish-Israeli tensions could grow again in coming months. This week, the Humanitarian Relief Foundation, the Turkish charity that led last year's convoy, said it plans to launch a new, much larger aid fleet to Gaza on the May 31 anniversary of last year's raid and just before Turkey's general elections in June.

Pana Film on Tuesday said, "Our guilt lies in standing beside innocent people, and not being supporters of Zionist-Fascist policies."

 Write to  Marc Champion at marc.champion@wsj.com 