FRANKFURT—Euro-zone governments have passed a week of heavy bond supply reasonably successfully, but more crucial tests await.

The biggest of the new week will come Thursday, when Spain auctions debt maturing in 2020 and 2024. Sales of Treasury bills, or short-term debt, from Spain, Greece and Belgium Tuesday and from Portugal on Wednesday will serve as the warm-up.

How those auctions will fare is difficult to judge. Debt sales this week in Greece, Portugal, Spain and Italy, all fiscally frail or highly indebted countries, went smoothly, which has boosted sentiment and sent yields lower.

Another positive could come from a meeting of euro-zone finance ministers on Monday and Tuesday. Markets have been bolstered by suggestions that they could take fresh measures to commit capital and political will in support of weaker euro-zone states through the European Financial Stability Facility. 

Indeed, Spain opted this week to add an auction of 2024 bonds, suggesting it sees an improvement in sentiment. The size of the two bond offerings will be announced Monday.

But the biggest risk is that the week's feel-good factor dissipates and bond yields rise again. Funding costs are almost certain to rise from previous sales of the bonds, when market yields were generally lower. But Spain could see a drop in the average yield paid on its 2020 bond from a mid-December sale, when it paid 5.446%.

Investors also face a flood of offerings from triple-A-rated euro-zone borrowers, and the European Financial Stability Facility, the €440 billion ($587.44 billion) funding vehicle set up after the Greek crisis for euro-zone countries in need, could soon launch its debut issue. 

Even so, yields of existing bonds from Greece, Portugal, Spain and Italy tumbled this week, aided by talk of Asian investors at the auctions and by purchases in the secondary market by the European Central Bank. The yield on Spain's 10-year benchmark fell to 5.313%, from 5.474%, while Portugal's 10-year yield fell to 6.764%, from 6.983%, and Italy's 10-year yield fell to 4.66%, from 4.792%. The moves came even as yields in Germany, the euro zone's defacto benchmark, jumped.

Some analysts have cautiously suggested that sentiment may be shifting in favor of Spain at the expense of Italy, which has been seen as the safer bet among the euro-zone's so-called peripheral countries.

Analysts at  Lloyds Banking Group said they have been hearing "more and more talk" about while Italy's overall national financial position is more favorable, Spain's relatively low level of debt relative to the size of its economy makes it better able to cope with rising financing costs, at least in the short term. 

"We think this might be a symptom of a market reassessment of Italy's status as 'darling of the peripheral investor'," the bank's analysts said. 

Some debt-market observers have hinted that the market relief, despite all the remaining stress, is a tentative sign that the markets don't want any more bailouts. Many consider Portugal the next candidate for a bailout, but its government has insisted it doesn't need one and has implements a mix of spending cuts and tax increases to shore up its finances.

"Ironically, Portugal for us is well on the road towards correcting its fiscal imbalances," said  Ciaran O'Hagan, a strategist at Société Générale in Paris.

Portugal has lower debts than Greece and no banking problems comparable with the meltdown of Ireland's banking sector. But Portugal suffers from chronically low economic growth, which combined with high borrowing costs makes it hard for the government to stem its rising debt and stay solvent, economists say. 

In addition to offerings from the euro zone's troubled members, up to €19.5 billion ($26.03 billion) in bonds are on offer next week from triple-A-rated Finland, Germany and France. In addition, a bond offering from Belgium via a syndicate of banks is being whispered on the market for next week or the week after. The offering could be have a 10-year maturity and likely would mean the cancellation of its first scheduled bond auction of the year, on Jan. 31. 

Driven by the market pressure, Belgium is seeking to work out additional deficit cuts for 2011 to offset its fragile political system. 

"Arguably, rising risk premium for Belgian government bonds may increase the pressure on politicians to move on forming a government by buying into compromises on the proposed state reform," said  Rainer Guntermann, an economist at Commerzbank in Frankfurt. 

 Write to  Emese Bartha at emese.bartha@dowjones.com 