So much for China slowing things down. 

The country's economy grew 9.8% in the fourth quarter, faster than in the prior three months and a quicker pace than economists had expected. An impressive performance, but a 2.9% drop in Shanghai stocks Thursday reflects concerns policy makers will need to increase their efforts to keep a lid on growth and, more importantly, inflation. 





Price gains did slow slightly in December: The consumer price index rose 4.6%. But this could prove a temporary respite, because the pace of food price rises has picked up in recent weeks. Non-food inflation is also steadily increasing. 

Beijing has taken some broad measures to slow things down, like raising the amount of capital banks must hold in reserve—and therefore cannot lend out. Key lending and deposit rates have also been raised. 

In truth, these are marginal in their impact. If Beijing is serious about clamping down on inflation, it needs to control loan growth. 

"The primary tool at the government's disposal is not interest rates and reserve requirements," says Alistair Thornton, China analyst at IHS Global Insight. Consider that reserve requirement increases did little to slow lending by banks, which made $1.2 trillion in new loans last year. With one-year deposit rates of 2.75% still well below the rate of inflation, it'll take several increases before policy rates reach a level that can meaningfully discourage spending and investment. 

When it comes to loans, Beijing's intentions—and its level of control over the situation—are difficult to read. Even if Beijing's target for new loans in 2011 has been lowered by about 10%, to about $1 trillion, as economists now think, this is still a torrid rate. Between 2006 and 2008, before lending rates were boosted sharply in order to prop up economic growth, lending was averaging just over half a trillion dollars a year. 

Anyway, last year lending crossed the official limit, and banks were also making a substantial amount of so-called "shadow loans" that are kept off balance sheets. Those, Fitch Ratings estimates, could've totaled as much as $455 billion. 

To be sure, cracking down just on that lending would help. And the good news for policy makers is that if they must cut into growth to keep inflation under control, then they've got plenty of room to move without falling below Beijing's official growth target of 8%. 

But for now, there's still a little too much sweet and not enough sour in China's policy mix. 

 Write to  Mohammed Hadi at mohammed.hadi@dowjones.com 