A good balance between oil supply and demand backed up by adequate inventories and spare production capacity show that last week's big drop in oil prices was "inevitable" and "in line with short-term market fundamentals," the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries said in its monthly report. 



 The Danish government said it would reinstate guards along borders with Sweden and Germany and conduct spot checks designed to fight crime and illegal migration, the latest in a series of small steps reversing hassle-free travel across European Union frontiers. 



 Finland's caretaker government struck an agreement with opposition lawmakers to win the country's backing of an aid package for Portugal, clearing the way for European Union finance ministers to sign off on the deal in meetings next week. 



 German Chancellor Angela Merkel backed Mario Draghi for the presidency of the European Central Bank, removing the last obstacle to the Italian central bank chief's likely accession to one of Europe's top economic posts. 

Later, Italian Economy Minister Giulio Tremonti said he had signed a document officially presenting Draghi's name to the rest of the 17 countries that make up the euro zone.



 The number of new psychoactive substances identified in Europe last year was 41, double the number in 2009, in a sign of the rapidly developing global market for "legal highs," health officials said. 



Annual consumer-price inflation in Germany, Europe's largest economy, was the highest in April since October 2008, driven primarily by energy-price increases, the Federal Statistics Office said, confirming its preliminary figures published April 27. 



 The Bank of England made a "marked" increase to its near-term inflation forecast, paving the way for earlier interest-rate rises than investors had expected. 

But a downgraded growth forecast balanced the picture, making some economists wary of forecasting near-term rate rises.



Two earthquakes struck southeast Spain in quick succession, killing at least three people and causing major damage to buildings, an official said.



 A largely peaceful protest by tens of thousands of Greeks against new government austerity measures was marred by violence in central Athens late in the day, when hundreds of youths wearing ski masks hurled water bottles, firecrackers and other objects at police who responded with tear gas and pepper spray. 

The protest was backed by a nationwide general strike that effectively shut down most government operations. 



Turkey demanded that one of its biggest commercial banks, Akbank, pay an extra $742 million in reserve requirements, hitting the bank's profits as the government and central bank struggle to control worrying signs of overheating in the economy.

The move came as official data showed Turkey's current account deficit doubled year-to-year in March to reach a record high equivalent to more than 8% of gross domestic product, hitting stock prices and the Turkish lira as concerns of overheating grew.



Poland's central bank raised all of its policy rates by 0.25 percentage point amid elevated inflation, surprising market participants, which widely expected the bank to pause its tightening cycle.



The U.S. trade deficit widened by a more than expected 6.0% in March, as soaring oil prices caused imports to outstrip a record level of exports. 

 A federal jury convicted Galleon Group founder Raj Rajaratnam on all 14 counts of securities fraud and conspiracy, providing the U.S. with a significant win in a push to prosecute insider trading. 

The verdict by the 12-member jury, following 11 days of deliberation, capped a blockbuster trial that started in early March and featured 45 wiretaps showing how the hedge-fund executive trafficked in insider tips provided to him by a web of contacts at the top tier of American business. 



 The U.S. approved a Royal Dutch Shell plan to drill for oil in five locations deep under the Gulf of Mexico, the second deep-water exploration plan approved in the Gulf since the government lifted a moratorium on deep-water drilling last October following the BP oil spill. 



 President Barack Obama is preparing a fresh outreach to the Muslim world in coming days, senior U.S. officials say, one that will ask those in the Middle East and beyond to reject Islamic militancy in the wake of Osama bin Laden's death and embrace a new era of relations with the U.S.  



 The killing of Osama bin Laden has thrust foreign policy into a 2012 Republican presidential contest that was supposed to revolve around the economy, dividing GOP candidates and complicating, at least temporarily, the central theme of incompetence they were pressing against U.S. President Barack Obama. 



The rate of increase in China's consumer prices eased slightly in April to 5.3%, though the government was widely expected to continue its campaign of raising interest rates and boosting bank reserve requirements to try to contain inflation.

The use of the yuan in foreign trade is likely to grow only modestly this year, a Chinese bank regulator said, suggesting that Beijing still has a long way to go in its drive to internationalize its currency. 



Tokyo Electric Power, the operator of the stricken Fukushima Daiichi nuclear facility, will accept government involvement in its management and won't cap total compensation funds for those hurt by Japan's nuclear crisis, as part of an agreement for assistance in meeting what could total tens of billions of dollars in claims.

The cabinet of Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan is expected to approve by Friday a plan to provide financial assistance to the company, which is likely to be funded by both the government and the utilities industry, government officials have indicated. 

A prefecture just south of Tokyo said it had detected higher-than-permissible amounts of radioactive material in tea leaves, in a reminder that Japan's radioactive-contamination problems are far from over.

The contamination—the first case in almost a month that an agricultural product has been found tainted outside Fukushima Daiichi's home prefecture—is also the first time that any agricultural item from Kanagawa Prefecture was found to contain an excessive level of radioactivity. 



 Syria escalated a countrywide crackdown on protesters as tanks shelled a central city and a southern town, killing at least 20 people, rights activists said. 

The U.S. Senate was expected to introduce a resolution calling for President Barack Obama to impose sanctions directly on Syrian President Bassar al-Assad. 



 Senior Libyan rebel leaders are pressing the Obama administration for quick financial aid, hoping to overcome continued uncertainty inside the U.S. government over how to free up assets seized from Col. Moammar Gadhafi's government. 

To that end, Mahmoud Jibril, the foreign minister of Libya's Transitional Interim National Council, and Ali Tarhouni, the group's finance minister, began talks with administration officials, with additional meetings scheduled through the rest of the week.

 Libyan security agents are confiscating money and belongings from African migrants to allow them on vessels sailing toward Italy, sometimes escorted by the Libyan navy, according to an international aid official and a social worker familiar with the situation.  



Uganda's main opposition leader, Kizza Besigye, was barred from boarding a return flight to Uganda from Kenya's capital of Nairobi ahead of Thursday's swearing-in ceremony for President Yoweri Museveni, opposition party officials said. 