It's hard to get excited about the U.K. government's March 23 budget, and unless things get a whole lot worse, or a whole lot better, its successors are unlikely to be any more interesting. 

This is a shame, because budget day is the one piece of political theater that still engages many Britons. It's essentially equivalent to the State of the Union address, except that it's all about money. The weekly encounters between the prime minister and the leader of the opposition have their charm but are too fleeting to stick in the memory, and the state opening of parliament is just dull. So if British politics has a big spectacle, it's the budget. 

Usually, the chancellor of the exchequer giveth with one hand and taketh away with the other. Some budgets are described as political, though in truth they all are. The object of the exercise is to shore up the base where that's needed, further alienate those who aren't going to vote for you anyway, and win over whoever happens to be in play at the time.

But this year there will be nothing to give away, and therefore the taking will also be pretty limited. Having set out its path to fiscal stability last year, the coalition government doesn't have much to work with between here and 2015, when, assuming it holds together in the meantime, it must once again face voters.

Indeed, the way things are set up, all the government has to offer voters for the next few years is blood, toil, tears and sweat. But there is something wrong with this picture—politicians just don't do that kind of thing, ever. 

There has to be an upside, and that's where the state-owned banks come in.

Only through the sale of the government's stakes in the Royal Bank of Scotland Group and  Lloyds TSB can it hope to deliver the holy grail of center-right politicians—the pre-election tax cut.

And that simple fact is key to predicting the likely outcome of all the public soul-searching about whether British banks are the right size, behave the right way, or pay their staff appropriately. All that really matters is that they're worth a lot when the political cycle dictates that the government's stakes must be sold.

Just to be clear, this would be true if the Labour Party were in power, or a Very-Left-Wing Party That Hates Banks. The current coalition is by no means more venal or less concerned about getting policy right. It's just that if you believe you are making things better, getting re-elected is pretty much goal number one. 

Of course, the job of the opposition is to make sure the government's stakes in the banks are worth as little as possible, thereby limiting its own exposure to a pre-election tax cut. So on Monday Labour Party leader  Ed Miliband and his economics spokesman  Ed Balls rolled out a plan to impose another "one-off" tax on bonus payments to bankers. 

Labour can and will keep on bashing the banks, because there is absolutely no downside. It appeals to the party's traditional base, and if it succeeds in keeping bank valuations low, it deprives the government of potentially its most effective vote-winning option.

Of course, Labour isn't alone in bashing the banks.  Mervyn King, The governor of the Bank of England, has scarcely a good word to say about banks and bankers, depicting them as institutions that are happy to take advantage of their customers and uninterested in the quality of their product.

And running in the background is the Independent Commission on Banking, chaired by  Sir John Vickers and due to present its interim report on April 11. It was established days after the new government took office in order to consider "structural and related non-structural reforms to the U.K. banking sector to promote financial stability and competition." 

Right now, it isn't looking that good for the coalition. The government is down about £6 billion ($9.7 billion) on its investment in RBS, and up just £190 million on its stake in Lloyds. 

But there is a long way to go before it needs to sell, and the U.K. may yet seem an attractive place to be for international banking groups. 

Clearly, there are conflicts of interest when the major shareholder in two of the leading banks also plays a key role in deciding what the right structure for the industry will be. 

It may be the case that the U.K. banking industry is too concentrated in a small number of very big institutions, and that for the sake of competition and a safer system, they should be broken up. 

But as an owner, the government presumably knows that the bigger the banks, the higher the price it will get for its stakes. So good policy may dictate a breakup, while good politics points to the opposite conclusion.

It is possible that a combination of the ICB and Mr. King will see the banking sector radically reformed with the intention of rendering it safe, bringing an end to its excesses and those of the people who work in it. Maybe fewer risks will be taken, smaller bonuses paid, and bankers will stop inventing structures whose chief attraction is that nobody else understands them, including—and possibly especially—the chief executive.

But the politics suggest otherwise. Get ready for a series of deadly dull budgets in which red tape is repeatedly shredded, entrepreneurs encouraged and bureaucrats lacerated. Before the big pre-election give-away. If RBS and Lloyds can get their acts together. 

 Write to  Paul Hannon at paul.hannon@dowjones.com 