Walter Zacharius built one of the largest independent book publishers in the nation by exploiting niches the bigger houses ignored.

Mr. Zacharius, who died Wednesday at age 87, founded Kensington Publishing Corp. and under its Zebra imprint created a top-selling line of mass-market romances.

He also stoked the market for African-American romances under the Arabesque line, published specialty editions for Wal-Mart and QVC, and was a prolific publisher of instant books, including entries about Tonya Harding, the Bobbitts, and O.J. Simpson. 

"He was an old-school guy who managed to step into the digital age," said Richard Curtis, a New York-based literary agent and publishing consultant.

Kensington produces as many as 600 titles a year. Early on, most of the books bore titles like "Stolen Ecstasy," (by Kensington's best-selling romance author, Janelle Taylor),but the company later branched out into history, health, gay/lesbian, and African-American interests.

In the 1960s, before founding Kensington, Mr. Zacharius owned Lancer Press, a publisher of mass-market paperbacks aimed at young men. Lancer published Terry Southern's bawdy novel "Candy," the "Conan the Barbarian" series, and the "Man From O.R.G.Y" series—a takeoff on James Bond and "The Man From U.N.C.L.E." 

He later published magazines, some raunchy, including "Swank" and "Gallery," but also "Nashville Gospel," launched in 1977 and aimed at the burgeoning born-again Christian movement.

In 1974, he founded Kensington, which at first concentrated mainly on historical romance novels. Buoyed by brisk sales, Kensington grew to more general-interest publishing. It established a partnership with the Mayo Clinic to produce medical guides. Some niches proved less successful than others; a 1990s push into Spanish-language romance novels proved less successful than the African-American variety. 

The Simpson book, titled "O.J. Simpson, American Hero, American Tragedy," was written in six days and was in stores within 11 days of the murder of Nicole Brown Simpson, a week ahead of the competition. It spent four weeks on the New York Times Best Sellers List.

"I could have written a much better book in 10 days," the book's author, Marc Cerasini, told the St. Petersburg Times in 1994. He noted that his first name was spelled wrong on the "About the Author" page.

In 2001, Kensington paid $2.5 million for the assets of the bankrupt Carol Publishing Group, including 1,300 titles and the Citadel imprint. In recent years it has begun offering its backlist in electronic formats. The privately held Kensington is now led by his son, Steven Zacharius.

A native of Brooklyn, N.Y., Mr. Zacharius served in World War II and returned to New York and became involved in the magazine business, closely related to the paperback industry in those days.

In 2004, Mr. Zacharius published his own novel, "Songbird," based in part on events he had witnessed in wartime. 

Mr. Zacharius became a philanthropist of educational and Jewish causes, but said he had no problem publishing books by Tim LaHaye, author of the apocalyptic Christian Left Behind series. After all, he told the Miami Herald in 2005, Mr. LaHaye "sells zillions of books."

—Email remembrances@wsj.com

 Write to  Stephen Miller at stephen.miller@wsj.com 