 Q. My husband was recently transferred to Memphis, and since we expect to be here for a few years, we've been house hunting. But the recent river flooding and tornado warnings have me terrified. What—if anything—can we do to make sure that what we buy is going to be safe?

 -Memphis 

 A. Since the swollen Mississippi crested at 48 feet on May 9 at Memphis, I understand your worries. Still, the event was relatively rare for the city, which sits on a bluff 254 feet above sea level. And you can easily avoid the problem simply by limiting your search to homes on high ground—or, if you must live in the flood plain, building on piers.

It's much more difficult to protect yourself from tornadoes, which can strike anywhere at any time and are a serious threat in your area. According to City-Data.com, historically tornado activity in the Memphis area is above the Tennessee average and is 170 percent greater than the overall average for the United States. 

If money and time are no object for you, your best bet is to build or buy a steel-reinforced concrete or cinder block home where the builder followed the most up-to-date codes for attaching the roof to supporting walls and the basement to the foundation. However, concrete homes tend to be more expensive than wood-frame houses. And even the strongest home is no match for the most powerful, EF5 tornadoes.

A more practical and less costly option is to buy any house you want and then have a small safe room, with steel-reinforced concrete roof and walls. Bolted to the home's foundation so it won't shift during a storm, a walk-in closet-sized room can be constructed for less than $1,000, and can serve as a refuge for your family as well as a storage spot for your most valuable possessions.

Whatever you buy or build, take the time to shop around for a comprehensive insurance policy. According to the insurance-rating organization A.M. Best, since 1953, tornadoes and related events have caused almost 57% of all catastrophic losses each year in the United States. Much of a tornado's destructive power is caused by wind, which is generally covered under homeowner's insurance policies. But don't take anything for granted. Read the fine print, and don't skimp on premiums if you need to purchase extra insurance to cover damage from tornadoes, floods and other natural disasters.

 Write to June Fletcher at fletcher.june@gmail.com.