ROME—Italians go to the polls in local elections this weekend, a vote that is shaping up as a key test of Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi's ability to hold together his center-right party's governing alliance with the formerly secessionist Northern League of firebrand politician Umberto Bossi.

Though voters will cast their ballots in key cities along the Italian boot, the most closely watched race in the Sunday and Monday vote will be in the country's financial capital, Milan, which is the 74-year-old premier's hometown, the springboard of his political career and a bastion of his political support. 

In addition to local council members, voters will choose whether to keep in office Letizia Moratti, the 62-year-old incumbent mayor who belongs to Mr. Berlusconi's People of Freedom party. Ms. Moratti is up against the center-left candidate Giuliano Pisapia, a 62-year-old lawyer.

Though many analysts believe Ms. Moratti will win, poll numbers show that a first-round and, therefore, a resounding victory isn't guaranteed. A lukewarm result could deepen tensions within Mr. Berlusconi's fractious national governing coalition, in particular alienating the Northern League, which has wide support in northern Italy. The League is key to the coalition's ability to last until the end of its parliamentary mandate in 2013.

"The Milan vote is a crucial test that will measure the strength of the ruling parties. Its outcome will likely shape a new equilibrium inside the coalition, with the Northern League eager to acquire more influence," said  Franco Pavoncello, a professor of political science at John Cabot University in Rome.

Mr. Berlusconi has pinned much hope on the Milan vote, saying recently that it would be "a way to boost our government and our majority."

The local elections cap a tumultuous six months for Mr. Berlusconi. In December, the Italian leader narrowly won a confidence vote in Parliament and still relies on only a handful of votes to pass legislation. His razor-thin majority is a particular handicap now, as Italy, one of the most indebted countries among the 17 nations that share the euro currency, tries to pass legislation aimed at lowering its debt and modernizing its economy.

In Parliament, Mr. Berlusconi more than ever needs the backing of Mr. Bossi's party, which has steadily gained ground over the years to become the third political movement in the country. The League has taken votes from Mr. Berlusconi's party by luring small-business owners and entrepreneurs who say the premier hasn't come through on campaign promises, such as lower taxes and softer labor laws.

"The League is proposing itself as an attractive alternative to the People of Freedom party for the moderate voters in the north, while [Berlusconi's party] risks being hit hard by abstention," said  Renato Mannheimer, president of research institute ISPO. The Northern League has presented its own candidates in 19 northern town councils and is allied with Mr. Berlusconi's People of Freedom party in others. 

Mr. Bossi, 69, has been openly at odds with the prime minister on national affairs, including the government's decision to join the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's air campaign in Libya. He also openly criticized Mr. Berlusconi for not fending off a bid by a French dairy company for local milk group  Parmalat
PLT


0.77
%




 SpA, saying he was letting Italy become "a French colony." 

The spat between Messrs. Bossi and Berlusconi has touched Italy's respected finance and economy Minister Giulio Tremonti. Though Mr. Tremonti is part of Mr. Berlusconi's center-right party, he also is close to the Northern League. Analysts say a defeat for Mr. Berlusconi's party in the upcoming local elections could push Mr. Tremonti forward in future elections. 

"A defeat of the center-right in the local elections could tempt the Northern League to push for an alternative to Berlusconi's leadership and support Tremonti as the possible successor," said  Roberto Biorcio, professor of political sociology at Milan-Bicocca University and a Northern League expert. 

Last month, Mr. Berlusconi suggested he would support Italy's 40-year-old justice minister, Angelino Alfano, as his potential heir should the premier step down from government during the 2013 general elections. But seemingly in a nod to the Northern League, Mr. Berlusconi last week suggested Mr. Tremonti could succeed him as head of the center-right coalition.

 Write to  Giada Zampano at giada.zampano@dowjones.com 