SHANGHAI --China's land sales rose 70% in 2010, Minister of Land and Resources Xu Shaoshi said Friday, raising expectations that the government would intensify efforts to curb rising property prices. 

Property developers paid 2.7 trillion yuan ($407 billion) worth of land for residential and commercial property development last year, up from the 1.59 trillion yuan recorded in 2009, when land sales rose 63% on-year. 

"Urban development has become more dependant on land transactions, resulting in an uneven allocation of benefits and social discontent, hence there is a need to reform the land transaction process," Mr. Xu said in a webcast of the ministry's annual working conference. 

In the first three quarters of 2010, Xu said land supply increased during the first three quarters of 2010 and the land prices were steady. However, in the last quarter, both the land prices and supply rose, posing challenges to the government's property-control policy. 

China will further reform its land auction process and strengthen tightening measures targeting land use, the minister added. 

Mr. Xu didn't elaborate on what changes may be made to the auction process. He reiterated that the ministry will increase its supervision of land usage, and pledged to end land hoarding and publish information about illegal behaviour by property developers. 

Land auction prices in several cities have hit record highs in recent weeks, and many analysts and homebuyers see the auctions as a major factor in the country's high property prices. 

Mr. Xu reiterated the ministry's commitment to allocating 70% of the residential land supply to the development of subsidized public apartments and small- and medium-sized homes, and to ensuring adequate land for the construction of 10 million affordable homes this year. 

China implemented a series of tightening measures last year, including limiting households' home purchases and hiking interest rates, to prevent overly high prices. However, officials have said recently the measures haven't been implemented well enough and property price movements have yet to meet their expectations. 