When Japan's Daiichi Fukushima nuclear power station was built, everyone knew it was in an area prone to earthquakes. But no one counted on this one.

After the shattering temblor that struck Japan Friday, that miscalculation, and its potentially catastrophic results, are bringing new scrutiny to atomic plants in other quake-prone areas.

Countries around the world, including the U.S., China and Japan itself, operate nuclear plants in proximity to active faults or along coastlines subject to tsunamis. It can be hard to avoid such locations, given a nation's geology and the billions of gallons of water the plants require.

The industry says the plants are fully tested to withstand the worst possible quakes in each location, and note that even the Daiichi plant survived Friday's quake intact, only to fall victim to a tsunami that wiped out its backup power generators. The crisis in Japan is prompting questions about the reliability of those assurances.

"What happened in Japan could just as easily happen here," said Sam Blakeslee, a California state senator and geophysicist who has argued that his state's two nuclear plants are more vulnerable to quakes than their operators claim.

  Tokyo Electric Power Co.
9501


0.14
%




, the utility that owns and operates the crippled Daiichi plant, tested the facility to a 7.9-magnitude quake, the strongest its scientific models showed was possible in the area, according to company documents reviewed by The Wall Street Journal. The quake that struck Friday was more than 10 times as big, on the logarithmic scale scientists use.

It wasn't the first time a quake had exceeded scientists' expectations. In 2007, a 6.6-magnitude quake struck Japan's Kashiwazaki-Kariwa plant, the world's biggest nuclear facility. The force of the quake "significantly exceeded" the plant's design expectations, the International Atomic Energy Agency later found. The quake sparked a fire on a transformer outside the main reactor and caused minor contamination in the surrounding sea.It came two years after a Tokyo court dismissed a lawsuit from nearby residents who said the plant was too close to a major fault line.

The unfolding Japanese disaster has been closely watched in China, which has been rapidly expanding its fleet of nuclear reactors, some of them in seismically active areas. China is building a plant in Dalian, across the Bohai Sea from Tangshan, a city that was leveled in 1976 by a 7.5-magnitude earthquake. 

China said its nuclear facilities were safe. The government has largely embraced American-made third-generation reactors, which include passive safety systems and don't rely on the older pumps that failed in Japan. The country is also less susceptible to the tsunami-size waves that crippled the reactors in Japan. 

Nonetheless, China announced Wednesday a decision to halt approvals of new nuclear-power plants as it considers additional safety measures and said it would conduct inspections at existing plants.

The U.S. hasn't broken ground on a new nuclear plant since the Three Mile Island disaster of 1979 in Pennsylvania, but it has plants in seismically active areas. In a letter to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission on Tuesday, Edward Markey and Lois Capps, two Democratic members of Congress, said there were eight nuclear reactors on the West Coast and 27 near the New Madrid fault line in the Midwest. 

The lawmakers wrote that they were concerned the plants "are not designed with sufficient levels of resiliency against the sort of earthquakes scientists predict they could experience."

Tom Kauffman, a spokesman for the Nuclear Energy Institute, a trade group, said every nuclear-power plant in the U.S. was designed and constructed to withstand the maximum projected earthquake that could occur in the plant's area.

A 2008 study in California, however, questioned how well regulators and plant operators understand the seismic risks facing the state's two active nuclear plants. The California Energy Commission studyfound that plant operators hadn't updated their models to reflect the latest seismic research.

Pacific Gas & Electric Co., which operates the Diablo Canyon plant on the central California coast, objected to the study in an October 2008 letter. The following month, the company disclosed that it had found a previously unknown fault running underground less than a mile from the plant. The company and federal regulators both say the plant's existing defenses are adequate even with the new fault. But the state's energy commission last year recommended that plant operators re-evaluate their earthquake vulnerability using new technology. 

PG&E spokesman Kory Raftery said the Diablo Canyon plant was designed to withstand a 7.5 quake, well beyond the maximum quake predicted by scientists of 6.0 to 6.5.

California's 2008 study was also critical of the state's other nuclear plant, Southern California Edison's San Onofre plant in San Clemente. New information after the plant was built, the study found, suggested it "could experience larger ground motions from earthquakes than had been anticipated at the time the plant was designed."

The study also found that the 30-foot sea wall protecting the plant was just three feet higher than the maximum wave height predicted by tsunami models when the plant was built. Those models didn't consider the possibility of tsunamis caused by underwater landslides, which the state study said could be even bigger.

"Based on historical information from scientists, the wall is capable of dealing with any type of tsunami that would be generated by an earthquake," Southern California Edison spokesman Steven Conroy said.

—Ben Lefebvre  and Dionne Searcey  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Ben Casselman at ben.casselman@wsj.com and Brian Spegele at brian.spegele@wsj.com 