 Japan Society  333 E. 47th St., (212) 715-1258  Through Feb. 5 

Other contemporary Japanese filmmakers are more extreme. Cult heroes like Takashi Miike and Sion Sono revel in pushing the limits of whatever genre they're tackling, whether it's the samurai battle royale that concludes the former's "13 Assassins," or the absurdist gore of the latter's "Cold Fish" (both of which are due to play New York screens soon). But Sabu, a former rock musician and a regular in Mr. Miike's casts, is different. As a director, he's profoundly connected to the plight of the common Joe. Or, in Japanese terms, the salaryman. The workaday mopes who populate his films are ordinary dreamers sleepwalking through lives of quiet desperation—until fate intervenes and turns waking life into a low-rent yakuza thriller. 

In films like "Postman Blues," "Drive" and "Monday," Sabu proves himself a master of the wrong-man paradigm, the car-jack fantasia and the blackout mystery, as characters dozing through their Walter Mitty existence wake up to discover themselves living out a reel of "Reservoir Dogs." Manic panic ensues. Amid the mayhem lies an affectionate satirical joust at Japanese society and genre archetypes.

Sabu, born Hiroyuki Tanaka 46 years ago in Wakayama, gets his first American retrospective as Japan Society fetes the director with a six-film survey. He'll be the guest of honor at an opening-night party, then appear at Friday and Saturday screenings for Q&A sessions. One obvious query is: What makes Sabu run? Or, more accurately: What hooked him on the thrill of the chase? "Non-Stop," his 1996 debut, is exactly that. Most of its 82 minutes consists of a cartoonish marathon, as a third-rate drug dealer pursues a strung-out rock singer who's on the heels of a feckless robber who screwed up a petty theft at the convenience store where the musician works. As they recklessly race, each man drifts into fantasy (sexual and otherwise) and flashbacks, their grunts and footfalls punctuating the digressions.

In addition to the American premiere of "Troubleman"—180 episodic minutes of a production shot for Japanese television—the series includes 2002's "The Blessing Bell." It's Sabu at his most Zen, as static frames observe at leisure a day in the life of a newly unemployed factory worker. The character, played by Susumu Terajima, wanders across Tokyo encountering remarkable strangers and events. He rescues a child from a fire. He wins the lottery. He also gets hit by a car and, later, robbed of all his winnings. But while in the hospital, he enjoys a philosophical conversation with a ghost played by cult director Seijun Suzuki. And that's not the half of it. By the time the man finally arrives home for dinner, his wife is convinced it's all a big fish story. By turns beatific and bruising, "The Blessing Bell" suggests Sabu is just as good standing still as in full sprint.

 BAMcinématek  30 Lafayette Ave., Brooklyn  (718) 636-4100  Thursday 

A return to the anarchic, nihilistic, hormonally driven form of transgressive comedies like "The Doom Generation" and "Nowhere," Gregg Araki's latest blow against public decorum is equal parts supernatural thriller, campus sex romp and paranoid sci-fi romance. A secret doomsday cult shadows an extremely good-looking cast that includes Haley Bennett, Juno Temple, Thomas Dekker and Roxanne Mesquida. IMDB them: you know the faces if not the names. When they're not taking drugs and bonking each other in every imaginable combination, the kids become cartoon sleuths to solve a mysterious disappearance, looking for clues in their own terrifying dreams. The movie is more about the unapologetic display of polymorphous sexuality than whatever the plot amounts to, but any reel dropped into the middle of the latest Jennifer Aniston flick might cause a riot. Mr. Araki will be present for a Q&A, as well as for selected weekend screenings at IFC Center, where the film opens Friday.

 IFC Film Center  323 Sixth Ave., (212) 924-7771  Friday-April 9 

Decades before "Angry Birds," there was simply "The Birds." That the creatures would amount to something more threatening than gaily chirping winged bipeds was implied by the name of the director: Alfred Hitchcock. The 1963 film is one of the master's most adroitly calibrated adventures in terror, as pleasurable for its technique—electronic sound design, avian model mechanics, the domino-effect staging of the gas station inferno sequence—as the psychology between those flirty would-be lovebirds: suave Rod Taylor and whiny Tippi Hedren. This weekend, it kicks off a new midnight series dedicated to avenging fauna. Coming soon: "Anaconda," "Empire of the Ants," "White Dog" and the Hitchcock-inspired "Birdemic: Shock and Terror." And more!

 Museum of the Moving Image  3601 35th Ave., Queens, (718) 777-6888  Friday 

Now that it has relaunched in-house screenings in a redesigned, state-of-the-art theater, MMI celebrates some of the finest efforts in film restoration from archives around the world. The eclectic array of movies runs the gamut from the historical to the obscure. And it's another rare occasion to see the 1970 Czech film "Valerie and Her Week of Wonders" on celluloid. This edgy coming-of-age saga is a twisted fairy tale about 13-year-old Valerie (Jaroslava Schallerová), whose arrival at puberty triggers a surreal fugue, full of Freudian imagery, darkly sexual foreboding and strange men in weasel masks. Though very much a piece of its era, the film inspired some Philadelphia indie-rock acts (Fursaxa, the Espers) to create the Valerie Project, and perform an original soundtrack at public screenings. This version is the original.

 Film Society of Lincoln Center  165 65th St., (212) 875-5601  Friday-Tuesday 

French ballerina Claude Bessy makes an appearance for the opening night of this annual festival of Terpsichore on celluloid. The former etoile of the Paris Opera Ballet is the star of "Claude Bessy, Lignes d'Une Vie (Traces of a Life)," one of 20 features, documentaries and short films featured. Other likely highlights include "All the Ladies Say," a profile of female break-dancers with names like Baby Love and Severe, and "Dancing Dreams," which documents one of the last projects of the late German choreographer Pina Bausch. "The Last Tightrope Dancer in Armenia" chronicles a pair of 70-something performers who pour their experiences into the sole acolyte who might sustain the fading tradition after their deaths.