Sandra Ng is one of Hong Kong's most successful comic actresses with a film career that has spanned 30 years and more than 100 films. She's a veteran of numerous Chinese New Year comedies, including most of the "All's Well Ends Well" movie series that made its debut in 1992.

This year she appears in two comedies opening around the Lunar New Year, including "Mr. & Mrs. Incredible," a US$7.5-million action adventure about a super-hero couple forced out of retirement to battle an evil adversary.

The 45-year-old Hong Kong actress has often been cast as unattractive but vivacious women in slapstick comedies, but over the years she has occasionally tried to break out of her comedic characters with varying degrees of success.

One of her first dramatic films was "Four Faces of Eve" from 1996, but audiences didn't warm to it and it flopped at the box office. But she later found greater success in two films where she played against type. She was named best actress at the Hong Kong Film Awards for her portrayal as a triad boss in 1998's "Portland Street Blues," and picked up a best-actress trophy at the Golden Horse Awards for her role as a prostitute in the bitter-sweet comedy-drama "Golden Chicken" from 2002.



What's the appeal for Chinese New Year comedies?

The market still wants this kind of comedy at Chinese New Year, with all the familiar actors and actresses. All the stories are about the value of the family, and they can go to the movies as a family.



Why do think audiences turned away from "Four Faces of Eve"?

I know the market doesn't want me in movies like this, but I just wanted to try something new. I lost four million Hong Kong dollars on that one.



What did you learn from making that film?

It was a very good experience, but it was too much for me. I knew then that I wouldn't be a good producer, because producers have a different mindset. Actors and actresses only have to concentrate on their role -- you don't have to think about the budget. I don't have patience to do this, and I don't have the ability to do this.



Do you prefer playing comedic or dramatic characters?

Both. But I really like triad movies. Maybe in our subconscious people like violence and very powerful people. I really enjoy playing that kind of role.