If you, like me, hate sales but relish the thought of finding something amazing hanging winsomely on the returns rack with your name on it, then this is a good time for us both. Whilst the sale signs might have come down, there is almost always a solitary rack sitting at the back of the store, bearing last-minute returns—things that got forgotten in the stockroom; things that were put on hold that a customer never returned for; or, just plain and simply, things that didn't sell. I urge you, should you have the energy, to riffle. As proof that this yield results, I should like to present to you, the jury, my Prada Sport pony-skin jacket (circa 2006), half price; my Gucci high-tops (the Tom Ford era), £40; and my Narciso Rodriguez gray, double-felted overcoat, $595, which Barneys kindly reduced from roughly $3,000 during that arduous winter of discontent—2008.

If, however, you want to put all of that behind you and move on, at least in fashion terms, toward the idea of warmer climes, then let's survey the emerging landscape. I refuse to write you a "trends" report on the basis that, as I have said many times before, one shouldn't pander to the expensive and manipulative tyranny of a trend. Unless, of course, one is prepared and happy to purchase a one-season wonder. Far better to take a look at what is out there and decide how it will fit into your wardrobe. If you are the sort of person who is fortunate enough to purchase a whole new wardrobe every season (whilst giving the last one away to charity), then regard this simply as a tiny part of your shopping list. 

None of us, though, is immune to the ridiculous whims and vagaries of an industry that insists on foisting upon us clothes that are entirely inappropriate for the season. Are you thinking about silk, chiffon or even cotton dresses in marmalade shades, plunging silk evening gowns or platform, open-toed wedges? No, me neither. Within six weeks, though, it's a certainty that said items will begin filtering into the stores, if they aren't already there. I'm not going to take up space in this column by complaining endlessly about the fact that the fashion industry seems to be impervious to the seasons. But I am going to ask the question (having been asked by so many of you in the past), "when will the industry listen to its customers?" Is it so wrong to want to buy a coat in February or a bikini in August, when they are most needed? What happened to living (and dressing) in the moment?

That said, look ahead we will— in anticipation of warmer days to come. Here, and in no particular order, are the broad brushstrokes of fashion for spring/summer 2011.

You knew it already (because for front-page editors, it was manna from heaven)—the brighter, and in some cases more fluorescent, the better. Clashing is acceptable (even desirable).

 Best from: Christopher Kane, Gucci, Dries Van Noten, Jil Sander and House of Holland.

 Watch out for:Nicole Farhi's flattering, softer-colored satin pleats, Prabal Gurung's color blocking and Christopher Kane's acid brights.

 How to wear it: If you don't have any color in your wardrobe, then buy a whole outfit (not necessarily from the same designer). Simply buying a cerise shirt or an aqua-blue pair of trousers will throw you and the rest of your clothing into a blind panic.

Namely white or nude. The idea of wearing all white on the city streets has never really taken hold, but this just might be the season. 

 Best from: Michael Kors, Ralph Lauren, Versace, Haider Ackermann, Hermès and Emporio Armani.

 Watch out for: Emporio Armani's safari shorts—longer than most and surprisingly wearable in neutral colors.

 How to wear it: With the courage of your convictions and without artifice—simple jewelry and flat sandals will suffice.

Print and stripes of the type that you could only imagine wearing walking along La Croisette, at a party in Capri or for dinner at Sunset Beach, Shelter Island. 

 Best from:Prada, Stella McCartney, Moschino, Jil Sander and Carolina Herrera.

 Watch out for: The Prada sombrero and striped shoe. 

 How to wear it: It's not cool to say so, but a light tan (faux perhaps) is required, otherwise these patterns will wear you.

Full skirts and frou-frou, clavicle-exposing, off-the-shoulder blouses are back, though the jury is out on whether they should really be worn together. This might be a case of OLGOR (only looks good on the runway).

 Best from: Yves Saint Laurent, Dior, D&G and Moschino.

 Watch out for: D&G's pretty peasant maxi dresses in beautiful floral prints.

 How to wear it: Simple hair and makeup with a strong lip (best seen at Fendi).

Flared pants, fluid lines, strong colors, high waists, midis—it's all out there.

 Best from: Marc Jacobs, Sonia Rykiel, Louis Vuitton and Etro.

 Watch out for: It has to be anything from Marc Jacobs—his show was a tour de force.

 How to wear it: With the right shoes. Jacobs showed his collection with strappy sandals; this season's platform wedges might be a step too far.

Long and floaty in flattering gossamer fabrics, with the emphasis on exposing the shoulders and the legs.

 Best from: Costume National, Lanvin, Emilio Pucci and John Galliano.

 Watch out for: The show-stopping, vibrant, sexy silks from Alber Elbaz at Lanvin.

 How to wear it: With toned, well-moisturized arms and shoulders. Sounds weird, but it's important for the proportions.

After a few seasons of keeping it under wraps, skin was everywhere—from shoulders (see above) to slashed necklines and bondage cutouts at the waist, and bare backs. 

 Best from: Rag & Bone, Rodarte, Versace, Roland Mouret, Gucci and John Galliano.

 Watch out for:No one knows how to make a woman's body look better than Roland Mouret. If you want to "do" exposure, then buy a dress.

 How to wear it: It sounds obvious, but I'm going to say it anyway: Not for those of us for whom the phrase "going to the gym" is anathema.

Less severe than minimal and much more fun, luxurious fabrics meet techno excellence with flattering shapes (though it does include the "big knickers" trend).

 Best from: Marni (you can even forgive the kooky swimmer's hat), Isabel Marant, Reed Krakoff, Bottega Veneta, Diane von Furstenberg and Chanel.

 Watch out for: Marni's leather-meets-scuba vibe, Loewe's gym knickers and Chanel's shorts

 How to wear it:Keep it simple, with plain cotton Ts and a chunky platform (see Marni) or the perfect flat sandal (from Bottega Veneta) 

Minimalism (which is never out of fashion), with a twist. First seen in Reed Krakoff's prescient autumn/winter 2010 collection (which many a fashion commentator dismissed), this is a whole new way of working structure and playing shapes and lengths off each other.

 Best from:Calvin Klein, Reed Krakoff, Rodarte, Emporio Armani, Givenchy, D&G and Antonio Berardi.

 Watch out for: Antonio Berardi's long, flowing gowns, cut to a mini at the front and worn with a sharp, boxy jacket.

 How to wear it: With a heel— non-negotiable.

 The East: Always in the undertow, all things Oriental rise to the surface in paper-bag waists, kimono jackets and Chinese-inspired prints. See Louis Vuitton, Haider Ackermann, Dries Van Noten and Philosophy di Alberta Ferretti.

 Biker bling: Biker jacket with bells, whistles and a price tag to match, as seen at Burberry Prorsum, Balenciaga and Balmain.

 Alexander McQueen: Sarah Burton's first show minus the master was exemplary. There were plenty of nods to the label's august past, but just enough spirit, sophistication and subtle sex appeal to prove she has what it takes to move the label onward and upward. Beautiful.