NEW DELHI—Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh reorganized his cabinet Wednesday in an effort to invigorate a coalition government hit by corruption scandals and faced with growing criticism for failing to keep a lid on surging food prices.

Mr. Singh shied away from sweeping changes, and promised a more extensive reorganization after the federal budget is delivered in February.

The shuffle—the first since the Congress party-led United Progressive Alliance returned to power in May 2009—signals Mr. Singh's resolve to retain control of high-profile ministries and to promote those who did well as junior ministers.

Mr. Singh left the finance, home, defense and foreign ministries intact, but switched some key portfolios, including petroleum, civil supplies, consumer affairs, steel and civil aviation.

Sharad Pawar, under fire for failing to bring down food prices, was removed from his post at the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution, but he will keep his position as minister of agriculture.

Kapil Sibal—who took over as telecom minister when A. Raja resigned in November amid allegations of favoritism and manipulation in the allocation of telecommunications bandwidth in 2008—will keep his post, and will continue to be in charge of education.

Petroleum Minister Murli Deora will move to the corporate-affairs ministry, while S. Jaipal Reddy will take his place.

"Reddy is seen as a more people-oriented person, though Deora isn't to be blamed for the oil-price hike," said Subhash C. Kashyap, historian and former secretary-general of the Lok Sabha, India's lower house of Parliament.

India's state-run fuel retailers raised gasoline prices Sunday for the eighth time in the past seven months following a jump in global crude-oil prices, adding to persistent inflationary pressure.

Among the other cabinet changes, Steel Minister Virbhadra Singh was succeeded by Beni Prasad Verma, while Civil Aviation Minister Praful Patel has been moved to the heavy industries ministry. Vayalar Ravi will succeed Mr. Patel as civil aviation minister.

Roads and Highways Minister Kamal Nath will be succeeded by C.P. Joshi and will move to the urban-development ministry. Analysts said Mr. Nath's departure comes as the pace of fund-raising to mend damaged roads fell short of expectations.

The government has been struggling for months to clean up its image after the graft-tainted Commonwealth Games in October, and the Raja-related allegations of the sale of 2G telecom licenses for a fraction of their value.

Also, the inflation rate based on the wholesale-price index accelerated to 8.43% in December from a year earlier, compared with 7.48% in November, driven mostly by surging vegetable and fruit prices.

Some critics said the cabinet changes, which come before polls in some important states, were too little, too late.

"The big picture is missing. The key ministries have been left undisturbed. It has been a game of musical chairs," said analyst Brahma Chellany of the Center for Policy Research. "I wonder how the government will convince the public about this being an important political exercise."

The opposition Bharatiya Janata Party has kept up a sustained attack on the government, leveraging on mounting public anger over food inflation.

The increasing discontent is eroding the Congress party's mass appeal, a risk the party can't ignore as West Bengal and Tamil Nadu states—two strongholds of UPA allies—face elections this year.

—Vibhuti Agarwal and Anant Kalain contributed to this article.

 Write to  Abhrajit Gangopadhyay at Abhrajit.gangopadhyay@dowjones.com 