  (See Corrections & Amplifications item below.)  

WASHINGTON— AT&T Inc.
T


-0.87
%




's proposed $39 billion acquisition of T-Mobile USA hits a lot of hot buttons in Washington: worries about U.S. competitiveness; the Obama administration's push to expand broadband Internet access and the desire of elected officials to show voters they are fighting to keep monthly phone bills down.

The deal also presents challenges to the Obama administration's effort to encourage more job-creating corporate investment in the U.S. and separate efforts by federal regulators to encourage more competition in technology and telecommunications markets. AT&T's proposition is that allowing consolidation, at least in this case, is the key to unlocking more investment.

Democrats and Republicans on Capitol Hill are already planning to hold hearings about the deal and the impact it could have on consumers and competitors. Wisconsin Sen. Herb Kohl, the Democratic chairman of the Senate Antitrust, Competition Policy and Consumer Rights Subcommittee, released a statement hours after the T-Mobile acquisition was announced saying his committee will "take a close look" at the deal, while Sen. Jay Rockefeller (D., W. Va.) says his Commerce Committee will also examine its impact. Rep. Lamar Smith (R., Texas) also plans to hold hearings on the acquisition.

But while Congress can put pressure on regulators, it has no authority to block the acquisition. Ultimately, the deal's future is up to the Federal Communications Commission and the Justice Department.

Federal regulators have so far remained mum the issue.

AT&T started its campaign to woo the FCC and the White House as soon as it announced the acquisition, claiming the deal helps achieve the "administration's and FCC's national broadband goals," and that the takeover of T-Mobile from Germany's  Deutsche Telekom AG "results in an American company investing in America."

FCC Chairman Julius Genachowski had no comment on the pending transaction during an appearance Tuesday at a wireless industry convention in Orlando, Fla.

The FCC, now controlled by Democrats, has been split along partisan lines when it comes to assessing competition in the mobile-phone industry.

Last year, with Mr. Genachowski and Democrats in charge, the FCC released a report on competition in the wireless market that found for the first time that there wasn't "effective competition." The report infuriated mobile carriers, since the agency had concluded for years that the wireless industry was competitive.

The FCC's five commissioners offered divided views on the report. Commissioner Meredith Attwell Baker, a Republican, said the report showed a "vibrant competitive environment," while her Democratic counterpart, Commissioner Michael Copps said it confirmed that "competition has been dramatically eroded and is seriously endangered by continuing consolidation and concentration in our wireless markets."

Lobbying on the deal has already begun. The Computer & Communications Industry Association, which includes big Silicon Valley Internet companies such as  Google Inc. and Facebook Inc., said Tuesday that the deal "may be the most aggressive and anti-consumer merger proposal in history." 

In response, an AT&T spokesman said the company "will focus on the facts of the transaction, which will demonstrate that the deal is in the public interest and that competition will continue to flourish."

  Sprint Nextel Corp.
S


-2.50
%




 Chief Executive  Dan Hesse, at the wireless convention, told the crowd that he had "concerns that it would stifle innovation and too much power would be in the hands of two." 

Consumer groups have uniformly blasted the AT&T deal.

But AT&T has an important ally in the Communications Workers of America, a large union with thousands of AT&T employees as members, which applauded AT&T's promise to "build out nearly every part of the U.S. within six years" with its 4G service. 

 Write to  Amy Schatz at Amy.Schatz@wsj.com and Thomas Catan at thomas.catan@wsj.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications:  The Federal Communications Commission's report on wireless competition in 2010 didn't take a position on whether the wireless industry was competitive. This article incorrectly states the agency had found the wireless market wasn't competitive.