A lot has happened since Greece agreed a year ago to a €110 billion ($163 billion) bailout package with the European Union and International Monetary Fund. The euro zone has marshaled resources on a scale that seemed unthinkable until recently. But politics has meant that the euro zone's bailouts are far less effective in quelling market tensions than they might have been. 

The bailouts began with the requirement of Germany and other lenders that the rescues shouldn't be a soft option for profligate governments. 



This led to the condition that bailout funds could be deployed only as a last resort. That ruled out the possibility of pre-empting a debt crisis—meaning a bond-market meltdown, in effect, was a precondition for a bailout—and increasing the chances of contagion spreading to other government bond markets. Rather than calming nerves, the bailouts had the effect of putting investors on edge.

The tough-love requirement also meant that the bailouts were priced at punitive interest rates, increasing worries that already-high debt burdens were unsustainable. Governments have recognized this problem, agreeing to lower bailout interest rates. But not before damage was done to the credibility of the bailouts, analysts say.

Another political decision that has increased the cost and reduced the effectiveness of the bailout vehicles is the decision—presumably based on motives of prestige—that they should borrow with a prime triple-A rating. That has rendered close to worthless the guarantees of all but the six prime borrowing governments in the euro zone, one of which is tiny Luxembourg. That has meant that €440 billion of government guarantees in the European Financial Stability Facility, the current euro-zone bailout vehicle, secures less than €250 billion in bailout funds.

Some European officials admit that political decisions about the shape of the European Stability Mechanism, the permanent post-2013 bailout fund, are also creating problems. Governments have decided that the ESM should be a preferred creditor, meaning its claims rank senior to those of run-of-the-mill private lenders. But they also have insisted that when a bailout occurs, private lenders should suffer losses.

That is going to make private lenders think twice. Not only will they get hit in the event of a post-2013 bailout, but the ESM's preferred-creditor status also means that to reduce a country's debt burden by an appropriate amount, private creditors will have to take even deeper losses because government creditors won't be taking any. Officials worry that, even though the EFSF isn't deemed to be a preferred creditor, private lenders harbor suspicions that governments will find a way to make sure they get repaid before private lenders do.

These considerations are heightening Greece's already-substantial debt difficulties. The current bailout is over time increasing the proportion of Greek government debt that is in the hands of governments: As bonds held by private creditors mature, they are in effect paid off by the bailout funds. If bailouts continue through 2013, according to J.P. Morgan estimates, European taxpayers will end up with €142 billion of Greek government debt, over a third of the total. 

That means the "haircuts" for private lenders will have to be a third deeper to achieve a given debt reduction. 

In fact, financial experts say, the situation for private lenders would be even worse than this, because a large proportion of these private creditors are Greek banks. Losses suffered by Greek banks won't benefit the government in the same way as write-downs imposed on foreign creditors. That's because the banks will probably need to rebuild their capital buffers to compensate for the losses—and the government may be the only candidate to provide that capital. Private creditors that are not Greek banks would thus be squeezed from both sides, and thus continue to be reluctant to lend.

Even after the bailout, the fund's preferred-creditor status could dissuade private investors from returning to the bond markets, knowing they are condemned to the status of junior lenders. Here, however, European officials say there is an "understanding" among governments that there will be a "cutoff date" during a restructuring. 

Before this date, the ESM will be a preferred creditor. Afterward, any loans it makes will rank as equivalent to private-sector loans. Without this shift, says one official, "one would indeed be crazy to buy on the market next to the ESM."

It is of course inevitable that political considerations will play a part in the shape of bailouts and possible that even an optimal bailout vehicle would still have left Greece with unsustainable debts. Yet, the involvement of governments in every step of the decision-making process attending to every bailout almost guarantees problems, making the process prey to the whims of politics from Slovakia to Finland. 

Alessandro Leipold, a former senior IMF official who is now the Lisbon Council's chief economist, says the bailout arrangements virtually ensure "that EU creditor countries' domestic interests will play a front-and-center role." Much more European bailout decision-making should be delegated, he says, to a technocratic board like the IMF's, ultimately responsible to governments but less at the mercy of national political dogfights. 

 Write to  Stephen Fidler at stephen.fidler@wsj.com 