TOKYO—The political infighting that looks to unravel the administration of Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan is starting to draw investor attention and threatens to undermine the economy's tentative recovery, analysts say. 

The cost of the parliamentary clash between the government and opposition has been largely confined to the political arena, pulling down Mr. Kan's approval ratings to less than 20% and stirring discord within the ruling party. 

But market watchers, who have long written off Japan's political turmoil as business as usual, are beginning to take notice, particularly over a budget impasse that could broadly stall legislation and lead to new elections. Standard & Poor's Ratings Service, which downgraded the country's debt rating to AA- on Jan. 27, said Tuesday that the political turmoil could start to hit growth. 

"Uncertainty in Japan's political arena threatens the country's near-term growth prospects," the ratings firm said. "In particular, the current gridlock between the ruling and opposition parties may stall the passage of budget-related bills. This could undermine growth, particularly in the latter half of 2011."

Many analysts and investors are concerned about another change of power.



"What we're worried about the most is the resignation [of Mr. Kan], which will destabilize the political situation," said  Kenichi Kubo, senior fund manager at Tokio Marine Asset Management Co. "It will be more positive for Japan stocks to avoid a general election." 

The latest victim of the political carnage was Foreign Minister Seiji Maehara, whose acceptance of 250,000 yen, or about $3,000, in campaign contributions from a foreign national over several years in violation of the law forced his resignation Sunday. Mr. Maehara had been seen as a leading candidate to succeed Mr. Kan if he stepped down.

On Wednesday, Mr. Kan appointed Takeaki Matsumoto, a deputy to Mr. Maehara, to become the new foreign minister. While he is considered a solid choice, the appointment will do little to solve the prime minister's growing problems that threaten to bring down his government.

Markets that for years brushed off the political turmoil, instead have focused on Japan's central bank. The bank's longtime policy of keeping rates at rock-bottom levels to get the economy out of deflation has led to the widespread belief that it is unlikely to make sudden moves that would affect bond or currency markets. The vast market for Japanese government bonds, or JGBs, is seen as stable because they are held mainly Japanese companies, which aren't considered likely to sell. 

Meanwhile, Japan's stock market—which remains well below the lofty heights it reached at the top of the Japanese economic bubble more than 20 years ago—is seen by many investors as performing well on Japan's strong exports to the rest of Asia and around the globe, so it has some insulation from the nation's domestic woes.

As a result, Japan's stock market is up about 3% so far this year, outperforming other Asian markets, while the bond market has been steady. The yen has been trading around 82 to the U.S. dollar, just below its all-time high of 79.75 in 1995. 

Some market watchers worry the turmoil may spur non-Japanese investors to sell the yen and could push up yields, making Japan's debt payments more expensive. "The possibility is high that we will see a weaker yen and higher JGB yields going forward," said Yoichi Ito, chief analyst at STB Research Institute. 

The biggest hurdle for the government is passage of legislation to keep itself funded. Borrowing accounts for 48% of what it plans to spend in its annual budget for the fiscal year beginning April 1. 

Mr. Kan needs support for pending legislation to issue 38.2 trillion yen in deficit-financing bonds and other related measures. The proposal faces a near-certain veto in the upper house of Japan's parliament, which is controlled by opposition parties led by the Liberal Democratic Party. Meanwhile, Mr. Kan faces continuing defections within his own party, the Democratic Party of Japan.

"Having succeeded in toppling the foreign minister, the opposition LDP will likely be emboldened to harden its stance on the budget and other issues," Morgan Stanley MUFG Japan chief economist Robert Feldman said in a report on Monday. 

He said that with the deficit bond bill unlikely to be passed by the end of the month, the government will need to resort to 20 trillion yen in short-term funding that will carry it through June. 

A cash crunch could then develop in July, some bureaucrats and economists say. In such a scenario, basic administrative operations would be covered through the issuance of other bonds and finance bills, but other services not specifically mandated by law may be suspended. These include activities such as marketing, public-relations programs and other government services deemed nonessential.

The legislative logjam will hit other measures, including a planned tax overhaul to provide a five-percentage-point reduction in the corporate tax cut as well as an increase in cash payouts for families with children.

If such measures aren't approved, the result will be a combined 2.4 trillion yen burden on households and companies, which could cause a 0.2 percentage point reduction in the gross domestic product for the upcoming fiscal year, said Toshihiro Nagahama, chief economist at Dai-Ichi Life Research Institute. "The economy may contract in the April to June or July to Septembers quarters," he said. 

—Kana Inagaki contributed to this article.

 Write to  Takashi Nakamichi at takashi.nakamichi@dowjones.com 