BANGALORE— Berkshire Hathaway Inc. Chairman  Warren Buffett said Tuesday the U.S. economy is improving steadily month by month, but added his company is also looking beyond its home turf to countries such as India, which offer attractive investment opportunities.

The 80-year billionaire investor is in India as part of a joint initiative termed, "Giving Pledge," with software pioneer  Bill Gates to promote philanthropy. But Mr. Buffett--popularly known as the "Oracle of Omaha" for his sharp investment sense—is also seeking opportunities to make deals in India, one of the fastest-growing economies in the world.

"In recent years, we see more opportunities outside the United States. We need a large country like India...a logical place to look at. I hope I spend some money here," Mr. Buffett told reporters at a news conference.

He added that Berkshire Hathaway has had about 85%-95% of its investments in the U.S. over the years.

"The U.S. economy has been improving very steady, but not at a great rate," Mr. Buffett said. "You talk about the monetary policy. That's important. You talk about fiscal policy. That's important. But I believe the most important factor is the underlying resilience of capital," he said, adding that President Barack Obama has followed policies that are in the "right direction."

In its annual report, released last month, Berkshire had said it anticipates that "general economic conditions will continue to gradually improve, albeit unevenly, over time." Mr. Buffett, in a letter to shareholders accompanying the report, said a "normal" year for Berkshire would be one with a general business climate better than last year's, but weaker than 2005 or 2006.

In contrast, India's economy has survived the global downturn largely unscathed. The government estimates economic growth will rise to 8.6% in the fiscal year ending March 31, from 8.0% last year.

Mr. Buffett said that he sees India as a large country, rather than an emerging market, and a promising investment destination. He added, though, that it would be more attractive for his company to invest in the local insurance sector if limits on foreign ownership of insurers are raised beyond the current level of 26%.

Mr. Buffett is also in India to meet employees at Berkshire's local insurance-distribution unit, which was announced this month. Berkshire India will be a corporate agent of Bajaj Allianz General Insurance Co. and sell insurance products online and through telemarketing, initially focusing on motor insurance.

"I would say that for the time being, and perhaps for some time, our activities in insurance here will be at the agency level rather than at the underwriting level," Mr. Buffett said.

Broadly, he said he prefers to invest in industries which have a moderate rate of change, and companies which have had reasonable success and a history of strong management.

A day earlier in Seoul, Mr. Buffett had said Berkshire is seeking further acquisitions following a $9 billion purchase of  Lubrizol Corp. last week. Berkshire had $38 billion in cash and cash equivalents at the end of 2010. Mr. Buffett has said his investment isn't focused on any particular sector or industry, but he isn't interested in electronics companies.

Mr. Buffett is scheduled to meet industrial leaders and Prime Minister Manmohan Singh later in the week.

 Write to  Dhanya Ann Thoppil at dhanya.thoppil@dowjones.com and Romit Guha at romit.guha@dowjones.com 