"A.D.D. has always been a problem for me," Mike O'Hara said, before refastening his gaze on the honeycomb of television screens a few feet away. "But now, it's working to my advantage."

O'Hara's professional "wingman," a 25-year-old from Baltimore named Ryan Wagner, leaned forward on the couch. Under a backwards-turned cap, his eyes darted from set to set, ballpark to ballpark. 

"For me, it's like driving down the highway," Wagner said. "You've got the games you're focused on, and then you check your mirrors. I look for pitchers in the wind-up—if I see someone about to throw a pitch, that means something may happen."

This was a mellow afternoon at the Major League Baseball Fan Cave. It was late April, and only four games were on TV: San Francisco at Pittsburgh, Tampa Bay at Minnesota, Toronto at Texas, Seattle at Detroit. Already there had been marathons in which O'Hara and Wagner divided their attention between 13 games at one time. There was the grueling night the Dodgers and Padres lumbered through a game with a three-hour rain delay, and the two men didn't depart the Cave until 5 a.m.

But they love it. They competed for it. O'Hara, 37, and Wagner beat out 10,000 applicants in an MLB contest for the pleasure of being paid to watch 2,430 regular- season baseball games— plus the playoffs— from a couch in the old Tower Records space on Broadway and East 4th Street. Every day they come into a high-ceilinged lair stuffed with baseball memorabilia and comfortable furniture—the Cave resembles an MTV ''Real World'' set, if the contestants were more interested in double plays than body shots—and observe hours of action from a bank of TV screens. They tune in for the league's first pitch, and do not leave until the last out is recorded, somewhere. 

You can go by their first-floor window right now and watch them, watching. Part performance art, part social media stunt, part dude fantasy, the MLB Cave is one of the most unusual anthropological experiments of Kardashian Era. 

Besides watching games, O'Hara and Wagner star in their own reality series on MLBFanCave.com. Both men have performance backgrounds. The Yonkers-born O'Hara is an actor and the frontman for a Celtic punk band called The Mighty Regis. Wagner just finished a stint with a touring company of "The Wizard of Oz."

But they're also unabashed baseball nuts. O'Hara bleeds Yankee blue. Wagner is an Orioles fan still traumatized by Jeffrey Maier. "It just makes me want to gouge my eyes out," he said. 

Yes: they both have girlfriends; both girlfriends are reported to be cool with the Cave. O'Hara and Wagner are living in apartments in the same building—separate apartments; sharing would be too weird. Wagner has a TV. O'Hara does not. They're watching their diet, and eating a lot of salad. They have memberships at a gym, and try to stay active. 

"I never sit down when I am watching baseball," O'Hara said. "I usually stand with a baseball bat."

They have a lot of season left. Late Wednesday afternoon the ticker at the Cave reported that O'Hara and Wagner had watched 436 games. A mere 1,994 remained. But over a month of action, they'd developed an appreciation for the gentle rhythm of baseball; for small-market teams like the Cincinnati Reds; for quirky local TV commercials they could practically recite by heart.

"There is something about baseball," O'Hara says. "It's like Christmas—when it comes around, you never get tired of it."

In a city full of strange jobs, theirs is one of the strangest. Wagner tells of a recent trip to a bar after a long shift at the Cave. "I'm sitting there at 2 a.m., just having a beer to decompress," he said. "' SportsCenter' is on, and this guy leans over to me, and says, 'Hey did you see that play?' "

Wagner laughs. "I was like, 'Yeah, thanks. Saw it!' " 