Forces loyal to Col. Moammar Gadhafi struck back against rebel-held cities across Libya on Sunday, while Republican leaders in Congress pressed for the U.S. to consider providing arms, intelligence and training to the rebels. 

  More photos and interactive graphics  

The fighting appeared to gain the Libyan government little ground against the rebels, increasing the likelihood of a prolonged standoff in the North African country.

With no evidence emerging that Col. Gadhafi is about to fall, Sen. John McCain of Arizona, the top Republican on the Armed Services Committee, and Senate Republican Leader Mitch McConnell of Kentucky urged the U.S. to consider various moves that would mark a sharp escalation in American involvement. 

Speaking on ABC's "This Week," Mr. McCain said the U.S. can help the rebels now by pumping in humanitarian assistance; by providing technical assistance, intelligence and training; and by declaring support for a provisional government. Mr. McConnell of Kentucky, speaking on CBS's "Face the Nation," said that "arming the insurgents" could be an option, citing as a possible model U.S. efforts against the Soviets during the Cold War.

Administration officials said later on Sunday that President Barack Obama is considering various options, but he wants any action, such as the establishment of a no-fly zone over Libya, to be closely coordinated with international allies. The U.S. is cautious right now about providing military assistance to the rebels, on the grounds that Washington doesn't know what aid is needed, who their leaders are and whether they can be trusted longer-term.

The assaults Sunday afternoon by forces loyal to Col. Gadhafi, which employed tanks, jets, helicopter gunships and heavy artillery, foundered in the key central-coastal city of Misrata, sandwiched between the government's two major strongholds of Tripoli and Sirte, according to residents. 

But government forces succeeded in stopping an advance by rebels on Sirte, Col. Gadhafi's hometown, from their capital, Benghazi, in the east.

Col. Gadhafi's military is larger and better equipped than the rebels, but it faces the daunting task of having to dislodge rebels from heavily populated urban settings and in remote desert locations. The rebels have been strengthened by defections of soldiers with equipment.

Government officials deny that the rebels have outmaneuvered them or have battled them to a stalemate. Libyan Deputy Foreign Minister Khalid Kaim says the military could crush the rebellion at will, but that it is under orders not to attack in heavily populated areas for fear of causing great loss of life.

Fighters united under the rebel command in Benghazi, and opposition forces working independently in towns like Misrata and Zawiya, have managed to rebuff multiple attacks by government troops. But they haven't been able to crack the regime's hold on the capital or on Sirte.



One retired Western military officer on the ground in Libya says the government could take out rebel positions in Zawiya, for example, about 30 miles from Tripoli, if it were ready to accept huge collateral damage and civilian deaths. It is unclear whether the government has the resources to mount such an effort in more than a few places.

The accounts of Sunday's battles provided by residents and witnesses conflicted with government reports. State television and a government spokesman announced that armed forces had won back Misrata and the oil-refinery city of Ras Lanuf, as well as Benghazi, the country's second-largest city, and the eastern border town of Tobruq.

Residents of Benghazi and Tobruq said there were no signs of pro-Gadhafi forces in their areas. Residents and journalists in Ras Lanuf contacted Sunday morning said the city remained under rebel control.

In Misrata, the country's third-largest city, residents said the government's offensive didn't start until afternoon—six hours after state television announced a government victory. 

Tank columns rolled into the city center from three directions, but an estimated 100 townspeople fought back over four hours, according to two residents reached by phone. Abdel Fatah al-Misrati, one of the rebels, said the rebel commanders intentionally opened the way for government tanks to enter the city, then surrounded them and attacked with antiaircraft guns and mortars.

By 4:30 p.m., the heavy artillery had ceased, and the city's local radio station was broadcasting news that the town was still free of government control. Misrata's civil-defense groups have fought off multiple assaults by the government over the past week. 

Earlier Sunday, heavy machine-gun fire erupted before dawn in the Libyan capital, including in the neighborhood of Col. Gadhafi's residence, as his supporters poured into the streets after state television broadcast the claims that the government's armed forces had recaptured key areas around the country.

Track events day by day.

See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

A look at the economic and political status of selected countries facing unrest in North Africa and the Middle East.

Rebel fighters said their westward push stalled on Saturday night after they appeared to have walked into an ambush in the small coastal city of Bin Jawad, which lies about 25 miles west of Ras Lanuf. Townspeople had led them to believe the city was clear of pro-Gadhafi forces, but when the rebel vanguard entered the village, they were surrounded and fired upon from houses around them, said rebel fighters who escaped. 

"The villagers betrayed us," said Mohammed Salah, 21 years old, a rebel fighter reached by phone. "We had to retreat, the explosions are coming nearer and nearer." 

The push back by government forces over the weekend continues a pattern of attack and counterattack between rebel forces in the east and progovernment forces. 

As of Sunday evening, the government retained full control of Tripoli, home to two million of the country's approximately six million people, and Sirte, while most of the remaining key coastal cities were under rebel control.

Around 4:30 a.m. sustained gunfire erupted in the vicinity of Col. Gadhafi's main compound in Tripoli. It was unclear who was the target or who was doing the shooting. A government spokesman said the city's residents merely were celebrating news that a military offensive had succeeded in the east.

One of the first international attempts to reach out toward the Libyan rebel government in Benghazi appears to have hit a roadblock. An eight-man British delegation that arrived unannounced to establish contacts with the rebels was arrested after it landed by helicopter outside of the Libyan port, rebel officials said on Sunday. Those arrested identified themselves as a British diplomat with a security detail. A rebel spokesman said the team had been released and had left Libya.

In the U.S., White House Chief of Staff Bill Daley, speaking on NBC's "Meet the Press," played down the chance the U.S. would act alone. "As the president said, all options are all on the table. But this has to be an international effort," he said.

Senior Obama administration officials said it would be difficult for the U.S. to enforce a no-fly zone without the direct participation of key North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies with major air bases near Libya, particularly in Italy. U.S. officials said NATO planners were meeting daily to prepare options for defense ministers scheduled to discuss Libya on Thursday. 

Sen. John Kerry, a Massachusetts Democrat who heads the Foreign Relations Committee, told "Face the Nation" the U.S. can do more to "bolster the opposition," but he offered no details. Mr. Kerry said the U.S. and its allies should plan for a no-fly zone but not implement it right away. Short of enforcing a no-fly zone, Mr. Kerry said the country's runways could be bombed to make it harder for Col. Gadhafi to use aircraft to attack the opposition.

—Sam Dagher and Alistair MacDonald contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Margaret Coker at margaret.coker@wsj.com and Charles Levinson at charles.levinson@wsj.com 