BRUSSELS—Finland was the only euro-area country to oppose a proposal Monday to increase the lending capacity of the currency bloc's temporary bailout facility, according to a person close to the situation. 

Euro-zone finance ministers are meeting in Brussels Monday and Tuesday to work on a comprehensive package of economic reforms that are expected to culminate in some grand deal by a March 25 meeting of heads of state and government. But a proposal Monday on how the European Financial Stability Facility could lend €440 billion ($615.96 billion), the amount it is currently supported by in guarantees, was stymied by Finnish opposition. 

The complicated structure of the EFSF, which was set up to ensure a triple-A credit rating, has made it so that, despite the guarantees, its actual lending capacity is currently only around €250 billion. Euro-area leaders have said they want to make sure the full €440 billion could be available and they are proposing that countries increase the guarantees further to allow for this. 

"We were the only ones to oppose it," a person close to the negotiations said. 

He said any support for an EFSF boost by the Finnish finance minister,  Jyrki Katainen, would be political suicide at this point. Mr. Katainen's party is in the lead in campaigns for a national election, set to take place in mid-April. Mr. Katainen and his party are hoping they can hold off on any specific agreements with the EU on emergency funding until then, as Mr. Katainen's position as head of the National Coalition Party could make him prime minister, said the person. 

Finland's support for the deal is made more complicated by the fact that its parliament is dissolved Tuesday ahead of elections. That means the government would have to call an emergency session of parliament to approve a decision by the finance minister on a Eurogroup deal. 

Moreover, the Finnish Parliament's grand committee said earlier this month that it will not authorize the Finnish government to give further loan guarantees related to the European financial-crisis mechanism. 

The grand committee said in a statement that the Finnish government had asked to increase its powers of giving further guarantees. "If the situation changes, the grand committee requires that it gets a chance to express its views before the closure at the EU level," it said.

—Arild Moen contributed to this article.