SINGAPORE—Manufacturing in South Korea and Taiwan accelerated in December even as expansion in China and India slowed, with developed markets in the U.S. and Europe supporting the region's exporters. 

The data released Monday by  HSBC Holdings PLC highlighted continued strength in Asia but also reinforced concerns about rising inflationary pressures that likely will prompt some Asian central banks to keep tightening monetary policy. 

The figures suggested the South Korean and Taiwanese economies continued to rebound from a lull late last year, when fears of a possible "double-dip" in the U.S. economy and Europe's sovereign-debt crisis sent ripples of caution through many parts of Asia, where economic growth remains dependent on exports to developed markets. 

HSBC's Monday releases follow the official Chinese PMI released Saturday, which showed manufacturing growth slowed last month, echoing a similar reading from the HSBC China PMI on Friday. 

"The U.S. economy continued to grow, but much faster in the fourth quarter than in the third quarter. Europe didn't completely blow up. So we see a good and healthy rebound in the fourth quarter due to inventory rebuilding, although the underlying fundamentals aren't particularly strong," said  Michael Spencer, chief economist in Asia for Deutsche Bank. 

Activity in South Korea's manufacturing sector accelerated in December to its fastest rate in seven months, propelled by an increase in new orders, according to HSBC. 

The HSBC Purchasing Managers' Index rose to a seasonally adjusted 53.9 in December from 50.2 in November. A reading above 50 indicates expansion; a reading below 50 signals contraction. 

"The Korean economy is ending 2010 on a strong note. With the global trade cycle firing up again, Korea especially stands to benefit," HSBC said in a statement. "The labor market is strengthening as well, which should help underpin consumption spending for the coming quarters." 

Still, HSBC warned that the Bank of Korea should heed growing price pressures: "With both the input and output price indices up sharply, it is only a matter of time before official inflation readings begin to threaten the central bank's target," the statement said. 

HSBC's Taiwan PMI rose to 54.7 in December from 51.7 a month before, helped by export demand. In the four prior months the PMI had languished below 50, as Taiwanese manufacturers took a breather following a sprint early in the year. 

Demand from Europe was a principal source of Taiwan's December export growth, HSBC said. "More importantly, the subsequent creation of new jobs is translating into stronger local demand," HSBC said. 

Taiwan's central bank raised its key interest rates Thursday in a bid to curb rising inflation, its third increase in 2010. Economists expect the central bank to continue to raise interest rates this year amid concern about in inflation.

China's official PMI fell to 53.9 in December from 55.2 in November, according to the China Federation of Logistics and Purchasing, which issues the data with the National Bureau of Statistics. 

The fall indicates that growth in manufacturing activity slowed in December, potentially alleviating some concerns about overheating and inflation in China. 

The input prices subindex declined to 66.7 from 73.5 in November. That means inflation pressures have moderated somewhat, though they remain at a high level. 

The HSBC PMIs are compiled by U.K.-based research firm Markit Group Ltd. and is sponsored by HSBC. 

India's PMI declined to 56.7 in December from 58.4 in November, according to HSBC. 

—Shen Hong in Shanghai contributed to this report. 

 Write to  Aries Poon at aries.poon@dowjones.com and Arran Scott at arran.scott@dowjones.com 