GHUDANI KALAM VILLAGE, India—As wheat production stagnates, the water table plunges and electricity blackouts remain a daily reality, farmers in the Indian state of Punjab are trying to escape the livelihood that made them famous and prosperous in the agricultural boom in the 1970s and 1980s known as the Green Revolution.

"If you want to know the truth, we want to run away from here. Take us with you," says 40-year-old farmer Balwinder Singh Boparai, sitting with visitors in grey plastic lawn chairs arranged in a circle in the dirt courtyard of his single-story concrete house.

Mr. Boparai and many of the other dozen farmers interviewed in this part of Punjab, a half hour's drive from the old industrial city of Ludhiana, say they face the sorry reality they don't have any other job opportunities as the state's once-mighty agricultural industry falters. Punjab hasn't lured many of the sectors that are making India famous worldwide for its rapid economic growth. The vast majority of people in this state in the northwestern corner of India still work the fields even as agricultural growth has slowed: It has risen at an average rate of 2.6% a year in the past decade.

"When we were young, we didn't realize there was no future in farming," Mr. Boparai says. "Nowadays, if we don't drink, the tension will drive us crazy."

Mr. Boparai farms 18 acres—a portion of which he and his three brothers own together, and another 14 that they lease nearby. Like almost everyone here in this village of 15,000 people, famous in Ludhiana district for having three enormous marble gurudwaras—the temples of the predominantly Sikh population -- Mr. Boparai grows rice and wheat, the staple foods of India. 

But his yields of both crops have stagnated in the past 15 years, he says. To keep yields from falling, he and other farmers say they keep adding more fertilizers. But the fertilizers need lots of water, draining the water table in the area, which they say has fallen to 40 feet from 20 feet in the past 15 years.

To irrigate their fields, the farmers use electric pumps to draw the water out of tube wells, but that's tricky because power is in such short supply. The state gives power free to farmers, but the utility companies are so short of capital that they lack the funds to expand capacity. Farmers get only four hours of power a day during wheat season, and six in the more water-intensive rice season. They supplement the erratic electricity supply with diesel-powered generators, which stand in their courtyards, beside the other accoutrements of daily life--a tractor, bicycles and shade trees.

Incomes--after expenses--have fallen between 15% and 25% in the past decade, farmers here say, even though they've pressured the central government to raise the minimum support price guaranteed for wheat and rice purchased by the government. Costs are rising, including for farm expenses like labor, which have gone up to 2,200 rupees a person for rice transplanting from 1,000 rupees three years ago, Mr. Boparai says. 

What also costs a lot are the farmers' own aspirations, driven by the dim future they see in agriculture at home and the hopeful images that flash across their TV screens of big jobs with big salaries in the new India.

"The children say, 'You got stuck in farming. Make us study so we can change our lives,'" says Gurmail Kaur, Mr. Singh's mother, the matriarch of the five-room concrete house where she resides with Mr. Boparai, three other grown sons and all of their children.

Mr. Boparai is paying 10,000 rupees a quarter, or $250, in private tuition fees for each of his three children, he says. 

"We don't let our children do any chores," says Mr. Boparai's sister-in-law, Manjeet Kaur. "We only want them to study."

His 19-year-old daughter, Navnee Kaur, is enrolled in a bachelor's of commerce program about a half hour away. She returns home each day at 4 p.m. then heads down the road for extra lessons in accounting at 6 p.m.

But Mr. Boprai, who has a fourth-grade education, says he sees few job opportunities for his kids. He notes there's a hiring freeze in the budget-strapped Punjab government, where those who wanted a non-farm job used to find employment. And the private jobs available nearby are mostly for accountants or call center workers in local banks or small cloth-manufacturing or embroidery businesses, paying only about 5,000 or 6,000 rupees—about $110 to $130--a month.

Workers in desperately poor states like Bihar or Madhya Pradesh might grab jobs like these, but not their children, who have grown up in times of plenty, the older farmers say.

"Our sons won't go to factory jobs paying 4,000 to 5,000 rupees," about $100 a month, says Charan Singh, 52, who farms 39 acres in the neighboring village of Maksudra, most of it leased, with his 24-year-old son.

"That expenditure our sons will incur just on their motorcycles and mobile phones," the turbaned, grey-bearded Mr. Singh says.

His son, Sarbjeet Singh, who sports a flat-topped hairdo says only two of his friends have gotten jobs outside of farming—and they had to leave the country to find them. One went to Australia, the other to England, where they both had relatives.

"Everybody has no jobs," says the younger Mr. Singh. "My friends, they help a bit on the farm but otherwise do nothing," he says, reclining in a green tee-shirt with white letters that say: "I'm not selfish—I just want everything."

He's trying to emigrate to Italy, where his sister moved three years ago to marry. When he does, his father says he will stop leasing farmland and subsist on the few acres the family owns outright.

Looking at framed photographs on the shelf above him of legendary Sikh leaders Guru Nanak and Guru Gobind Singh, the elder Mr. Singh sighs and says, "Farming is a failed business. With me, our family's farming tradition will end."