SEOUL—The new chairman of South Korea's financial regulator said the government will act sternly against financial-market disruptions or distortions and ensure systemic stability.

The comments come as Seoul takes steps to protect the domestic market from risks posed by rapid foreign capital flows into and out of the country.

"The government will respect the financial industry's autonomy and provide the grounds that will allow the industry to develop on its own," the Financial Supervisory Commission's  Kim Seok-dong, who officially assumed his post Monday, said in a speech at the Korea Exchange.

"But at the same time the government will be resolute in carrying out its responsibility of safeguarding financial-market stability…transparency and soundness are the major premises for the continued development of the financial markets that we cannot yield on," Mr. Kim said.

In a separate speech for his inauguration later Monday, Mr. Kim said the authority should ensure that recent steps taken by Seoul to guard the market against rapid foreign-capital flows are carried out appropriately. He also said the FSC should prevent excessive one-way flow of market liquidity and proactively respond to risks in the global financial markets.

Also Monday, data released by HSBC showed the country's manufacturing-sector activity accelerated in December to its fastest rate in seven months, propelled by an increase in new orders.

As data suggest inflationary pressures are building up fast, riding on stronger local demand and higher global raw-material costs, the Bank of Korea would have to raise the official interest rate from the first quarter, economists say.

South Korea's stock market closed at a record Monday, buoyed by optimism about the global economy. One sign of improving conditions came in HSBC's purchasing-managers index, which rose to a seasonally adjusted 53.9 in December from 50.2 in November. A reading above 50 indicates expansion; a reading below 50 signals contraction.

"With the global trade cycle firing up again, Korea especially stands to benefit. While exports are accelerating again after a recent lull, the labor market is strengthening as well, which should help underpin consumption spending for the coming quarters," HSBC said in a news release, noting that such improvement is seen both in domestic demand and exports.

South Korean authorities last year took several steps to handle a flood of investment as officials in the U.S., Europe and Japan sought to boost their economies through super-low interest rates and investors in turn looked for higher yields in Asia, Africa and Latin America. Those flows of funds have led to a rapid appreciation of some currencies and raised concerns of instability should investors abruptly reduce their holdings.

Seoul imposed a cap on banks' foreign-exchange forward positions in June and in December announced a plan to impose a bank levy against the balance of non-deposit foreign-currency debt. Legislators also are considering the reintroduction of taxes on foreign investors' purchases of some government bonds.

An official at the Financial Supervisory Service has said that South Korea plans to lower the ceiling on banks' foreign-exchange forward positions. The cap for domestic banks will fall to 40% of their capital from 50% currently. The limit for local branches of foreign banks in Korea will be cut to 200% of their capital from 250% currently.

The official, who spoke last month, didn't specify when the revision will take effect, but he said the market impact will be minimal because the banks' positions are already well below the new limits.

Separately, Mr. Kim said his agency should proactively manage potential risks to the financial market such as household debt and risky project financing loans to guard against systemic risks. Mr. Kim also said the government should help domestic financial firms expand abroad as well as strengthen their capabilities to tap into new business areas.

Also Monday, the FSS said it has directed domestic banks to spread out the maturity of their liabilities to reduce potential systemic risks stemming from a mismatch between asset and liabilities.

"If there is a shock to financial markets at a time when liability maturities are concentrated, banks' ability to cope with a crisis will be damaged as it becomes more difficult for them to raise funds," the FSS said in a statement.

The authority said banks plan to spread out these liabilities, such as deposits, through such methods as increasing long-term financing and adjusting the timing of bond issues.

—Arran Scott and Kanga Kong contributed to this article.

 Write to  Se Young Lee at vincent.lee@dowjones.com 