Nobel laureate Muhammad Yunus filed an appeal Wednesday with Bangladesh's Supreme Court in his bid to overturn a central-bank order last week to remove him as head of the microfinance bank he founded. 

Mr. Yunus was dealt a setback Tuesday when a high court ruled in favor of the central bank, intensifying a struggle between Mr. Yunus and the government of Bangladesh Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina.

Bangladesh Bank on March 2 said Mr. Yunus, 70 years old, must step down as managing director of Grameen Bank. The central bank said Grameen had failed to get its approval, as required by the law that formally set up the bank, when it reappointed Mr. Yunus to the role in 1999.

Mr. Yunus challenged the central bank's authority to rule on such a matter and questioned why authorities had acted only now, 12 years after the appointment. The Supreme Court said it will rule next Tuesday. 

Mr. Yunus, speaking Monday via video to a microfinance conference in Washington, claimed the government was attempting to take control of the bank for political reasons. A spokeswoman for Grameen Bank said Mr. Yunus continues to head the bank during the legal appeal process. 

Mr. Yunus is a popular figure in Bangladesh, an impoverished Muslim-majority country of 160 million bordered by India and Myanmar. Grameen Bank has more than eight million rural borrowers, who own 96.5% of the bank's share capital, making it a potential power base, some analysts say.

He moved briefly to set up a political party in 2007 after winning the Nobel Prize in a public bid to clean up Bangladesh's notoriously corrupt politics. The abortive move into politics, which happened during a period of military rule, reportedly angered Ms. Hasina, who is head of one of Bangladesh's two big political dynasties and took up her current stint as prime minister after elections in 2008.

"A lot of this has to do with the personal animosity between Sheikh Hasina and Muhammad Yunus," said Lamia Karim, an associate professor of cultural anthropology at the University of Oregon-Eugene who has written a book on Grameen Bank.

Bangladesh's politicians dislike Mr. Yunus's success and the fact that he isn't beholden to them, Ms. Karim said. Grameen also has entered into other businesses, becoming the country's largest cellphone provider in a joint venture with Telenor Group of Norway and producing yoghurt with France's Groupe Danone SA.

Attempts to reach the Bangladesh Awami League, Ms. Hasina's party, weren't successful. A spokesman for Bangladesh Bank, the central bank, didn't answer calls seeking comment.

Mr. Yunus has said he's ready to stand down as managing director but only when a plan is in place for a smooth transition.

Grameen Bank was transformed into a formal bank in 1983 by a special government law, which allowed the government to appoint a nonexecutive chairman of the board and own up to 25% of the bank's shares. The government's current shareholding is 3.5%, Grameen Bank says.

Last year, Mr. Yunus wrote Bangladesh's finance minister to suggest he stand down as managing director and be appointed chairman to ensure continuity, according to a copy of the letter released by Grameen Bank. It's unclear how the government responded.

In a statement Monday, Mr. Yunus said he was committed to a "smooth transition of management leadership" with the "friendly support we need from all stakeholders of the bank."

U.S. officials are concerned the developments could undermine the independence of Grameen Bank, which Mr. Yunus founded in 1976. Mr. Yunus and the bank jointly won the 2006 Nobel Peace Prize for its pioneering work in extending credit to poor rural dwellers, mainly women, without collateral.

Secretary of State Hillary Clinton spoke to Mr.Yunus on Tuesday, according to the Associated Press "We are troubled by the letter that the Bangladesh Bank sent to the Grameen Bank concerning Dr. Yunus' status as managing director," State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley told a news conference. " We continue to follow developments closely." 

The government has claimed the institution lacked proper oversight and last year began to probe its activities. Increasing criticism of the global microcredit industry, which Mr. Yunus helped pioneer, has given the state ammunition. Ms. Hasina in December blamed the country's microlenders for "sucking blood" from poor borrowers.

Critics say microfinance has failed to alleviate poverty and had saddled rural borrowers with debt. In India, microfinance banks have drawn criticism for making huge profits and after debt issues appeared to have sparked a series of suicides in the southern state of Andhra Pradesh. Grameen Bank has largely avoided such scandals and is widely credited with empowering women and providing a model to help provide the poor with capital, although critics have questioned the bank's effectiveness in reducing poverty.

