Porsche Automobil Holding's sportscar unit said it has no concrete plans to establish a production facility in the U.S. or China, dismissing a German media report published Sunday. A Porsche spokesman said the sportscar maker might decide on a production facility abroad at some point in the future. 

 Airbus said it took 644 aircraft orders worth a total of $84 billion at list price last year, beating U.S. rival Boeing thanks to unexpectedly robust demand from airlines in Asia, the Middle East and emerging-market countries.  

The European commercial plane maker also landed the first firm order for an updated version of its best-selling A320 model from U.S. upstart carrier Virgin America, marking the second planned deal for the modernized jetliner since it went on sale last month. 

Air India has called for bids to lease 36 to 40 planes as it aims to expand its fleet size in a fast-growing aviation market. 

 UBS said it is revising its much-publicized dress code to focus on the core elements of the style guide, namely requiring its Swiss retail banking staff to wear colors used by the bank across all elements of its corporate design.  

India's Axis Bank beat expectations with a 36% rise in third-quarter net profit to 8.91 billion rupees ($196.4 million), helped by higher non-interest income. 

Larsen & Toubro, India's largest engineering and construction company by sales, reported an 11% rise in third-quarter net profit to 8.41 billion rupees ($185.4 million) on sharper execution of existing projects, despite rising input costs hurting margins. 

 The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries rejected oil consumers' claims that it needs to open the spigots after predicting demand for its crude will be higher in 2011 than previously forecast. 

BP won rights to drill for oil and natural gas in four deepwater exploration areas in Australia, the latest sign that the U.K. company's role in last year's Gulf of Mexico spill isn't stifling its expansion of offshore projects. 

Russian gas giant Gazprom said it has signed a deal with Japan on a possible joint construction of a liquified natural gas plant near Vladivostok in Russia's Far East. 

State-run Oil & Natural Gas Corp. has appointed six investment banks for its share sale in March as India's federal government proceeds with divesting a 5% stake in the country's largest oil explorer by volume. 

 Accelerating Asian demand helped luxury jewelry and watchmaker Compagnie Financière Richemont report a 36% sales increase to €2.12 billion ($2.84 billion) for the three months ended Dec. 31. 

 ING confirmed it is in talks with a number of potential bidders to sell its real-estate investment business, but declined to comment on media reports it is close to striking a deal. It said the talks may result in one or more deals. 

 Global private-equity firm Permira named Henry Chen and Alex Emery partners and co-heads of Asia to lead the development of the firm across the Asian-Pacific region.  

Hong Kong billionaire Li Ka-shing's charitable foundation is set to become the second-biggest shareholder of China Timber Resources Group. 

Separately, the company said it will sell 1.5 billion shares to a unit of blue-chip insurer China Life Insurance Co. for 40 Hong Kong cents (US$0.05) a share. 

Baffinland Iron Mines recommended shareholders accept a 590 million Canadian dollar (US$596 million) joint offer for the company by ArcelorMittal and Nunavut Iron Ore Acquisition. 

Nord Gold, the gold unit of Russian mining company Severstal, said it will float on the London Stock Exchange in a transaction expected to value it at as much as $5 billion. New and existing shares totaling around $1 billion will be offered to investors, people familiar with the matter said. 

 Swiss drug maker Roche Holding said Alan Hippe, joining from steelmaker ThyssenKrupp, will take over as chief financial officer from Erich Hunzier in April.  

 U.K. drug giant GlaxoSmithKline said it will record a £2.2 billion ($3.49 billion) charge in the fourth quarter to cover costs relating to a U.S. government investigation of Glaxo's marketing practices, as well as additional costs tied to consumer lawsuits regarding the diabetes drug Avandia.  

Tesco said it will make a complaint to the U.K.'s Advertising Standards Authority over Wal-Mart Stores-owned Asda's 10% price-guarantee claims. 

Shareholders in South Africa's Massmart Holdings have agreed to sell a controlling stake in the retailer to Wal-Mart Stores for $2.39 billion, the U.S. retail giant's first foray into the growing sub-Saharan African market.

 Apple chief Steve Jobs said he is taking a medical leave of absence but will remain CEO. The 55-year-old cancer survivor didn't specify what health issue forced the leave, but said Chief Operating Officer Tim Cook would oversee day-to-day operations. 

 Goldman Sachs decided to exclude U.S. clients from the private offering of as much as $1.5 billion in shares of social-networking company Facebook, citing "intense media attention." Goldman said the move came after officials at the securities firm "concluded the level of media attention might not be consistent with the proper completion of a U.S. private placement under U.S. law."  

Goldman began notifying clients of its decision on Sunday night in Asia, and clients in Europe and the U.S. were being told on Monday, according to people familiar with the situation.

Nokia said it will discontinue its free music downloads for handsets in several markets as it revamps an online service it launched with record labels to rival Apple's iTunes. 

U.S. optical-fiber maker Corning won the first major contract for the 36 billion Australian dollar (US$35.6 billion) national Internet broadband-network project in Australia that the government hopes will improve broadband speed across the country. 

Italy's Prysmian and Melbourne-based Warren & Brown Technologies won smaller orders worth up to A$300 million and A$110 million, respectively. 

 A legal case pitting Internet search giant Google against Spain's privacy laws will be heard by a Spanish court Wednesday, a Google spokeswoman said.  

Separately, Italy's antitrust authority has accepted an offer by Google to improve transparency after publishers accused the company of abusing its dominant market position. 

 Hitachi said it will more than double its overseas research and development staff by March 2013 as part of its first major R&D shake-up in 25 years.  

Tata Consultancy Services posted a 30% jump in its third quarter net profit to 23.3 billion rupees ($513.5 million), as cost controls and demand for outsourcing of technology services offset the impact of a rising rupee. 

 Mobile company VimpelCom said its board approved a revised $6.5 billion merger with the telecom assets of Egyptian billionaire Naguib Sawiris, but major shareholder Telenor accused its Russian partner of deception. 