Dominique Strauss-Kahn's dramatic arrest in New York on sexual-assault charges was a shock to the financial world, but not necessarily to the financial system. While the head of the International Monetary Fund has been a key player in tackling the global financial crisis, the IMF's institutional strength and Europe's common interest in protecting the euro should limit any fallout. Even so, the impact is likely to be felt in three ways.

The first is in France. Although undeclared as a candidate, he was seen as the front-runner to challenge Nicolas Sarkozy in next year's presidential elections. Polls suggested he would win, while investors were reassured by Mr. Strauss-Kahn's fiscal prudence. If Mr. Strauss-Kahn can't stand, the beneficiary will likely be Mr. Sarkozy, given the lack of credible Socialist Party alternatives. The risk is that Mr. Sarkozy, faced with a stronger challenge from a resurgent far-right Front National, drifts further away from reforms promised in 2007 but only partially delivered.

Second, Mr. Strauss-Kahn's arrest has raised concerns that efforts to bail out Greece and Portugal might be upset or delayed. That seems unlikely. The IMF has reached agreement on Portugal's €78 billion ($110 billion) bailout. The remaining hurdles relate to internal European politics, in particular conditions set by Finland, and are unlikely to require any renegotiation of the IMF part of the package. 

The Greek situation is more problematic: the country faces a likely €60 billion funding shortfall in 2012 and 2013. IMF and euro-zone staff are currently working on a review looking at whether Greece's debt is sustainable, a key issue if the IMF is to lend more money. But  John Lipsky, first deputy managing director, is closely involved and there is no immediate urgency for a decision. 

Third, there is the impact on the IMF itself. Mr. Strauss-Kahn had been expected to resign from the IMF to challenge Mr. Sarkozy. A debate was already underway over whether Europe could retain its lock on the IMF top job. With Brazil, China, India and Russia joining the ranks of the 10 biggest IMF shareholders, there have been calls to give a greater voice to emerging-market countries. 

However, Europe is likely to push hard for another European. Mr. Strauss-Kahn is widely acknowledged to have played an important role in steering Europe's unprecedented bailouts. He had the clout, experience and contacts to broker deals. Europe and the U.S., who still contribute nearly half of IMF financing, are unlikely to risk handing control to someone outside Europe at such a critical juncture. German Chancellor Angela Merkel pointedly noted Monday that "in the current situation…Europe has good candidates to offer." 

 Write to  Richard Barley at richard.barley@dowjones.com and Matthew Curtin at matthew.curtin@dowjones.com 