 I am 61½ with children ages 10 and 9. I will continue to work full time until 70½ and had not planned to file for Social Security until then. Now I understand that the children can receive benefits until age 18 when I become eligible in six months. Apparently there is a family maximum payment based on my benefit amount. 

 Should I file for a lowered monthly payment at age 62 to receive seven and eight years of benefits for the kids, or wait until I reach full retirement age at 66 and receive a higher monthly benefit for me, but only three and four years of benefits for them? 

  JON DEMOS  Lexington, Ky.  



Read the complete  Next: Planning & Living the New Retirement report .

It's smart to look into the benefits your children might be eligible for when you turn 62. However, if your continuing earnings are substantial, you may find they are able to collect only a very small check or nothing at all.

A retiree's minor child can usually collect each year half of what the retiree would get at full retirement age. But as you note, a family's combined benefits are subject to a cap; the annual payments based on one person's work record are usually limited to 150% to 180% of that person's benefit at full retirement age.

Perhaps a more significant impediment is Social Security's "earnings test." If you claim Social Security before the year you reach full retirement age, your benefit—and then your children's benefits—would be reduced by $1 for every $2 you earn over a threshold, which is $14,160 in 2011. If an early claimant continues to work and earns $50,000 this year, for example, Social Security would withhold $17,920 of the family's benefits ($50,000 minus $14,160, divided by 2). That could be a huge dent, considering that the biggest payment for someone retiring this year at the full retirement age of 66 is $28,392.

To figure out your family's situation, try doing the math yourself or ask Social Security to help. If your children would collect a payment at your age 62, that's an "extra" benefit you probably should take advantage of, says  William Reichenstein, director of research for Social Security Solutions Inc. If you are married, you should also consider the impact of your filing early on your spouse.



 I currently have my wife, who is 20 years younger, named as my sole primary IRA beneficiary and my two daughters (from a previous marriage) listed as secondary beneficiaries. Upon my death I wish for my wife to pass on to my two daughters some of my IRA assets. I am told that this can be done if, within nine months from my death, my wife "disclaims" the specific assets to be passed on. Is that correct? 

  G.D. LANDES  Atlanta  

Yes, heirs have the option to disclaim, or say no to, assets they are to inherit. The property then goes to the next person in line: in the case of an individual retirement account, to the "contingent" or secondary beneficiaries you have named. "Disclaimers are a very valuable technique" for estate planning, because they give heirs flexibility to make some decisions after a death, says  Douglas Siegler, a lawyer with Sutherland Asbill & Brennan LLP in Washington.

But "flexibility is good and bad," he adds. A beneficiary could decide not to disclaim any part of an inheritance. And some families inadvertently miss the nine-month deadline you refer to.

In second marriages, decisions about allocating assets between a surviving spouse and the children from a first marriage can be thorny. It's usually a good idea to provide some money directly to the children, from either assets or life insurance, Mr. Siegler says. You could provide for your IRA to be split three ways, in any proportions you choose. Some people also set up trusts to provide distributions to the spouse, with the remainder earmarked for the children.



 My first husband passed away four years ago. Recently, I found someone very special, and we wanted to get married. We are 75 and 81 years old. My accountant has told us that if we married, whether our tax forms stated "married filing separately" or "married filing jointly," we will be penalized financially. Is this accurate? 

  BARBARA SULLIVAN  Sagamore Beach, Mass.  



There's an easy way to answer that question, particularly at this time of year: Using the documents you have assembled for your 2010 returns, ask your accountant or your beau's to calculate what your federal and state tax bills would have been for 2010 if you were married versus your actual tax bills as single filers. You could do that yourself with tax-preparation software. Make adjustments if you expect your finances to be significantly different in 2011 and coming years.

But taxes are only one financial consideration as you weigh marriage, notes  Jeffrey Schrader, an accountant in Trenton, N.J. If you are collecting a pension or medical benefits based on your first husband, for instance, you'll want to confirm they wouldn't be affected by remarriage. (You don't need to worry about Social Security: Remarriage after age 60 doesn't affect a survivor benefit based on your first husband's earnings.)

Further, if one or both of you would bring substantial assets to the marriage, there are significant issues to discuss about how your assets would be divided in case of divorce or death. A prenuptial agreement could be appropriate, Mr. Schrader notes, and you would need to revise your estate documents.

 Next welcomes your questions at next@wsj.com. Ms. Damato is a Wall Street Journal news editor in South Brunswick, N.J. 