KISSIMMEE, Fla.—If there's a certain spring in Eric Chavez's step this week, if his mood seems a little brighter, there's a good reason. In the past week, the former star learned that he can still play baseball, and that's cause for minor celebration.

Spring training games are meaningless for most. But for Chavez—who hasn't played a full season since 2006—each Grapefruit League ballpark is a laboratory, a testing ground where he sees if his injury-wracked body can still handle the rigors playing baseball games.

With one all-important week in the books, Chavez is feeling confident that he can continue a career on the brink, and he looks like he's in the lead to make the Yankee roster as a backup infielder.

"A few months ago, I didn't think I'd be playing in a spring training game," said Chavez, who spent the winter contemplating retirement at age 33. 

Then his agent told him that teams kept calling, asking about his services. He was surprised but decided to give it another shot. The results have been better than he could have hoped. 

His shoulders don't ache. His back feels strong. His neck doesn't feel tight. He could tell early on that his batting-practice sessions were sharper and more powerful than in years past. 

"The way I've been swinging the bat in BP, for me, it hasn't been there in about two years," Chavez said. "That lets me know that it's in the tank. Obviously, you have to take it out there and translate it out there, but I've just got a feeling that it's in there."

In the past week, he's found that as the play has accelerated to game speed, his body can keep up. He has five hits in 14 at-bats, including a double, with one walk. Manager Joe Girardi has used him at first base and third base in practice, though mostly at first during games.

"He's played very well, whether we've put him at third or first. We've talked about how third has been his primary position, and we've put him at first more.…He's swung the bat very well."

Chavez has a pedigree that makes him popular with the spring training autograph seekers, but it's largely ancient history at this point. Chavez was a premier third baseman for the Oakland A's from 1999-2006, winning six straight Gold Gloves and hitting more than 25 home runs seven times. He was rewarded with a long-term, $66-million contract, a rarity for the A's.

A string of injuries and surgeries tore apart that budding career, however, and the A's declined to pick up his contract option this past winter. This is a last chance of sorts for Chavez. If his body holds up, he'll continue his career. If not, he'll call it quits.

"I want to know that I can still play," Chavez said. "If I come here, and I'm healthy, and I'm still playing, I know things are going to work out for me. And if they don't—and I don't perform and I don't feel good— well, I don't want to be playing baseball at a low level.

Chavez is in Yankee camp on a minor-league contract, a low-risk gamble for the Yankees that, so far, is working out. Now that he's proving he can hit, Chavez appears to be in the lead to claim the backup corner infielder's spot, spelling Alex Rodriguez at third and Mark Teixeira at first. Injured utilityman Ronnie Belliard appears ticketed for the minors, and minor leaguer Jorge Vasquez doesn't offer the kind of infield defense that Girardi wants.

Whoever makes the team as the backup corner man needs to be able to spell Rodriguez, whose surgically repaired hip makes him a candidate for frequent DH days.

When Girardi was asked how much of a factor the candidates' third-base defense was to determining who gets the backup spot, Girardi nodded slowly.

"Yes. That's important," he said.

Asked if that meant that Chavez would be a likelier candidate because he's one of the best third basemen of the past decade, Girardi nodded again, and smiled.

"It's important," he repeated. 

The implication is that as long as Chavez keeps hitting and his body holds up, he's the likeliest candidate to claim the job. 

With what looks like an inside track to make the team, Chavez is feeling good right now. But even if he doesn't fit into the Yankees' plans, in the past week he's learned that his body has some life left in it after all. Despite teetering on the edge of retirement this winter, Chavez now believes his baseball career isn't done yet.

"There's a lot of things that I'm proving to myself, that I can still play. There's something left in the tank. If it doesn't work out here, I definitely feel I can help somebody win," Chavez said. 

 Write to  Daniel Barbarisi at Daniel.Barbarisi@wsj.com 