HONG KONG—Billionaire  Stanley Ho's statements in a feud over control for his Macau casino fortune are raising questions about his real intentions, who really represents him—and whether he is of sound mind to make major decisions concerning the disposition of his wealth.

The future of the 89-year-old's holdings has been in question since he was hospitalized for brain surgery in 2009. At stake is an indirectly held 18% stake in  SJM Holdings Ltd.
SJMHF


-4.07
%




, the casino operator that controls about 30% of Macau's gambling market, which is valued at nearly $30 billion a year.

Fresh concerns sprang up last week after Mr. Ho made a televised appearance saying a family dispute over his fortune was settled, while at the same time his attorneys filed a lawsuit against two branches of his sprawling family to regain the shares of his flagship casino empire. Concerns were further exacerbated over the weekend by another round of confusing and seemingly contradictory public statements about the billionaire's wishes.

The increasingly bizarre ping-pong of statements elevates doubts on Mr. Ho's mental competence and whether or not a judge will call on medical experts to issue a ruling on his mental status. 

  Paul Shea, a geriatric-medicine specialist, said that generally speaking, in cases of a legal dispute, Hong Kong has a system to prevent people close to a patient from taking advantage in emergency situations when it is decided that the patient is mentally incapacitated and vulnerable to lose property against his will. The courts may order the formation of a committee of doctors, lawyers, accountants and other parties to evaluate legal decisions, he said.

Last week, Mr. Ho appeared at times to struggle to read from note cards in his televised statement. Dr. Shea said that "reading words means he recognizes words and knows how to speak, but doesn't mean he understands the whole issue," and that a statement like Mr. Ho's as a measure of legal competence is "grossly inadequate."

Dr. Shea isn't involved in Mr. Ho's treatment.

The weekend's volley began Sunday when a law firm that says it represents Mr. Ho issued a statement on his behalf saying talks to resolve a quarrel among his four different families over control of his casino interests failed to reach a conclusion.

"Dr. Ho expressed his continuing disappointment that members of his second and third family continue to ignore his requests for a resolution of this matter," the law firm, Oldham, Li & Nie, said. It added that Mr. Ho instructed the firm to take "all available action" to ensure that his wish to divide his holdings equally among the four families is carried out.

See a timeline of Mr. Ho's casinos business.

Mr. Ho has a complicated family tree, which includes four women who he and others refer to as his wives.

But hours later, a public-relations firm representing the second and third families released a copy of a legal motion signed by Mr. Ho dropping an earlier lawsuit he filed against them. It also released a letter signed by Mr. Ho in which he supported their moves to transfer his holdings into their control.

The public squabbling highlights the conflict between the families connected with four different women who have borne Mr. Ho's children. Mr. Ho has at least 17 acknowledged children from the four women he and others call his wives. His first wife passed away in 2004. 

SJM announced last week that Mr. Ho had given up nearly all his stake in the company to his third wife and the children of his second wife. But in a twist, Mr. Ho, through his law firm, subsequently denied that he authorized the transfer and sued his children. In his televised statement, he said he wanted to resolve the issue outside the courts and was firing his lawyer. The lawyer said that the law firm continued to represent him. That sparked several days of talks with Mr. Ho and his wives shuttling between their walled compounds in the most-exclusive neighborhoods of Hong Kong and Macau. 

Several of Mr. Ho's family are active in his businesses, including two who have opened their own casinos. His fourth wife is an executive director at SJM.

Mr. Ho built his empire under a four-decade monopoly that ended in 2002 when American and other competitors entered the market. Macau is now far bigger than Las Vegas in gambling revenue.

—Kate O'Keeffe contributed to this article.

 Write to  Shai Oster at shai.oster@wsj.com and Loretta Chao at loretta.chao@wsj.com 