The 112th Congress convened at noon today, and the first order of business was the election of the speaker of the House. Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi finished second in the 241-173 vote, losing to her predecessor, John Boehner. Rep. Heath Shuler (D., N.C.) received 11 votes; Rep., John Lewis (D., Ga.), two; and five other Democrats, one apiece. One representative voted "present," and two, including Boehner, did not vote.

"Shuler and some other House Democrats blame [Minority Leader Nancy] Pelosi for the drubbing their party took in the midterm elections, and they accuse the Californian of not being responsive to moderate Democrats," Roll Call reported Monday, in explaining why Rep. Heath Shuler (D., N.C.) planned to vote for Shuler. A "senior aide," speaking anonymously, "predicted Monday that a chunk of Democrats will register their discontent" by voting for Shuler: " 'I don't think it will be 40, but I wouldn't be surprised if it were 20,' the senior aide said."

If might've been 40 if only there had been that many moderate Democrats left.

The Daily Caller reports that Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi changed her Twitter handle last night: "Pelosi dutifully ceded the use of @SpeakerPelosi in exchange for @NancyPelosi. Meanwhile, . . . @SpeakerBoehner became the Ohio congressman's active account Wednesday morning."

Pelosi "celebrated the occasion by declaring the two character shortening a victory for 'RTers,' " whatever those are. Obviously that's why she decided not to use @MinorityLeaderPelosi--still not spoken for at this writing--which is seven characters longer than the old handle. If she loses the RTers, she will have lost Middle America.

The Associated Press reported yesterday that Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi "said she had no regrets on her last day as House speaker." Lots of other people also don't regret it was her last day as House speaker.

OK, we admit this is a pretty insubstantial item. But you have to admit, "Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi" sounds awfully nice.

 Two Papers in One! 

  Dana Milbank Gets Freudian   "This erection of the GOP's small tent had the effect of shifting attention from Steele's tenure."--Dana Milbank, Washington Post, Jan. 4

  Democrats Against ObamaCare   One of the first orders of business for the new House majority will be the passage of a bill repealing ObamaCare. It won't actually become law, because that would require approval by the Senate, where Democrats still have a majority, and the signature of the president, who still favored ObamaCare the last time we checked. But the bill, expected to be approved a week from today, is an important symbolic step. It will set the stage for future bills to curtail specific portions of ObamaCare, and, Republicans hope, for full repeal after the 2012 election.

Unlike ObamaCare itself, the move for repeal is bipartisan, FoxNews.com reports:

Boren, a third-generation congressman whose father was the last Oklahoma Democrat to serve in the U.S. Senate, is far from typical of his party today. His district in eastern Oklahoma gave 66% of its vote to John McCain in 2008.

The following comment is more representative of the minority party's mainstream:

Right, let's stick it to the insurance companies by forcing everyone to buy their product!

 NPR reports that Rep. Henry Waxman, top Democrat on the Energy and Commerce Committee, "says he's actually looking forward to the GOP hearings" on ObamaCare, " 'because it will educate the Republicans, who didn't pay any attention to the bill while it was going through the Congress. And I think the public--the more they hear about this bill, the more they're going to like it.' "

We were surprised to hear Waxman saying something so sensible, but then we realized that by "this bill," he means the ObamaCare law, not the bill to repeal it. 

Something similar happened when we read this quote from Kathleen Sebelius, the secretary of health and human services, in the Sacramento Business Journal: "Repeat would be a huge setback we cannot afford." Repeat? The first time was a huge setback we could not afford. But then a reader noted that Sebelius almost certainly said "repeal" and the reporter mistyped it.

  AP: Aggressively Partisan   Pro-ObamaCare Democrats no longer have the House majority, and they never had Middle America, but they still have the Associated Press, which writes that "House Republicans vow they will follow up with dozens of attempts to hack away at what they derisively call 'Obamacare.' " As Tim Graham of NewsBusters.org notes:

This makes all the more curious a criticism of the media relayed by National Public Radio:

But if the AP reporter had done what Rosen advises, what he wrote would have been indistinguishable from an opinion column. Far be it from us to disparage opinion columns, and an honest one is better than a dishonest news story--but there is a great deal to be said for the craft of reporting the news straight.

The NPR story goes on to say this:

That's right, NPR is touting its firing of Juan Williams as evidence of its objectivity and lack of bias. OK, we suppose Rosen has a point. Here is at least one news organization that may as well abandon any pretense of being unbiased or objective.

  A Moderate School of Islam   "Five hundred Pakistani religious scholars have warned that anyone who expresses grief over the assassination of a senior ruling party official who opposed the country's blasphemy law could suffer the same fate," Reuters reports:

So a moderate Muslim is one who calls for the murder of those who oppose strict blasphemy laws and for the murder of those who grieve the victims of such murders. To be clear, that's according to Reuters, not us. And as evidenced by its careful use of the phrase "war on militancy," Reuters is very precise about the use of language.

  Why Does Everyone Pick on Poor Obama?   "Top Pakistani Official's Murder Adds to Obama's Afghan Woes"--headline, Miami Herald, Jan. 4

  Return of the Whigs   "Trump Says He'll Run for President"--headline, FoxNews.com, Jan. 4

  Unfortunate Timing for Fiorina   "Boxer Pleads Guilty to Crack Charge"--headline, Enquirer (Cincinnati), Jan. 4

  Less Than a Week in Office, and She Makes an Enemy of Limbaugh?   "New Mexico Governor Removes EIB Members"--headline, Associated Press, Jan. 4

  Tin Soldiers and Nixon's--Oh, Look! A Squirrel!   "Kent State University Celebrates 50 Years of Black Squirrels on Campus"--headline, Plain Dealer (Cleveland), Jan. 5

  The Lonely Lives of Scientists   "Columbia Conservation Scientists Study Cougar"--headline, Columbia (Mo.) Daily Tribune, Jan. 3

  The Lonely Lives of Cougars   "Columbia Conservation Scientists Study Cougar"--headline, Columbia (Mo.) Daily Tribune, Jan. 3

  But Seals Aren't Ruminants, Nor Do They Have Cloven Hooves   "Jews Ready to Roll Out New 'Ethical Kosher' Seals"--headline, Religion News Service, Dec. 30

  The Hooked Beak Was a Dead Giveaway   "Report: Saudi Arabia Captures Israeli Vulture for Being Mossad Spy"--headline, TalkingPointsMemo.com, Jan. 4

  Wouldn't It Be Easier Just to Plug Up Its Snout?   "Frankenswine, the Less Pungent Pig: Scientists Genetically Modify Farm Animal So It Won't SMELL"--headline, Daily Mail (London), Jan. 5

  Especially in Detroit at Night   "Walking Faster May Lead to a Longer Life"--headline, WebMD.com, Jan. 4

  Parcells to Coach Yomiuri Giants   "Big Tuna Fetches Record $396,000 in Tokyo"--headline, Associated Press, Jan. 5

  Then He Ate a Whole Bag of Doritos   "Stoner Scores Winner for Wild Against Devils"--headline, Associated Press, Jan. 4

  No Wonder They Play as if They've Never Practiced   "Wizards Have Entire Roster Practicing for First Time"--headline, Washington Post website, Jan. 4

  Hey, Kids! What Time Is It?   "in Hartford, It's Time to Party"--headline, Journal Inquirer (Manchester, Conn.), Jan. 5

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

 Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  Zombie Calls Michele Bachmann 'Chris Matthews'--Now That Would Be News   "Chris Matthews Calls Michele Bachmann a 'Zombie' "--headline, NewsBusters.org, Jan. 4

  777 Spills Coffee Grounds--Now That Would Be News   "Coffee Spill Grounds a 777"--headline, WSJ.com, Jan. 5

 Look Out Below! 

  Everything Seemingly Is Spinning Out of Control   "Fox News Mocks Religious Right as Gay"--headline, NewsBusters.org, Jan. 4

  News of the Tautological   "Jackson's Illness Prior to Death Reported"--headline, Chicago Sun-Times, Jan. 5

  Breaking News From Genesis 7:21-22   "La. Has Mass Bird Kill Just Days After Ark."--headline, Associated Press, Jan. 4

  Breaking News From 1780   "Patrick Henry Knocks Off Thomas Jefferson Girls"--headline, Richmond Times-Dispatch, Jan. 5

  Breaking News From 1933   "Prohibitionists: Leave Us Alone!"--headline, John Stossel syndicated column, Jan. 5

  Breaking News From Thanksgiving 2003   "Resurgent Turkey Flexes Its Muscles Around Iraq"--headline, New York Times, Jan. 5

  News You Can Use   "Kitty Not Eating? Maybe the Furry Faker's Mad at You"--headline, MSNBC.com, Jan. 3

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  Blue Plate Special   Jalopnik.com reports that the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles has revoked the "world's greatest license plate." A letter from the DMV to the plate holder, whose name is redacted, explains the decision:

And come to think of it, when you put it that way, it isn't funny at all! But maybe the plate holder could switch to the Appalachian Trail plate. That wouldn't offend anyone except people from South Carolina.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to John Williamson, Zack Russ, Hillel Markowitz, Bruce Goldman, John Sanders, Rod Pennington, Ed Lasky, Jim Beach, Michele Schiesser, Chris Duncan, Aaron Spetner, Kyle Kyllan, Ravi Baskaran, Jon Bender, Marc Young, Dennis Powell, Mark Kellner, William Schultz, Judah Spetner, David Gerstman, Rosanne Klass, Tom Mayer, Jeffrey Magnuson, Ethel Fenig, Larry Pollak, Joe Perez, John Bobek, Steven Aucella, Mark Finkelstein, Nathan Marinoff, Carl Nelson, Marty Stephens, Arlene Ross, Harris Perry, Andrew Levinson, David Wesolowicz, Bart Borkosky, Gayle Trotter, Don Stewart, Steve Prestegard, Gerald Massoudi, Bill Gately and Philip Ellison. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)