DENVER—Jason Huss stepped out of a mud-caked Hummer sporting slicked-back hair, a black-and-red pinstripe suit and a bright red tie. Four of his friends met him in similar get-ups.

It's "cool to dress up as gangsters," said Mr. Huss, a stocky 38-year-old gun lover and mobster-movie aficionado.

But Mr. Huss and his friends weren't just playing dress up. They soon whipped out black Tommy guns, loaded them and took turns shooting their way through a firing range done up with brick-painted walls and cardboard targets of "good guys" and "bad guys."

Mr. Huss's suit was covered with dust after his turn, and sweat dripped from his brow. "It's a lot of fun," he said.

Mr. Huss and his friends are Zoot Shooters. It's the latest twist on a sport called practical shooting, in which competitors move through a course, earning points for shooting with speed and accuracy.

About three decades ago, practical shooters from a generation reared on Roy Rogers and Gene Autry began dressing up in cowboy suits and firing six-shooters, giving birth to the sport of "cowboy action shooting." 

Today, there are thousands of cowboy shooters world-wide.

Now, a new generation of sport shooters raised on punk rock, skateboards and mobster movies is moving in. 

So far, there are only about 60 Zoot Shooters, in four states and Italy. As the sport gets under way, the cowboys are turning out to be some of the most eager gangsters. "Actually, our biggest draw right now is cowboys," says Mr. Huss. 

Still, the new guys haven't earned their spurs in the eyes of some cowboy shooters.

A new generation of sport shooters inspired on mobster movies and dressed up in zoot suits is moving in.

"There are two schools of thought," says Steve Fowler, a longtime cowboy shooter going by the name Bat Masterson, a famous Old West gunfighter. 

He recently took up Zoot Shooting, under the alias G-Man. "One is that [Zoot Shooting] is another costuming game and it's a lot of fun…The other is, if it ain't cowboy, it ain't nothing."

Some cowboys, who can be sticklers for period-correctness, say that the Zoot Shooters name refers to the wrong era. 

"They're mixing periods," says Rick Shaw, also known as Sand River Slim, a cowboy shooter in Colorado. "The zoot suit guys are from the '40s."

Indeed, zoot suits—the flamboyant suits with high-waist pants, long jackets and padded shoulders—do date to the 1940s and the late 1930s. 

Historians think they came out of urban jazz scenes, then were associated with the 1940s Zoot Suit Riots, where sailors in Los Angeles clashed with Latinos in zoot suits who were considered defiant and unpatriotic for wearing the fabric-heavy suits during wartime cloth rationing.

This historical association has left some cowboys feeling that the Zoot Shooters are idolizing a shameful time in American history.

"We've had some people give us flak," says Mr. Huss. "It's just a cute name that rhymes with suit." Also, he says, "We're not historians." He says a lot of Zoot Shooters are war veterans.

Mr. Huss, who goes by the alias "The Hustler," is co-founder of the American Zoot Shooters Association, which he formed with a friend two years ago. 

Members dress like gangsters, cops and flappers from the 1920s and '30s and take on aliases like Al Capone or Eliot Ness.

Zoot Shooters run through a course they call a "caper," which is often based on a scene from a famous gangster movie, like "The Godfather" or "Miller's Crossing." The winner is the person who shoots with the most accuracy in the shortest time. Penalties are tacked on for hitting the "good guys."

Mr. Huss fell in love with guns as a boy, after his grandfather gave him a World War II rifle. In 2006, he started participating in practical shooting.

In the fall of 2007, he and his friend Henning Wallgren, a former professional practical shooter who manufactures gun parts in Colorado, discovered a mutual fascination with the Thompson submachine gun, or "Tommy" gun, the two-handed, rapid-fire guns developed just after World War I and adopted by mobsters during Prohibition. Today many Tommy guns are semiautomatic.

In October 2008, Mr. Huss and Mr. Wallgren, who goes by the alias "The Undertaker," founded the Zoot Shooters Association. 

One day recently, Mr. Huss and his friends gathered at the Colorado Rifle Club, a rural shooting range about 50 miles outside Denver that seemed more fit for cowboys than gangsters.

Mr. Huss loaded the round drum-magazine of his semiautomatic Tommy gun. He crouched behind the brick wall. "Shooter ready?" asked Mr. Wallgren, who was the "range officer" maintaining safety and running the clock. "Ready," said Mr. Huss. The sound of gunfire cracked through the air. In less than a minute, he was finished with the "caper." 

When Mr. Fowler, a policeman, first heard about Zoot Shooters he had already collected a closet full of Western outfits and attended dozens of formal cowboy balls. Now, he sports a 1930s police uniform with gold buttons and a shiny badge engraved with "G Man."

"I've been tickling the costuming part of it a little more," he says. 

Mr. Huss, while working his day job fixing up four-wheel-drive vehicles, dreams that Zoot Shooting will one day become as big as cowboy shooting, which has seen a multi-million dollar cottage industry spring up around it. Like cowboy shooting, Zoot Shooters pay annual membership dues and also fees for participating in a match. 

Earlier this year at a gun show in Las Vegas, Mr. Huss—decked out in his Zoot Shooting gear—bumped into a posse of cowboys in costume.

Among them was Harper Creigh, the 74-year-old founder of cowboy action shooting, who goes by the alias Judge Roy Bean.

"I at first thought they hated us," Mr. Huss said.

Instead, Mr. Creigh said he knew who Mr. Huss was and told him that about 25 years ago he and a buddy contemplated creating a shooting sport with Tommy guns called the "Roaring Twenties." The idea never came to fruition. "If I wasn't so old and beat up I'd probably jump in and get involved," Mr. Creigh says.

 Write to  Lauren Etter at lauren.etter@wsj.com 