As financial institutions continue in their quest for new ways to recover revenues lost to new laws, the mantra for credit-card holders this year is "Be better informed -- or risk getting blindsided by changes."

Credit cards are back in vogue for both issuers and consumers. Card issuers are again opening the doors for subprime borrowers who were locked out during the recession. They also have retooled their business models to meet new federal regulations. At the same time, consumers are returning to plastic, after two years of saving and reducing debt.

With so much back in sync, "one would think 2011 would bring smooth sailing for consumers," says  Robert Hammer, chief executive of bank advisory firm  R.K. Hammer. But you "better tighten your safety belt, the ride may become bumpy."

Here's what to expect.

Credit-card solicitations nearly doubled last year to 2.73 billion, from 1.39 billion in 2009, according to market-research firm Synovate's Mail Monitor, which tracks direct mail. And a double-digit gain is expected this year.

Big numbers mean issuers will be competitive with attractive promotions.

Credit-card solicitations to consumers with subprime credit scores are up. "The proverbial wheels of the credit engine are being greased once again," says  Anuj Shahani, director of competitive tracking services for Synovate. Banks have saturated super-prime households and are again looking to subprime consumers to build up their revenues. That's good news for people who were shut out of credit cards over the past two years. But getting a card will probably cost them more, due to higher interest rates and fees.

Card issuers are continuing to raise their annual percentage rates -- no matter what the prime rate is and no matter how great your credit score. All credit-card offers mailed since the second quarter of 2009 carry variable rates, which means that as the prime rate rises, so too will the APR. That should be a warning flag to consumers who think their APR is a standing rate. With the prime rate at 3.25% and the average APR at the end of 2010 at 14.06%, the gap between the two -- at 10.81 percentage points -- is the widest it has been in two decades, according to Synovate. And it's expected to continue to broaden.

As card issuers stepped up offers to subprime consumers last year, the gap between the interest rate offered to consumers with the best credit and the rate offered to those with subprime credit has more than doubled -- to a 5.3-percentage-point difference in the fourth quarter of 2010, from a 2.5-percentage-point gap in the second quarter.

A top-tier credit score netted you an average 12.95% rate at the end of 2010, versus the 18.22% average offered to subprime borrowers. The range is expected to get wider this year.

Fees now account for some 48% of all revenue for credit-card issuers, up from 31% a decade ago, according to Mr. Hammer. Fees on cash advances, for example, have jumped to 4% or 5% with no cap, from 2% with a $50 cap, he says, and they could go higher. Other fees are on the horizon, including fees for paper statements, paying your bills on the due date and even excessive customer-service calls.

The most ubiquitous card offers this year will be cash-back promotions, a bonanza for card issuers, according to a December study by the Chicago Federal Reserve. With an average cash-back reward of $25, consumers spend about $79 more a month on the credit card, researchers found. At the same time, they raise their debt level by $191 a month because their average monthly payments fall, too.

What's more, consumers shift spending from other cards to the one with the cash-back rewards, the report says, giving card issuers an extra incentive to push cash-back cards over even their other rewards cards.

You've probably already noticed that rewards programs tied to your debit card have become less rewarding. Expect that to continue on most cards. Interchange fees, which merchants pay card issuers when they accept your debit card, help subsidize rewards programs. But the federal government is in the process of determining by how much issuers must reduce those fees. Once the decision is made, those issuers are likely to take a saber to rewards programs.

Credit-card issuers will be introducing a bevy of cards that offer better rewards based on what, if any, annual fees are attached.  Citigroup,
C


0.66
%




 for example, rolled out ThankYou Cards in early January, the benefits of which look more like membership levels to a museum: The more you pay in annual fees, the more perks you get.

—Read more at marketwatch.com.