HONG KONG— Companies may be queuing up to raise capital in Hong Kong in the coming months, but some prospective investors are starting to lose confidence.

A Chinese maker of curtain walls,  Yuanda China Holdings Ltd., shelved a plan Friday to raise up to US$536.2 million in a Hong Kong initial public offering because of weak demand from investors, said a person familiar with the situation. The company may relaunch the deal but attempt to raise less money. 

Also on Friday, Hui Xian Real Estate Investment Trust—the first yuan-denominated IPO outside mainland China—fell sharply on its Hong Kong debut, closing Friday at 4.75 yuan (73 U.S. cents), down 9.4% from its 5.24 yuan IPO price. 

Many investors have looked at the stock-market performance of recently listed companies and have been turned off from subscribing to more deals. This year's Hong Kong IPOs on average have risen just 0.64% from their IPO price. In contrast, the mean increase for a Hong Kong IPO over the same period last year was 17.13%, according to data provider Dealogic.

Hong Kong has an unusually large proportion of retail investors active in the IPO market, and they historically have been swayed more by sentiment than have institutional investors.

"There is plenty of available liquidity for the right deals, but investors remain highly selective," said  Richard Orders, head of Moelis Asia, a boutique investment bank that specializes in capital markets and advisory businesses. 

One poor performer has been marble-quarry operator  China Kingstone Mining Holdings Ltd., which has dropped 5.8% from its IPO price of 2.25 Hong Kong dollars, even after being priced at the bottom of its marketed range. Investors who bought into Chinese property developer  Top Spring International Holdings Ltd., which also priced at the bottom of its marketing range at HK$6.23, have lost 8.7%.

To be sure, both stock offerings made their market debuts in the wake of the March 11 earthquake in Japan, an inauspicious start. Analysts were also cautious about those stocks because of the Chinese government's efforts to cool down the country's property market.

But overall, deal makers say, the general malaise reflects investor worries over whether bankers are able to price IPOs accurately—denting a key component in any salesman's job. Underwriting standards have come under greater skepticism: Hong Kong's Securities and Futures Commission in March said an inspection of 17 IPO sponsors showed various faults, including unsatisfactory due diligence. And after two years of leading the world in terms of IPO volume, Hong Kong may simply be tired of them. 

The sluggish performances come ahead of a new wave of marquee Hong Kong IPOs. Swiss commodities trader Glencore International and Italian fashion house Prada SpA, are still expected to meet with strong demand from prospective shareholders, bankers say, but others may struggle. 

One that will have to battle to attract investors attention include Chinese regional lender Guangdong Development Bank, which discussed plans with banks in mid-April for a multi-billion-dollar IPO. It hasn't yet selected its investment-bank advisers for the offering, said people familiar with the situation. Another IPO candidate is Hong Kong-based jeweler Chow Tai Fook, the people said; it also hasn't yet chosen its advisors.

During the first few months of the year, many companies held off raising fresh capital due to volatile stock markets caused by political unrest in the Middle East, the Japanese earthquake and concerns over European sovereign debt. 

According to data provider Dealogic, the volume of IPOs in the first quarter of the year totaled US$2.28 billion, well down on a year earlier at US$3.95 billion. Once stock markets rallied from late March, companies again looked to raise fresh capital. 

The biggest overseas company to list in the second quarter should be Glencore, which is seeking to raise up to $12.1 billion through a dual listing in London and Hong Kong. Glencore is expected to announce its cornerstone investors Wednesday when it launches its presentations to potential IPO investors. Cornerstone investors, who can take up a large chunk of a share sale, are used as a way to boost an offering's appeal.

Prada made presentations to analysts in the week starting April 18, and is expected to begin meeting with prospective investors in late June before listing in Hong Kong in early July, said one person familiar with the matter. 

Of course, some IPOs have performed well. Investors which bought into  Far East Horizon Ltd., a financial leasing unit of state-owned Sinochem Group, has surged 39% since the company priced its Hong Kong IPO in the middle of the indicative price range at HK$6.29.

But the upcoming big-name IPOs will have to perform well if Hong Kong hopes to keep its status as the venue of choice for global companies looking to make public offerings. 

—Nisha Gopalan contributed to this article.