 Please see Corrections & Amplifications below. 

HONG KONG—The share of Credit Suisse Group AG's profits generated in the fast-growing economies of the Asian-Pacific region should quadruple within four years, said a senior executive.

  Osama Abbasi, the Swiss bank's chief executive for Asia-Pacific, expects the region to shake off the impact of Japan's disaster quickly and investors to return to the region en masse within months.

Since his appointment on Oct. 1, Mr. Abbasi says he has pushed to make the firm's private bankers and investment bankers work more closely together, brought in senior managers from Europe to the region, and is looking to bulk up in Australia to help meet his target for the region's contribution to the group.

Last year Asia contributed about 5.4% of group profit. Mr. Abbasi said that should rise to about 25% within three to four years. The Swiss bank's profits slipped 56% in the region during 2010, to 368 million Swiss francs ($402.3 million), partly because costs rose 150 million Swiss francs as the firm hired bankers. Its investment-banking team swelled by 100 bankers, or 35%, in the first half of 2010, then growth slowed during the remainder of the year. Most of the extra cost came as Credit Suisse beefed up back-office systems and risk compliance to meet tougher regulatory requirements.

Swiss regulators plan to demand that Credit Suisse and crosstown rival  UBS AG bolster their businesses and build up capital cushions far in excess of international standards. This so-called Swiss finish is designed to prevent a repeat of the crisis in 2008, when the Swiss government had to bail out UBS.

Mr. Abbasi acknowledged "clearly the Swiss finish is tough" but said the bank was comfortable it would exceed regulators' targets.

Credit Suisse recently sold $2 billion worth of contingent convertible bonds—known as "cocos"—to raise capital after its original offer to sell $1 billion of the securities was 22 times subscribed, Mr. Abbasi said. Cocos are a new type of safety capital that automatically convert into equity capital when a bank's common equity ratio drops below a certain level.

The bank's revenue slipped 11% last year in the Asia-Pacific region to 3.4 billion Swiss francs, but Mr. Abbasi sees signs of a turnaround in revenue.

Credit Suisse analysts expect the Japanese disaster to dent the country's economic growth rate by just 0.2 percentage point and the reconstruction efforts to invigorate some sectors of the economy.

When some of Credit Suisse's peers argued to close the Tokyo Stock Exchange after the disaster, the Swiss bank said it wanted business to continue. "Our view was to keep the market open—we're service providers," Mr. Abbasi said.

Even before the quake, markets were jittery, raising worries among bankers that companies might struggle to raise capital in the stock market this year. According to Citigroup Inc., from the start of the year to the week ended March 16, net equity-fund outflows from Asia excluding Japan totaled $7.2 billion.

In a poll at a Credit Suisse conference in Hong Kong last week, delegates forecast that investors will stop pulling their money out of the region in the next two months. 

—Peter Stein and Deborah Ball contributed to this article.

 Corrections & Amplifications  Credit Suisse Group AG's 2010 profit in the Asian-Pacific region was 368 million Swiss francs ($401 million). An earlier version of this article incorrectly said it was 828 million Swiss francs. Also, Credit Suisse recently sold $2 billion of contingent convertible bonds—known as "cocos"—after its original offer to sell $1 billion was oversubscribed. The amount the bank originally sought raise was previously stated incorrectly as 1 billion Swiss francs.

 Write to  Alison Tudor at alison.tudor@wsj.com 