"Welcome to Ireland, the home of cricket," read a British newspaper advert for Ryanair the day after Ireland pulled off one of the greatest upsets in cricket history by beating England at the ICC World Cup.

It was a classic piece of opportunism by Ryanair, the cut-price Irish airline, which has cultivated a reputation for irreverence and has a history of picking fights with the big guys. These days, Ireland's cricketers seem to have adopted a similar strategy. 

As Ireland prepares to face West Indies on Friday in Chandigarh, India, the country's remarkable ability to take on—and beat—the world's elite cricket nations is challenging the game's established order. It's also raised an awkward question for the sport's administrators: Specifically, what do you do with the Irish?

"How do we get to the higher echelons of the world game?" asks  Warren Deutrom, chief executive of Cricket Ireland, the governing body of Irish cricket. "What does the [International Cricket Council] want us to do?"

For sheer shock value, Ireland's win over England in Bangalore on March 2 was arguably the most memorable game ever played in this tournament. England is a three-time World Cup finalist, the country that invented cricket. Until recently, many Irish sports fans didn't know the country had a national cricket team, let alone a good one.

But inspired by some big hitting from Kevin O'Brien, who clubbed 113 runs off just 63 balls and recorded the fastest hundred in World Cup history, the Irish reached a target of 328 runs with five balls to spare—a record run chase at the World Cup.

It's the not the first time Ireland has turned over one of cricket's established nations. Ever since the sport was first played in Ireland on Dublin's Phoenix Park in the early 19th century, the Irish have shown an extraordinary ability to kick some of cricket's biggest names in the teeth.

In 1969, Ireland produced one of the sport's biggest shocks, humiliating the West Indies by bowling out a team that included legendary figures such as Clyde Walcott, Clive Lloyd and Basil Butcher for a total of just 25 runs.

Stories surrounding that game have grown over the years. Some say the touring West Indians enjoyed the famous Irish hospitality the night before. Not so, says Dougie Goodwin, the Irish captain that day, who returned bowling figures of five wickets for six runs off 12.5 overs. "They were late getting in on the plane and then had a long drive from the airport," he says. "We might have had a few, but I don't think they had time to have a drink." 

Of greater significance to the future of Irish cricket was the country's victory over Pakistan on St. Patrick's Day at the 2007 Cricket World Cup in Jamaica. The outcome, which sparked frenzied celebrations from its fans, known as the Blarney Army, also helped build momentum back home, paving the way for greater professionalism in Irish cricket.

But some fear that the game's development in Ireland could be put at risk by the ICC's decision to limit the number of associate nations at the next Cricket World Cup in 2015. Under proposals announced in Dubai before the 2011 World Cup, the 2015 tournament will be contested by just 10 countries, down from 14 currently competing in India. The qualifying process will be decided when the present tournament ends. 

By limiting the number of associate nations at the event, cricket officials are aiming to reduce the surfeit of one-sided matches that have made the World Cup group stage one of the dullest exhibitions in all of sports—a four-week grind in which the sport's superpowers, such as India and Australia, inflict a series of humiliating defeats on world cricket's also-rans. 

These ritual sacrifices are often over almost as soon as they've started and are routinely played in front of empty stands. Of the first 14 matches at the 2011 tournament, 10 were decided by a margin of more than 75 runs, by at least seven wickets or with more than 40 balls to spare. "We understand the difficulties involved, but if it's a credible international sport then it can't have finance as the sole consideration," said Deutrom. "If that's the case, then the sport is in a much poorer place than we think it is."

More importantly, Cricket Ireland remains powerless to having its best players poached by England: Eoin Morgan returned from the 2007 World Cup as one of the sport's most promising batsmen, balancing his Ireland commitments with a county contract with Middlesex. But despite the lure of playing for his country against superstars such as India's Sachin Tendulkar and Jacques Kallis, of South Africa, Morgan declined the chance to represent his country in favor of a county game for Middlesex. 

His decision has since been vindicated: Today Morgan is an established star of the England one-day and Twenty20 team. He has also played six Test matches for England and earlier this year was handed a $350,000 contract by the Kolkata Knight Riders to play in the Indian Premier League. 

Inevitably, the most common question of O'Brien, Ireland's new hero, in the hours after his match-winning innings in Bangalore was whether he too had ambitions to play for England. But he says he is happy to continue playing for Ireland, a decision that speaks to the changing economics of Irish cricket.

O'Brien is one of 13 full-time professionals in Ireland's 15-man World Cup squad. The match against England was the first in which the country had fielded a team made up of 11 fully professional players. "I have got a lot more consistent over the 14 months since I received a full-time contract," O'Brien says. "Up until last year there were only two guys on that list: Trent Johnston and Alex Cusack. Now there are six, on top of the five guys playing county cricket in England."

The money required to pay for these contracts depends on Deutrom continuing to balance the books. The winner of the 2011 World Cup will receive more than $4 million in prize money, compared with the $2.24 million collected by Australia, the winner of the 2007 tournament. 

The total prize money for the top eight teams has also risen to $7.48 million, with the two defeated semifinalists receiving $750,000 each and the four beaten quarter-finalists earning $370,000. By contrast, for winning through to the last eight in 2007, Ireland collected just $56,000 in prize money, a figure dwarfed by the $11 million share of the tournament's media rights given to Zimbabwe, a full ICC member whose team Ireland had helped eliminate in the first round.

This year, following changes to the allocation of prize money, Ireland will receive around $1 million from the tournament in media rights, a sum that has allowed Cricket Ireland to grow from two employees to 15. "Just think what we could achieve if we could select all of our best players," says Deutrom.