SINGAPORE—Private home sales in Singapore rose 29% in April from a month earlier, in a sign that recent government measures to cool the city-state's red-hot property market have yet to temper strong underlying demand. 

A total of 1,788 private residential units were sold in April, up from 1,386 in March and the highest since November 2010, when 1,915 units were sold, according to data posted on the URA's website Monday. In February, a total of 1,105 private homes were sold. 

Like in China and Hong Kong, Singapore's property prices have risen significantly since the economy rebounded in late 2009, reaching records as the city-state's economy expanded 14.5% last year and grew at an annualized pace of 23.5% in the January-March period. 

Regulators in these markets have sought to stem speculative activity and prevent a price bubble through a series of measures. Singapore unveiled its latest property tightening measures in January, its fourth set in 16 months and described by analysts as the harshest yet.

The measures have had some bite. Private-home prices in the city-state rose 2.2% in the January-March period from the previous three months, slower than the fourth quarter's 2.7% rise. 

But resilient demand in the months after January could foreshadow further curbs as the government seeks to respond to public discontent over high housing costs—a hot-button issue that contributed to the ruling People's Action Party dropping seats and vote share in the general election held earlier this month. 

"Despite the punitive policies in place, demand for private housing does not appear to have abated,"  Chua Yang Liang, head of research South East Asia at property consultancy  Jones Lang LaSalle,
JLL


-0.87
%




 said. "The return of demand is underpinned by a strong economic rebound and continued growth. The low financing environment is just as guilty," he said. 

The January measures require individual buyers with outstanding property loans to pay more cash on new purchases, while limiting their borrowing to a maximum of 60% of the property's value, down from 70% previously. 

"Policy risk is heightened and we urge buyers to be cautious," Mr. Chua said.

 Write to  Chun Han Wong at chunhan.wong@dowjones.com 