The new, star-studded Knicks proved on Sunday night that they have one thing in common with the old, no-name Knicks: When the 3-pointers aren't falling, things can get ugly.

The Knicks were dominated 106-93 by the Indiana Pacers (28-38) while putting up perhaps their worst offensive output of the season. They made 36% of their shots while Carmelo Anthony made nine of his 22 attempts and scored 25 points. The Pacers led by as many as 20 behind forward Tyler Hansbrough, whose energy poked holes in a lifeless Knicks team.

The Knicks struggled at what is usually their specialty, the 3-point shot. They made three of their first 17 attempts from that distance and made seven of their 30 attempts on the night. The parade of misses was led by Chauncey Billups, who missed all of his seven attempts, Toney Douglas, who went one-for-eight and Anthony, who went one-for-five.

The list of problems for the Knicks on Sunday night is seemingly endless: They let the Pacers shoots 57% on field goals, both Anthony and star forward Amar'e Stoudemire battled foul trouble, with both collecting five and the team was held to a season-low 11 assists, a mark Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni singled out after the game while noting that the team lacked rhythm. 

Even after losing by 18 to a talented Dallas Mavericks team on Thursday, this is arguably the lowest point of the Knicks' post-trade era, during which their record now stands at 6-5.

"I think that we were a little stagnant out there offensively," said Stoudemire, who echoed D'Antoni's comments about a lack of rhythm on offense. He added: "We didn't help ourselves out there. They got to the basket at will, finished with dunks, they shot the ball well....We knew it was going to be very important from an effort standpoint for us to set the tone early, and we didn't accept the challenge and we lost."

Anthony finished with five rebounds and no assists in 37 minutes. Stoudemire was more efficient, scoring 28 by making eight of his 15 attempts, but he struggled to get off shots near the basket. 

Stoudemire said that Roy Hibbert, the Pacers center who scored 12 points and added eight rebounds, was not as big of a defensive force as Stoudemire's early fouls were. He said once he picked up those early fouls, he played a less aggressive style.

Anthony expressed similar frustration with the foul situation, saying that referees allowed forward Dahntay Jones to "beat me up" during the game. Jones was in the game for star forward Danny Granger, who was out with the flu.

Billups, in his return to health, made just four of his 14 attempts and scored nine points.

Billups had missed six games with a bruised quadriceps and knee soreness, and he looked disjointed in his first game back. He said he felt fine and that he wouldn't address the injury in order to avoid excuses. He did, however, preach patience for a team that is still coming together after trades and injury problems.

"I don't know at what point [chemistry] becomes a problem. I just know we haven't been able to get [it]. We have had one real practice, and that was [Saturday]," Billups said. "The trade happened two weeks ago—it's not that easy. We end up practicing in games."

The Knicks made a minor comeback early in the fourth quarter. Guard Bill Walker, who had briefly lost his rotation spot after injuring his knee last week, made a 3-pointer to cut the lead to 87-75. A moment later, after a hard foul from James Posey, Stoudemire came to the line with the crowd chanting "M-V-P" in an effort to motivate the struggling Knicks. 

They couldn't get within single digits, however, and the game looked lost with 6:59 to go, when Anthony drove to the lane with his team down 12 but was called for a charge on Jones. He laid down on the court for a few seconds, shaking his head with a mixture of disbelief and frustration.

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 