California regulators are considering a plan to force the state's four natural-gas utilities to perform safety tests on more than 700 miles of decades-old pipelines—or replace them.

The proposed order, issued late Tuesday, stems from an explosion last September of a natural-gas line owned by  PG&E Corp.
PCG


0.82
%




 that killed eight people and destroyed dozens of homes in San Bruno. A federal investigation showed the pipeline, built in the 1950s, had manufacturing defects but had never had a safety test that might have revealed such flaws.

California is focusing on older pipelines, built before 1962, when the state began requiring the pressure tests for new lines. The federal government started mandating the tests in 1970.

Carl Weimer, a safety expert in Bellingham, Wash., said Wednesday that California's proposal "makes a lot of sense, especially where utilities can't find good records" of prior tests or inspections.

A PG&E spokeswoman said the utility looked forward to working with regulators on a testing plan. It was unclear how much the plan would cost and how much of that bill ratepayers would shoulder.

The California plan comes as federal concerns rise about the deterioration of older gas pipelines and some states contemplate new safety regimens. Explosions in older pipelines killed one person in January in Philadelphia and five in February in Allentown, Pa. The U.S. has more than 188,000 miles of gas-field and gas-transmission pipelines built before 1970, which is 58% of the total. 

A recent federal law requires utilities to inspect gas-transmission lines that traverse populated areas by December 2012. But they aren't required to do pressure tests, which can cost as much as $500,000 per mile.

Michael Florio, a member of the California Public Utilities Commission, said last week that more tests of older pipes are needed because "confidence in the system has been shaken" by the San Bruno explosion. The commission is expected to vote on the plan next month.

This week, PG&E began pressure tests on 152 miles of natural-gas pipelines that share certain characteristics with the San Bruno pipeline. The utility said its first test of a 1.5-mile stretch of pipeline in Mountain View, Calif., built in 1944, turned up no leaks or other problems. It said tests for all 152 miles should be completed by October and will partly fill a gap in its records that has made customers and regulators fearful other pipelines could contain hidden defects.

Tuesday's proposed order would require PG&E to test or replace more than 700 miles of gas transmission pipelines that run through heavily populated areas. 

Other utilities that would have to develop test plans include Sempra Energy's Southern California Gas Co. and San Diego Gas and Electric Co. and  Southwest Gas Corp.
SWX


0.09
%




 All would have to estimate the costs of their plans and how ratepayers would be affected.

All the utilities would be required to step up leak patrols and possibly reduce pressures inside the pipelines until they were screened.

Regulators are concerned about the condition of older pipes for many reasons. PG&E's records indicated that the San Bruno pipeline was built of seamless pipe, but investigators discovered it was built of seam-welded pipe and many of those welds were defective.

Wrongly identifying the kind of pipe meant no special inspections of welds had been conducted in more than five decades. Federal investigators believe defective welds played a role in the pipeline failure.

Under the PG&E tests now underway, pipeline segments are being pulled from service for at least five days. Pipelines are emptied of natural gas, scoured, tested, and any leaky segments are replaced. Newly welded pipes are then x-rayed to make sure they are sound. The tests are intended to expose weaknesses so pipes fail now and not when they are carrying flammable natural gas.

Federal safety officials still have not completed their investigation of the San Bruno accident but have pledged to complete their work prior to the one-year anniversary on Sept. 9.

 Write to  Rebecca Smith at rebecca.smith@wsj.com 