With Egypt's long-stagnant political landscape apparently now in flux, it remains to be seen whether Nobel laureate Mohamed ElBaradei can emerge as a credible opposition leader. 

The ambitions of Mr. ElBaradei aren't known, making it uncertain whether he would be a candidate to unite the splintered Egyptian opposition movement and lead the large Arab nation, though his stature in the country is certainly high-profile in the current turmoil: Security forces placed him under house arrest Friday, according to the Associated Press.

In February 2010, Mr. ElBaradei helped re-energize Egypt's splintered and demoralized opposition movement that had been worn down by years of police harassment, arrests and personal animosities. When he flew home Thursday from Vienna after a long absence to join nationwide demonstrations, Mr. ElBaradei said he would consider taking charge of a transitional government.

See where key events took place in Cairo Friday.

A succession of rallies and demonstrations, in Egypt, Jordan, Yemen and Algeria have been inspired directly by the popular outpouring of anger that toppled Tunisian President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali. See how these uprising progressed.

But the veteran diplomat had no organizing role in the protests that kicked off this week and his reputation in Egypt has flagged in recent months in part due to his lack of presence on the ground.

Mr. ElBaradei, 68 years old, is a Cairo native with a history of standing up to Egypt's previous strongman governments even before the rule of President Hosni Mubarak. As the former head of the International Atomic Energy Agency, he won the Nobel Peace Prize for the group's work in nonproliferation and has had a long career interacting with global leaders in international capitals.

Mr. ElBaradei was seen attending noon prayers Friday at one of Cairo's main mosques, one of the gathering points for protesters. Security forces surrounded the mosque and forcefully tried to disperse congregants after prayers ended. Mr. ElBaradei's whereabouts after that couldn't be confirmed, though the AP reported he was under house arrest. 

A lawyer by training, Mr. Elbaradei studied at New York University in the 1970s before joining the Egyptian foreign service. He has a long relationship with top U.S. policy makers—but Over the past decade America's relationship with him has been complicated.

Members of the Bush administration scorned the Egyptian diplomat, believing he had actively sought to undermine U.S. attempts to pressure Iran over its nuclear program while heading the IAEA. They specifically said Mr. ElBaradei buried documents that showed Tehran had been experimenting with building nuclear warheads and long-range nuclear-tipped missiles. The former IAEA chief said at the time that he wasn't certain if the intelligence was genuine.

Mr. ElBaradei had publicly condemned the Bush administration's decision to invade Iraq, saying repeatedly that the IAEA's analysis had been correct about the lack of weapons of mass destruction there, but was ignored by Washington.

Still, Mr. ElBaradei forged a strong working relationship with the Obama administration, say U.S. and IAEA officials. He worked closely with the White House in the final months of his tenure at the IAEA to try to forge an agreement with Iran that would have seen Tehran ship out the majority of its low-enriched uranium to a third country.

Iran ultimately balked, but Mr. Elbaradei coordinated closely with Mr. Obama in developing the project, said U.S. officials, and the Egyptian traveled to Tehran to try and cinch the deal.

Mr. ElBaradei lavished praise on Mr. Obama after he won the Nobel Peace Prize in late 2009. "In less than a year in office, he has transformed the way we look at ourselves and the world we live in and rekindled hope for a world at peace with itself," Mr. ElBaradei said in a statement. "I cannot think of anyone today more deserving of this honor."

Mr. ElBaradei's reputation for standing up to an unpopular White House under President Bush helped burnish his reputation when he returned to Egypt from Vienna in February 2010 after his tenure at the IAEA ended.

On Feb. 24, Mr. ElBaradei met with several opposition leaders and notable intellectuals at his home in Cairo where they announced the formation of a new political movement called the National Association for Change.

The group that rallied around the Nobel laureate even included Egypt's illegal but tolerated Muslim Brotherhood, which successfully gathered one million signatures for a petition to demand sweeping constitutional reforms.

The chief architects of Tuesday's rallies in Egypt were from the National Association for Change, a group of opposition movements that rallied around Mr. ElBaradei last summer. In a country where public dissent is rare and demonstrators infrequent, these organizers spurred tens of thousands of people to turn out to protest against President Mubarak.

Those demonstrations ended without any tangible political changes—but with plenty of arrests from among the demonstrators. In the ensuing months, Mr. ElBaradei spent much of his time outside Egypt—to the ire of several opposition group organizers.

The public demonstrations that kicked off this week were also organized by the National Association For Change—but without Mr. ElBaradei at the helm. Many of the organizers said Mr. ElBaradei lost the trust of opposition figures after last summer, but concede he is one of the few figures in the country capable of rallying disparate political movements around him.