KAMPALA, Uganda—Uganda's main opposition leader was barred from boarding a return flight to Uganda from the Kenyan capital Nairobi on Wednesday ahead of Thursday's presidential swearing-in ceremony, party officials said Wednesday. 

Opposition leader Kizza Besigye, President Yoweri Museveni's main challenger in the Feb. 18 disputed polls, was to return from Kenya on Wednesday when airline officials told him that the Ugandan government had asked them to bar him from the flight. 

The Kenya Airways flight KQ410 arrived in Uganda without the opposition leader, said Anne Mugisha, deputy foreign spokeswoman for the opposition Forum for Democratic Change. "It seems [the] government wants to impose an exile on Besigye," she said. 

A Ugandan government spokesman said separately that the government wasn't involved in the opposition leader's travel arrangements from Kenya. He also denied that the government had barred Mr. Besigye from the flight. "The government of Uganda has nothing to do with Besigye's travel plans from Kenya or any other sovereign state," Fred Opolot, head of the state-run Media Center, told reporters in Kampala. 

A Kenya Airways official said the Ugandan government had directed the airline to bar Mr. Besigye from the flight, but added that negotiations with the government and the opposition party were under way on whether to allow Mr. Besigye to return home on an another plane later Wednesday. 

According to Ms. Mugisha, Besigye had surgery in Nairobi to have his sight restored. He also received treatment for a wound on his right hand after being shot with a rubber bullet by police on April 14 during protests against steep rises in food and fuel prices. Security forces sprayed Mr. Besigye with large amounts of pepper during his arrest on April 28, leaving him half blind. 

Tensions in the country are also mounting as the country's parliament prepares to begin debate on the controversial antihomosexuality bill Wednesday. 

The bill has been opposed by activists and some members of the opposition and it is feared that the blocking of Mr. Besigye could trigger unrest ahead of the swearing-in ceremony, according to analysts. 

Ugandan security forces blocked media from accessing the international airport early Wednesday. "Airline officials told him that the Ugandan government had threatened to bar the plane carrying him from landing at Entebbe [Uganda] Airport," a party official said. 

Ms. Mugisha said the opposition leader was still at Nairobi Airport and had demanded a written explanation from the airline about his situation. 

Mr. Besigye disputed the results of February's polls, saying they were rigged, and asked for new elections. He was expected to stage a parallel inauguration ceremony in the capital Thursday, an event that had raised fears of clashes between his supporters and security forces. 

Mr. Museveni said Tuesday that he wouldn't allow the unrest to delay his swearing-in ceremony Thursday. Mr. Museveni won the Feb. 18 elections with around 68% of the votes. 

Uganda, Africa's largest robusta coffee grower, has been rocked by opposition-led protests since last month over increases in food and fuel prices. 



