PARIS—The head of Nicolas Sarkozy's party insisted in an interview that the unpopular French president plans to run for re-election, brushing off speculation that the party would put forward a new candidate.

Despite dismal poll ratings, Mr. Sarkozy is set to stand again on a platform of economic and social reforms, said  Jean-François Copé, the head of the ruling Union for a Popular Movement Party, or UMP.

"He's the [incumbent] president. It's in the logic of institutions that he runs for a second mandate. There's no debate about that," Mr. Copé said.

Mr. Copé dismissed speculation that other candidates, such as Prime Minister François Fillon, who enjoy better public support, may emerge from the party's ranks. "I've never had a doubt that he'll run, never," Mr. Copé said.

Polls in the past month have shown consistently that Mr. Sarkozy may not even make it to the election run-off, with International Monetary Fund boss  Dominique Strauss-Kahn and Front National leader Marine Le Pen poised to outvote him in the first round. 

Mr. Sarkozy's approval rating, which has been languishing around 30% for months and dipped earlier this week to as low as 21% in a Harris Interactive poll for Le Parisien newspaper, are giving cold shivers to the majority party when compared with the 54% and 51% approval ratings that François Mitterrand and Jacques Chirac enjoyed a year before their re-election to a second presidential term. 

But while conceding the UMP's unconditional support for Mr. Sarkozy, who hasn't yet officially said whether he'll run, Mr. Copé said Mr. Sarkozy should step up the pace of change, implying that some of the key reforms the president has carried out in the past four years haven't gone far enough. The reform package he sketched includes doing away with the 35-hour work week and cutting money transfers to regions as well as some social benefits, in order to restore France's public finances and close the competitiveness gap with Germany.

Mr. Sarkozy never effectively repealed the shorter working week, the main target of his "work more to earn more" campaign slogan in 2007. "During the presidential campaign we'll need to have a serious debate with the French people on this subject, to overturn the 35-hour working week, to get closer to what others do in Europe," Mr. Copé said.

Mr. Copé added that he wants to scrap the limit "not by law, but by negotiating it sector by sector, company by company."

The statutory reduction in working time, adopted by a Socialist government in 2000, is costing France €12 billion ($17.04 billion) a year to finance extra time off for workers in the private sector. That comes on top of a €5 billion revenue shortfall due to tax exemptions on hours worked beyond the 35-hour legal threshold—one of Mr. Sarkozy's first changes when he came to power. 

Even if he has relaxed some of the rigidities of the shortened week, Mr. Sarkozy has been wary of suggesting an outright repeal. Such a move would have carried substantial political risk because millions of French workers have come to see the reduction in working time as an irreversible social benefit.

But the regime is now hurting France's competitiveness, UMP figures say. 

"Before the crisis...we could still maintain the 35 hours, with some adjustments. Now, it has become untenable," Mr. Copé said. "Our main problem is that we don't produce enough because we don't work enough."

Putting public finances on a sustainable track should be the other priority if the right-wing candidate wins the presidential election next year, Mr. Copé said. He added that the current government is doing a "credible" job to cut the public deficit, but there is a need for a more drastic slashing of public spending, which represents 56% of the country's gross domestic product. 

The best way to do it would be cutting bloated government transfers to municipalities and reducing some social benefits, he added.

Mr. Sarkozy's government has pledged to curb the public deficit from a projected 5.7% of GDP this year to 3% in 2013—the maximum allowed under euro-zone treaties—by freezing the value of state spending, apart from interest on debt repayment and pensions, and by exerting better control over health-care costs. 

In a recent survey on France, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development said the government may not have any choice but to hike taxes in order to cut its deficits. 

"Not only will the next government have no room for maneuver on public finances and labor costs, but they'll have to boost income," said  Dominique Barbet, an economist at BNP Paribas in Paris. "There's no way around it."

But Mr. Copé, who doesn't believe in raising taxes, disagrees. 

"What matters is the dynamics of public spending," he said. Closing tax loopholes, which the government said would bring an additional €3 billion in savings in 2012 after €11 billion this year, only allows for limited savings, Mr. Copé noted.

The party leader singled out one main task for the next president: making France a lot more like Germany. A key step would be to eliminate obstacles to export so that the country's mid-sized companies could move closer in size and efficiency to Germany's much-envied Mittelstand. 

More generally, a reinforcement of the cooperation with Berlin is in order.

"We must create a Franco-German G2 within the European Union, and we have some huge efforts to undertake from the economic and social point of view," he said. The goal is to increase convergence between the two countries, which account for half of euro-zone GDP and the equivalent of more than a third of U.S. GDP.

That means mending the fractious and often uneasy relationship between Mr. Sarkozy and German Chancellor Angela Merkel, which has been strained lately by the Greek debt crisis, with France trying to convince a reluctant Germany to pump more money into debt-laden Mediterranean countries. 

Mr. Copé said providing financial support to distressed euro members in order to keep the bloc together is the best way to go. But he said this will have to come at the price of a sweeping reform of the euro zone's governance, which remains fragile despite recent steps to strengthen it. 

"Letting down Greece means opening the door to the dismantling of the euro zone," he said. "We could strike a deal by saying: in the short term we can do nothing else but support those member countries facing troubles. At the same time, we need to open a discussion on European governance, set up some firebreaks to avoid that this kind of situation repeats itself in the future."

Mr. Copé is convinced that Mr. Sarkozy is the right person for the job, in spite of his record-low approval ratings.

"I'm a disciple of Chirac, I know what it is to be a candidate with very bad poll ratings and still be elected at the end," he said. "In politics, one year is like eternity."

But analysts said the options for Mr. Copé and his party and his party are limited.

"Looking now for another candidate would be like opening a Pandora's box at the UMP," said  Emiliano Grossman, who teaches political science at Sciences Po, in Paris. "Sarkozy won the past elections; he's the one with the prestige and the legitimacy." 

 Write to  Gabriele Parussini at gabriele.parussini@dowjones.com and Nathalie Boschat at nathalie.boschat@dowjones.com 