BANGALORE -- Real-estate firms are approaching non-banking finance companies for loans to pay for land, construction and pre-development of projects, now that most banks have shut their doors on this sector.

Last year, 20 developers raised about 30 billion rupees ($667 million) from the non-banking financial institutions through non-convertible debenture, according to Enam Securities' April report. Such debt cannot be converted to stock, and offer healthy yields of 14% to 18%.

This year, analysts say such lending to the sector would rise in the form of general-purpose loans that developers can put to a variety of uses.

"The current [non-banking finance companies'] appetite for the real-estate sector would be about 40 billion rupees," said  Amit Goenka, national director of capital transactions at Knight Frank India, a property advisory. "But the concern is that the latter's need for capital is much more".

Bank loans traditionally accounted for at least half of a developer's borrowings. As of March 25, the most recent date for which data is available, banks' total loan outstanding to commercial real estate stood at about 1.11 trillion rupees ($24 billion). But lenders turned cautious after the suspected involvement of realty firms in the bribe-for-loan scam in November and the second-generation spectrum scam.

While banks usually lend to real estate firms at interest rates of 13% to 14%, other financial institutions charge between 16% and 20% and private equity firms seek returns of 24% to 30%.

With bank loans drying up and private equity deals needing time to finalize, developers who need small and quick loans are looking at non banks. 

"We wanted to experience how this functions and we needed the money for projects that are at the pre-development stage," said  Rajesh Madhani, managing director of Mighty Group, a developer in Mumbai that recently took a corporate loan of 500 million rupees from Edelweiss Capital Ltd.

There is a lot of demand for money around the 250-million-rupees category and for the early stage of projects, said  Sandeep Kotak, executive vice-president of real estate group at Kotak Mahindra Bank.

In March, Bangalore-based Puravankara Projects Pvt. Ltd. raised 1.50 billion rupees through an non-convertible debenture placement from Kotak Mahindra Bank's non-banking arm. The money was raised for construction finance and general corporate purposes.

Century Real Estate HoldingsPvt. Ltd. also raised 1.70 billion rupees through a similar debenture placement with private equity firm Kotak Realty Fund this year, after having raised 2 billion rupees from Kotak Mahindra Bank's non-banking arm.

"We are looking to raise another 7.50 billion rupees now through more structured transactions," said  Mahesh Prabhu, director of finance at Century Real Estate.

Gagan Banga, chief executive, Indiabulls Financial Services, said Indian non banks cannot fund the huge requirement of realtors and private equity firms are the only remaining available alternative for developers to raise money.

"We fund only large and established companies in the mode of lease rental discounting and construction finance; We are not targeting smaller companies," he said.

Indiabulls lends to developers through direct cash loans. Of the 200 billion rupees in its loan book as of March 31, less than 8% of the lending was to real-estate firms.

But non-banks are in a difficult spot due to a regulatory change by the Reserve Bank of India. In its recent monetary policy review for 2012, RBI said bank loans to non-banks can no longer be termed as priority sector advances. Banks are required to lend 40% of their loans to agriculture, exports and other weak sections tagged as priority sectors.

Meanwhile, banks are still not considering fresh proposals from realtors.

"We are very cautious and watching the situation," said Ramnath Pradeep, chairman and managing director of state-run Corporation Bank. "Unless the market situation improves and correction (in prices) takes place, it is difficult to say when the loan flow (from banks to realtors) will start again."

