Nine hundred people attended the Museum Dance at the American Museum of Natural History on Thursday, a gala that is in its 40th year, according to event organizers. The evening's theme, Bold and British, was perfectly aligned with a certain royal wedding set to take place the next morning. Interpretations on the theme varied widely: tailored floral dresses, white gloves, elaborate hats, feathered head pieces, and leopard prints for the ladies; top hats, crowns and safari helmets were common with the men. 



Two of the benefit chairwomen,  Zibby Right and  Dana Wallach Jones had made use of the personal shoppers at Saks Fifth Avenue, the evening's sponsor, to find their attire. 

Standing between the reconfigured skeletons of a Barosaurus defending its child against an Allosaurus, they discussed their plans to watch the royal wedding in the morning. For neither would it be a dressy occasion. 

"I'll be in bed with my children in pajamas with a mug of coffee," said Ms. Jones.

The sole celebrity at the event was the actor  Steve Guttenberg, who wasn't preoccupied with the royal wedding. In fact, he said, he had be en route to a different wedding the next day, as he'd been invited to Steve Wynn's nuptials in Las Vegas. "It's even bigger," he said. 

Soon a bagpipe player cued guests that it was time to move into the Hall of Ocean Life, where a video montage of English settings played beneath the blue whale. Chicken potpies were served at dinner, and bowls of English candy like Double Deckers, Crunchies and Maltesers were placed throughout the Hall of African Mammals.

  Christopher Raxworthy, who is authentically British and a curator at the museum, greeted diners with a "Yeah, Baby!" 

He went on to talk about his work, and clarified that while he was an expert in herpetology, this had nothing to do with STDs, but in fact, amphibians and reptiles. 

When asked later how it felt to be surrounded by Americans dressed in their perceptions of the British, he said, "It's really fun. In a sense it's a very powerful form of flattery."

A representative for the museum said the event raised close to $400,000. 

—Lizzie Simon