BERLIN—German gross domestic product will grow 2.3% in 2011, the government forecast Wednesday, as continuing demand from abroad and improving domestic conditions boost Europe's largest economy. Last fall, the government predicted 1.8% growth for 2011. 

"The numbers make it clear: the recovery has taken hold," Economics Minister  Rainer Brüderle said, adding that while growth will continue at high rates in the developing world, the pace of recovery from financial crisis in developed countries is likely to slow this year. That means this year's growth will be supported by increasing domestic demand, which the government sees rising by 2%, and private consumption, forecast to rise 1.6%. "Private consumption will therefore be driving growth," Mr. Brüderle said. 

Germany's economy grew 3.6% in 2010, the fastest pace in 20 years, according to data released last week by the country's statistical office. Mr. Brüderle said that German GDP is likely to grow 1.8% in 2012, and the number of unemployed that year will fall to 2.68 million from 2.94 million this year. "We find ourselves on the fast track to full employment," Mr. Brüderle said.

Mr. Brüderle also said that the strong growth rate will help the government enact some tax relief "as soon as possible," and potentially within this legislative period. "I am confident that tax relief can work in this legislative period, above all for those with small and middle income levels." 

Regarding the euro-zone's ongoing debt crisis, the economics minister said that an existing package of €750 billion ($1 billion) in aid from bloc members and the International Monetary Fund can't be expanded without tough and clear conditions. "I believe the volume of the euro bailout fund is adequate," he said. 

Mr. Brüderle added that long-term reforms for the euro zone must include an orderly insolvency process for both large banks and governments that fall into fiscal emergencies. 

 Write to  Patrick McGroarty at patrick.mcgroarty@dowjones.com 