What do you get when you cross a science experiment with a love of home-grown food? A mound of mushrooms growing out of a turkey pan by the microwave. 

That's the way it is at the Redmond, Wash., home of  Paul Nghiem, a University of Washington cancer researcher who bought a $26 mushroom-growing kit online around Christmastime. Now, his two sons, ages 5 and 11, are obsessed with it. "The five year old was going nuts," Dr. Nghiem says. "Every day asking, 'Can we cut them? Can we cook them?'"

Following the instructions that came with the kit, Dr. Nghiem placed the block of sawdust in a pan and tented a plastic bag on top with chopsticks. Since then, with consistent watering, the Nghiems have grown several meals' worth of shiitakes. Dr. Nghiem says the boys can't get enough of the mushrooms. "I didn't get to eat any the other day," their dad complains. "They ate them all before I could get to the table."

Locavore eating is moving indoors with mushroom-cultivation kits, a niche product whose sales are multiplying (not to say mushrooming), as foodies seek out ever-more-unusual ingredients (Hen of the Woods, anyone?). The kits also appeal to parents who, at this time of year, are looking for projects to occupy winter-bound kids. 

  Paul Stamets, owner of Fungi Perfecti, an Olympia, Wash., retailer, says sales of his indoor mushroom kits have been growing at a steady 25% a year for the past three years. Kit varieties range from meaty maitake (my-TOCK-ay) to delicate pearl oyster mushrooms. 

More bang for the buck can be had growing mushrooms outdoors. Mr. Stamets's website, Fungi.com, and some other kit retailers sell "plugs" of mushroom spawn, which growers can inject into logs or even tree stumps, a process otherwise known as "inoculating." The outdoor method takes more work than indoor kits: The grower drills holes in a log, then uses a hammer to whack a dowel plug into each hole. It may take a year or even two before any actual mushrooms appear; but once it occurs, fruiting could potentially continue—on and off—for a period of several years.

Fueling home-growers' enthusiasm is a favorable nutritional profile for the lowly fungus. Mushrooms are low in calories, rich in antioxidants—and they are a rare fresh fruit or vegetable naturally containing Vitamin D, according to the Mushroom Council, a San Jose, Calif., trade group of growers. 

A variety of mushrooms that were once hard to find now can be grown at home. It's more convenient—and more entertaining—than buying mushrooms at the store. But it doesn't necessarily save money. 

 Taste: Meaty, a bit spicy 

 Preparation: Sauté caps with onions; stems can be tough.

 Price at market*: $14.99 a pound 

 Kit**: $19.95 at gmushrooms.com; may yield 6 to 14 ounces of mushrooms

 Taste: Tastes like meat 

 Preparation: Grill the thick, gigantic caps for a meat pattie stand-in. 

 Price at market*: $3.99 a pound 

 Kit**: $39.95 at mushroomadventures.com; may yield 4 to 5 pounds

 Taste: Earthy

 Preparation: Stir fry with scallions, almonds and soy sauce

 Price at market*: $24.99 a pound 

 Kit**: $29 at fungi.com; may yield a 1/2 to 1 pound of mushrooms.

 Taste: Similar to chicken thigh meat

 Preparation: Remove tough stems, slice and saute in olive oil or butter with salt, pepper and a few garlic cloves for 5 to 10 minutes. Raw consumption isn't advised because some people can have an adverse reaction. 

 Price at market*: $7 a pound 

 Kit**: $37 at mushroomadventures.com; may yield about 4 pounds

 Taste: Delicate, chewy texture; woodsy flavor

 Preparation: Try them with pasta or in soup

 Price at market*: $8 to $12 a pound

 Kit**: $19.95 at bttrventures.com; may yield about 1 1/2 pounds.

 * Prices vary with region and availability. Shiitake; Portabella and Maitake: Current prices at Whole Foods store in Austin, Texas. Blue Oyster: Current farmers market price in Chico, Calif. Pearl Oyster: Price range according to BTTR Ventures. 

 ** Shipping not included  

 Source: WSJ reporting 

Mushrooms are increasingly headliners in vegetarian and vegan dishes, where they provide a "chewy, rich meatiness," says  Connie Green, a professional mushroom forager in Napa, Calif., and distributor of wild mushrooms to restaurants across the country.

Only in the past decade or so have mainstream grocers expanded their offerings beyond plain white button mushrooms. Now many supermarkets regularly stock shiitakes, creminis and portobellos, and oyster mushrooms are even starting to appear. 

Mushrooms are created when two spores mate and grow a network of long filaments similar to roots, called mycelium. In order to "fruit," or bear mushrooms, the mycelium must "feed" on a substrate—typically dead organic matter, such as fallen leaves or a tree stump. The medium, a substrate block provided in mushroom-growing kits, may include sawdust, straw, wood chips or even coffee grounds. Mycelium is already growing in it, representing a significant head start over outdoor cultivation.

To get started, a few days of refrigeration may be necessary for the kit, followed by a soak in water. Then in as little as a week, mushrooms will start to form. Many growers will get multiple "flushes" or fruitings from one kit—which can mean six weeks to six months of mushroom mania.

Mushrooms do well indoors because they like temperatures from 55 to 75 degrees Fahrenheit, "and most people keep their houses in that range anyway," says  Donald Simoni, owner of Mushroom Adventures, a Marysville, Calif., maker of mushroom kits. 

Starting other kinds of plants from seed requires strong light. But kit-grown mushrooms can sprout with the ambient light found in the home, and some will even grow in the dark. It helps to maintain a constant humidity level. Mr. Simoni recommends sprinkling the mushroom patch with water at least once a day. Some kits come with a sprayer or a plastic tent, to be draped over the patch to hold in humidity.

A mushroom kit, however, makes a major mess if it isn't harvested on time. Mature mushrooms produce spores resembling white powder; a single mushroom can produce millions of spores. The powder can start to appear around the mushroom patch and even coat countertops and cabinet surfaces.

That happened to  Trista Martin, a 26-year-old professional nanny in Olympia, Wash., who recently began growing mushrooms in her kitchen, including the big and toothy Lion's Mane, whose flavor she describes as "lobster-like." "The entire shelf turned white, and there was a pretty thick layer," she says. "It coats everything it lands on. We had to wipe down cookbooks, the shelf and everything else." 

Mushroom spores can cause allergic reactions, such as eye or nose irritation, in some people, says  Daniel J. Royse, who oversees a mushroom-research laboratory at Penn State University. Pennsylvania produces some 60% of the mushrooms grown in the U.S., according to the Mushroom Council.

An experiment growing different types of mushrooms in coffee grounds led two undergrads at the University of California, Berkeley, to start their own mushroom-growing business in 2009; they moved into mushroom kits and began exclusively selling them starting last summer. 

Using Pearl Oyster mushrooms, the best-performing variety in their experiment,  Nikhil Arora and  Alex Velez formed BTTR Ventures LLC (also known as Back to the Roots), of Emeryville, Calif. 

Whole Foods began selling the kits out of a single store in Berkeley last spring. The kits sold out fast, and a month later, 30 Whole Foods stores across Northern California were selling them. Now, they are sold in more than 150 Whole Foods stores. 

"It is performing much better than we expected," says  Randy Ducummon, regional produce coordinator for Whole Foods' Northern California region. "At Christmas we put it out as a potential gift item, and we couldn't get enough and sold out." 

While the benefits of growing your own food are many, in the case of mushroom kits, saving money may not be one of them. Mr. Simoni's Blue Oyster kit retails for $37, plus shipping, and will yield up to four pounds of mushrooms. That compares with $28 for four pounds of Blue Oyster mushrooms that he gets at farmer's markets. Mr. Simoni says the point of the kits isn't just the size of the yield. "Just as important is the fun of learning how the process works," Mr. Simoni says. "It's educational." 

The kits are "fun and interesting, and if it gets kids eating mushrooms, then that's great," says  Laura Phelps, president of the American Mushroom Institute, in Washington, which lobbies for commercial mushroom growers. "But you'd be better off economically going to the grocery store."

 Write to  Anne Marie Chaker at anne-marie.chaker@wsj.com 