 Paris 

Amid the frenzy backstage before Chanel's haute couture show in January, makeup artist  Peter Philips's hands fluttered over his table until they landed on a pale blush. He twirled it over supermodel  Kristen McMenamy's cheeks, chin and hairline, creating a subtle softness to match the pearl gray on her eyelids. 

"Oh, I love your colors," he gushed.

Mr. Philips, the Belgian hired three years ago as Chanel's creative director for makeup, has made his name with unconventional nail-polish colors—from the taupe-toned Particulière, to Jade green, to the Mimosa yellow due to hit stores in May. His bold take led him to design temporary tattoos for Chanel's show two years ago. They were so striking that the company made a limited number for sale. Consumers snapped them up.

But fashion has swung back from flashy, youth-inspired looks over the past two years to more traditional styles, such as the camel coat, white shirt and shoulder bag. 

The trend has trickled down to makeup, too. Mr. Philips's job will be to tone down his wilder instincts—while translating the trend into sales.

His couture look at the January show was positively classic, using pink, silver and black around the eyes. His back-to-basics approach is now hitting cosmetics counters with a new Chanel lipstick line whose shades stick to a range of reds, roses and plums.

"It's not hard to design a nail-polish color that lasts a season, but a classic must last forever and please women all over the world," says Mr. Philips. "There are a whole lot of women worldwide I create for who aren't interested in fashion."

With the shift to more classic looks, red lipstick is back, with new high-profile launches from Chanel, Yves Saint Laurent and Dior, replacing the more youthful lip-gloss look popular for the past decade. Eyes are smoky, faces are bronzed. At the Chanel couture show, models' nails were painted in Tendresse pale pink. Fashion editors cite the return of tastefulness and prettiness after years of flirty looks such as cat eyes.

Of course, when Chanel hosts its fall/winter fashion show Tuesday, Mr. Philips could send out a blast of bold color. Just as with clothing, the most daring fashions appear on the runway before more wearable versions hit stores. The Paris runway's reputation as the most trend-setting for clothing holds for cosmetics, trend forecasters say. 

Chanel is one of the few labels, with Hermès and Dior, to keep everything in-house. Mr. Philips is part of the creative triumvirate at the core of the couture house, alongside  Karl Lagerfeld for fashion and  Jacques Polge for perfume. That puts makeup at the nerve center of the brand's image, resulting in a runway-to-cosmetic counter coherence that few others have. Analysts estimate privately held Chanel brings in about $3 billion a year in sales, with the three divisions contributing about one-third each. 

While a flood of new perfume and makeup has made designer beauty products seem less exclusive, Chanel's tight rein on cosmetics and fragrances has helped maintain an upscale image. 

"That's one of the challenges for beauty," says Allure editor-in-chief  Linda Wells. "In some cases, it turned from luxury to commercial," she says, adding Mr. Philips's work "brings it back to luxury, attached to a fashion brand and exclusive perfume." 

As makeup has become more closely tied to fashion trends, more labels are following Chanel's lead and getting into cosmetics. Gucci is one of the most recent additions to the cosmetics counter. 

Still, most makeup and perfume lines are outsourced to specialists. Giorgio Armani and Yves Saint Laurent work with L'Oréal SA; Procter & Gamble Co. does Gucci and Dolce & Gabbana. It is common for the makeup director to be an outside consultant.

Mr. Philips, by contrast, visits Mr. Lagerfeld about once a month in his rue Cambon studio in Paris. "I pass by Cambon and see what fabrics are around," he says. The fabrics inform his vision for the shows and the colors he may use.

One way Mr. Philips maintains an air of exclusivity is to produce one-off products and limited editions, such as Byzantine Lumière, an eye-shadow palette limited to 1,500 copies. His unusual nail-polish colors often attract waiting lists long before they arrive in stores. The Particulière shade sold seven times more than expected.

Updating Chanel's classics is Mr. Philips's long-term goal. 

"Le Rouge for Chanel is holy," says Mr. Philips in rapid-fire English. "That's a strength, but can also be a weakness because people can think it's all we can do."

After working on it for two years, he released the Rouge Coco line of $32 lipstick last year. He was inspired by the shape and motion of the traditional lipstick tube, which has been overtaken by brush-applied lip gloss. In April, he plans to follow up with Rouge Coco Shine, a creamier version.

"I wanted women to rediscover the pleasure of applying lipstick," he says. "All I see them do is a quick gesture of lip gloss. It's like fast food."

 Write to  Christina Passariello at christina.passariello@wsj.com 