I first saw the Roman Forum nearly two decades ago, on a warm but not yet stifling morning in late June. Audio guides were still unknown in Italy, and I could still read eight-point type without glasses, so I dutifully followed the itinerary prescribed in my Blue Guide, pausing every few steps to take in more of its dry, authoritative words. With each archaeological detail, I absorbed a slightly stronger appreciation of the site's importance as the center of public life in ancient Rome. 

And then I read: "The body of Julius Caesar was brought to the Forum after the Ides of March in 44 B.C., and here his body was probably cremated."

I doubt that the low, dirt-covered mound in front of me, the supposed remains of Caesar's cremation altar, could have thrilled me more had I been the first to unearth it since antiquity. All of a sudden, an event of colossal importance both historic and mythic—which I knew about from boyhood stories, movies, Latin lessons, Plutarch and Shakespeare—acquired a new reality.

"This is it," I said silently to myself, with more conviction than ever before or since. "I am here." 

Ruins of imperial greatness are supposed to evoke a mood of philosophical pessimism, of sic transit gloria mundi. The pit of monumental fragments that the Forum is today can certainly have that effect when seen from the 21st-century street. But step down and explore the site on its own level, and the classical past takes on an almost irresistible immediacy. 

This quality arises in part from the place's accessibility, the general lack of barriers between the visitor and the ancient structures themselves. Nothing is ever more than a few feet away, and most of it is close enough to touch.

Columns and cornice fragments two millennia old lie apparently abandoned amid weeds and wildflowers. Such sights, which are especially startling to New World visitors, enhance the general impression of authenticity. This is no theme-park replica or sterile museum exhibit that we are stepping—and sometimes stumbling—over. This is unmistakably the original.

Distances are welcoming, almost intimate. The Forum proper is not even 10 acres large, and you can take a thorough tour of the extended area included in the admission ticket in about three hours. Think of the expanse that this modest space occupies in our cultural consciousness.

Surely no patch of ground outside the Holy Land is so dense in momentous associations. Four hundred feet away from Julius Caesar's funeral pyre, Marc Antony gave the oration that turned popular feeling against his assassins. Two hundred feet northeast of that spot stands the Senate House, where the forerunners of modern republican legislators continued to meet even after being rendered impotent by imperial rule. Between those points ran the route that triumphant generals followed with their spoils and captives, en route to offer thanksgiving sacrifices at the Temple of Jupiter.

This richness is both overwhelming and empowering, because the human scale helps make it possible to imagine oneself a witness to or even a participant in long-past events. 

That history seems all the closer because of its many resonances today. "Palace," "rostrum," "capitol," "asylum," "money": All these words echo the names of institutions once located in the Forum or on the two hills beside it. The triumphal arches of the Emperors Titus and Septimius Severus, versions of which can now be found in former imperial capitals from London to Moscow, celebrate conquests—of Jerusalem and what is modern-day Iran—that seem uncannily relevant to current concerns.

A sense of continuity across the millennia derives from the superimposition here of architectural forms from distinct yet inextricably related cultures. The most spectacular example of this accretive character is the second-century Temple of Antoninus and Faustina, a shrine to a deified imperial couple, whose Corinthian columns enclose like a protective cage the baroque 17th-century facade of a medieval Christian church. Such hybridization is a concrete reminder of what the Cambridge architectural historian David Watkin calls the Forum's "fascinating post-antique life." The same Via Sacra that victorious pagan generals followed to the Capitol became a procession route for newly elected popes on their way to claim St. Peter's throne.

Much of the Forum's multilayered character has disappeared in the excavations by archaeologists over the past century and a half. In "The Roman Forum," an entertaining combination of travel guide, history and polemic published in 2009, Mr. Watkin deplores those upheavals as reflecting a blinkered view that older is necessarily better, and he notes the irony that some of the most famous structures, including the Arch of Titus and the Temple of Vesta, are modern reconstructions. 

Mr. Watkin's book is also an elegy for the Forum as depicted in the 18th-century engravings of Giovanni Battista Piranesi, when the place was largely a cow pasture, the ancient monuments sheltered monks and tradesmen, and ordinary Romans as well as foreign tourists enjoyed outings in a bucolic setting. Nowadays, he writes, "many of the ruins can be baffling, ugly and frustrating, their original function remaining obscure," while continuous digging makes "visiting parts of the Forum about as attractive as looking into the hole made in New York on 9/11."

Of course, as Mr. Watkin himself recounts, the story of the Forum has been one of almost uninterrupted destruction and rebuilding. The ancients recycled bits of old temples to make new ones. Renaissance popes mined the Forum as a marble quarry for the construction of St. Peter's Basilica and other churches. The area has served many purposes both sacred and profane over its long history, according to shifts in prevailing values. What does it say about our time that the Forum's custodians have chosen to lay bare, and that millions of ordinary visitors come every year to see, the closest things we have to physical foundations of our civilization?

—Mr. Rocca writes the European Life column from Rome for The Wall Street Journal Europe.