Amid the ever-shifting landscape of film-viewing technology, streaming has suddenly become a rushing river. And now Mosfilm, the 87-year-old titan of Soviet and Russian film production—famed for works by masters such as Sergei Eisenstein and Andrei Tarkovsky, as well as genre films from adventure tales to musicals—has taken a leap into that river. On April 26 Mosfilm announced a partnership with YouTube allowing viewers to watch a substantial number of landmark movies from the studio's collection in their entirety.

Karen Shakhnazarov, Mosfilm's general director and also a filmmaker, producer and screenwriter, released a statement saying in part: "For us the project with YouTube is very important and interesting. The aim is to offer users the possibility to view online legal quality video content and prevent illegal use of our films." Fifty titles were initially made available, and five more are being uploaded each week; by the end of the year, Mosfilm aims to have uploaded more than 200 movies to Mosfilm's YouTube channel (www.youtube.com/mosfilm). Many are subtitled. According to Youri Hazanov, who handles YouTube partnerships for Central and Eastern Europe, the deal followed YouTube's standard partnership arrangement; YouTube will sell advertising on the channel and share the revenue with Mosfilm.

What does this unprecedented access mean for Mosfilm and for film enthusiasts? One benefit is to show Western cinéastes that Soviet cinema encompasses more than Socialist Realism and groundbreaking classics. Mosfilm is also offering some films for viewing and downloading on their website, so it is clearly embracing online technology, for a variety of reasons.

Alla Verlotsky, founder and president of the New York-based Seagull Films, which programs and distributes Soviet and Russian cinema and is dedicated to increasing awareness of its rich variety, said by phone that it's "a stage of Mosfilm's development coming from being a main star-making studio. Mosfilm is basically the United Artists or MGM of Russia." She credits Mr. Shakhnazarov, who took over the studio's leadership more than a decade ago, with rescuing it from the brink of financial catastrophe and taking a visionary approach to shepherding it into the future. The move is significant for Russian viewers, too, she said, because American movies flooded movie theaters there after the collapse of the Soviet Union and the Russian economy and film industry. Raised on Hollywood fare, many young people are technologically savvy but have yet to discover homegrown classics and genre films. 

The array of movies viewers can explore includes not only masterworks by Tarkovsky, such as his complex, dreamlike meditation on memory, "The Mirror" (1974), but also comedies, live-action and animated fantasy films, musicals, melodramas and action and adventure films. Seagull Films has shown hundreds of Mosfilm titles, many in collaboration with New York's Film Society of Lincoln Center. "It looks like a sketch of all the programs we've done," Ms. Verlotsky said, citing a string of examples. They include Mr. Shakhnazarov's perestroika-era "Zero City" (1988), a surreal allegory laced with absurdism, which screened in a series on Russian fantastic cinema. "Nine Days of One Year" (1961), Mikhail Romm's ambivalent tribute to technological progress, appeared in a retrospective of Soviet films from the 1960s. And Vladimir Motyl's folktale-western mash-up "White Sun of the Desert" (1969), a favorite among cosmonauts, recently ran in a series on Soviet "Easterns." 

The image quality of streamed movies sometimes leaves something to be desired in comparison to DVD or Blu-ray, but the Mosfilm/YouTube partnership is an example of how in some cases these new technologies are making difficult-to-access titles more readily available, whether through YouTube or through providers such as Netflix, Amazon or MUBI.

Mr. Shakhnazarov's statement suggests that YouTube's antipiracy controls were a significant incentive. Ms. Verlotsky said, "A big, big problem in Russia is piracy. . . . I think it's really good for the studio to sort of be in control and in charge of your product and better than just to see bootlegs." Chris Dale, a spokesperson for YouTube, explained by phone that YouTube's Content ID technology, developed by Google engineers, allows partners to identify and control or block copies on YouTube: "All you need to do is provide the appropriate reference—audio and visual or video reference files—and then the system will automatically check those references and act on the policy that you've put in place."

Ms. Verlotsky said: "I think it's a good step, even in the domestic market. . . . It's good to say this is our production, this is how we want viewers to see it." Watching movies online may be a radically different experience from viewing them on the big screen, but the partnership highlights the complicated forces behind the trend. And in this case there is something magical about being able to click open a treasure box of Russian and Soviet cinema on one's computer screen.

 Ms. Jones writes about film for the Journal. 