  Paul Pierce knows determination. He didn't start playing basketball until he was 12 years old. While he was cut from his high school varsity basketball team his freshman year, he later became the star of the team his junior and senior years. He went on to play for the University of Kansas, entering the NBA draft after his junior year and was the 10th overall pick by the Boston Celtics in 1998.

It would take 10 years playing for the Celtics before he won an NBA championship. Some players might slow down after a title win; Mr. Pierce, the team's 33-year-old captain, started training even harder. "I enjoyed my moment, but then I realized I needed to be committed to my training all year if I wanted another title," he says. "It's easier to lose fitness when you get older."

He sticks to a strict training regimen even amid the Eastern Conference Semifinals against the Miami Heat. (The Celtics are currently down 3-1 in the series.)

Mr. Pierce is sometimes known for a fiery temperament on the basketball court. "I play with a lot of emotion," he says. "It's up and down depending on how I'm playing, how the team is playing, the calls that are being made." Off the court, Mr. Pierce tends to be more laid back and devotes a portion of his time to charities.

In 2002, Mr. Pierce, who was nicknamed The Truth by Shaquille O'Neal, founded the Truth Fund to help under-served youth. His newest program is FitClub34 (34 is Mr. Pierce's jersey number), a fan club/fitness club that helps motivate kids and asks them to pledge 60 minutes of physical activity per day. "I thought: What can I do to make a difference and help kids going through tough times? Remind them to play." 

The program promotes nutrition and exercise, and Mr. Pierce has helped develop workout routines for children. "I try to take the drills I use at practice and think of a fun spin for kids," he says. "Exercise is really about running around and having fun. It doesn't have to be boring." 

He even gives tips on his FitClub34 website for getting fit while watching a Celtics game on TV: "Every time I dunk during a game, I tell people to get off the couch and do five jumping jacks; or an assist means you have to do five sit-ups." 

The 6-foot-7-inch, 230-pound small forward is a nine-time NBA All Star. In November, Mr. Pierce scored his 20,000th career point, becoming the third person in Celtics history to do so, after Larry Bird and John Havlicek.

The Celtics have 11 a.m. practice most days. Mr. Pierce tries to hit the gym by 9:15 a.m. to get in extra drills or put in some time on the treadmill or bike. The team runs through plyometric drills, exercises that train the body for a burst of speed and strength. 

Individually, Mr. Pierce performs two to three one-hour total body workouts per week. He does stretching drills almost every day of the week, especially pre- and post- practice and games. 

Plyometric exercises help generate powerful, explosive movements that enhance athletic performance. Think of when a basketball player quickly pivots, then drives to the hoop, or a football player who quickly changes direction mid-run to elude a defenseman. 

These strong, speedy motions require fast-twitch muscles that can be developed by mimicking similar movements in a workout. Performance coach David Jack, who works with Paul Pierce and is an adviser to FitClub34, likens plyometrics to creating stored energy by stretching a rubber band: "It's what we call load and explode."

 Here are two plyometric drills recommended by Mr. Jack:

 • Jump and Land—Stand with knees bent, feet shoulder-width apart and arms down to your sides reaching back. Jump as high as possible by pushing down through the feet, extending through the hips and knees and throwing the arms up at the same time. Land safely and keep a strong core. Don't let the knees cave in or the back round. Once your form is solid, you can jump and land with quick, continuous jumps. Perform eight to 10 jumps, rest for at least one minute, and repeat two times.

 • Single Leg Blast Off—Place one foot on a bench or high step and cock the arms as if getting ready to sprint. Drive the top leg down into the bench and explode straight up in the air. Land in the starting position, with the ball of the foot touching the ground first, then the heel. Rest and repeat, with 10 repetitions on each leg.

—Jen Murphy

He mixes up his strength routines, using super sets, which are two exercises performed in a row without stopping, or small circuits, which might be four to five exercises performed consecutively with little rest in between.

He often does exercises that zone in on singular movements and muscle groups. For example for upper body, he might perform a one-arm dumbbell bench press. For legs, he will do a single-leg squat or single-leg dumbbell step ups. 

Over the years, he has moved toward performing longer sets (12 repetitions or more) with slightly lighter loads to avoid putting too much strain on his joints. He will sometimes perform exercises or jog in a pool to put as little stress as possible on his joints. 

Mr. Pierce also uses the Jacobs Ladder, a machine that looks like a ladder tilted at a 40-degree angle. The angle takes stress off of the lower back and the faster Mr. Pierce climbs, the faster the rungs move. 

"I do five or six sets on it. Usually one minute on, one-minute off. It's quick and very efficient for cardio," he says. 

During the offseason, usually from late June to early October, Mr. Pierce likes to get in a two-hour workout a few days a week, usually involving weights and a run. He is often at his home in Manhattan Beach, Calif., and likes to run barefoot up the sand dunes. "It really helps with endurance," he says. In the afternoons, he'll play hoops for two hours. 

Mr. Pierce usually has oatmeal for breakfast. He eats a banana before practice and has a protein shake after. Lunch might be a chicken Caesar salad and if he is hungry midday, he'll snack on peanuts. Mr. Pierce is pretty regimented about his pre-game meal: grilled salmon, a baked potato and broccoli. 

The Truth on Health program teaches kids to eat a balanced diet to combat obesity, and Mr. Pierce aims to lead by example, he says. "In season I eat fruits, vegetables, a lot of complex carbs and lean protein and I stay away from sugars and processed foods."

His favorite splurge in the off-season is fried chicken. Also: "Ice cream and anything chocolate, especially chocolate cake," he says.

"I can't stand pull-ups. I hate doing them. No matter how fit I am, it hurts every time."

"The biggest challenge for me, even as a professional athlete, is being consistent week in and week out. It's not just about being committed to the workout, it's about the diet and the lifestyle. Make the commitment and have someone there to hold you accountable."

For a fast, efficient workout, Mr. Pierce pulls out the jump rope. "Jumping rope kicks my butt every time. Just a few minutes and I'm breaking a sweat."

"It's always changing, but right now when I'm working out I'm listening to anything by Lil Wayne or Kanye West."

—Email workout@wsj.com.