 WPP, the Dublin-based owner of advertising agencies that include Ogilvy & Mather, Young & Rubicam and JWT, said its net profit in 2010 rose 34% to £586 million ($953.5 million) as the recovery in emerging markets and the U.S. strengthened demand for advertising.  

 Ratings agency Standard & Poor's lowered Toyota's bond rating to AA minus from AA, citing what it said was "weak profitability" for the world's largest auto maker. 

 Airbus, expanding cockpit automation across its entire model lineup, is introducing a new feature over the next few years to help planes fly close to each other in busy airspace without triggering airborne-collision warnings.  

Airbus parent European Aeronautic Defence & Space conceded to archrival Boeing in a decade-long, multi-billion-dollar contest to build refueling planes for the U.S. Air Force. 

 HSBC Holdings wants to remain headquartered in the U.K. but is increasingly having to justify the decision to shareholders. HSBC, which moved its headquarters to London from Hong Kong in 1992 when it bought Midland Bank, reviews the decision every three years and is due to decide this year on any possible change.  

 UBS Chief Executive Oswald Gruebel won't accept a bonus for 2010, despite the bank's having returned to profit last year and halted massive outflows of wealthy client funds. 

 ABN Amro Bank, the former Dutch financial giant that collapsed and was nationalized during the financial crisis, posted a €414 million ($579 million) net loss in 2010 in a move aimed at clearing the decks to prepare it for privatization.  

 Royal Dutch Shell is close to selling four of its onshore oil blocks in Nigeria to local oil producers eager to snap up Western oil majors' properties as unrest in North Africa and the Middle East boosts global crude prices. 

 Italy's Dolce & Gabbana is planning to fold its secondary D&G brand into the main label, according to people familiar with the matter, in an effort to limit cannibalization between the two lines. 

 Luxury fashion house Hermès International, galvanized by a 46% jump in full-year net profit to €422 million ($590.2 million), emphatically asserted its independence.  

Belgium's KBC Group said it sold its Centea subsidiary to Crédit Agricole of Belgium for €527 million ($737.1 million). Centea has more than 615,000 private banking and insurance customers through a network of 657 points of sale operated by 608 bank agents across Belgium. Crédit Agricole Belgium is half-owned by France's Crédit Agricole.

 Nestlé was dealt a blow by a Swiss court in its battle to retain control of the coffee-capsule market. The court withdrew a preliminary ban on a rival capsule to Nestlé's Nespresso single-serve coffee brand, in a move that is likely to open the market to other competitors.  

Readers of Newsweek will get their first full dose of new editor Tina Brown on Monday when her official re-launch of the magazine hits newsstands sporting a new font and thicker paper, more photos and graphics, and articles covering a wider range of topics from politics to fashion. 

United Co. Rusal's board rejected Norilsk Nickel's sweetened offer to buy most of Rusal's 25% stake in the firm, the latest twist in the struggle for control of the world's largest nickel producer. Norilsk is at the center of a power struggle between Rusal Chief Executive Oleg Deripaska, and Vladimir Potanin, a billionaire with a stake of just under 30% in Norilsk. 

Rio Tinto, which continues to lift its stake in bid target Riversdale Mining, has begun the search to replenish its board as several directors, including former British Airways Chief Executive Rod Eddington, prepare to retire.

Separately, the Anglo-Australian mining company said its interest in Riversdale had risen to 17.5%, and one person familiar with its 3.9 billion Australian dollar (US$3.95 billion) bid for the company said discussions with the two largest shareholders in Riversdale are ongoing. 

 Britain's health-services cost watchdog denied reimbursement for the drug Lucentis—developed by Roche Holding and Novartis—in cases of a diabetic-related eye disease.  

 Inditex Group has agreed to pay $400 million for a flagship Zara retail store on Fifth Avenue in Manhattan, in one of New York City's largest retail condominium deals ever, according to people familiar with the transaction.  

American Express struck a deal to offer discounts to shoppers via Foursquare Labs, a start-up that lets users win prizes and meet people by using their mobile phones to "check in" at bars, restaurants and stores.

BlackBerry maker Research in Motion said its chief marketing officer has decided to leave the company—just weeks ahead of one of its most significant product rollouts in years. RIM said Keith Pardy is leaving for "personal reasons," but is continuing to help the company over a six-month transition period. 

Sony said a shipment of PlayStation 3 consoles is being held at a port in the Netherlands as part of a continuing patent dispute with South Korea's LG Electronics regarding Blu-ray technology. The shipment is being held because a Dutch court handed down a 10-day temporary injunction from distributing the console in Europe. 

 Google doesn't seem daunted about acquisitions in the wake of its failure last year to land online coupon site Groupon. The Internet giant's deals chief plans to be very active, despite challenges that include soaring valuations for some Web start-ups, as it comes off a record 48 acquisitions last year. 

 A long-running dispute over ownership of Turkey's largest cellphone company Turkcell Illetisim Hizmetleri is close to resolution, with an appeal court in the Caribbean expected to deliver its final verdict on the case in the coming weeks. 

 French waste and water utility Veolia Environnement posted a 0.1% drop in its net profit to €581.1 million ($812.7 million), falling short of expectations despite netting proceeds from asset sales. Revenue grew 2.5% to €34.79 billion. 