ANN ARBOR, Mich. – It's official: Rich Rodriguez has gone from one of the trendiest evangelizers of football's spread offense to unemployed in three years. University of Michigan athletic director David Brandon relieved him of his head coaching duties Wednesday.

Mr. Rodriguez's tenure at Michigan was as brief as it was difficult. He was the first outsider to lead Michigan's football team since Bo Schembechler almost four decades earlier, and only the fourth in 100-plus years of Wolverine football.

But the same man who pushed West Virginia to its first number-one ranking in school history struggled through a 3-9 season his first season at Michigan, followed by a 5-7 record last year. His team's 7-6 mark this season represented a huge drop-off after a fast start, with the team losing six of its final eight games. While Mr. Rodriguez's Wolverines were improving and have almost all of their starters returning next season, it wasn't fast enough for a pround program like Michigan's. The Wolverines have won more games over its 131-year history and has a higher winning percentage than any other college team. 

"The drama, as he calls it, he has dealt with when he got on the campus, and even before that," Mr. Brandon said at the press conference. "And he has handled all of it in an amazingly controlled and measured way. … Rich Rodriguez is a good man."

Although speculation about Mr. Rodriguez's replacement has centered largely on former Michigan quarterback and current Stanford head coach Jim Harbaugh, it appears unlikely he'll return to his alma mater. When asked at the press conference, Mr. Brandon replied, "I personally believe Jim is headed to the NFL, but that is my opinion as opposed to any judgment."

Full analysis of the five Bowl Championship Series games, including insights from the Journal's Darren Everson and key stats to watch.

Attention now turns to other candidates, including former Michigan assistant Brady Hoke, now the head coach at San Diego State, and former Michigan player and assistant coach Les Miles, who led Louisiana State to a national title during the 2007 season. Mr. Brandon did not rule out hiring someone without direct ties to Michigan, either. 

As for Mr. Rodriguez, his name has returned to the list of candidates for jobs at Pitt, the University of Connecticut and virtually every other school looking to make a coaching change. He says he wants and expects to coach this fall.

It's been a long 36 months for Mr. Rodriguez. Before arriving in Ann Arbor, he was one of college football's darlings for bringing his alma mater, West Virginia, to college football's upper echelon. The Mountaineers even managed a Bowl Championship Series victory over SEC champion Georgia at the 2007 Sugar Bowl. Whenever a coaching position opened, his name was invariably at the top of the wish list – including Alabama's, which offered him the head coaching job in 2006. Nick Saban took the position instead, and won a national title last year.

Mr. Rodriguez accepted the Michigan job a year later, and the chaos surrounding his program did not take long to surface. His departure was quickly followed by a lawsuit by West Virginia demanding full payment of his $4 million buy-out, which he and Michigan eventually paid. It proved to be only the start of an almost non-stop drumbeat of negative publicity Mr. Rodriguez endured throughout his three years in Ann Arbor.