Forces loyal to Col. Moammar Gadhafi pressed their offensive into eastern Libya on Sunday, as an unraveling and demoralized rebel force fled the coastal oil town of Brega and began to lose its grip on power in its de facto capital city of Benghazi.

The battlefield developments lent urgency to an Arab League request Saturday to the United Nations Security Council to enforce a no-fly zone over Libyan airspace that is likely to be taken up this week. 

The League's decision was an unprecedented endorsement of military action aimed at an Arab country, but European diplomats said it wouldn't likely suffice to ensure the measure is enacted.

The opposition's armed ragtag volunteer corps continued to lose ground. Rebel officials on Sunday said they have begun rounding up Gadhafi supporters in Benghazi following a string of mysterious explosions, armed robberies and the assassination on Saturday night of a journalist from al-Jazeera, the Arab satellite channel. 

Track events day by day.

See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

A look at the economic and political status of selected countries facing unrest in North Africa and the Middle East.

In a sign of spreading panic, several international humanitarian groups and news organizations pulled their staff from Benghazi to the city of Tobruq near the Egyptian border, citing concerns that, after taking Brega, government forces might head straight to the frontier. If Mr. Gadhafi's troops succeeded in capturing Tobruq, they would cut off rebels' supply lines from Egypt and any hopes of an unimpeded retreat.

"There was a lot of speculation: will he try to seal everybody in?" said Cassandra Nelson of Mercy Corps, one of the aid groups that retreated to Tobruq.

In Tripoli, the spokesman for the Libyan armed forces made a rare appearance, telling foreign journalists the government's forces have routed rebels from areas as far east as the coastal town of Brega. "The areas have been cleansed," the spokesman, Col. Milad Hussein, said.

Col. Hussein said the government had full control of the town of Zawiya, about 30 miles west of Tripoli and the strategic eastern oil-facilities towns of Ras Lanuf and Brega.

Speaking in Benghazi on Sunday, Abdel Fattah Younis, the former Minister of Interior who defected early in the uprising to the rebels' side and is now the rebel military's chief of staff, countered that rebel defeats at Ras Lanuf and Brega were merely tactical withdrawals.

"Even if our forces have withdrawn a few kilometers, that doesn't mean much in military terms, especially if they are fighting in a semi-desert with little strategic value," he said. 

He said overenthusiastic youth volunteers had disregarded military advice in their rush towards Tripoli and had overextended the rebel lines. He said the young fighters recent setbacks had convinced them of the need for trained military leadership, and the rebels have begun putting disorganized volunteer groups under the command of trained officers.

Rebel forces are hoping to make a stand against Col. Gadhafi in more built up areas where the government's air and artillery advantage would matter less. In recent weeks the rebels have put up tough fights in urban areas of western Libya, but have proven less effective fighting in open terrain, where they are exposed to airstrikes. 

"We are trying to woo them into an area where we can even out the fight," Gen. Younis said. 

The air superiority of forces loyal to Col. Gadhafi has helped tip the balance of power against the rebel forces based in the eastern part of the country.

European diplomats said the Arab League decision would turn the international focus back to U.N. deliberations this week. But they said the weight of the message would be softened somewhat by the fact that Libya's neighbors, Algeria and Syria, didn't back the no-fly zone. Libya was a League member until its membership was suspended last month.

Also tempering momentum is the reluctance of most, if not all, Arab countries to go beyond rhetorical, and perhaps some financial, support for United Nation's enforced no-fly zone. 



Despite favoring the recommendation that the Security Council enforce a no-fly zone, the Egyptian military, the Arab world's largest, is unlikely to participate in such an operation or to offer strategic support, said analysts. 

After assuming power in the wake of President Hosni Mubarak's departure, the armed forces are now more focused on internal affairs of state and will want to avoid the popular stigma of colluding with Western powers to attack a fellow Arab country, observers say.

"I don't think that the Egyptian armed forces have time now to engage in such outside problems. They are very busy here in Egypt," said Mohammed Kadry Said, a retired major general in Egypt's Air Defense Command and the head of security studies at the government-funded Al Ahram Center for Political and Strategic Studies. 

When European Union leaders met Friday to discuss Libya, many, including German Chancellor Angela Merkel, showed reluctance to support no-fly-zone proposals being pushed particularly by French President Nicolas Sarkozy. 

They agreed to such action only if there was a demonstrable need, a clear legal basis for it and regional Arab support.

The European Union's foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton flew to Cairo Sunday for talks with Arab League Secretary General Amr Moussa and Egypt's Prime Minister Essam Sharaf and Foreign Minister Nabil El Araby. On Monday evening, she will travel on to Paris for a meeting of foreign ministers of the Group of Eight, a forum which comprises the main industrialized economies and Russia, where the main focus will also be on developments in Libya and elsewhere in North Africa.

At the Security Council, China is still seen as the big stumbling block; its traditional reluctance to give a stamp of approval to any international intervention in a developing nation remains strong. Any move will be further complicated by the fact that China this month holds the rotating seat of Security Council president.

Russia also has resisted a no-fly zone, but privately U.S. officials said the Russians were less opposed and wouldn't stand in the way of action if there was broad consensus otherwise.

Sen. Charles Schumer (D., N.Y.) said he thought the Arab League action has markedly raised the chances of a U.N. move. "I certainly think the Arab League's decision makes a no-fly zone more likely," Mr. Schumer said during an interview on NBC's "Meet the Press" on Sunday.

For its part, the White House issued a statement Saturday welcoming the move, saying it "strengthens the international pressure on Gadhafi and support for the Libyan people."

Still, the White House statement didn't overtly endorse a no-fly zone.

—Yaroslav Trofimov  in Benghazi,  Sam Dagher in Tripoli  and Gerald F. Seib  in Washington, D.C.,  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Charles Levinson at charles.levinson@wsj.com and Stephen Fidler at stephen.fidler@wsj.com 