The discovery of four more bodies in Acapulco Sunday brought to more than 30 the number of people found slain after a weekend of violence in the Mexican resort city, with at least 16 of their bodies found without their heads.

Track the increasing violence in an interactive map.

Authorities early Sunday discovered a body hanging from a bridge on the main highway between Acapulco and Mexico City, and the bodies of two other men nearby, one missing its limbs and head. A fourth body was found elsewhere in the city.

Such brutality, though gruesome, isn't uncommon in Acapulco, once a popular and safe destination for tourists from around the world. Yet it remains a major destination for Mexico's multibillion dollar tourism industry, with officials having maintained throughout the government's assault on drug traffickers that the violence is concentrated elsewhere.

Nonetheless the situation in the city has deteriorated. Since a shootout more than a year ago in which the Mexican navy killed Arturo Beltran-Leyva, the alleged leader of a powerful drug cartel, the city has been the epicenter of near constant violence. Officials say several drug-trafficking groups are struggling to gain control of its port, the entry point for numerous drugs headed to the U.S. border.

In a scene that bore signs of drug-related conflict, 15 headless corpses were found early Saturday morning on a sidewalk near a shopping mall, according to a statement issued by police of Guerrero, the state in which Acapulco is located. Investigators soon found the victims' heads in a pile elsewhere. All the dead were young men under the age of 30, the statement said.

Photographs published by Mexican newspapers showed uniformed men patrolling the crime scene where the remains of a charred car were found near the decapitated bodies. News reports said a message was found near the bodies, claiming to have been left by members of Mexico's Sinaloa cartel.

In other violence in the city Saturday, six people were found shot dead in a taxi, while another man was found shot to death in a car. An additional two young men were gunned down as gunmen drove past them on an Acapulco street.

Over the weekend, state authorities called for additional security forces to be sent to the city, and members of the Mexican navy and military patrolled its streets. The Mexican attorney general's office said it would begin investigating the killings, and state officials urged residents and tourists not to panic.

The spate of killings marks the biggest series of incidents in the port town since September, when a bus load of 20 Mexican men were kidnapped as they arrived from the nearby state of Michoacán. Government officials at first suggested the men might have been connected with the drug trade, something family members denied, saying the men were on vacation.

Weeks later, 19 of the bodies were discovered in a mass grave on the outskirts of the city.

 Write to  Nicholas Casey at nicholas.casey@wsj.com 