MUMBAI -- India proceeded with its ambitious 400 billion rupees ($8.83 billion) disinvestment program Wednesday by inviting initial bids from investment banks to manage Oil & Natural Gas Corp. Ltd.'s proposed $3.05 billion follow-on public offering.

ONGC plans to hire six merchant bankers to manage the share sale, which is likely in March, its chairman said. In a separate development, the chairman of state-run Steel Authority of India Ltd. Wednesday said he expects the first tranche of SAIL's follow-on public offering to float in the second week of February.

The success of these offers will determine whether the federal government will meet its financial year disinvestment revenue target of 400 billion rupees. It has already raised 227.63 billion rupees this year by selling small stakes in six companies, most recently selling a 10% stake in Shipping Corp. of India Ltd. in November for 5.82 billion rupees.

The funds are essential for the government to reach its budget deficit goal of 5.5% of gross domestic product for this financial year till March, even taking into account the one-time windfall it got from selling telecommunications bandwidth in May. The funds raised will mostly be spent on social development projects.

The federal government plans to sell a 5% stake in ONGC by mid-March. It currently owns 74.14% of the oil and gas explorer. In December, ONGC conducted a stock split, a bonus share issue and paid a special interim dividend.

The government also plans to divest 10% of its stake in SAIL, while the steelmaker itself will issue additional shares worth 10% of the expanded equity base, in two tranches. The sales are forecast to raise a total of 180 billion rupees.

SAIL plans to file its initial share prospectus with the securities market regulator on Jan. 20, its chairman  C.S. Verma told Dow Jones Newswires Wednesday. The government currently holds an 85.82% stake in the steelmaker.

The government also plans to sell some of its 99.59% stake in Hindustan Copper Ltd. 

Market participants expect the ONGC issue will be the hardest sell, not only due to its size but also because of uncertainties over de-regulation and subsidy sharing.

ONGC and other upstream operators GAIL (India) Ltd. and Oil India Ltd. share a third of the subsidy burden that goes to downstream oil marketing companies who sell fuel products at government mandated subsidized prices.

Traditionally, upstream operators, downstream retailers and the government have shared the subsidy burden equally, but in some years the state has taken on more of the load.

Investors perceive the subsidy sharing to be arbitrary, and with crude oil prices settling at two-year highs above $90-a-barrel and predictions of prices touching the $100-dollar mark soon, the subsidy burden is set to rise further.

 Write to  John Satish Kumar at john.kumar@dowjones.com 