WASHINGTON—William M. Daley has long straddled the worlds of business and politics.

The 62-year-old Mr. Daley, named President Barack Obama's new chief of staff Thursday, has never held elected office. But his father, Richard J. Daley, and his brother, Richard M. Daley, created a dynasty, together serving more than four decades as Chicago mayor. 

Bill Daley grew up in the door-knocking, pol-slapping world of Chicago politics. He rose to commerce secretary under President Bill Clinton and ran Vice President Al Gore's 2000 campaign for president. 

But he also brings to the White House an extensive business background that will make him a rarity in an administration dominated by political strategists and policy wonks. 

For the president, the selection answers critics who say he needs better relations with the business community, but it also brings an outside influence to a White House peopled with longtime aides to Mr. Obama. And it sends yet another signal that Mr. Obama is serious about looking for pragmatic compromises with resurgent Republicans.

Mr. Daley now oversees Midwestern operations for J.P. Morgan Chase & Co., serving as the bank's public face in Chicago. He also works a lot in Washington helping Chief Executive James Dimon navigate the political landscape, especially during the debate last year over financial regulation that will cut the bank's bottom line by billions.

Mr. Dimon, a newcomer in Washington politics, was incensed by the political bashing of the banking industry. Mr. Daley, known for having a calm exterior, encouraged his boss to temper his anger when dealing with legislators, insiders say. Indeed, friends say Mr. Daley is known for keeping his cool and pushing to move things along—insisting that decisions get made, not postponed, and preventing meetings from going longer than needed.

His banking job also gave Mr. Daley a chance to use his Chicago connections to build business for the bank, without having any direct responsibilities to any specific businesses. Within the bank, he is credited with helping J.P. Morgan win a role to advise Exelon Corp. in its ultimately unsuccessful bid for Public Service Enterprise Group Inc.

The White House said Mr. Daley won't deal with anything related to J.P. Morgan for a period of two years, and said officials would work through other issues, such as divesting his stock holdings, before he gets started. 

Mr. Daley also sits on the boards of Boeing Co. and drug maker Abbott Laboratories. And he once served on the board of Fannie Mae and as president of the Amalgamated Bank of Chicago and SBC Communications Inc., now known as AT&T Inc.

Early GOP reviews were positive. 

"This is a guy who's been in the private sector, in private business," said Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.), a frequent critic of Mr. Obama. "Frankly, my first reaction is, it sounds like a good idea."

Some liberals are wary. Mr. Daley has said his party went too far to the left in the health-care debate. Labor unions remember his hard push as commerce secretary for the North American Free Trade Agreement through Congress in the early 1990s. More recently, when asked to endorse Mr. Obama's push to create a consumer-protection agency for financial products, he declined. He wrote an op-ed essay advising the party take a "moderate, centrist course."

"This was a real mistake by the White House," said Adam Green, co-founder of the Progressive Change Campaign Committee. "Bill Daley consistently urges the Democratic Party to pursue a corporate agenda that alienates both independent and Democratic voters."

Friends say Mr. Daley has a self-deprecating sense of humor and that he conveys little of the self-importance so common in Washington.

Mr. Daley and Mr. Obama have never been personally close, but his name was suggested by two of Mr. Obama's closest advisers, David Axelrod and former chief of staff Rahm Emanuel.

In a twist, Mr. Daley will be filling a job that opened when Mr. Emanuel left to run for mayor of Chicago—after Mr. Daley's brother, Richard, said he wouldn't run for reelection. 

It is the most significant move in a larger White House shuffle. Three top aides are leaving the White House and will form the nexus of the president's re-election campaign. David Plouffe, who ran Mr. Obama's 2008 campaign, arrives next week to shape the president's strategy and message. And on Friday, Mr. Obama will name Gene Sperling as chairman of his National Economic Council.

Mr. Daley takes the reins from interim chief of staff Pete Rouse, who will become counselor to the president.