 Sarasota, Fla.  

Great character actors make the world of theater go 'round. Florida's Asolo Repertory Theatre is proving the point with its exceptional revival of "Twelve Angry Men." Reginald Rose's popular jury-room drama is better known as a movie than a play—it was originally written for a CBS telecast in 1954, then filmed in 1957, and only made it to Broadway a half-century later—and the film version starred Henry Fonda and Lee J. Cobb, two of Hollywood's best-known faces. In most of its incarnations, though, "Twelve Angry Men" has served as a vehicle for unfamous performers who look and sound (as Jack Webb said of the character actors whom he cast in "Dragnet") "as real as a guy pouring a cup of coffee." That's what Asolo Rep is giving us, and the results are truly inspiring.

Mr. Rose's 1964 stage version of his original "Studio One" teleplay is an astonishingly well-made piece of work. The mechanism that propels the stage action, which is played out in real time, couldn't be simpler—one juror gradually persuades his 11 colleagues not to send a slum kid to the electric chair—but often the simplest devices are the best ones, and "Twelve Angry Men" is so theatrically sound that it can be performed by amateurs and still retain much of its power.

 Twelve Angry Men  Asolo Repertory Theatre, Mertz Theatre, 5555 N. Tamiami Trail, Sarasota, Fla.  ($17-$65), 941-351-8000/800-361-8388,   closes Mar. 26

The script also contains more than its share of high-minded heavy-handedness, however, and there are more than a few moments when you can all but see "APPLAUD" and "BOO" signs flashing over the proscenium. Not only is the never-seen slum kid who's been accused of killing his father a member of an (unspecified) minority group who Never Had a Chance, but Juror No. 10 (played here by Douglas Jones) is an eye-rollingly self-evident bigot who telegraphs his bad-guy status right at the top of the play by making a clanking reference to "those people." As for Juror No. 8 (Jud Williford), the lone holdout, he's so damn noble that Mr. Fonda actually wore a white suit when he played the part in Sidney Lumet's film.

But since I last saw "Twelve Angry Men" in the Roundabout Theatre Company's excellent 2004 Broadway premiere, I've had two eye-opening experiences: I saw a kinescope of the original live-TV version, which was performed much more straightforwardly than Mr. Lumet's film, and I served as the foreman of a New York jury. No, I didn't wear a white suit, nor was I especially noble, but I did get to see how seriously my fellow jurors took what we were doing, and I realized in the process that "Twelve Angry Men" is for the most part surprisingly true to life in its portrayal of what happens in a jury room. So is Asolo Rep's production, which has been staged with bracing clarity by Frank Galati, a member of Chicago's Steppenwolf Theatre Company ensemble. Mr. Galati keeps a tight leash on the sermonizing, making sure that the obvious moments are thrown away instead of played to the hilt, and so they feel like occasional bumps in an otherwise smooth road that takes you exactly where you want to go.

As for the cast, I wish I had 12 paragraphs in which I could separately sing the praises of each member. Mr. Williford, who is younger than the well-known actors who've played Juror No. 8 in the past, turns in a beautifully understated performance that does much to draw the sting of Mr. Rose's clichés. James Clarke plays the angry, anguished Juror No. 3, Mr. Cobb's role, and does a singularly fine job of making him seem like a real human being instead of a hammy tragedian who's been cast by mistake in a naturalistic play. Mr. Jones's huge, threatening stage presence transforms an Archie Bunker-like stick figure into a bona fide villain. And David S. Howard, who looks and sounds like Fredric March, uses both of those attributes to compelling effect in the smaller but choice part of an aging juror who refuses to be bullied.

Mara Blumenfeld's period costumes couldn't be more believable (every juror is wearing just the right kind of hat). Russell Metheny, the set designer, has come up with a suitably grubby-looking jury room whose centerpiece is a wall clock that ticks off the play's 90 minutes in full view of the audience. Had I been the director, I wouldn't have had the nerve to take that kind of chance, but Mr. Galati's staging is so taut that you'll never think to look at the clock, much less your watch. As much as I liked the Broadway revival, this one is, if anything, even better.

I don't want to end this review without paying tribute to Mr. Jones's amazing sangfroid. At the opening-night performance, a member of the audience seated in the back of the theater became ill right at the top of Juror No. 10's big speech and had to be carried out to a waiting ambulance. Not only did Mr. Jones carry on without so much as blinking an eye, but his control was so absolute that he somehow managed to prevent the incident from breaking the dramatic tension that had been built up so painstakingly throughout the preceding hour. That's acting.

—Mr. Teachout, the Journal's drama critic, blogs about theater and the other arts at www.terryteachout.com. Write to him at tteachout@wsj.com.