KITZBÜHEL, Austria—This year, the major contenders for the famed Hahnenkamm downhill, the Alpine World Cup race beginning here Saturday, include defending champion Didier Cuche, from Switzerland, and Austria's Klaus Kröll, who won last week's Lauberhorn in Wengen, Switzerland.

The two are closely matched, setting the stage for a familiar battle on the icy slopes of this Austrian village. "After winning the Lauberhorn, I'm most confident this week," said Mr. Kröll. "I know the course more, which should be an advantage. And all the Austrians will be cheering."

Throughout World Cup history, the rivalry between Austria and Switzerland is unrivalled. For years, these two nations ruled alpine ski racing, dominating downhill events at the World Cup and the Winter Olympics. 

At its peak during the 1980s, Switzerland won no fewer than 14 medals at the Alpine World Championships in 1987. Since then, Austria has taken over. Its avalanche of 101 Olympic alpine medals are almost twice as many as any other country and it has won the Nation's Cup, a cumulative ranking of men's and women's World Cup results, every year since 1990.

There are other popular sports in these two nations, of course. Switzerland is home to Roger Federer, arguably the greatest tennis player ever to have picked up a racket, while Austria used to be one of European football's leading teams, twice reaching the World Cup semifinals.

But for both places, a combination of geography and history means that skiing matters above all else. Last week's annual Lauberhorn downhill in Wengen, which was run for the 81st year, is pretty much the Swiss Super Bowl, while the Hahnenkamm in Kitzbühel is what Wimbledon is to tennis and St. Andrews to golf. It's the biggest sports event in the Austrian calendar.

"In the opinion of Austria, Kitzbühel has the hardest downhill in the world," said Wolfgang Winhein, a journalist with Austria's national daily, the Kurier, who has covered the World Cup since 1973. "[It's] more dangerous than any other."

Up to 58 competitors are testing their mettle Saturday on the treacherous Streif. They blast down a 3.3 kilometer blue line on the iced Hahnenkamm mountain with jumps of up to 80 meters, slopes as steep as 85%, and speeds as fast as 140 kilometers per hour. In less than two minutes, it's over.

The course is considered the most intimidating in the sport. Austrian skier Hans Grugger suffered a sickening fall and underwent an emergency operation for a brain injury on Thursday after crashing during a training run here. Last year, Swiss skier Daniel Albrecht suffered concussion and lung damage after an horrific crash.

But the perils of careening down an icy drop of 860 meters don't seem to put people off. Around 80,000 spectators, most of them Austrian, are expected in Kitzbühel this weekend. Another 1.5 million Austrians will be watching on television.

"All Swiss do the same," said Karin Forrer, from St. Gallen, who has paid 70 Swiss Francs ($73) to be in the stands. "Lunch in the dining room with the World Cup [on television]."

In recent times, they haven't enjoyed what they're watching. After decades of superiority on the slopes, Austria and Switzerland have seen their World Cup results go into steep decline. Austria hasn't won the men's World Cup title since 2006—its longest barren run in 15 years. Swiss superstar Carlo Janka was last year's winner, but Switzerland hadn't previously had a World Cup champion in either the men's or women's events since 1995.

So far, this year doesn't look to be much different. Leading the way with the most World Cup points this time is Croatia's Ivica Kostelic, 215 points ahead of second-place Aksel Lund Svindal of Norway. While Mr. Kostelic didn't win Wengen's downhill last week, he won the other two races, picking up 100 points for each.

His determination is evident: Training was cancelled in Wengen last Thursday, but Mr. Kostelic went anyway. "I ski all events and it's demanding," he said. "I try to concentrate every time, each race. I try to forget I'm number one—at least during the race."

Ski racing's new order comes at a time when the World Cup is struggling to retain sponsors and viewers. Some critics have complained that the Federation Internationale de Ski, the sport's global governing body, needs an overhaul amid complaints that the World Cup features too many races and too many racers.

The FIS rankings list dozens of male skiers on the World Cup circuit, though few people pay attention to racers listed after the top 30, meaning that most live television coverage stops after 45 minutes, according to Infront, the Italian sports-marketing agency that sells the broadcast rights. 

Prize money at some World Cup events has barely risen in decades and while the Hahnenkamm Committee voluntarily expanded the purse for this weekend's race, almost tripling some prizes, winners at the Lauberhorn last week took home just 33,000 Swiss Francs. "The prize money is the same as it was in 1992 even though a lot has changed in the world economy-wise," said Mr. Kostelic.

Meanwhile, team sponsors have dropped out, while others have reduced their commitment to ski racing after the Winter Olympics. Eastern European countries including the Czech Republic have been particularly badly hit, while even successful teams such as Croatia, which is backed by insurance giant Allianz SE, Croatian mobile operator Vip, and Austrian lender Raiffeisen Bank International AG, are aware that deals could disappear if results go downhill. "I'm pretty confident that as long as we have good results, they'll stay with us," said Mr. Kostelic.

Still, the sport's premier events remain a big draw. This year, Hahnenkamm's budget of €6.5 million ($8.7 million) is expected to generate a projected up to €40 million for the local economy, while Wengen's smaller budget—€4.1 million—raised an estimated €20 million for the Swiss economy.

"Wengen is special," said Markus Lehmann, managing director of the Lauberhorn races. "We have record numbers of VIPs and we keep trying to improve the experience."

Although the Lauberhorn and Hahnenkamm races are known by some ski racing fans as "Jurassic Park" because their organizers are so resistant to change, Mr. Lehmann said additional features such as new "park and drive" shuttles from Interlaken airport have been introduced to impress business clients. Bigger and better facilities have also been installed to offer the pre-race entertainment and dining options desired by corporate sponsors such as Audi, the World Cup's lead sponsor. 

"The next five years are secure," Mr. Lehmann said of the Lauberhorn races. "After that, it depends on the development of skiing and the strategy of the FIS."