It's no secret that New York sports fans have enjoyed an abundance of championships through the years. The Yankees, the winners of 27 titles, have brought more glory to Gotham than most places have seen in the fullness of history. 

Now, with the Jets just two wins away from a second Super Bowl title, New York could move within a half-percentage point of Boston in the race to earn what is, perhaps, the most exalted title of all: the winningest sports town in U.S. history.

Among metropolitan areas that have a franchise in each of the four major sports, New York's seven teams (including the Islanders but not the New Jersey Nets or Devils) have won championships in 8.4% of their combined 616 seasons. This puts New York second only to Boston, which has won a title in 9% of its total team seasons. 

The Yankees account for more than half of New York's championships. But even if the Yankees were removed from the picture, the city would still have a championship winning percentage of 4.9%. This would still put the city ahead of other less-fortunate towns like Philadelphia, Denver and Washington, D.C. 

New York's football Giants have done their bit by winning six times, including three NFL championships before the Super Bowl era. The Jets, of course, won a title in 1969. The city's other baseball teams—the Giants, Dodgers and Mets—have won the World Series eight times. The Rangers have four Stanley Cups, the same as the Islanders. And the Knicks have two championships. 

By this scoring method, cities tend to benefit from having had one of the National Hockey League's "Original Six" franchises. New York, Boston, Detroit, Chicago, Montreal and Toronto had a 40-year headstart winning Stanley Cups over cities like Pittsburgh (6.0%), Philadelphia (4.7%) and St. Louis (4.5%). Even so, there's very little chance Atlanta, which has one just a single championship (the 1995 Braves) in 151 seasons, or Phoenix, which has just one in 92 seasons (by a single run in Game 7 over the Yankees in 2001) will ever catch up. 

Before you Bostonians get too smug, know this: Thanks largely to hockey, Canada is going to be tough to beat. Led by the Canadiens' 23 titles, Montreal leads all cities in the study with a 17.4% championship rate. Toronto, led by the Maple Leafs, have won at an 11.1% clip.

 Write to  Matthew Futterman at matthew.futterman@wsj.com 