TV is a writers' medium—but don't tell that to a movie director. 

This pilot season, with heightened pressure on networks to make sure new shows break through the clutter and compete with hundreds of cable channels, Netflix and the DVR, the big-four networks have increasingly turned to feature-film directors. 

Adjusting to TV isn't always easy. Unlike in film, where auteurs impart their vision, in TV the writers rule. Not only do they come up with plots and write weekly scripts, a head writer runs the series, serves as a liaison with network and studio executives and makes key decisions on casting, locations, and, yes, hiring a director. 

"Long term, it's a writer's medium so I think it's about striking that balance," says CBS Entertainment President  Nina Tassler. Feature-film directors "bring a different perspective, a different kind of storytelling."

Later this month at the annual upfronts in New York, ABC, NBC, CBS and Fox will announce which pilots get picked up. Among those are CBS's "Untitled Susannah Grant Project," about a surgeon whose deceased wife speaks to him, directed by Oscar-winner Jonathan Demme ("Silence of the Lambs"), "Exit Strategy," a Fox thriller directed by Antoine Fuqua ("Training Day"), and "R.E.M.," a NBC pilot about a cop who lives in alternate realities directed by David Slade ("The Twilight Saga: Eclipse").

The strategy comes as several cable series have generated buzz using feature film directors. In April "The Killing," directed by Patty Jenkins ("Monster"), premiered on AMC. FX recently aired an episode of "Justified" directed by Tony Goldwyn ("Conviction"). 

Martin Scorsese directed HBO's "Boardwalk Empire" pilot. The pay-cable network also hired Kathryn Bigelow ("The Hurt Locker") to direct a pilot, "The Miraculous Year," about a powerful New York family led by a self-destructive composer. HBO passed, saying Ms. Bigelow did a great job on the pilot but that it wasn't a good fit. HBO is now readying "Luck," a horse-racing drama directed by Michael Mann and starring Dustin Hoffman. 

The influx of big-screen directors to TV comes as movie studios increasingly prioritize action flicks, sequels and remakes, putting the squeeze on smaller independent films. "It used to be there were the TV people and the feature people. Now the lines are blurred," says  Barry Jossen, executive vice president of ABC Entertainment Group.

Ms. Jenkins says it was a nice break to have to execute someone else's ideas, in this case, executive producer Veena Sud's creepy portrait of Seattle in the pilot for "The Killing." "Sometimes it's fun to have your own vision, and sometimes it's fun to try on someone else's vision," she says. 

Directors with Oscar statuettes on their mantels must adjust to TV's quicker shooting schedules, fewer takes and smaller budgets—or try to. "I'd watch her [Ms. Jenkins] go 12, 13, 14 takes. For a line producer, that's justifiable cause for a heart attack," says  David Madden, president of Fox Television Studios. 

When he directed "Exit Strategy," Mr. Fuqua used wide shots and sweeping crowd scenes, rather than the closeups of TV. "I took the exact same approach as I would with a movie," he says. One surprise—commercials. "They'd remind me about act breaks for commercials and I'd go 'What's an act break?'" 

Terence Winter, executive producer of "Boardwalk Empire," says he got out of the way when Mr. Scorsese was working. "We were laughing because normally you're on the set and it's your show." Instead, he says, "We hung out at craft services." 

Mr. Winter chimed in a couple of times, as when actor Michael Pitt's character, a 1920s gangster, entered a room packed with women while keeping his hat on. He asked the first assistant director how to give Mr. Scorsese a note suggesting Mr. Pitt take off his hat. 

"He said: 'I don't know. No one's ever given him a note before.' " 

 Write to  Amy Chozick at amy.chozick@wsj.com 