  (See Corrections & Amplifications item below.)  

HONG KONG—Hong Kong broadcaster  Television Broadcasts Ltd.
TVBCY


-1.88
%




 said Wednesday its biggest shareholder, Shaw Brothers (Hong Kong) Ltd., agreed to sell its 26% stake in the company to a group of three investors led by  ITC Corp. Ltd.
0372


-2.25
%




's Chairman,  Charles Chan. 

TVB, one of the world's biggest distributors of Chinese-language television programming, didn't disclose the value of the stake being sold by Shaw Brothers, which is controlled by TVB Chairman Sir  Run Run Shaw. But based on TVB's Wednesday closing price of 45.90 Hong Kong dollars per share, the stake is valued at about HK$5.23 billion (US$670.5 million). 

According to TVB, the other investors that have agreed to buy the stake are private equity firm Providence Equity Partners LLC and Taiwanese businesswoman  Cher Wang, chairman of HTC Corp.

The investors couldn't be reached for comment. 

The broadcaster said 103-year-old  Sir Run Run will remain as chairman of the company after the share sale, while three new board members will also be nominated, including Ms. Wang and Mr. Chan, who had earlier invested in TVB's Hong Kong pay-TV venture. 

Sir Run Run has made no secret of his intention to bow out of TVB, a company he co-founded more than 40 years ago. For several years, he has sought buyers for his stake. In 2009, he gave up his executive duties to assume a nonexecutive chairmanship role, leaving his wife,  Mona Fong, to oversee the broadcaster's day-to-day operations. 

A plan by Sir Run Run to sell TVB parent Shaw Brothers in 2008 fell through as the onset of the global financial crisis damped investor interest and company valuations. Various parties, including the chairman of Chinese developer  Country Garden Holdings Co.
CTRYY


-11.76
%




,  Yeung Kwok Keung, were in the running for the TVB controlling stake. 

Nonetheless, speculation has continued over a transfer of control at TVB, and as recently as September, the vice chairman of property firm  Henderson Land Development Ltd.
HLDCY


2.51
%




,  Peter Lee, said he was considering to buy a stake in the company in a personal capacity. 

Founded in 1967, TVB operates several free-to-air channels in Hong Kong, broadcasting mainly in Cantonese and English. It also operates a number of satellite and pay-TV networks around the world. TVB commands about 85% market share in the free broadcast segment, against competitor Asia Television Ltd., which isn't listed. 

Once completed, the sale of the TVB stake would represent Sir Run Run's final farewell to the motion-picture and television empire he helped build in Hong Kong starting in the 1950s. He also owns a 6.23% stake in TVB through the Shaw Foundation Hong Kong Ltd. TVB said Wednesday, the Shaw Foundation will sell a portion of its stake to independent third parties before the completion of Shaw Brothers's TVB stake sale. 



 Correction  An earlier version of this article incorrectly referred to Providence Equity Partners as Providence Capital Partners. 



 Write to  Jeffrey Ng at jeffrey.ng@dowjones.com 