It's art you can touch—and sit on. 

On Friday, Christie's in New York will put up for auction a marble sculpture of a polar bear that doubles as a bench. That's typical for the 66-year-old artist, Judy Kensley McKie, whose work is in Boston's Museum of Fine Arts and the vice president's residence in Washington. Everything she's made over four decades, she says, "has a practical use."

The bear bench is one of six McKie works being auctioned by Christie's that stood in the New York duplex of bond trader Morton Swinsky, who died last year. Mr. Swinsky also had a hand in producing many Broadway shows, including "Chicago," "Hairspray" and "Billy Elliot." 

The polar-bear bench "had a life to it," says daughter Karen Swinsky. "The room doesn't have the same energy without it."

At the Rhode Island School of Design, Ms. McKie trained as a painter, not an animal sculptor. She married a fellow art student. "We were living on absolutely nothing," she says. "We slept on pillows on the floor, because we couldn't afford furniture. I decided I would make my husband a table as a birthday present, and that was the beginning of realizing that furniture was what I really loved doing."

Stone and wooden objects depicting animals in pre-Colombian, African and American Indian art have long fascinated Ms. McKie. The animals came into the furniture, she notes, because she wanted to bring her sculpted objects to life. Her two-dozen-odd benches and her bowls, lamps and other furniture have incorporated not only polar bears but baboons, doves, alligators and jaguars. Among other McKie works being auctioned by Christie's are a serpent side table and a monkey bench..

At the Boston museum, visitors are invited to sit on a McKie bench with winged horses at each of its four corners. (The bench is part of the museum's effort to display art that also serves as public seating.) In Washington, former Vice President Walter Mondale's wife, Joan, bought a wooden table with dogs for their residence. 

According to Christie's, all 14 of Ms. McKie's pieces to come to auction previously brought a price "significantly in excess" of their estimates, with one in 2008 bringing in $134,500.

For the polar bear, made in 2004, Ms. McKie needed something white. Her previous benches had been made from wood or bronze. So she turned to marble from Carrara, Italy, the source of many of Michelangelo's masterpieces. 

Christie's estimates that the bench will bring between $25,000 and $35,000.

—Stan Sesser 