TOKYO—Food and gas supplies are rapidly running out in parts of Japan, leaving people not only in the earthquake-stricken northeast but also in Tokyo scrambling to grab what's left on the emptying shelves at groceries and convenience stores.

Chief Cabinet Secretary Yukio Edano reported that supplies are being depleted not only in the evacuation zone around the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear-power complex, but also in neighboring areas including Iwaki, a city on the northeastern coast.

"Please distribute the goods to these regions" that are both within and outside the 30-kilometer radius, Japan's top government spokesman said in a televised speech. "There is too much overreaction," he said, referring to radiation fears.

In Iwaki, almost all of the convenience stores have been shut down while the few open supermarkets are devoid of fresh food and daily necessities, according to a local public-relations officer. Those wanting to leave the town have been stymied by a shortage of gasoline.

Authorities have evacuated people within a 20-kilometer radius of the troubled nuclear-power plant and have told those within the 30-kilometer radius to stay inside as officials scramble to avert a full-blown nuclear crisis.

Mr. Edano said radiation at the plant was about 1,500 microsieverts as of Wednesday afternoon, a reading he emphasized posed no immediate health problems to people remaining in the evacuation area.

Radiation jitters haven't been confined to northeastern Japan. About 150 miles to the south, people in Tokyo and the wider Kanto region have been hoarding supplies amid concerns the winds may carry the radioactive materials to the capital.

"I went to the supermarket to buy bread, instant noodles and canned food, but there was very little left on the shelves," said Mieko Saiki, a 29-year-old employee at a Tokyo consulting firm. 

The country has survived massive earthquakes in the past and has one of the world's most sophisticated distribution systems. Yet, retailers say the current trial they face is unprecedented.

"The turmoil that this earthquake and tsunami have triggered is so widespread," Koji Tsusue, a spokesman at supermarket-chain operator  Aeon Co.
AONNY


0.34
%




, said, adding congestion has led to delays in the delivery of its supplies.

Retail giant  Seven & i Holdings Co.
SVNDY


0.04
%




, which runs 7-Eleven convenience stores and the Ito-Yokado supermarkets, said rice, water, batteries and toilet paper were flying off the shelves.

"With the aftershocks and the nuclear-power plant issues, I understand the consumer psychology," said spokeswoman Mayumi Ito. "But we are providing gradual supplies so I wish they will buy more calmly."

Gasoline supplies are low with industry giant  JX Holdings Inc.
JXHLY


0.73
%




 still facing a shutdown of three refineries, which have a combined operating capacity of 667,500 barrels. That dwindling supply has tied hands of retailers who have the supplies but not the fuel to deliver to the disaster-hit areas.

The refining sector in Japan is gradually restoring operations, but even by the end of the month refinery throughout is expected to remain below pre-quake levels.

The gradual improvement in domestic operations is being complemented by increased output and help from other countries, particularly neighbor South Korea, which normally is a big supplier of fuel to Japan. 

Japanese company and government officials are also scouting out additional supplies of oil and gas to help the country's damaged power-supply infrastructure get on top of serious power shortages. Some quake-hit units came back online Thursday and are cranking up output, according to the Petroleum Association of Japan. 

"I don't know when this situation will calm down,"  Lawson Inc.
2651


0.36
%




 official Yuki Takemoto said. In addition to the shutdown of a factory in Chiba prefecture due to liquefaction, the convenience-store operator said raw materials are also lacking.

But reassurances from the government on radiation risks are unlikely to calm the hoarders for now. 

"Even if people tell us it will be OK on TV, I'm not going to risk being exposed to radiation," said Aya Nishimura, a 27-year-old housewife in Tokyo. 

"I can't stay inside forever so when I do go out, I wear gloves, a hat and a mask to hide my skin," she said, adding that she lines up at the supermarket first thing in the morning to buy quickly disappearing goods.