The Pentagon said it's ordering U.S. military personnel to stay at least 50 miles from a stricken Japanese nuclear plant to avoid exposure to radiation leaking from the facility. 

The Pentagon order, responding to concerns about possible radiation exposure, affects a significantly wider area than the exclusion zone set by the Japanese government. On Monday, Japanese authorities recommended evacuation to 20 kilometers, or 12.4 miles, around the affected reactors. The Japanese government advised individuals 10 kilometers beyond the immediate evacuation zone to remain indoors.

The U.S. government had until now recommended that U.S. citizens in Japan follow the Japanese government's recommendations. 

A notice issued on Tuesday by the U.S. embassy in Tokyo advised U.S. citizens to stay out of the 20-kilometer exclusion zone; a statement issued by the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission the same day said its experts "continue to conclude the steps recommend by Japanese authorities parallel those the United States would suggest in a similar situation."

Separately, the White House said Wednesday that U.S. citizens within 50 miles of Japanese reactors damaged during the disaster should evacuate. 

Nuclear Regulatory Commission Chairman Greg Jaczko made the recommendation to President Barack Obama in light of the "deteriorating" situation at Japanese nuclear reactors, White House Press Secretary Jay Carney said. U.S. citizens needing assistance to evacuate should contact the U.S. embassy in Japan, Mr. Carney said.

Col. David Lapan, a Pentagon spokesman, told reporters Wednesday that the U.S. forces in Japan had been directed to stay 50 miles, or 80 kilometers, beyond the stricken Fukushima Daiichi nuclear-power plant. The directive, he said, "applies just to U.S. forces" as a precautionary measure. 

Col. Lapan was not able to immediately provide information about when the U.S. military set the 50-mile exclusion zone. And he said the U.S. military assisting in the relief effort were prepared to respond to the evolving situation. 

"We train and equip all of our people to operate in all kinds of environments," he said. "We know how to measure, we know how to test, we know how to respond, how to take precautions, all of those things." 

News of the wider U.S. military exclusion zone came as U.S. forces stepped up earthquake relief efforts in Japan, with more ships and personnel arriving off the Japanese coast. The U.S. military has sent two firefighting trucks to help efforts at the Fukushima plant, and the Japanese government has requested additional pumps and hoses. 

The firefighting equipment is being operated by Japanese personnel. "There is no direct DOD [Department of Defense] involvement at the Fukushima plants, other than the trucks and the hoses that I described," Col. Lapan said. 

At present, 14 U.S. Navy ships are off the coast off Japan, with the USS Blue Ridge—the command ship for the Navy's Seventh Fleet—expected to arrive Thursday. 