ISLAMABAD—Pakistan was plunged into political crisis Sunday after a key member of the ruling coalition quit the government, throwing into jeopardy Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani's hold on power.

The development means Mr. Gilani's Pakistan People's Party has lost its majority in Parliament, complicating an already bleak outlook for a nation struggling to contain a Taliban insurgency and fix an economy in dire straits. Instability also could lessen the effectiveness of a crucial U.S. ally in the region—one that increasingly is being viewed as a major factor in whether the U.S. can achieve its goals in the war in neighboring Afghanistan.

The crisis was triggered when the Muttahida Qaumi Movement, the second-largest party in the coalition after the PPP, said it was joining the opposition in protest against an increase in petroleum prices and what it claimed was rampant corruption in the administration. Last week, the party had pulled its two ministers from the cabinet. The MQM represents the descendents of the Mohajir community who migrated from India after the creation of Pakistan in 1947. It controls the country's main financial hub, Karachi.

"Right at the start of the new year the government has raised the prices of petrol and kerosene oil, which is unbearable for the people who are already under pressure from the already high prices," Reuters reported MQM as saying. "In such a situation, the MQM considers it unfair with the people of Pakistan to sit in the government."

U.S. officials said they were closely watching the political developments but that they believed it was too soon to say what impact, if any, the move would have on Pakistan, a Washington ally and the recipient of billions of dollars in U.S. civilian and military aid. 

Officials acknowledged that the political turmoil could create new challenges for the U.S. at a delicate time in relations, and could raise new questions about the role of Pakistan's already weak civilian government as a partner with Washington against militants. 

In a report to Congress in September, the White House highlighted concerns about what officials described as eroding public support in Pakistan for the civilian government. U.S. officials said that erosion was compounded by Islamabad's slow response to last year's devastating floods and scant progress on corruption.

The Pakistani army has, in contrast, gained in stature, taking a central role in flood relief. The army has also assumed a prominent role in difficult discussions with the U.S., which is pressing for a major new Pakistani offensive against militant safe havens in North Waziristan, a tribal area bordering Afghanistan. U.S. officials say they believe a crackdown by Pakistan may be the only way to make lasting gains against the Taliban in Afghanistan. 

"We understand the potential challenges posed by political uncertainty in Pakistan, but the U.S. military's primary concern is continuing to improve our relationship with Pakistani forces—especially along the border with Afghanistan," a U.S. military official said. 

A delegation from Afghanistan's 70-member High Peace Council is scheduled to hold talks this week with Pakistan's leadership as part of an effort to find a diplomatic solution to the nearly decade-old Taliban insurgency, said its deputy chairman, Ataullah Ludin, on Sunday, the Associated Press reported.

The delegation will visit Islamabad on Tuesday to discuss the group's efforts to initiate talks with the Taliban. Many senior Taliban are believed to have fled Afghanistan for Pakistan during the U.S.-led invasion in 2001: The Taliban's leadership council is named the Quetta Shura after the Pakistani city of Quetta where it is based.

Mr. Gilani said he was confident that the government wouldn't fall. "I am not going anywhere," he told reporters in the central Pakistani city of Lahore. The crisis won't affect the position of President Asif Ali Zardari, who is halfway through a five-year term that ends in 2013. The PPP, which Mr. Zardari leads, formed the government after parliamentary elections in February 2008 that ended the nine-year military-led government of Gen. Pervez Musharraf.

Analysts said it isn't likely that the president would ask the prime minister of his own party to take a no-confidence vote unless the opposition demands it. The government could still hang on as there is little chance of the fragmented and squabbling opposition uniting to vote out the administration. And Mr. Gilani contended the main opposition party, led by ex-Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, wouldn't support any move that could destabilize the present democratic set-up.

Ahsan Iqbal, a spokesman for Mr. Sharif's Pakistan Muslim League (N), said the party was monitoring the situation., "We support the democratic process, but will not protect a corrupt government,." he said in a telephone interview.

The PML (N) is the second-largest party in parliament; it also leads a coalition government with the PPP in the country's biggest province of Punjab, so any move to oust the PPP in Islamabad could have repercussions for Mr. Sharif in the provincial assembly.

The MQM is the second party to have quit the government in the past two weeks. Last month, Jamiat-e-Ulema-e-Islam, a right-wing Islamic party, quit after one of its ministers was sacked by the prime minister for publicly accusing a fellow minister of corruption.

The MQM has 25 members in parliament, known as the National Assembly, leaving the government 14 short of a majority in the house of 342.

Even if the government survives, it will become much more difficult for a minority government to implement steps to try to prevent an economic meltdown.

"The survival of the government may not yet be in danger but its ability to govern certainly is," said political analyst Maleeha Lodhi, a former ambassador to Washington. "This development takes the government and country towards political paralysis."

The government, backed by the International Monetary Fund, is trying to implement a general sales tax and other changes to boost revenue and cut a budget deficit finance officials say has risen to 8% of gross domestic product, double the 4% target.

The IMF has issued a stern warning to Pakistan to take steps to cut the deficit, saying in a recent letter to the government that the state of the nation's economy was far worse than previously realized. It urged immediate belt-tightening measures and has withheld $3.5 billion from a loan package totaling $11.3 billion in a bid to pressure the country to take action.

The IMF recently agreed to extend the term of the loan by nine months through September to give the country more time to get the deficit under control. The IMF and the World Bank worry that unless Pakistan boosts tax revenue, its economy may unravel through escalating inflation.

The government continues to spend billions of dollars on subsidies, like those for electricity, and on state enterprises. Massive flooding this summer, which killed almost 2,000 people and displaced 20 million others, has compounded the economic strife.

But opposition parties, including the MQM, have said they will resist any move by the government to introduce new taxes. The MQM claims any such move would affect the urban middle-class population from which it draws support. The party has called for an agricultural tax on large landholders, who are currently exempt.

—Adam Entous in Washington contributed to this article.