President Obama sure has moved on, but there are stragglers.

Just one year after bludgeoning Wall Street in his State of the Union address, claiming that "bad behavior on Wall Street is rewarded," the tone in Tuesday night's speech represented a move to the center.

"To reduce barriers to growth and investment, I've ordered a review of government regulations," he said. Mr. Obama focused on proposals—tax overhaul, competitiveness and regulations—that are aimed broadly at commerce but would indirectly benefit last year's bad guys.

You might think that Wall Street and its advocates on Capitol Hill would take some satisfaction that most of the finger-wagging is over. The bank tax never happened. Congress passed a lukewarm raft of new regulations. It could have been a lot worse.

But you'd be wrong. Key Republicans who were critical when Dodd-Frank was signed into law are complaining even louder now. They want the new laws wiped off the books. And they're hell-bent on doing it, Mr. Obama's move to the center notwithstanding.

Carrying this big Republican eraser is Rep.  Spencer Bachus, the new chairman of the House Financial Services Committee. Rep. Bachus has ratcheted up the rhetoric since the Republican "shellacking," as Mr. Obama put it in November. And Tuesday was no different. The Alabama Republican took the president's center and moved it to the left.

"Administration policies are putting U.S. firms at a disadvantage compared to foreign companies," he said in a statement. "The Volcker Rule, derivatives, and many provisions of Dodd-Frank are raising costs for American businesses and sending jobs overseas."

By now, it isn't too hard to recognize the well-worn argument being espoused here: Government intrusion through regulation and taxes was responsible for the financial crisis and are the biggest hindrance to our competitiveness. It's the old free-markets-are-better line. 

In other words, "Washington and the regulators are there to serve the banks," as Rep. Bachus said in December.

Rep. Bachus is hardly alone. Tea Party favorite Rep.  Michelle Bachmann (R., Minn.) this month introduced a bill to repeal Dodd-Frank. She called it "job-killing" and argued that the law "grossly expanded the federal government beyond its jurisdictional boundaries."

The reaction to this kind of rhetoric has been to diminish it. Rep. Bachmann's bill doesn't have much support. The Republicans won't be able to push significant repeals through.

The recent record, however, suggests something different. At the outset, the Tea Party was belittled as a negligible movement. The public and legal backlash against health care was viewed as temporary and symbolic. Today, the Tea Party is so powerful as to merit its own televised response to the State of the Union. Criticism of health care has been strong enough that Mr. Obama hinted Tuesday at more concessions.

That's why supporters of Wall Street regulation shouldn't take idle the threats of Rep. Bachus and the energized wing of his party.

Already, Rep. Bachus and his team are assembling a to-do list aimed at stripping Dodd-Frank. 

They want to scale back derivatives rules. They want to scrap the Volcker rule. If they can't close the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, they want to make its chief accountable to Congress and its budget subject to the House Appropriations Committee. They want to strike compensation given to whistleblowers and curtail new powers granted to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. 

Ultimately, they want to shutter the resolution authority created to handle too-big-to-fail firms.

And that is if a full-on repeal fails. Rep. Bachus hasn't hinted whether he supports Rep. Bachmann's repeal bill, but he did vow to go through Dodd-Frank "page by page" to find and eliminate its "job-killing" elements.

That big Republican eraser could be worn to a nub by the time all is said and done.

What is so intriguing about this approach is the landscape it would leave us with. Broadly, it would restore regulation to pre-2010 levels. There are two ways of predicting what would follow. It would either free credit and free markets to fuel the kind of American economic resurgence it needs to compete—or history would repeat itself.

The Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission releases its final reports on Thursday. There are three reports, split along party lines. The official one, endorsed by Democrat appointees, reportedly blames Wall Street, while another blames a sort of perfect storm of global economic events and a third blames government policies on homeownership.

All three share the same assertion: The financial crisis was preventable.

Rep. Bachus and his ilk would argue that the majority of Dodd-Frank isn't prevention. They might even suggest it's an enabler. Fair enough. But returning the system to its previous state—where high leverage, predatory products, opaque markets, lax credit standards and risk-taking go unpoliced—can't be a solution.

That is why it is time for this cadre of regulatory critics to stop tearing down and tell us what they want to build.

It is one thing to use an eraser, quite another to put pen to paper.

 Write to  David Weidner at david.weidner@dowjones.com 