When you're on the road, it's smart to be prepared for anything—emergencies and flights of fancy alike. Even in this age of OnStar buttons and AAA Premier memberships, you should be able to weather low-level crises on your own, or at least wait safely and comfortably until help arrives. Still, there's no reason a thoughtfully stocked trunk can't also facilitate, say, going to the shore or picnicking in the park. The tools we've put together here don't comprise a complete emergency kit, but they will come in handy in both times of stress or leisure. As the saying goes, "Prepare for the worst. Hope for the best." We'd add: Prepare for the best as well.

 Etón Raptor 

Even if you never set foot on a trail and have no idea how to use the built-in altimeter, barometer and compass, the Raptor offers a killer feature that makes it an essential travel companion: solar-powered cell phone charging. The rubberized case is splash- and shock-resistant, despite the giant monocrystal solar panel on the back. The Raptor sports the requisite LED light and digital alarm clock and can pull AM/FM radio as well as over-the-air NOAA weather alerts. All of its functions are solar powered except one: the bottle opener, which is integrated into the loop handle.  $150, etoncorp.com  

 Klein Tools Canvas Bag 

Everything that makes this the go-to tool bag among construction pros also makes it the ideal trunk-bag for the rest of us: a steel-frame hinged opening, industrial-grade canvas body, riveted leather handles and a vinyl-reinforced bottom. This was designed to transport serious tools; it can easily hold more weight than you can comfortably carry. When crisis is not at hand, you'll appreciate the bag's classic detailing—the leather buckles, the stitching on the handles and its salt-of-the-earth honesty (the bags are manufactured in Fort Smith, Ark.). It also doubles as a perfectly sized picnic basket.  $50 (for a 16-inch bag), homedepot.com  

 Pendleton Motor Robe with Leather Carrier 

The inherent properties of wool make it ideal for the rigors of the road and picnics alike. Wool blankets are naturally mold- and mildew-resistant, liquid beads off of them before being absorbed and they'll keep you warm even when they're wet. Pendleton originally made these in the 1900s for passengers traveling by ship, but re-branded them "motor robes" with the release of the Model T. These days, they're made from virgin wool that's combed, dyed, spun and woven in the company's Oregon and Washington mills. The included leather carrying strap keeps the tartans compact and portable.  $80, pendleton-usa.com  

 Leatherman Juice XE6 

AAA recommends motorists carry just three tools in case of emergency: an adjustable wrench, pliers and a screwdriver with a reversible flat- and Phillips head. (Unless you really know what you're doing with those socket wrenches, they reason, you're likely to do more harm than good.) Supplementing that with a Juice XE6, from Leatherman's line of smaller-handled multitools, ensures you'll be ready for more than just roadside service. It puts 18 tools at the ready, among them a serrated knife (great for slicing a baguette), a bottle opener and a corkscrew that's easier to handle than the ones on Swiss Army knives.  $100, leatherman.com  

 Klean Kanteen Reflect 

While we're all for colorful water bottles as means of self-expression, the one rolling around the back of your trunk should be sturdy and unadorned—beautifully so. Both the bottle and cap of Klean Kanteen's new Reflect line are milled from a single piece of food-grade stainless steel that's polished to create a mirrored or brushed finish. There's no paint to wear off (the logo is laser etched) and no plastic parts (the cap has two silicone rings and a bamboo top). It's also big enough to hold a standard 750-milliliter bottle of wine. Just saying...  $33, kleankanteen.com  

 American Red Cross by Etón Road Torq 

The Road Torq is the R2D2 of your emergency kit—cute, useful and utterly dependable. If your car breaks down, fold out its three reflector legs and flip its head forward to direct light where you need it. It can also stand guard bravely on the road, its flashing beacon alerting oncoming traffic to steer clear. If you forget to charge it, just give its all-metal crank a spin. A minute of cranking generates enough juice for 15 minutes of light, which means the Road Torq, like any good droid, can be ready at a moment's notice.  $40, etoncorp.com  

 Duracell Powerpack 450 

The Powerpack 450 makes the process of jump-starting a car foolproof—and doesn't require a benevolent second motorist. If you can locate the positive and negative terminals on your battery, you're in business. The Powerpack 450 will literally talk you through the process (it gives voice-guided instructions). Accidentally reverse the polarities when attaching the alligator clips—a potential disaster with standard jumper cables—and the unit will automatically disengage. Explosion averted. The Powerpack 450 also features an air compressor (great for inflating tires on cars, bikes and jogging strollers) as well a 12V DC and two standard outlets for plugging in laptops, iPod speakers and even small appliances. These should be standard-issue for every car owner.  $170, duracell.com  

 Corrections & Amplifications: 

Klein Tools canvas bags are manufactured in Fort Smith, Ark. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said the bags are made in Fort Smith, Ariz. 