TUCSON, Ariz.—Rep. Gabrielle Giffords's district office here at the corner of North Swan Road and East Pima Street opened for business at 8 a.m. Monday, as usual.

But the days since Ms. Giffords and three members of her staff were shot—one was killed—have been anything but normal for the employees at the Arizona Democrat's office, where a shrine of candles, flowers, balloons and posters sprawls out in front.

Ms. Giffords remained in critical condition Wednesday, but doctors are optimistic she will survive. Gabriel Zimmerman, Ms. Giffords's 30-year-old community outreach director, died at the scene.

Two other staffers were shot but survived: Ron Barber, 65, a retired state employee who is the Tucson office district manager, and Pam Simon, 63, a former economics and English teacher, who is Ms. Giffords's outreach coordinator. Both are still hospitalized but recovering.

The decision to open, right on time, was practical—a way to ward off the tears that many who work for Ms. Giffords are keeping at bay, said C.J. Karamargin, her communications director. It was also symbolic, to send a message that violence, "no matter how horrific," wouldn't deter them.

"We did the thing she would want us to do," Mr. Karamargin said.

The same resolve could be seen in Ms. Giffords's office on Capitol Hill, which has remained open since Monday thanks in part to help coming from many avenues. 

Much of her staff there has flown to Arizona, but about eight young aides in Washington have been taking part in conference calls, handling a barrage of media requests and dealing with well-wishers. The office has four or five volunteers entering thousands of condolence emails into a database all day.

"They're performing at a very high level under some very difficult circumstances," said Doug Thornell, an aide for Rep. Chris Van Hollen (D., Md.) who has been assisting Ms. Giffords's aides this week.

At the district office, some normal work has resumed; employees were opening mail from constituents and sent a letter on behalf of a veteran who filed a disability claim eight months ago and hasn't heard back.

But the employees—there were eight before the shooting—and visitors have spent much of the time helping each other cope. 

In a conference room were blown-up pictures, including a 2009 holiday shot of the staff—"a family photo," Mr. Karamargin called it—and one of Mr. Zimmerman with a copy of the Declaration of Independence he had helped bring to Tucson for display.

Mr. Zimmerman, who had a graduate degree in social work, was also a history buff. Two years ago, on a trip to President Barack Obama's inauguration, Mr. Zimmerman visited the Lincoln Memorial on a cold dreary day and refused to leave until he'd read every word on the monument.

After the shooting, House Speaker John Boehner, a Republican, called for flags at the Capitol to be flown at half-staff because Mr. Zimmerman had been killed in the line of duty, a gesture that touched Ms. Giffords's aides. "When do social workers die in the line of duty?" Mr. Karamargin said. "It was just very hard to keep it together."

Rep. Hansen Clarke, a newly elected Democrat from Michigan, traveled from his home state to Tucson after the shooting. 

He was hanging out at the office, trying to "represent the representative" while staying out of the way.

Even with reinforcements from outside, it is hard to fill the shoes of the injured workers, who Mr. Karamargin insists "are coming back."

Ms. Simon is the office mother figure, the keeper of the snacks. She handles, among other things, veterans issues and organizes a program to send holiday cards to troops. A retired general came to visit her in the hospital Wednesday.

Mr. Barber is considered the office father figure. He is known for his attention to detail, whether calling out that a margin on a press release is too wide or overseeing the agendas for every event. Mr. Barber chose the handouts for the event outside a supermarket last Saturday: a statement of Ms. Giffords's swearing-in and a bill she had introduced last Thursday, calling for congressional salaries to be cut 5%.

"Pam, Ron and I had never worked in a congressional office before," said Mr. Karamargin. "We learned together what it was like and we became a family."

 Write to  Michael Rothfeld at michael.rothfeld@wsj.com, Ann Zimmerman at ann.zimmerman@wsj.com and Danny Yadron at danny.yadron@wsj.com 