Well into the plot of "Downton Abbey," the aged Violet, dowager countess of Grantham, says of the sudden death of a visitor to the estate that no Englishman would dream of dying in someone else's house, especially someone he didn't know well. It's a little touch of Wilde in the night, and by now a well-worn kind in portrayals of upper-class snobbery—but with Maggie Smith in the role of the dowager, the line takes on newly hilarious life. More important, it's a believable one. Every character, every aspect of this four-part "Masterpiece Theatre" series—set in the years just prior to World War I—reflects the tradition-bound world of the period's aristocracy, its religiously observed rules of dress and behavior, and they do so with a forcefulness impossible to resist. 

Violet's distaste for strangers who don't have the good manners to drop dead at home is absurd and meant to be, but in this drama, which profitably avoids caricature, even the absurd have something to say for themselves—in the case of Ms. Smith's Violet, plenty. 

 Downton Abbey  Begins Sunday, 9-10:30 p.m. EST  On PBS, where dates and times vary; check local listings 

Not since "Upstairs, Downstairs" have we seen such scrupulous attention to the details of life downstairs—the kitchen, the cramped servants' quarters, the food, the wine, the harried servants themselves who tend to the belief that service in a grand house is among the greatest privileges life could have offered. And the grandness of Downton Abbey is extreme, even by the standards of "Masterpiece Theatre" opulence—it is lushness unlimited, inside and out. Though not, of course, in the downstairs world.

Presiding over it all is Robert, Earl of Grantham—a masterly portrayal by Hugh Bonneville. Fatherly, authoritative and wise, with a touch of the dashing about him, Robert is, in the eyes of the servants, all that nobility should be. Cora, his wife, enjoys roughly the same status—a role Elizabeth McGovern brings to glowing life.

Life begins to darken at Downton when an inheritance clause and related complications threaten the family's control of the estate. Some viewers will inevitably try to gain some clarity about the legal problem at the heart of this story. To these, good luck. Everyone else will be happy to settle for the knowledge that it's about gender and move on.

And there is no end of high drama and craftily plotted intrigues to move on to, both upstairs and downstairs—it can get quite breathtaking downstairs. One concerns the mysterious past, and pained present, of John Bates, a wounded veteran—the former batman for the Earl of Grantham—now employed as a butler at Downton and not having an easy time of it. Downstairs society doesn't look kindly on butlers with limps, as some of the old hands make clear. Brendan Coyle's portrayal of the stalwart, haunted Bates—a majestic figure—is unforgettable, and one of the series' great triumphs.

"Downton Abbey," created and written by Julian Fellowes, merits all the accolades that greeted its initial broadcast in Britain. Hardly a moment of these four 90-minute episodes lacks a riveting tension. There is, it turns out, a moment of shock as well. This comes with a "Downton" scene involving a rose-growing contest that mimics, unmistakably, every detail of just such an event in the great wartime film "Mrs. Miniver" (1942)—a movie that rallied more supporters to the British cause than any event short of the German bombing blitz. 

In the new miniseries as in the classic film, an arrogant aristocrat who has been winning best-rose honors forever—thanks to her superior social status—finally yields to pressure and allows a humble citizen, whose rose is far worthier, to win. Mr. Fellowes has told the British press that his subconscious may have retained some memory of "Mrs Miniver," but that criticism about all this was simply "carping from the Left." A curious explanation, that—a considerable number of people will undoubtedly be surprised to discover themselves counted, now, among soldiers of the Left.

There are some mysteries in life, of course, that can't be solved. Still everything should be coming up roses for "Downton Abbey." There is no mystery about the potency of this series, slathered in wit, powered by storytelling of a high order.

 Lights Out  Begins Tuesday, 10-11 p.m. EST  On FX 

There may not be much wit, but there is storytelling of a powerful kind in "Lights Out"—the new 13-part FX drama starring Holt McCallany ("CSI: Miami") as a former heavyweight boxer retired from the ring and struggling to support his family. If you ignore the pointlessly crude bedroom scene with which it begins—highly recommended—it's quickly clear that this skillfully sustained, sharply plotted series is a fighter saga you'll want to follow to the final bell. A judgment, it's worth noting, that comes from someone with a longtime aversion to all films about boxers, broken down and otherwise. 

 Write to  Dorothy Rabinowitz at Dorothy.Rabinowitz@wsj.com 