Modern British sculpture will probably have a lively run at auctions this year, fueled by major exhibitions.

Attention-getting shows are catalysts that widen collector interest, often with a positive effect on the prices of chosen artists' works.

Opening to the public tomorrow and running until April 7 at the Royal Academy of Arts in London will be its first exhibition for 30 years devoted to British sculpture of the 20th century. The show will feature classic masters such as Jacob Epstein, Henry Moore and Barbara Hepworth to contemporary hot-shots Damien Hirst and Julian Opie.

Running parallel to the Royal Academy event will be a selling show of British sculpture at Robert Bowman Modern in nearby Duke Street from Jan. 28 until April 7. It will feature pieces by key figures such as Epstein, Hepworth, Kenneth Armitage and Elisabeth Frink. A bronze head of Albert Einstein, which captures the searching essence of genius, will be priced at £120,000. Frink's "Horse and Rider" (1970s) reflects her deep affection for horses stemming from a childhood influenced by a father who was a brilliant horseman and amateur jockey (price: £75,000).

Until Feb. 26, Pangolin London at Kings Place is holding one of the largest exhibitions ever to concentrate on Lynn Chadwick's theme of human couples. The faceless bronze figures, some romantic and others frenetic, are instantly recognizable. Drawing and prints by Chadwick are also included in the show. Prices range from £3,000-£1 million.

The Hepworth Wakefield, a museum designed by star architect David Chipperfield and built at a cost of £35 million, is scheduled to open in May. It is named in honor of the Yorkshire town of Wakefield's most famous sculptor, Barbara Hepworth. One of the largest spaces for exhibiting outside London, a major feature will be an unknown and unique collection of 40 sculptures by Hepworth. 

Among the highlights on the program of the Leeds-based Henry Moore Institute this year will be "United Enemies," a show from Oct. 27 until Jan. 17, 2012, featuring British sculpture in the 1960s and '70s, an experimental period marked by intense rivalries between artists.

Strong demand for top British sculpture has been building up over recent years, says Frances Christie, Sotheby's director of 20th-century British art. "There is more awareness today of the three-dimensional," she suggests. "We have an increasing number of new buyers who recognize that a sculpture has just as much impact as a painting on the wall."

At Sotheby's last sale of British art in December, Hepworth's "Coré" (1955-56), an abstract bronze sculpture reflecting the female figure, was estimated at £150,000-£250,000 and fetched £445,250. "Barley Fork" (1952) by Chadwick, a unique, welded iron, abstract piece with threatening teeth, was bought at the top of its estimate for £241,250. While Armitage's "Roly-Poly" (1955), a fun bronze figure rolling on its back with legs in the air, was sold for £55,250, above its estimate of £30,000-£50,000. 

International auctioneers Sotheby's, Christie's and Bonhams hold specialist modern British art sales each year; British art also appears in benchmark modern and contemporary London auctions. 

Henry Moore will feature in Christie's prestigious impressionist and modern evening sale Feb. 9 with "Goslar Warrior" (1973-74), with an estimate of £1.5 million-£2.5 million. 

The monumental figure is one of only six life-sized renditions of the male form that Moore tackled throughout his lengthy career. Three of these depict a wounded warrior, of which the "Goslar Warrior" was the last to be executed. The piece is influenced by ancient Greek battles. However, the name honors the German town of Goslar that nominated Moore for an art prize.

At Sotheby's evening sale Feb. 8, Moore's "Reclining, Connected Forms" (1969), a monumental, abstract bronze featuring two reclining forms, one nestled inside the other, is built around a recurring fascination of Moore with the theme of mother and child (estimate: £1.5 million-£2.5 million).

Elsewhere in pre-fair news, Tefaf, the world's most influential fine arts and antiques fair, which will be held March 18-27 in the Dutch town of Maastricht, will feature Moore's large-scale masterpiece "Mother and Child Block Seat" (1983) among its 30,000 works. The 244-centimeter-high sculpture will be shown by Landau Fine Art of Montreal.

 Write to  Margaret Studer at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 