A mere one stop away from Manhattan on the No. 6 subway, the South Bronx neighborhood of Mott Haven has faced an uphill battle during the recent economic woes to keep its development momentum alive.

The nexus of Bruckner Boulevard and Alexander Avenue in Mott Haven was at the center of much of the economic and cultural boom the area saw in the past decade. But the burst of activity that flooded the area in the mid-2000s—peaking around 2007—has slowed significantly. A number of "for rent" signs can be seen along both thoroughfares and vacant lots can be found in every direction.

"When I first took the space, the economy was great, lots of developers, the future was very promising," said Alex Abeles, owner of Bruckner Bar & Grill, which opened in the neighborhood in 2006 and remains a popular local spot. "But a lot of people moved out in the past couple of years and things aren't happening the way they were a few years ago."

Local brokers say the influx of renters and home buyers who came to the area—many after being priced out of Harlem and parts of Queens and Brooklyn—has all but evaporated in the last couple of years, due largely to the economic downturn.

"A lot of the people who couldn't afford to buy a home in Harlem or Bed-Stuy five years ago can do so now, because real estate there is not as strong as it was back then," said Allison Jaffe, an independent broker who has worked in Mott Haven since 2004. "And unlike some of those neighborhoods in Brooklyn and Queens that are complete with restaurants and child-care facilities, Mott Haven isn't move-in ready for a young family."

While dining options and other amenities aren't abundant, a number of businesses did open up during the neighborhood's development spurt. 

Bronx Hydro & Garden, a hydroponics and indoor gardening store, launched at the corner of Bruckner and Alexander, and Verde Custom Flowers opened at a prominent location two years ago, moving from its former loft space in the area.

The dynamics that initially inspired what some called gentrification in the South Bronx were similar to what triggered rapid development in neighborhoods like Williamsburg and Long Island City in the '90s: a steady influx of artists looking for affordable studios and loft spaces. While this trend continues in Mott Haven today, albeit to a lesser extent, the arts scene in the area has also suffered in recent years, according to local artists.

"At one point in 2006 there were at least half a dozen galleries here and now there are one or two left," said area resident Barry Kostrinksy, whose gallery Haven Arts closed in 2009 after a six-year run due to a lack of funding. "Most people don't think of South Bronx as a place to buy art; well-heeled collectors go to Chelsea, maybe Brooklyn."

Long-held attitudes about the rough-and-tumble character of the neighborhood are difficult to shake off, given the landscape of industrial lots and housing projects. The economic downturn also hit the borough particularly hard compared with Manhattan and Brooklyn, locals say. Unemployment in the Bronx stood at 11.7% in March, the highest county jobless rate in the state and well above 8.4% for New York City as a whole.

"I saw a lot of people lose their jobs and go from being food connoisseurs to not being able to afford a cup of coffee; from treating their friends to lunches and dinners to losing their homes and moving back to the states they came from," said Chris Dimitriyado, owner of Alexander's Café, which also opened in the area in 2006.

The latest development to go up in the neighborhood, Bruckner by the Bridge, is a low-income housing project with 419 rental units in three buildings. Residents as well as local business owners expressed concerns about the addition of another housing project in a neighborhood that is already dotted with many, including the 10-building Mitchell Houses complex.

"Instead of making it a multi-income community, they build another housing project," said Mr. Abeles. "It's not going to bring in investors and businesses."

But the developers behind the new project say they are responding to a need for decent, affordable housing in the area. Buildings are equipped with air-conditioners, hardwood floors, a children's playroom, a lounge and other amenities not commonly found in low-income housing, according to developer Atlantic Development Group.

"We don't feel that if you're in the low-income strata that you don't deserve quality housing," said Sharon Smith, an executive vice president at the Atlantic.

Meanwhile, many residents and business owners voice a mixture of concerns about the neighborhood regaining its lost momentum while saying they enjoy what the area offers today.

The views of Linda Cunningham, a longtime resident and organizer at Bronx Art Space who moved to the area more than a decade ago from SoHo, are typical. 

"We're lacking amenities that you may have in Williamsburg, but we have a sense of community," she said of Mott Haven. "I like it this way, but it doesn't make the market move." 