A year ago,  Bill Gross, head of the $1 trillion Pimco bond fund, warned that government bonds in the U.K. were sitting on a bed of nitroglycerin. 

What he neglected to mention was that it's being driven down a mountain track in a truck with a broken suspension. The perils facing investors were highlighted by Chancellor of the Exchequer  George Osborne's budget and the minutes of the most recent Bank of England policy meeting, both announced Wednesday.

The rest of the world might dismiss the risks as Britain's bad luck. But that would be wrong. Gilts, as U.K. government bonds are known, could well prove a bellwether for other sovereign debt markets, not least U.S. Treasury bonds.

Gilts' fortunes are riding on the government's ability to deliver its austerity program. But this is a battle against both economic and political head winds. 

On the economic front, a high U.K. inflation rate has put upward pressure on the government's spending even as lower-than-forecast growth is reducing its revenue. Although the government is on course to slightly undershoot its November projections for the current year's budget shortfall, cumulative deficits are now expected to be £46 billion ($ 74 billion) bigger over the subsequent five years.

But even this will be optimistic if growth fails even to live up to the latest lackluster projections; a real risk, according to  Stephen Lewis, an economist at Monument Securities. 

Meanwhile, the government's junior partner, the Liberal Democrats, are being crushed in the opinion polls. Some recent voting intention surveys show them dropping into single digits, down from the low 20s a year ago. Voters seem to be migrating to Labour, the left-leaning opposition. Ireland's recent general elections won't fill Liberal Democrat Members of Parliament with much joy. There, the Greens, junior left-wing partners in the outgoing right-leaning ruling coalition, were left without a single seat in the Irish parliament.

A political balancing act may yet force Mr. Osborne to produce expensive concessions in future budgets. But even before then, Liberal Democrat MPs could well revolt, voting down government legislation. As austerity really starts to bite, the friction will only grow.

Slipping government finances aren't the only black cloud for gilts.

Headline consumer prices rose 4.4% in February on the same month a year earlier, more than double the Bank of England's 2% target rate. They are widely expected to breach 5% over the coming months. 

Bank of England policy-setters have long argued that inflation was being driven by temporary factors and spikes in volatile commodities, like food and energy. But a rise in core inflation, which strips out energy, food, alcohol and tobacco, to 3.4% belies that complacency.

Although three of the bank's nine-member Monetary Policy Committee have taken to calling for a rate rise, the majority are sticking with Governor  Mervyn King, who has argued against the futile gesture of raising interest rates to control inflation caused by factors beyond the bank's control. Mr. King's view, meanwhile, seems to be strongly influenced by external member and arch-dove  Adam Posen, who has consistently called for the bank's quantitative-easing program to be extended by another £50 billion. 

Mr. Posen, it's worth noting, is an expert on Japan's lost decade and has worked closely with Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke. His view is that the sorts of financial crises suffered by Japan two decades ago and the U.S. and U.K. in 2008 require central banks to keep interest rates low for a very long time in order to allow banks and households to rebuild their balance sheets. Fiscal austerity makes it even more important to keep monetary policy easy.

So far, it seems the gilts market is siding with Mr. King. The yield on 10-year bonds is 3.57%. But if inflation continues to overshoot bank projections, if in a year's time it hasn't fallen substantially from current levels, investors' patience is likely to evaporate. A combination of big government deficits and high inflation is ugly for bond investors. Foreigners, large buyers of gilts during the past couple of years, have started to cool on the market, becoming large net sellers in January.

Ratings agencies are already looking closely at the U.K.'s triple-A status. And the Bank of England's chief economist,  Spencer Dale, admitted this week that the MPC is fighting a battle to retain its credibility. 

It could be that the reason gilt yields are so low has less to do with the market's faith in the Bank of England and George Osborne than its need for safe havens. Gilts continue to be ranked with German bunds and U.S. Treasurys. But were sentiment to shift, yields could jump above 5% in very short order says  Simon Penn, market analyst at UBS.

A gilt market rout would be a worry for U.S. Treasury bond investors. To be sure, Treasurys might initially benefit from panic flows. But smart investors would then start looking at parallels between the markets. 

The U.S. government has shown much less inclination to get to grip with its huge budget deficits and fast-swelling debt load than the U.K.'s. At the same time, it's hard to believe Mr. Bernanke's Fed would have a different attitude to "temporary" inflationary overshoots than Mr. King's Bank of England. 

Remember, the U.K.'s temporary overshoots have lasted the best part of five years and are certain to last for at least another two.

Nitroglycerin transport doesn't always end in disaster. But as the 1950s French film "The Wages of Fear" showed, the odds aren't great.

 Write to  Alen Mattich at alen.mattich@dowjones.com 