HANOI—Vietnam's central bank raised two of its key interest rates in another effort to tame inflation, which remains stubbornly high and is threatening the economic stability of one of Asia's most promising emerging markets. 

The rate moves come after the government last month said its top priority is fighting double-digit inflation, with Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung flagging the use of interest rates as one of the tools to control the mounting price pressures. 

The so-called rediscount rate—the rate the central bank pays commercial banks on their surplus funds—has been raised to 12% from 7%, the State Bank of Vietnam said in a statement posted on its website. It last raised the rate in November to 7% from 6%. 

The rate for recapitalizing banks has also been raised to 12% from 11%, the statement said. The central bank last raised this rate in February to 11% from 9%. 

It has kept its benchmark lending rate unchanged at 9% since November last year. But economists say this rate now has less impact on the market than other policy rates because the government has allowed commercial banks wide flexibility in negotiating lending terms with customers rather than following the country's benchmark rate. Some banks lend at up to 17%. 

"The central bank's decision to sharply raise its rediscount rate is aimed at encouraging banks to hold more funds, after it said it wants to cut credit growth to less than 20% and [limit] money supply expansion to less than 16% this year," said an analyst with Hanoi-based Agribank. 

Vietnam, which saw gross domestic product expand a robust 6.78% last year, has one of Asia's strongest inflation rates, which analysts blame on a mixture of muddled economic policies, loose credit and other factors. The country's problems have been exacerbated by a persistent trade deficit that has undermined confidence in the Vietnamese currency, the dong. The consumer-price index rose at its fastest pace in two years in February, climbing 12.31% from the same month last year. 

The government last month tightened monetary and fiscal policies, including plans to trim public investment and the budget deficit, increase domestic production and rebalance trade. The State Bank of Vietnam devalued the dong by 8.5% against the U.S. dollar on Feb. 11 in its fourth devaluation in 14 months, and Mr. Dung said Vietnam will cut its credit-growth target to below 20%, from an earlier target of 23%. 

Economists generally applauded those moves, but many said the government would need to do more to bring inflation under control, and some have argued policy makers need to be willing to accept slower growth to make sure Vietnam doesn't overheat. 

State media Tuesday cited the deputy planning and investment minister, Cao Viet Sinh, as saying the government's measures to fight inflation will likely result in lower-than-expected GDP growth this year. Mr. Sinh said GDP is expected to grow between 6.5% and 7.0% in 2011, lower than the government's target of 7% to 7.5%. 

ANZ Bank said in a note that the latest interest rate increases "show that the authorities are now acting more aggressively and proactively against inflation." 

"These moves should help rein in inflation expectations and improve domestic confidence in the recently devalued Vietnamese dong," the bank said, adding that it expects inflation to stand at 10% at year's end. 

 Write to  Nguyen Pham Muoi at phammuoi.nguyen@dowjones.com 