LISBON—The European Central Bank Friday stepped in to buy Portuguese government bonds in the secondary market, as the country's Prime Minister José Socrates urged lawmakers to reach an agreement over new austerity measures and avert a bailout. 

The ECB bought short-dated bonds, with one trader citing buying of at least €300 million ($420.7 million). 

The ECB's secondary-market purchases were its first in a month and come a week before euro-zone leaders meet to iron out details of a deal aimed to contain the debt troubles weighing the region. 

EU leaders announced a raft of measures last weekend, including increasing the effective size of the region's temporary bailout facility to €440 billion and tweaking its mandate to allow it to buy bonds issued by debt-laden countries in the primary market, subject to strict conditions. 

However, the responsibility of propping up non-core euro zone in the secondary markets rests with the ECB, although the latest round of purchases came as a surprise. The ECB had stayed away from markets in recent weeks even as yields on Portuguese government bonds escalated to record highs. ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet recently said any debt purchases in the secondary market would be temporary. 

The extra yield demanded by investors to buy 10-year Portuguese government bonds instead of safe-haven German bunds eased 0.29 percentage points to 4.16 percentage points, with the 10-year Portuguese bond yield falling 0.27 percentage points on the day to 7.34%. 

"We saw support from the ECB in small ticket sizes which has helped a narrowing of spreads," said a trader. 

Despite the slight relief in Portuguese bonds, the country is still widely seen as the next country to follow Greece and Ireland into accepting a bailout, something the government is keen to avoid. 

"I will do what it takes to avoid a bailout," Mr. Socrates told legislators Friday. "But what the opposition is doing is pushing Portugal toward a rescue from the International Monetary Fund." 

Political tension escalated late last week after the government outlined a new set of austerity measures to rein in its spiraling budget debt. Opposition parties objected to the measures on the grounds that they could push the country towards a deep recession. 

The government doesn't require formal parliamentary approval of these latest measures, but Mr. Socrates said if parties were unanimous in their opposition, his government wouldn't have the support required to remain in power. 

The parliament will discuss the measures next Wednesday ahead of the European Union summit in Brussels on Thursday. 

 Write to  Patricia Kowsmann at patricia.kowsmann@dowjones.com and Neelabh Chaturvedi at neelabh.chaturvedi@dowjones.com 