DARAA, Syria—Thousands gathered at the funerals of those killed in an uprising in southern Syria, while the government scrambled to tamp down protests that threaten to grow larger on Friday.

A week of protests have left at least 45 people dead, according to activists, and posed the biggest challenge President Bashar al-Assad has faced since taking over from his father in 2000. 

As protests mount in Syria, a close ally of Iran in the region, the U.S. and Europe sense an opportunity to weaken Tehran's influence across the Middle East. But uncertainty over what might replace Damascus's government is spooking Washington and its closest regional partner, Israel. 

"No one is certain what would follow Assad," said a U.S. official working on the Middle East. "But no one expects him to go down without a fight."

The week of demonstrations, highly unusual in Syria, has been focused in Daraa, a small Sunni Muslim dominated city south of the capital. Demonstrations turned especially violent Wednesday after security forces stormed a local mosque there and fanned out into the city, shooting live rounds to dispel crowds on the street, according to activists.

But the violent repression hasn't put security forces in control of the city, as thousands were still willing to mobilize at funerals on Thursday.

Syria's government has denied it attacked the mosque, blaming the deaths on "armed gangs," and hasn't addressed the subsequent shootings and deaths reported from Daraa. 

The White House called for an end to the Syrian government's "brutal repression of demonstrations." The United Nations, Britain and France have also condemned the violence. 

The Syrian government has struggled to contain the unrest to Daraa and the surrounding area by dealing out harsh treatment for participants and offering up vague promises of reform and economic carrots to the rest of the Syrian population. 

Track events day by day.

In a move apparently aimed at deflating protests planned for Friday, Buthaina Shaaban, an adviser to Mr. Assad, said the state would look into the "legitimate demands" of the people. 

She said the government would study the possibility of ending an emergency law that has been a cornerstone of the its control since 1963, draft a new law to allow political parties and seek ways to fight corruption.

All three are complaints opponents of government have focused on, but they are also issues the state has promised to consider before and failed to follow through on. 

The government also said it would raise public sector salaries by 20% to 30% and lift the minimum wage for the private sector. Mr. Assad further ordered the release of those detained in "recent events," SANA reported. No other details were provided.

There's little clarity on what Mr. Assad and his government are thinking as they work to put down the protests. 

Some analysts speculate that a real debate is taking place in the government over the extent of possible reforms and how strongly to respond to protests.

"There are two wings in the regime and each has the authority to do what he wants without the permission of the other one," said Ayman Abdel Nour, a prominent Syrian dissident who describes himself as a former friend of Mr. Assad. "There are those behind the crime at Omari mosque, and those who want reform. It is a tug of war."

Others describe Wednesday's violence as a clear sign the government's main strategy will be to crack down hard. "Sure, there is a very heated debate on reforms," said Joshua Landis, a professor at Oklahoma University. "But the decision to send the Republican Guard to shoot at people, to accuse the people of Daraa of being incited by outsiders and suggesting a conspiracy are all deliberate and telling decisions." he said. "That is not a call for dialogue, but a statement that this is war."

It is unclear how events will unfold Friday. Millions of Muslims attend religious service at noon, a time when protesters in the region have mobilized to take control of symbolic public spaces. Egyptians took over centrally located Tahrir Square on a Friday, and just over two weeks later Hosni Mubarak resigned the presidency. 

But Syrians haven't experienced even the limited freedoms that Egyptians had under Mubarak's rule. "The people have been socialized in a culture of fear since 1963, and have been exposed to a very large and effective security apparatus," said Murhaf Jouejati, a Syria expert at George Washington University and National Defense University.

The country is also home to large minority group such as Christians, Druze and other sects that view Mr. Assad, who is an Alawite, as their insurance against a dominant Sunni Muslim state. 

Wealthy Sunnis, many who owe their fortunes and ability to conduct business to sweetheart deals with and protection from the government, also feel they have much to lose.

"We are afraid of what come afterwards," a Christian businessman in Syria, who is sympathetic to the political demands of protesters, said in a telephone interview. 

Activists say the protests cross sectarian and religious lines. They have dubbed Friday as the "Friday of Honor" and are calling on all Syrians through social media sites to participate in memory of the fallen "martyrs" in Daraa and to push for reforms. 

Mr. Assad might be able to navigate his way though this challenge by placating the restive residents in Daraa through a mixture of concessions and repression. But the air of invincibility that he once had as the Arab world's most vigorous opponent of Israeli and American designs, proudly boasting that he is in tune with the people, has been dented, analysts said. 

U.S. officials see Mr. Assad working to build better relations with Syria's moderate neighbors including Turkey and Saudi Arabia as he distances itself from Iran, according to a review of U.S. diplomatic cables provided by the whistleblowing website WikiLeaks. Iran "may be warily monitoring Syria's engagement with moderate players," one U.S. diplomat wrote in a February 2010 cable to the office of Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.

In direct talks with U.S. officials, Mr. Assad is frequently evasive, "deflecting questions" about Syria's position on terrorism support for Hezbollah, according to a U.S. diplomat's summary of meeting between Mr. Assad and U.S. Sen. John Kerry (D., Mass.) in February 2009. "Bashar al-Assad says one thing and does another," Mr. Kerry told the Syrian president, according to a review of the summary. "It is important to have trust," Mr. Assad told Mr. Kerry. 

—Jay Solomon in Washington and David Crawford in Berlin contributed to this article.