FLORHAM PARK, N.J.—LaDainian Tomlinson has mentored Joe McKnight this season, and the Jets teammates conferred throughout Sunday's regular-season finale against the Buffalo Bills. Mr. Tomlinson had the day off to rest and prepare for the playoffs, so he took an interest in the performance of Mr. McKnight, a fellow running back who was getting the bulk of the carries.

Just knowing he could lean on Mr. Tomlinson for advice, Mr. McKnight said, was a great benefit, and the rookie ran and ran, all afternoon. But in the days since, Mr. Tomlinson has clammed up. No more words of encouragement, no more words, period. The postseason is afoot, and Mr. McKnight said he can sense Mr. Tomlinson's focus: He wants a championship, the one achievement that has eluded him.

"I haven't heard L.T. say anything the last couple days," Mr. McKnight said. "He's got a killer mentality right now: 'I want this, I need this.'"

On Wednesday, Mr. Tomlinson again reiterated that he signed with the Jets (11-5) over the offseason in large part because he felt he would have the best chance to win here. A first-round meeting with the Colts (10-6) on Saturday night at Lucas Oil Stadium looms as the first step in the process.

Mr. Tomlinson's postseason experience is a mixed bag. He has appeared in seven playoff games, all with the San Diego Chargers, helping the team to three victories. Two of those wins came at the expense of the Colts and their quarterback, Peyton Manning, another icon. Both players will enter the Hall of Fame someday. Whether Mr. Tomlinson goes in with a Super Bowl on his résumé remains to be seen.

"Who knows if this opportunity will come around again?" said Mr. Tomlinson, a 10-year veteran who ranks sixth on the NFL's all-time rushing list with 13,404 yards. "I want to take advantage."

There is little question that Mr. Tomlinson's production waned over the latter two-thirds of the regular season. During his first five games, buoyed by a fresh start with a new team, he rushed for 435 yards and averaged 5.7 yards per carry. He looked explosive and young, the old L.T. born anew. But then, just as quickly, the corrosive effects of his blue-collar profession seemed to take hold. Over his last 10 games, he rushed for 479 yards and averaged just 3.3. yards per carry, numbers that were reminiscent of his last two seasons in San Diego.

Against the Chicago Bears on Dec. 26, he labored and gained 28 yards on 13 carries. He sat out against the Bills even though he stood just 86 yards short of his ninth 1,000-yard season, another potential milestone in a career full of them.

 Jets coach Rex Ryan figured it would be best to rest and recharge Mr. Tomlinson for the playoff push, and he was in agreement. The numbers, he said, mean nothing to him at this stage of his career. 

He said he feels "pretty fresh, pretty healthy," and will share carries this weekend with running back Shonn Greene. Quarterback Mark Sanchez has been limited at practice with a sore throwing shoulder, and Mr. Ryan wants to emphasize the ground game. The idea is to take some of the pressure off of Mr. Sanchez, as well as keep Mr. Manning off the field. Ball control, Mr. Ryan said, is important.

The question is how much pop Mr. Tomlinson has left. He long ago became known around the league for his rigorous offseason workouts, thanks to his work with Todd Durkin, a San Diego-based personal trainer. The exercises range from the masochistic (800-pound leg squats) to the unorthodox (rice buckets to improve hand strength), each designed to build him up, hone his instincts and prolong his career.

"He wanted to play like a scared rabbit," Mr. Durkin said earlier this season. "So we'd mimic the moves of a rabbit: quick, powerful, explosive, strong. And most of the NFL guys that we'd bring in to train with him, they couldn't hang with him. They'd puke."

Running backs coach Anthony Lane has described Mr. Tomlinson as one of the most adept backs in the league when it comes to avoiding head-on collisions, but the numbers are still jarring: Including the playoffs, Mr. Tomlinson has accumulated 3,195 carries and 601 receptions. His job is punishing, and Mr. Tomlinson acknowledges being closer to the end of his career than the beginning.

Last Sunday, Mr. McKnight came off the field after the first series and sought counsel. Mr. McKnight felt like he was "dancing" too much at the line of scrimmage. Mr. Tomlinson told him to relax. 

"Just hit the holes and wear down the defense," Mr. Tomlinson said. "The big runs always come late."

 Write to  Scott Cacciola at scott.cacciola@wsj.com 