HOUSTON—Rising floodwaters continued to snarl crude-oil and gasoline deliveries in the Southeast, forcing refiners near the swollen Mississippi River to find other ways to make shipments. 

Heavy rains and snow melt have caused parts of the Mississippi River to reach as high as 13 feet above flood stage, snarling barge and tanker traffic along the river and in some cases forcing pipeline closures. The congestion has caused traders to worry about disruptions of fuel delivery and helped boost wholesale gasoline prices. 

  Exxon Mobil Corp.
XOM


-0.42
%




 said Friday it shut down two crude-pipeline segments in its North Line System, north of Baton Rouge, La., and one pipeline in its Southwest Line west of Anchorage, La., until water levels subside, said Patty Errico, public and government affairs manager at Exxon Pipeline Co. 

"We are purging oil from these systems and backfilling with fresh water in areas that may be affected by high water," Ms. Errico said. 

Where Exxon is seeing pain,  Enterprise Products Partners LP
EPD


-2.29
%




 is gaining, however. Volumes of gasoline, diesel and other finished fuels have increased for its Enterprise TE Products pipeline system, company spokesman Rick Rainey said. The system originates near Beaumont, Texas, and snakes through the Gulf Coast, Midwest and Northeast. 

"We have seen a spike in deliveries of refined products over the past week, particularly into the Little Rock market," Mr. Rainey said. 

Pipelines have gained in importance as swollen river levels have made barge traffic more difficult.  Magellan Midstream Partners LP
MMP


-2.94
%




 discontinued operations Friday morning at two of its terminals along the Mississippi River in Louisiana because of flood concerns, the company said. 

Magellan couldn't estimate when it would reopen the 2.8 million-barrel terminal in Marrero and a 50,000-barrel terminal in Gibson, which mainly store and distribute heavy oil, said spokesman Bruce Heine. 

Refiners  ConocoPhillips,
COP


-1.86
%




 Exxon,  Marathon Oil Corp.
MRO


-2.71
%




, Motiva Enterprises LLC,  Murphy Oil Corp.
MUR


-2.79
%




 and  Valero Energy Corp.
VLO


-1.69
%




 have refineries along the Mississippi River that account for nearly 14% of total U.S. refining capacity. 

The companies don't expect floodwaters to impact operations, but reduced use of the river has caused some of them to increase their dependence on pipelines to deliver fuel to market. 

The Army Corps of Engineers is close to opening the Morganza Floodway to relieve pressure on the levees downstream that protect the Baton Rouge and New Orleans areas. The river is expected to reach a critical level by Saturday, according to National Weather Service forecasts. 

Opening the floodway would reduce the amount of water in the Mississippi by sending it flowing through the Atchafalaya Basin, a swampland that extends south to the Gulf of Mexico. 

"We're just standing by, ready to go at any minute," Corps 1st Sgt. Jimmy Henkins said of opening the spillway. 

Although redirecting the floodwaters would benefit the refineries along the river, it would make life difficult for  Alon USA Energy Inc.,
ALJ


-3.22
%




 an 80,000-barrel-a-day refinery in Krotz Springs, La., which is about 25 miles southwest of the flood gates. 

Alon is building supplemental levees in anticipation of waters flowing through the basin, company spokesman Blake Lewis said. The refinery could be forced to run at reduced rates or be completely idled depending on how the rush of water affects barge or pipeline activity, Mr. Lewis added. 

 Write to  Ben Lefebvre at ben.lefebvre@dowjones.com 

