MUMBAI—The State Bank of India, or SBI, the country's largest bank by deposits and loan advances, is waiting for Iranian oil firms to designate banks to receive payments for the oil they sell to India, a senior executive said on Saturday. 

On Wednesday, a senior Indian finance ministry official said the State Bank of India will take suitable precautions to avoid possible U.S. sanctions due to any dealing with the blacklisted Hamburg-based European-Iranian Trade Bank AG. 

Though the EIH isn't subject to sanctions by the United Nations or European Union, the U.S. Treasury has barred it from conducting any business inside the U.S. and frozen any assets it holds in the American financial system. 

Iran's central bank has an existing account at EIH AG. 

"It is not because we are afraid of sanctions or something, but because they (Iranian oil firms) are not able to designate a suitable bank which should receive payments on their behalf," Deputy Managing Director Pratip Chaudhuri told reporters on the sidelines of a government-run summit to coax investments from people of Indian origin living abroad. 

India is apprehensive that its firms and banks dealing with the EIH could face the same penalties from the U.S. 

At the same time, the country with the world's second-largest population, can't afford not to buy relatively cheap Iranian oil. The Islamic state is the second-biggest supplier of crude to India after Saudi Arabia, accounting for about 14% of the country's oil import bill. 

New Delhi and Tehran had opened a temporary channel for oil-related transactions for crude shipments to India in January. As per the arrangement, Indian oil companies would open accounts with India's state-run SBI, which in turn would deposit the payments for Iranian crude with the EIH Bank. 

The temporary channel was created after India's central bank, the Reserve Bank of India, said late last month that all trade-related payments with Iran had to be cleared outside the Asian Clearing Union, a clearinghouse through which most India-Iran trade was being conducted earlier. 

However, the new mechanism is likely to ruffle the U.S. administration, as the Treasury Department blacklisted EIH Bank in September, saying it provided a financial lifeline to Iranian companies that it alleges support weapons proliferation. 

EIH AG is a Hamburg-based bank specializing in services and business with Iran. It has branches in Tehran and in the Free Zone of Kish Island. 

Mr. Chaudhuri also said the Indian bank's retail-bond issue will be launched within a month, without elaborating immediately. 

 Write to  R. Jai Krishna at krishna.jai@dowjones.com 