Sen. Jon Kyl, the No. 2 Republican in the Senate, suggested Sunday he was open to certain revenue increases to deal with the deficit, as long as tax rates don't go up. The second-ranking Democrat, Sen. Dick Durbin, immediately pounced on what he saw as an opening.

On "Fox News Sunday," Mr. Kyl was asked whether there was any significant tax he'd consider raising. He replied by saying he was opposed to raising tax rates, but added that Republicans agreed "we need tax reform to eliminate loopholes." 

"We will not agree to raise tax rates to generate revenues," Mr. Kyl (R., Ariz.) said Sunday.

Mr. Durbin (D., Ill.) saw an opening. "I believe he has set the stage for us to enter into a meaningful conversation," he said, adding that he was open to looking at changes to entitlement programs, something many Democrats resist.

Any movement on taxes would be significant. Taxes and revenues are the most significant sticking points in the budget battle between Republicans and Democrats. President Barack Obama has said he wanted to end tax breaks for the wealthy as part of a plan to rein in the deficit, though Republicans have said they opposed any such efforts. A broad overhaul of the U.S. tax code, however, is a complex and politically delicate process and many political analysts don't believe it will advance this year.

House Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio) on Sunday reiterated his opposition to raising taxes, saying doing so will hurt the economy. The wealthy are the "very people that we expect to reinvest in our economy and to create jobs in our country," he said on CBS's "Face the Nation."

Former Republican House Speaker Newt Gingrich, who announced last week that he was running for president, also said he wouldn't support raising taxes. "I believe this is a country which has overspent, it's not under taxed," he said on NBC's "Meet the Press," voicing a common refrain by Republicans. 

Another impasse in the budget debate is what to do about the $14.294 trillion debt ceiling, which the U.S. government is expected to hit Monday. President Obama has said a vote in Congress on whether to raise the debt limit should be separate from the budget debate. Republicans, meanwhile, insist the two should be linked. 

"To raise the debt ceiling without dealing with the underlying problems is totally irresponsible," Mr. Boehner said. Treasury officials say they have until Aug. 2 before the country could begin defaulting on its debt.

Mr. Gingrich said Congress should consider passing short increases to the debt ceiling. "I would say find a formula and pass very, very short debt-ceiling increases with very small amounts and take some savings that the president couldn't possibly veto," he said. Mr. Gingrich warned not to give President Obama a "blank check. Because it's wrong for the American people."

It's unlikely such a plan would have the support of the White House. In a debate earlier this year over the budget, Mr. Obama said passing short-term budgets every few weeks would create too much uncertainty for the financial markets. 