STRATFORD-UPON-AVON—In its newly renovated, small Swan Theatre, the Royal Shakespeare Company continues its 50th anniversary celebrations with Dominic Hill's rollicking production of Philip Massinger's 1632 satiric comedy "The City Madam." 

Massinger (1583-1640) was the son of an Elizabethan "new man," someone who became a provincial gentleman by his talents, not by birth. The playwright had a chip on his own Caroline shoulder because his mother was a tradesman's daughter, his relative poverty made him an Oxford dropout and he had strained relations with his father's noble patrons, the Herberts. In these turbulent pre-Civil War times, the commercial competition of London life and the aping of courtly manners and extravagances by the merely wealthy made for the sort of edgy comedy that came from Massinger's own experience.

The City Madam is the profligate Lady Frugal (the splendidly purse-lipped Sara Crowe), whose two terminally spoiled daughters, like their mother, have forgotten that they are dependent on their rich but cynical, penny-pinching merchant father, Sir John Frugal (who bought his knighthood) for their station in life as well as their lifestyle. At the center is the younger brother, Luke (an appropriately mercurial performance by Jo Stone-Fewings), whom Sir John (a credibly scary Christopher Godwin) has just bought out from debtors' prison, and who is treated as a servant by the "ladified" (Massinger's scathing neologism) mother and her ghastly girls (Lucy Briggs-Owen and Matti Houghton, who can mimic mama's moues with ease.)

In the first of many surprises, Luke pleads with his brother to consider the welfare of, and show charity to, those in debt to him; but he also urges his brother's gentlemen-apprentices to embezzle from him. The daughters make impossible-to-comply-with and unconscionable demands on their suitors—one a self-made man, the other the aristocratic son of Lord Lacy—while his lordship (a show-stealing characterization by Nicholas Day) pleads with Sir John to call his women to order and to notice Luke's good nature. 

Sir John pretends to retire to a monastery, leaving his entire estate to Luke, whereupon the prodigal brother turns really nasty. He strips his sister-in-law and nieces of their jewels, wigs and gowns; decides to give them to a trio of devil-worshipping Virginia "Indians" as human sacrifices; and even celebrates his birthday sumptuously, but alone, as there is no one he wishes to share anything with. 

With opulent costumes, masques, magic, music and puppetry, on the Swan's thrust stage, the bitter comedy is played out in a fashion that would have been familiar to Massinger's contemporary audiences—an authentic treat.

 Until Oct. 4 

  www.rsc.org.uk  

 Write to  Paul Levy at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 