MAZAR-E-SHARIF, Afghanistan—In the slums of Brazil, poor children dream of making it big by learning to kick a soccer ball. In the shanty towns of Afghanistan, it's all about tossing a dead goat.

Over the past several years, the ancient sport of buzkashi—Dari for "goat grabbing"—has turned into a big business in northern Afghanistan. Instead of sporting-goods manufacturers, sponsors usually are rival warlords who bet on their favorite goat grabbers.

The buzkashi stars get a monthly wage, receive cars as gifts for a stellar performance and save enough money to afford a second or even third wife, the ultimate status symbol here.

"I used to practice buzkashi on donkeys, now I drive a Lexus!" said 33-year-old champion  Jahaan Geer from his saddle covered in bright hand-woven carpets.

Mr. Geer used to play for  Abdul Rashid Dostum, one of Afghanistan's most brutal warlords in the 1990s civil war, but he recently switched to play for Kam Air, the Afghan airline, whose wealthy owner is one of the biggest buzkashi enthusiasts.

Like most buzkashi players, Mr. Geer comes from a farming family that could barely afford to eat meat once a week. Now he claims to eat four to six pounds of lamb, goat and chicken a day to maintain his thick, muscular build.

This northern city holds some of the most competitive games across the country, with a buzkashi statue one of the first things visitors see when they leave the airport.

Every Friday, thousands of spectators gather at the city's buzkashi field, eating red-dyed hard-boiled eggs and sharing bags of opium and joints of hashish. Children with handfuls of fifty- and hundred-dollar bills from wealthy spectators crisscross the bleachers to place bets with a bookie. Occasionally, the spectators drop everything and flee as stampeding horses threaten onlookers while players vie for possession of the goat.

The objective of the game: fight through the mob of horseback rivals and drop the headless goat carcass into the "circle of justice"—a circle drawn into the earth around a pole that serves as a goal. More recently, the sport has been played with a dead calf, because the flesh is stronger and the carcass lasts longer, players say.

In a recent game here, which lasted four hours, Mr. Geer anchored a foot into the stirrup, allowing him to slip down the saddle. He dipped to the ground and grabbed with one hand the goat carcass, which can weigh as much as 160 pounds, while holding onto the reins with the other. A scrum of horses formed, with about 80 players beating one another with whips as they fought over the goat. 

What remained of the goat after Mr. Geer rode off as the game's winner was cooked and eaten by poor spectators in a festive after-game meal. The wealthier ones collected the winnings on their bets. Players like Mr. Geer can receive tips worth thousands of dollars for dropping the goat into the circle of justice, in a country where most Afghans live on less than $1 a day.

"Twenty years ago, the players had passion. Now, they play only for the salaries, not because they love buzkashi," complained 65-year-old Jabar, a cleaner at the Mazar-e-Sharif stadium who has worked at buzkashi fields for 20 years. "It's become a game for the rich to gamble."

During the Taliban regime, buzkashi was banned, as were most sports, because it was considered immoral. After the U.S. ousted the Taliban in 2001, the new Afghan government proclaimed it the national sport, organizing tournaments across the land.

Now, the Afghan Buzkashi Federation wants to go global and says it's considering applying for Olympic status. Although there are no regional games, buzkashi is played across Central Asia and in parts of India and Pakistan, much to the dismay of animal-rights advocates, who oppose any international recognition for the sport.

"England banned fox-hunting, Spain is banning the bullfight, and the lesson is that pastimes involving cruelty belong in the past, as they are games of shame that spotlight callousness more than skill," says  Syed Rizvi, a spokesman for People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals.

Such arguments don't sway the Afghan Buzkashi Federation's deputy chief,  Mirwais Utikhil. He says he finds nothing wrong with whipping horses and playing with a goat cadaver. "We love our horses, not just because of buzkashi, but because they are also weapons. They have always helped us fight off invaders," says Mr. Utikhil.

No one knows the exact origins of buzkashi, but Afghans believe the game originated about 800 years ago, with the invading Mongol armies of Genghis Khan, whose skilled horsemen pillaged villages, stealing sheep and other livestock at full gallop. Afghan villagers developed the same tactic to steal back their livestock from the Mongol occupiers, creating the foundations of the game, according to Afghan government information promoting the sport.

Afghanistan's current first vice president, Mohammad Qasim Fahim, has sponsored several players. The player described by the chief of Mr. Fahim's office as "the best" is Aziz Ahmad, a 47-year-old master who has been playing since he was 15. Mr. Ahmad lives in a large, two-story house in one of Kabul's wealthiest neighborhoods, a far cry from the impoverished farming village where he grew up in northern Kunduz province. He gets a monthly salary from the vice president, who also gave him the house.

"If you don't have money in Afghanistan, you don't have a good life," Mr. Ahmad said. as six of his 11 children from his two wives surrounded him, bringing him nuts and refilling his cup of green tea. "If I wasn't a buzkashi player," Mr. Ahmad mused, "I probably would have ended up a day laborer."

—Walid Fazly contributed to this article.