LONDON—U.K. manufacturing output rose steadily in November, suggesting the sector helped support economic growth in the fourth quarter, official data showed Thursday. 

However, the wider industrial-production measure increased at a slower rate than expected after again being dragged down by declines in oil and gas extraction. 

  Ross Walker, European economist at RBS, said manufacturing output is on course to achieve growth of 3.8% in 2010, which will be the strongest full-year increase since 1994. 

"[Manufacturing] is at this time the best performing sector of the U.K. economy—something we haven't been able to say very often since about 1870. The latest data are very welcome and provide further evidence that some U.K. macroeconomic rebalancing is underway," he said. "Still, some caution is warranted as manufacturing output amounts to only 13% of GDP." 

The Office of National Statistics said U.K. manufacturing output rose 0.6% on a monthly basis in November and was 5.6% annually. That compares with a rise of 0.6% and 5.8% in October. 

Industrial production, which includes manufacturing, mining and quarrying, electricity, gas and water supply, grew 0.4% on a monthly basis in November after falling 0.1% in October. The November figure was 3.3% higher in annual terms. 

October's month-to-month figure was increased from the original estimate of a 0.2% decline, while the annual estimate was increased to show a rise of 3.5% from the originally reported rise of 3.3%.

Thursday's data comes after December's Purchasing Managers Index for the manufacturing sector was last week shown to have risen at its fastest rate for 16 years. Driving the rise in the PMI was strong export growth, which led to a surge in output and new orders. 

  Nida Ali, economic advisor to the Ernst & Young ITEM Club, said the combination of the strong PMI figure, rising export demand and the weak pound, meant the manufacturing sector is expected to continue to grow robustly and lead the economic recovery. 

In the three months to November, compared with the previous three-month period, manufacturing output grew 1.2%, the ONS said. Industrial production increased 0.8% in the three months to October, compared with the previous three months. 

 Write to  Ainsley Thomson at ainsley.thomson@dowjones.com and Nicholas Winning at nick.winning@dowjones.com  