TOKYO—The day traders and hedge funds that profited handsomely from the volatility surrounding  Tokyo Electric Power Co.
9501


0.14
%




 shares immediately after the quake could soon be replaced by a different breed of investor: long-only asset managers looking to reinvest in Tepco, on a bet that Japan won't let the utility go bust.

For  Daisuke Iketani, a 30-year-old day trader in Tokyo, the volatility in Tepco shares following the March 11 earthquake provided a rare golden opportunity: He made a profit of ¥2 million ($24,500) mostly through a flurry of short orders as the stock briefly plunged from the prequake ¥2,100 level to below ¥300, wiping out 80% of its market capitalization. On Thursday, shares rose 3.2% to ¥425.

The Japanese stock market was closed for a holiday on Friday.

"If you're a day trader, the temptation is great to invest in a stock like this," said retail investor  Yuuki Hakamata, citing the sharp price movements and the massive volume.

Amid the initial panic selling sparked by concerns of radiation leaks at the company's crippled Fukushima Daiichi nuclear-power plant on Japan's northeastern coast, mysterious trades also emerged.

On March 30, an unidentified investor bought nearly 40 million Tepco shares—valued at around ¥18.17 billion—in the last 10 seconds before the stock closed at ¥466, according to several traders at major brokerage firms. It remains uncertain whether the large position is still being held, but many market players speculate that the investor unloaded the position after shares staged a short-term rebound in the subsequent sessions.

While still one of the most actively traded stocks on the Tokyo Stock Exchange, trading in Tepco shares has stabilized recently. Volume has declined by nearly 90% from a peak of 303 million shares logged on April 6, sapping the appeal for speculative traders who cash in on volatility.

Many investors believe that Tepco is too big to fail, and the government is preparing a framework for supporting the stricken utility through the continuing nuclear crisis. This is prompting some U.S.-based asset managers to invest in the stock and re-evaluate their holdings.

"In early April, a couple of long-only buyers were coming and buying the stock," said one trader at a foreign brokerage firm. Another fund manager at a Japanese asset management firm added that U.S.-based asset managers seemed to be placing the long orders, adding that the investments didn't come from pension funds either in the U.S. or Europe.

Market experts say the key to the feasibility of a longer-term investment in the utility's shares will hinge on the scale and time frame of the compensation the company will be obliged to pay to victims of the nuclear reactor accident and, most importantly, how much financial assistance the government is willing to offer to Tepco.

"What the markets despise the most is uncertainty so the government needs to clarify its stance," said  Mana Nakazora, chief credit analyst at BNP Paribas Securities in Tokyo. She added that local media reports seem to indicate an increasing chance that Tepco's corporate bonds and stock will retain some degree of value. 

"It may be possible to invest in the stock once the company's value can be estimated through more clarity on how much and how long it will need to shoulder the compensation costs," said  Naoki Fujiwara, a fund manager at Shinkin Asset Management Co. 

But Mr. Fujiwara, who removed Tepco from his portfolio after the earthquake, said another critical issue is how much the shareholders will be required to take responsibility. Even if shares aren't delisted, he said investors remain nervous about the lingering risks of capital reduction and dilution.

On Tuesday, Tepco held its first briefing for institutional investors and analysts since the disaster, but the return of this so-called traditional long community is expected to be far down the road since their main incentive for investing in the stock had been high dividends, which will likely be scrapped for years to come. 

The asset-management arm of Japan's biggest life insurer, Nippon Life Insurance Co., dropped Tepco shares from the portfolio of one of its funds. Nippon Life is also one of the biggest investors in Tepco following  Dai-ichi Life Insurance Co.
DCNSF


9.61
%




, which recently said it expects to book a special loss of about ¥100 billion due to its equity holdings in the utility. U.S.-based investment management firm  AllianceBernstein Holding LP
AB


-1.22
%




 also trimmed its weighting on Tepco to "the low end of a meaningful active position" as of the end of March.

Plans to inject large amounts of water into the No. 1 reactor at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant will be put on hold until operators can better measure the water and pressure levels in the containment vessel, with no set time in place for when the effort will resume, a Japanese nuclear-safety agency official said Friday. 

The plan to fill the vessel with water to ensure the fuel rods would be brought to a state of cold shutdown was postponed Thursday over concerns that a large increase in the water volume could produce leaks in the vessel. 

The flow of water had been increased from six liters an hour to 10 liters, which had brought the temperature down to around 113 degrees centigrade and the pressure slightly above atmospheric pressure, which officials said was a greater fall than expected. 

While the goal is to lower the temperature of the fuel rods to below 100 degrees on a constant basis to achieve a cold shutdown, authorities are concerned that a fall in pressure could allow outside air to enter the vessel. This raises the risk of an explosion as the air mixes with hydrogen that was produced in the days of ultra-high temperatures early in the crisis.

Hidehiko Nishiyama, spokesman of the government's Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency, said recovery workers are currently studying how to bring in equipment that can measure the water level. Many of the unit's monitoring systems were knocked out in the original disaster. 

"At this point, increasing the amount of water for injection may be difficult," he said. "We need to determine a method to measure the water level, then we will decide whether to increase it further." 

Earlier efforts involving less water helped cool the fuel to about 130 degrees centigrade, well below the 1,000 degree-plus point at which it could start to become dangerous. 

In another positive sign, Mr. Nishiyama said that a robot entering the No. 1 reactor building hadn't found water building up, which suggests the vessel isn't leaking. 

—Atsuko Fukase contributed to this article.