STATS: A 5,368-square-foot, three-bedroom home with two full baths and three half-baths on 2.8 acres asking $2.4 million, or $437 a square foot. Property taxes in 2010 were $10,717.

This property in Reno, Nev., features a 5,368-square-foot house with three bedrooms, as well as a two-bedroom guesthouse, a pool, a pool house, a tennis court and a greenhouse.

DETAILS: This 1960s adobe ranch house sits behind wrought iron gates in a walled compound that includes a two-bedroom guest house with a fireplace, a pool, a pool house (with fireplace), a tennis court and a greenhouse. There's also a riding ring, a barn with two stalls and a tack room. In the concrete near the barn are two sets of handprints that the broker says were left by the sons of casino mogul Bill Harrah and his wife, Scherry. Scherry Harrah bought the house in 1969 after the couple divorced and lived there until 1977. 

SELLER: Kimberly Hefner, a former model who was married to  Hugh Hefner for nine years. The couple were separated for over 10 years and their divorce was finalized in 2010. 

NEIGHBORHOOD: The "Biggest Little City in the World" has moved beyond its reputation as the home of the quickie divorce. The house is just 15 minutes from the Reno-Tahoe International Airport and 10 minutes to the annual Reno Rodeo. This year the rodeo starts June 16, and it's not too late to apply for the job of cowboy-in-training (no experience necessary) and help drive 300 steer across the high desert and through the streets of downtown Reno.

WHAT I PAID: Ms. Hefner paid $2.1 million for the house in 2010. 



WHAT DREW ME TO THE HOUSE ORIGINALLY: The architecture and the tax laws, says Ms. Hefner. "The Nevada tax laws are pretty fantastic and the people are nice and everything fell into place." 

WHY I'M SELLING: Ms. Hefner misses her two college-age sons—one who lives in Los Angeles and one who lives in San Francisco but spends much of his time in Los Angeles. "I didn't realize how homesick I'd be. I really want to be where my kids are," she says.

WHAT I'LL MISS: "You feel like you're at Canyon Ranch," says Ms. Hefner, who liked to sit by the pool when she wasn't at Tahoe or hiking in the mountains. She says that she'll also miss the lack of traffic, especially compared with Los Angeles.

WHAT I WON'T: The location. "For me, it's in the wrong state. If my kids were [in Reno] I would have stayed," she says. If she had stayed, she says that she would have added a sauna and steam room. 

OTHERS SAY: "The price is a little higher than she paid for it, but sometimes we get crazy offers," says  Diana Renfroe of Dickson Realty. She predicts the house will go for more than $2 million because it's unusual to have such a large piece of property with a single-story home and room for horses close to downtown.