When I wrote my first book, "The Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants," I was pregnant with my third child. I remember wanting to include my unborn baby in the book's acknowledgments, because she had been such excellent company throughout the writing process. So I acknowledged my husband and two sons and "the little one soon to be born." That was 10 years ago, and I was 33. 

This past year I returned to writing about the Sisterhood after a long absence. A few weeks into the manuscript I started feeling a familiar nausea again. I discovered I was pregnant with my fourth child. 

It wasn't a total surprise, exactly. Sometime around turning 40 I realized that I longed for another child before the shop closed up for good. But it seemed a lot to ask, as we already had three healthy and beautiful children. So I figured if it happened it happened, and if it didn't, it didn't. It didn't happen and it didn't happen and then suddenly it did, when I was 43, when my youngest was nearly 10 and my oldest 15. 

In spite of the nausea, there was a joyful symmetry in rediscovering pregnancy as I rediscovered the four young women of the Sisterhood 10 years later. Gestating characters feels something like the mental equivalent of gestating a baby. In both cases, to create them you lose yourself. Or at least you reshape yourself to encompass them. 

To my characters I gave the space in my head for their thoughts, their voices, their desires. I wanted to think their thoughts, to hear their words. To my baby I gave most of the real estate in my abdomen, much of what I ate, air from every breath and, along with my other children, the custody of my happiness for the rest of my life. 

Eventually the characters emerged from my head like four Athenas and the baby from my body in the traditional way, the egress in all cases laborious and thrilling. You surrender yourself to them; you let them go. That's what it is to be a mother.

I admit that I feel half like a mother, and half like a grandmother, this time around. More like a grandmother when I'm muttering about what kind of advanced degree you need to fold this new kind of stroller. But I feel unalloyed pleasure watching my 15-year-old—now the size of a man—carry his tiny brother around.

My older children are as eager to bathe and dress the baby as my husband and I are. We all talk and sing and coo to him like lunatics. All five of us pass him around the table at dinner, so we each get a chance to eat. A few days ago I was in the drugstore, and in my basket I carried a tube of Clearasil and a package of newborn Pampers. That pretty much sums up my life at the moment. 

And it's different for my characters this time, too. My new novel, "Sisterhood Everlasting," portrays four teens who have grown into women. They're discovering their capacity not just for sisterhood, but motherhood.

It's not that they literally become mothers in the course of the story, although that does happen for one of the characters. But they reorder the universe so that they aren't always in the center of it, they see themselves in the larger context, they learn how to surrender their own desires and expectations to those of another.

I guess I wanted, more than anything else, to experience alongside my characters—these sisters—the gift of motherhood. 

—Ms. Brashares's "Sisterhood Everlasting" will be published in June. 