NEW YORK—Crude-oil futures crept lower but still held above $100 a barrel, following reports that a settlement to the conflict in Libya could be on the horizon. 

Light, sweet crude for April delivery settled down 32 cents, or 0.3%, to $101.91 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange. Brent crude on the ICE futures exchange settled down $1.56, or 1.3%, to $114.79 a barrel. 

Crude headed lower after al-Jazeera reported Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi had accepted a plan for a multinational commission to mediate the conflict with rebel groups. However, it was unclear whether such a plan, put forth by Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez, was feasible. 

Libya's envoy to the U.S. later said opposition forces would reject Mr. Chávez's proposal, according to a U.S. senator. 

Crude's move lower underscored how closely oil prices are tracking developments in Libya, where an antigovernment revolt has disrupted oil supplies and raised fears that the unrest sweeping the Middle East and North Africa could affect supplies elsewhere in the region.

"There's still unrest going on in other countries," said  Matt Smith, an oil analyst at Summit Energy in Louisville, Ky., calling the move "a temporary blip until the next negative headline hits the newswires and we see a rebound." 

The International Energy Agency said the unrest in Libya has started to affect oil supplies in Europe, the main recipient of Libyan oil. Crude prices above $100 a barrel could have a "very significant undermining effect" on global growth, IEA chief Nobuo Tanaka said. 

However, no country has asked the energy watchdog to release strategic oil stocks, Mr. Tanaka said. 

 What? Hugo Chavez is being taken seriously? If oil drops on a meaningless Chavez twitter, there must be money to be made here. I'd go long oil the next few days. I had no idea traders were so, well, gullible. 

—Alonzo Quijana

Most developed countries remain well-supplied with oil and have the option of tapping strategic reserves in the event of a significant shortfall. In addition, several members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, including Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, have said they are raising production to make up for lost Libyan crude. 

European shipbrokers told Dow Jones Newswires that Saudi Arabia's state-owned oil company is directing its shipping arm to send crude from the Persian Gulf to the Mediterranean.

Also Thursday, the price differential between the two major oil benchmarks, Nymex's West Texas Intermediate crude and Brent crude, narrowed, even after the U.S. government reported record levels of oil at the Nymex delivery point of Cushing, Okla. High oil supplies at Cushing have kept WTI trading at a record discount to Brent in recent months, upsetting WTI's position as a marker for world oil prices.

Analysts said the narrowing spread was likely due to profit-taking, as investors who bet on the spread widening closed their positions. "We view this contraction as corrective and more related to profit-taking than to any fundamental developments," said  Jim Ritterbusch, head of the oil-trading advisory firm Ritterbusch & Associates. Nymex crude recently traded at a discount of about $13 to Brent crude.

 Write to  Dan Strumpf at dan.strumpf@dowjones.com 