"If you're going to Therme Vals, bring your black bathing suit," an architect friend advised before I traveled to the canton of Graubünden in eastern Switzerland. "It's all architects and designers in black." 

He was spot on. The Peter Zumthor-designed spa in Vals, two and a half hours from Zürich, is a cube made from narrow slabs of gray-green Valser quartzite. Its interior is minimalist and angular. It is home to six baths and several steam chambers and relaxation rooms, including a flower petal pool and a steam room draped with leather curtains. And in each bath, you'll find architects and designers relaxing—and sporting black bikinis and box-cuts.





Long before Mr. Zumthor won the 2009 Pritzker Prize, people were sinking into Switzerland's naturally fed thermal baths in search of health benefits from the hot waters. In the 1960s, many of Switzerland's baths were reimagined, given new exteriors and adjoining hotels. And recently, many spas have been overhauled so dramatically that people visit for the contemporary design as much as for the healing waters. 

There are several such baths within a couple of hours of Zürich and St. Moritz, which allows for some very relaxing day trips. Overnighting is also possible, and often provides for access to the baths after they've closed to the public for the day. 

Though the country is known internationally for its architecture stars like Herzog & de Meuron and Le Corbusier, within Switzerland no living designer is more widely known than Mario Botta. Many cite his redo of the Tschuggen Grand Hotel's Bergoase Spa in pine-scented Arosa, two hours southeast of Zürich, as the genesis of modern bath design. Five years ago, Mr. Botta transformed the boxy '60s resort; it now resembles a spaceship, with sail-shaped glass dormers on the roof, swooshing, transparent doors, a crystalline gangway and underwater Kneipp rock trails lit with red and blue lights.

The main thermal pool at Bergoase is filled with nooks and niches. A 93.2-degree current carries bathers past a curvaceous Duke White granite wall toward rapid jets and gurgling underwater coils. A connected shaft leads to an outdoor pool overlooking the Schanfigg Valley and the 8,704-foot-high Aroser Weisshorn, especially breathtaking in morning, when copper and pink puddles of light drip over its eastern face. The Tschuggen Express, a rollercoaster-like funicular added in 2009, chugs past the outdoor bath up to a private ski launch. 

 Tamina Therme in Bad Ragaz, an hour from Zürich, is one of the newest spas to one-up Therme Vals. Designed by Zürich architect Josho Smolenicky in 2009, it is dreamlike, with oversized oval windows as a central motif. The 97.7-degree water is drawn from Tamina Gorge in nearby Pfäfers, where 13th-century pilgrims bathed; some believe the water has healing properties, which explains the older crowd. A variety of classes—think aqua-cycling and baby swim—lend the baths a gymnasium vibe. 

 Mineralbad & Spa, run by Bern-based Aqua-Spa-Resorts, was designed by husband-and-wife team Miller & Maranta and built in 2010 in the village of Samedan, four miles from glitzy St. Moritz. Tucked under an 18th-century clock tower, the baths nod to Mr. Zumthor's understatement, but amp up the color and sensuality. Lighting gets special attention—in one room a trio of boulder-shaped lanterns hang, in another a chicken wire wrapped florescent chandelier dangles. 

Guests begin in a dramatic, water-filled foyer covered in orange and yellow tiles. Canals lead to dim, tranquil cavities where bathers swan around. Level two, a study in greens and blues, has cleansing herbal steam baths, an intense 113-degree vapor room, a 104-degree fire bath and a cold plunge. The roof's hot pool is not to be missed, offering views of the belfry, the ashy summits of the Livigno Range and the village's sweet Sgraffito-style wall decorations. 

Long known for its 20-some summer baths along the lake and River Limmat, Zürich has until now lacked a main thermal bath. In December 2010, Thermalbad & Spa Zürich opened in the former Hürlimann Brewery in Kreis 4, adjacent to the Google offices. (It's also run by Aqua-Spa-Resorts.) 

Thermalbad, fed by Zürich's Aqui spring, is a chaotic space with nary an English phrase on signs, but there's no denying the place's coolness. On a Sunday evening in January, the four-story brick warehouse was a hit. Young suburbanites cozied up in the underwater music pool, splashed through century-old stone vaults and nestled into whirlpool drums. A Roman-Irish spa, separated by glass doors and accessed by your key, costs 23 Swiss Francs extra (about $25), and includes a sea-buckthorn scrub, heated stone beds and a labyrinth of quiet baths. It's worth paying to momentarily escape the crowds. 

As in Mineralbad, the best is up top. The bath's heated rooftop pool offers panoramic views of Zürich's iconic Salt and Pepper Church and Freitag Tower. Finally, Zürich got a mountain. Whether the black bikinis will flock to it remains to be seen.