

SYDNEY—A one-hour strike planned for Friday by more than 1,000 engineers against Qantas Airways Ltd. has been cancelled, but the airline still faces work stoppages next week.

A Qantas spokesman on Thursday confirmed a message the airline had posted on Twitter saying Friday's strike over pay and conditions had been called off and that the normal schedule had been restored. Qantas had said earlier it would have to cancel 31 flights and delay another 46 services Friday.

But Australian Licensed Aircraft Engineers Association Vice President Wesley Bell told Dow Jones Newswires, "The strike has been cancelled for tomorrow only," and one-hour stoppages against Qantas at some Australian airports on Monday and Tuesday are still on.

"The sole premise is not to disrupt the passengers, and we're going out of our way to minimize that," Mr. Bell said. "We want Qantas to negotiate first and foremost."

The union, which represents aircraft-maintenance workers, on Monday had called on about 1,600 members to stop work between 8 a.m. and 9 a.m. Friday (2200 and 2300 GMT Thursday).

After recovering from the effects of the financial crisis, airlines now face fresh head winds in the form of higher fuel costs. Qantas's home market of Australia is also suffering from declining consumer confidence.

The airline is concerned that unions are attacking its brand as competitors ramp up efforts to capture market share. Qantas's reputation took a hit in November when an engine explosion forced the grounding of its fleet of A380 superjumbos.

Engineers association secretary Steve Purvinas said Monday his union is concerned about Qantas's moving its engineering services overseas. The union has demanded that external contractors must be paid the same rates as Qantas's in-house engineers when performing the same tasks.

Qantas has said the union is understating the cost of its demands, which the airline puts at 29% over three years and more over subsequent years.

"If the union is serious about not disrupting the airline's operations and passengers, I call on the union to cancel the strike action planned for Monday and Tuesday next week," Lyell Strambi, the executive responsible for operations at Qantas, said in a statement later Thursday, adding that the airline cannot agree to the union's "unreasonable and excessive demands". 

Unions representing pilots and baggage handlers have also threatened industrial action if their demands aren't met. 