NEW YORK—Most financial-planning services are covered by existing laws and regulations, but some consumer-protection issues remain, a government study concluded. 

Even though the profession isn't regulated by a separate body of rules, state and federal regulations already apply to many services provided by financial planners, said the report. However, concerns about "certain consumer-protection issues" were raised by the report, released Tuesday by the U.S. Government Accountability Office following a study required by the Dodd-Frank Act. 

"The GAO confirmed what we have known for years: There is great confusion among the public about the profession of financial planning," said  Susan John, a certified financial planner and chairman of the National Association of Personal Financial Advisors. The trade group, based in Arlington Heights, Ill., is among a coalition of financial-planning groups that have lobbied for more tightly regulating the profession. 

The ranks of the financial-planning profession more than doubled between 2000 and 2008, to 208,400 from 94,000, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. That number will rise to 271,200 by 2018 because of the need for advisers to assist millions of future retirees, according to figures cited by the GAO. 

State and federal investment-adviser laws generally apply to financial planners, whose services typically include providing advice about securities, according to the study. It said the Securities and Exchange Commission and state regulators also review the activities of financial planners during examinations. 

Existing laws and regulations can also apply to using marketing materials and financial-planner professional designations, the GAO concluded. Advertising rules imposed by the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, Wall Street's self-policing organization, for example, would apply to planners who are also registered as brokers. Financial planners who sell insurance products, such as variable annuities, must be licensed by state regulators, the GAO noted. 

Enforcement of regulation, however, may be inconsistent, according to the report. Regulators are limited in their ability to identify problems, the GAO said, because they don't specifically track complaints, inspections, and enforcement actions specific to financial-planning services. The GAO recommended that state regulators and the SEC collaborate to "identify methods to better understand problems" specifically related to the financial-planning activities of investment advisers. 

Consumers may also be "unclear" about when a financial planner must serve a client's best interest, particularly while providing multiple services with different standards of care. A financial planner who is also a broker may follow the brokerage industry's requirement to recommend "suitable" investments, while a planner who is a registered investment adviser may act as a fiduciary, putting client interests ahead of his or her own. 

The GAO also recommended that the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, or NAIC, assess consumers' understanding of the standards of care associated with the sale of insurance products. Planners who sell insurance products may be subject to different legal standards, depending on the state in which they are licensed, it said. The SEC, it noted, is already required by Dodd-Frank to conduct studies about investor literacy and possibly harmonizing standards of care among registered investment advisers and brokers who give advice. An NAIC spokeswoman declined to comment. 

At least one investor advocate, however, raised concerns about the SEC's resources to regulate financial-planning services. "We already have inadequate resources for investment advisers," said  Barbara Roper, director of investor protection for the Consumer Federation of America, a Washington, D.C., advocacy group. That problem is the basis for a study expected to wrap up this week about whether the agency should outsource its oversight of investment advisers. Ms. Roper added that she was "disappointed in the quality of the GAO's analysis." 

"They didn't put this in the proper context of what's going on in terms of regulation," she said. 

An SEC spokesman said the agency looks forward to considering the GAO's recommendations. 

 Write to  Suzanne Barlyn at suzanne.barlyn@wsj.com 