A plan to open a homeless shelter on the Upper West Side is moving forward despite a snag between the city and the building owner in the efforts to prepare the facility as a shelter. 

The single-room occupancy building at 306 W. 94 St., which formerly operated as the Hotel Alexander, is set to become a transitional shelter for 200 homeless men. Samaritan Village Inc. will operate the shelter for nine years at an annual cost of $7.9 million to the city.

But the deal has hit a snag: There are presently eight tenants in the building who won't leave and the city won't move forward with the shelter until there's an amicable solution. 

In an effort to get them out to make way for the shelter, some tenants received letters with an offer for $50,000 and three years of free rent in an equal-size apartment in an adjacent building, which functions as a traditional SRO residence and is also owned by Alexander Scharf. 

Mr. Scharf declined to comment on the offer and said only that he is leasing out the building. "I am not involved with that," he said, referring to the offer. 

Tenants had until Tuesday to accept the deal, but so far none have taken it, according to  Marti Weithman, project director of the S.R.O. Law Project of Goddard Riverside Community Center, who is advising tenants in the building.

"It has put the tenants in a difficult position and I think some of them have expressed that they've felt pressured," said Ms. Weithman. "They are rent-stabilized permanent tenants so they do not have to leave where they are. They have rights where they are," she said.

The shelter will open "in the upcoming weeks," said  Barbara Brancaccio, a spokeswoman for the Department of Homeless Services. 

Until recently, the Hotel Alexander building had operated as a budget option for travelers, with an average rate of $90 and a boutique feel. But a new state law that will go into effect in May makes it illegal to rent space in most multifamily residential buildings for less than 30 days at a stretch. The law will push SRO owners out of the hotel trade, and the buildings will revert instead to long-term residences. 

But SRO owners believe that the units, with communal bathrooms and few kitchens, won't be profitable in a rental market. "It's never been viable to maintain these as permanent residences. There just isn't enough money coming in," said  David Satnick, a lawyer who represents SRO hotel owners. 

 Write to  Melanie Grayce West at melanie.west@wsj.com and Aaron Rutkoff at aaron.rutkoff@wsj.com 