 Haiku, Hawaii 

To reach W.S. Merwin's longtime home on Maui's north shore, turn off the Hana Highway past the turnoff to the town of Haiku and head down a single lane edged with red volcanic soil. 

About a quarter of a mile from steep cliffs dropping to the sea, the foliage starts to grow thick. Rustic wire fencing strains to hold back arching fronds and tropical blooms. Just beyond a swinging metal gate is a modest carport, solar panels on the roof. Several hundred yards beyond is a home which seems to disappear into the jungle.

The property's remoteness, which some might find inconvenient or even unsettling, is one of its appeals to the current U.S. poet laureate, whose work reflects his commitment to environmentalism and his long-standing passion for gardening. 

"People just get it or they don't," said Mr. Merwin. 

William Merwin, the 83-year-old Pulitzer Prize-winning author of "The Shadow of Sirius" and more than 40 other volumes of poetry, essays, and translations, and his wife, Paula, live in what their friend and neighbor Michelle Sewell calls "a handmade house." It's built in the shape of a rectangle, surrounded by deep porches, or lanais. A few steps lead down to the home's entry lanai, where the Merwins place their shoes, and then directly into a living room that feels like a Polynesian longboat.

Wood planks form the peaked ceiling and the floor is made of tightly fitted planks of darkly oiled eucalyptus robusta wood. To enjoy their garden, the Merwins head to their breakfast lanai, overlooking a valley filled with thousands of palms planted from all over the world. 

Mr. Merwin's path to his palm forest was an indirect one. The son of a Presbyterian minister, he was born in New York, lived in France and then came to Hawaii in the 1970s to study Zen Buddhism. Not long after arriving, he heard of a small piece of land near the coast with a small cabin, the place where three native Hawaiian activists had hidden after defying the U.S. Navy and occupying the bombed island of Kaho`olawe.

When Mr. Merwin first saw it in 1976, it was mostly covered with dry, waist-high grass. At one time, the area had been a thick forest of prized Acacia koa trees. But those had been cut down, and the area ruined beyond agricultural use by poor irrigation techniques. Still, he was enchanted by the cries of the plovers, a migrating bird which had just returned from Alaska.

Using his small inheritance, he spent $60,000 or so for just over three acres in 1977. With little money left, he drew plans for the house, and recruited friends and local craftsmen to help him build it. 

He insisted on disturbing the land as little as possible during construction, so no bulldozer was used to prepare the site. In exchange for digging a cesspool for him, he let two men live in the cabin rent-free. To save money, he designed the home based on 8- or 4-foot design modules, keeping costs low by avoiding using custom-made materials.

By the time Paula Dunaway, a children's-books editor, joined him in the early 1980s, he'd built the 1,375-square-foot house. The couple later bought two adjacent parcels of land, totaling 15 acres. 

Mr. Merwin wrote much of "The Folding Cliffs," a novel in verse of 19th-century Hawaii, in his home's west lanai, which overlooks a dense section of the palm forest. One of his best-known poems, titled "Place," begins, "On the last day of the world / I would want to plant a tree." 

At first, Mr. Merwin said, he had somewhat "naively" hoped to restore a rain forest with native plants. But the soil was so leached and the conditions so dry and wind-swept that he found the only ones that thrived were Hawaiian Pritchardias, a type of palm. He estimates he now has more than 850 different species of palms on the property, including a few he's saved from extinction, such as Hyophorbe indica from Reunion Island.

In 2010, shortly before Mr. Merwin agreed to become the poet laureate, the couple created the Merwin Conservancy, preserving the home and the palm forest and receiving nonprofit status as a retreat for writers and botanists. "William has created one of the greatest palm collections in the world," said Charles R. "Chipper" Wichman, director of the National Tropical Botanical Gardens. "It is amazing." 