 Canberra, Australia 

The recent flooding in Queensland, Australia, has rekindled the debate over what federal and state governments should do to steel this country against climatic shocks. Thirty-five have lost their lives since December, and thousands of people and businesses have been affected. Governments are still assessing the damage as the massive clean-up and reconstruction effort gets under way, though experts estimate that the bill could run into the tens of billions of dollars.

For scientists, the scale of the flooding was no surprise. Australia has the most variable climate in the world, owing to a natural system, the Pacific Ocean's El Nino/La Nina cycle, also called El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO). Droughts strike eastern Australia during episodes of El Nino; the region is hit with floods when the cycle switches to La Nina. These episodes are caused by changes to atmospheric circulation thanks to a gradient in sea surface temperatures across the Pacific Ocean. For instance, El Nino droughts hit when the eastern Pacific is warmer than the western Pacific; La Nina floods are triggered when the eastern Pacific is relatively cool. The current flooding coincides with one of the strongest La Ninas on record.

Australia's climate may get even more volatile in coming years. Last year, a climatological pattern known as the Interdecadal Pacific Oscillation (IPO) reversed its direction, the first shift since the 1970s. This phenomenon is also caused by a sea surface temperature gradient, but it acts over a bigger area and its cycles run over decades, rather than years like ENSO. Its significance to Australia's climate was only fully appreciated last year when a team of scientists led by Wenju Cai of the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation published research on it in the Journal of Climate.

They found that when an index measuring the IPO went negative—meaning cooler average temperatures on the surface of the equatorial eastern Pacific—this oscillation amplified the impacts of La Nina episodes, leading to severe floods. According to Mr. Cai, this is exactly what happened last year, and accounts for the severity of the Queensland floods.

Though public attention still focuses largely on the El Nino/La Nina cycle, it's evident that the direction of the IPO affects climate around the Pacific on a much longer timescale. In particular, the recent shift means that Australia's embattled eastern states may not have seen the worst of the damage such climate variability can bring. In Queensland and elsewhere, this research suggests that Australians may be looking at decades of even more frequent summer floods.

Although Mr. Cai's research on the IPO puts the problem in a new perspective, the basic issue isn't a new one for Australia. The IPO index previously went negative in the mid-1940s, reversing a severe drought that had crippled agricultural output during the Second World War. Over the next 30 years, it caused eight episodes of severe flooding in Queensland, including a devastating flood in Brisbane in January 1974 that claimed 14 lives. The index switched to positive in the late 1970s, bringing prolonged droughts to many regions of Australia. In February 2009, the south-eastern state of Victoria, then in the grip of drought, was hit by bushfires. The fires ripped through country towns, claiming 173 lives and causing widespread damage.

Because Australians have always experienced some climate variability in one form or the other, they have girded for it. The country has invested heavily in counter-measures in the agricultural sector such as seasonal climate forecasting and the development of drought resistant crops.

The trouble is that urban Australia still has a long way to go in making the right preparations. In the wake of the Queensland floods, there have been calls for tighter building codes and stricter urban planning regulations to keep houses and infrastructure away from the most flood-prone areas. Urban Australia certainly needs these two measures.

There's one more, though, that it shouldn't forget. Both droughts and floods can make potable water scarce. That's why water desalination plants are an important technological fix. The country has built two so far, in the states of Queensland (in the east) and in Western Australia. Several more are under construction. Water purification and recycling, stormwater harvesting and cloud seeding are also technological approaches under this banner. In order to protect its cities, Australia may do well to err on the side of overpreparation.

 Ms. Jones is a science journalist based in Canberra. 