It's a Memorial Day release that co-stars Brad Pitt and Sean Penn, boasts surreal visual effects and has the Internet buzzing in anticipation. But "The Tree of Life" isn't a typical popcorn flick; it comes from director Terrence Malick, whose cinematic trademarks include long, loving shots of leaves waving in the wind.

The movie follows a boy, growing up in the 1950s, whose life is alternately shaped by his earthy mother (Jessica Chastain) and his hard-shelled father (Mr. Pitt). As an adult, played by Mr. Penn, he grasps for meaning. Ahead of a limited May 27 release, Mr. Malick's film premieres Monday at the Cannes film festival, known for its embrace of directors associated with words like auteur and oeuvre.

Distributor Fox Searchlight has released scant details about the movie. In April the company launched a website, TwoWaysThroughLife.com, which offered bits of footage matched with cryptic descriptions, including an allusion to "the ascent of Life." Such glimpses—a boy swimming underwater, an asteroid smacking into Earth—suggest a film that draws connections between the human experience and something more cosmic. Fox Searchlight, known for savvy campaigns that launched breakouts like "Little Miss Sunshine," declined to comment. 

Mr. Malick is a former Rhodes Scholar and journalist who doesn't do interviews to promote his films. "Tree" is only the director's fifth feature film release since his resounding 1973 debut with "Badlands," starring Martin Sheen on a murder spree with his moll, played by Sissy Spacek. "The Thin Red Line," released in 1998, might be the most meditative World War II epic ever; it earned seven Oscar nominations. 

Because of built-in Malick fans, "the first $5 or 10 million [at the box office] won't be a problem. But how do you move it past that amount?" says Russell Schwartz, a former marketing executive for New Line Cinema, which released Mr. Malick's most recent film, "The New World."

The "Tree" website "sells some mood but no story," says Robert Marich, author of "Marketing to Moviegoers." He adds: "That's perplexing, this close to release." 

 Write to  John Jurgensen at john.jurgensen@wsj.com 