  (See Corrections & Amplifications item below.)  

Doctors and pharmacists are criticizing a U.S. drug company's decision to permanently halt production of an anesthetic used in carrying out the death penalty, saying the drug was still needed for some surgical procedures.

  Hospira Inc.,
HSP


-0.03
%




 the sole U.S. maker of the anesthetic thiopental sodium, decided Friday not to resume producing the drug after months of opposition by activists and others over its use in lethal injections, the only or primary execution method in the 35 states that carry out the death penalty.

But the medical community on Monday expressed concern that Hospira's decision could put some groups of patients at risk.

While doctors generally favor newer medications over thiopental for surgeries and other procedures, they still prefer it in certain cases, including those involving geriatric, cardiovascular and obstetric patients, "for whom the side effects of other medications could lead to serious complications," the American Society of Anesthesiologists said in a statement.

While voicing its opposition to thiopental's use in executions, the organization said that "it is an unfortunate irony that many more lives will be lost or put in jeopardy as a result of not having the drug available for its legitimate medical use."

The American Society of Health-System Pharmacists also voiced concern. Thiopental is vital for a "specific few high-risk patients, where there is not anything quite as safe," said Bona Benjamin, the organization's director of medication-use quality improvement. Thiopental is used in emergency caesarean sections, for example, because there is a risk that propofol, a more popular anesthetic, could sedate the infant, Ms. Benjamin said.

The society of health-system pharmacists, which represents 35,000 pharmacists, doesn't purchase thiopental from overseas suppliers because no foreign manufacturers of the drug have been approved by the Food and Drug Administration, Ms. Benjamin said. "We have a policy that opposes purchases of thiopental or any drug from a supplier where the pedigree can't be determined to be pure," she said.

The FDA does permit prisons to import drugs used in executions. The agency didn't return a call seeking comment. 

Hospira, based in Lake Forest, Ill., suspended U.S. production of thiopental in 2009 due to manufacturing issues, though it had planned to resume production this year at a facility in Italy. But government officials in Italy, which opposes the death penalty, demanded that Hospira prevent the drug from being used in capital punishment. Hospira had long opposed thiopental's use in execution, but it concluded it couldn't guarantee it wouldn't be used in lethal injections.

In an interview last week, Thomas Moore, Hospira's president, U.S. region, called its decision to halt production necessary but unfortunate. "We are in the business of providing medicines for patients, and we are now put in a decision of not being able to do that and that's regrettable," Mr. Moore said.

Reached Monday, Hospira didn't have anything to add to Mr. Moore's comments.

 Write to  Nathan Koppel at nathan.koppel@wsj.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications 

The American Society of Health-System Pharmacists doesn't purchase drugs. A previous version of this article incorrectly implied that it does.