KABUL—Afghan and coalition officials are considering a plan to boost the manpower target for Afghanistan's security forces to around 400,000 soldiers and police, roughly a 30% increase over the current goal for the allied training mission. 

The plan's details are still being hashed out by Kabul and the U.S.-led coalition, whose eventual withdrawal depends on the ability of Afghan forces to take over security operations. Both Afghan and Western officials say they are in broad agreement on the need to bolster the Afghan security forces beyond the current target number.

"The war in Afghanistan needs more troops. We are facing a lack of security forces," said Gen. Mohammad Zahir Azimi, an Afghan defense ministry spokesman. He added that there is an "informal agreement" between Afghan forces and the international community on the 400,000 number.

The current goal, of 171,000 soldiers and 134,000 police, was announced about a year ago and was supposed to be reached later this year. As of October 2010, levels stood at 145,000 troops and 116,000 police.

Word of the plan to bolster the number of Afghan security forces came after Defense Secretary Robert Gates on Wednesday approved sending 1,400 additional Marine combat forces to Afghanistan ahead of the spring fighting season. The new Marines could start arriving later this month, officials said.

The timeline for the proposed increase in Afghan forces isn't yet clear. Under the plan being considered, the Afghan army would end up with between 200,000 to 240,000 soldiers with police and other forces making up the rest of the 400,000 total, Afghan officials said. 

"If that's what [the Afghans] are aiming for, we should encourage that," Liam Fox, the U.K.'s Defense Secretary, told journalists Wednesday in Kabul. "The earlier the Afghan government is able to get control, the quicker it will be possible for us to transition from a combat role."

Concerns over the quality of Afghan soldiers and police, and the cost of training more, had previously led coalition members to resist Afghan demands for the goal to be increased to 400,000, a numberthat some U.S. military commanders had earlier advocated.

The Afghan police, in particular, has been beset by problems including drug use and corruption. The army has had its own troubles, including retention issues: In September 2009, for instance, 1,200 soldiers deserted, compared with 800 recruited.

Some coalition commanders are reporting a turnaround in the Afghan army, with new recruits outnumbering deserters in recent months. These commanders also report improvement in the abilities of Afghan soldiers, which some officials say are being trained faster and at lower cost than previously envisioned.

Additional international funding to support extra troops will depend on quality targets being met, such as lowering the attrition rate and increasing the number of qualified mid-level commanders. Afghan and Western officials plan to discuss such issue this month, said U.S. Col. John Ferrari, a senior officer at the coalition training mission.

The Afghan government's international backers spent just over $20 billion on training and equipping Afghan forces between 2003 and 2009. A further $20 billion is being spent between last year and this; it isn't clear how much more it would cost to reach the newly proposed manpower targets.

Separately, suspected Taliban fighters attacked an Afghan tribal leader who days ago agreed to help coalition forces crack down on insurgents in a volatile southern district, tribal elders said. The attack left Haji Sayed Badaar Agha, a leader of the Alikozai tribe in the Sangin district of Helmand province, in critical condition, the elders said. The coalition said it was monitoring the situation but couldn't confirm reports of the attack.

Mr. Agha's tribe agreed Saturday to try to halt insurgent attacks and expel foreign militants from Sangin in exchange for foreign aid money.

— Adam Entous in Washington and Habib Khan Totakhil in Kabul contributed to this article.

 Write to  Alistair MacDonald at alistair.macdonald@wsj.com 