TRIPOLI, Libya—Mourners firing rifles into the air and shouting for revenge rallied outside a Tripoli cemetery Monday as the family of Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi buried his second-youngest son, killed in a weekend airstrike by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.

Col. Gadhafi was visible in dozens of large portraits held aloft by his followers, but not in person. Libyan officials said he and his wife escaped harm during the Saturday night attack, which also killed three of their young grandchildren at a gathering in one the family's residential compounds. The leader has not been seen in public since then.

"Revenge, revenge for you, Libya," chanted the crowd, which numbered more than 1,000. "We demand revenge for our martyrs."

The scene underscored the Gadhafi government's portrayal of the NATO bombing campaign as Western effort to kill the Libyan leader and seize the country's oil reserves. The crowd, however, was relatively small for such a politically charged event in a city of more than one million people, where the government claims overwhelming support.

NATO officials say they are striking the military and its communications facilities to shield civilians from a violent crackdown on a popular uprising against Col. Gadhafi's four decades of rule. They denied targeting the leader or his family in Saturday's strike on what they called a "known command and control center."

Track the latest events in Libya.

Track events day by day in the region.

See the level of unrest, plus the economic and politic status of some countries across North Africa and the Middle East.

Popular demonstrations in Tunisia toppled a president and spread to countries across the region. See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

A Muslim cleric who prayed over the coffin of the son, 29-year-old Saif al-Arab Gadhafi, denounced the "crusaders, occupiers and tyrants attacking Libya."

Libyans arriving in organized groups converged to watch as the coffin was unloaded from a black ambulance in a wide intersection outside al-Hani cemetery, where the Libyan leader's father is buried. Young men shimmied up lampposts for a better view. Col. Gadhafi's relatives and confidants rolled up in a caravan of 11 SUVs and sedans with three police escorts.

People jostled to get close as the ambulance inched through the crowd. It took security guards more than 10 minutes to clear space on the asphalt for the coffin, which was draped in the green Libyan flag and topped by flowers that wilted in the heat.

Saif al-Islam Gadhafi, wearing a black cloak, stood over the body of his younger brother and recited a verse from the Koran. Pallbearers took the body into the cemetery for burial in the sandy soil.Another older brother, Hannibal Gadhafi, and a half-brother, Mohammed Gadhafi, were also present.

Saif al-Arab, who had not finished university studies, was the sixth of the leader's seven sons and one of the least prominent. For the government, his death turned him into a symbol of martyrdom and defiance. State television announced that people in one Tripoli neighborhood had promised to name all males born there this month Saif al-Arab, which means "Sword of the Arabs."

Later Monday, the family was to bury the three children killed in the attack: 2-year-old Carthage, daughter of Hannibal Gadhafi; 5-month-old Mastura, daughter of Col. Gadhafi's daughter Aisha; and 15-month-old Seif Mohammed, son of Mohammed Gadhafi.

"This is a national loss," said Mohammed Naura, a 63-year-old engineer who attended the funeral.

The NATO attack provoked looting and burning by angry mobs Sunday at the closed embassies of the U.S., Britain and Italy in Tripoli. On Monday, Turkey said it had closed its embassy temporarily and evacuated staff because of deteriorating security in the capital.

Outside Libya, South Africa's government Monday denounced the NATO raid, saying "attacks on leaders and officials can only result in the escalation of tensions...and make future reconciliation difficult." Russia has also condemned the raid. On Monday, China renewed its call for a cease-fire.

NATO officials have said they would keep bombing until Col. Gadhafi's forces stop launching deadly attacks on civilian areas.

On Monday, the regime advanced its tanks to one edge of Misrata, the rebels' main stronghold in western Libya, and began shelling the besieged city, but then stopped as NATO planes flew overhead, according to news agency reports.