WASHINGTON—Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman  Mary Schapiro said her agency would seek to weigh any potential changes to U.S. stock-offering rules against the SEC's mission to protect investors.

The SEC is conducting a broad review of the rules with an eye toward changes that could expand the booming market in private shares of technology firms such as Facebook Inc. and Twitter Inc. The agency is considering whether to ease a decades-old requirement that private companies with 500 or more shareholders make lengthy financial disclosures and a rule prohibiting closely held companies from advertising their shares, known as the "general solicitation" ban. 

House Republicans are pushing for changes to the rules, arguing that restrictions on private stock sales and the costs of complying with SEC rules for public stock offerings are hampering companies' ability to raise capital.

Rep. Darrell Issa (R., Calif.), the panel's chairman, said private capital formation in the U.S. "is increasingly difficult." 

Ms. Schapiro said the agency would be mindful of both companies' needs and investors' interests as it proceeds.

"While we have an important responsibility to facilitate growing companies' access to America's investment capital, we must balance that responsibility with our obligation to protect investors and our markets," Ms. Schapiro told the House Oversight Committee on Tuesday.

"Too often, investors are the target of fraudulent schemes disguised as investment opportunities," she said. Ms. Schapiro said such frauds accounted for 22% of the commission's enforcement cases in fiscal year 2010.

Ms. Schapiro said the review was "front and center" on the SEC's agenda, but indicated it would take some time. She said the SEC staff will have to gather data from closely held companies that have issued private shares in order to determine whether the 500-shareholder threshold should be raised. The data "will be hard to get because they are private companies," she said. 

The SEC also will analyze the constitutional issues raised by the general-solicitation ban, she said. Some critics argue the ban violates free-speech protections. SEC Corporate Finance Division Director  Meredith Cross said the SEC may issue a document later this year posing a series of questions about the general-solicitation ban and seek comment from the public. 

Ms. Schapiro argued that existing regulations aren't preventing many small companies from going public. She said roughly 40% of companies that went public in the 12 months that ended in September were small companies. 

Rep. Patrick McHenry (R., N.C.) pressed Ms. Schapiro to move toward excluding so-called institutional investors and so-called accredited investors, who have at least $1 million in net worth, from the shareholders who count toward the 500-shareholder threshold. 

"This is exactly the issue we're looking at," Ms. Schapiro said. She acknowledged the threshold, which was instituted by a 1964 law, was arbitrary. 

Ms. Schapiro, however, voiced concerns about loosening the general-solicitation ban, saying it could make it easier for fraudsters to cast a "very wide net" in a private offering and target the elderly and other vulnerable people.

"The frauds can be devastating to investors," she said.

 Write to  Jessica Holzer at jessica.holzer@dowjones.com 