BEIJING—China aims to trim its national budget deficit this year to 900 billion yuan ($137 billion), equivalent to 2% of gross domestic product, down from a 1 trillion yuan deficit that accounted for 2.5% of GDP last year. 

China targeted keeping last year's national budget deficit within 3% of GDP. 

The narrower deficit target comes as China exits a 4 trillion yuan stimulus package adopted in the past two years. China has also tightened monetary policy and cooled the property sector in a bid to curb inflation and asset bubbles. 

The Ministry of Finance's budget report, issued during the National People's Congress, the annual legislative session, said China expects national budget revenue of 8.972 trillion yuan this year, up 8%, and national spending of 10.022 trillion yuan, up 11.9%. 

Including a 150 billion yuan contribution from the government's central budget stabilization fund—effectively a 'rainy day' fund—the ministry expects national budget revenue of 9.122 trillion yuan 

That contribution will reduce the stabilization fund's balance from 236.813 billion yuan at the end of last year to 86.813 billion yuan at the end of this year.

Despite the narrower budget deficit this year, the ministry reiterated that "China will continue its active fiscal policy". 

However, "fiscally, there is still a significant imbalance between our revenue and expenditure," the ministry said in the annual report. 

Cuts in taxes including personal income tax, "unsustainable fast growth in exports and imports" and a high base of comparison last year will produce slower revenue growth this year, the ministry said. 

"China is under very big pressure on expenditure as it needed to increase fiscal expenditures" on certain parts of the public sector, such as education, health, social security, subsidies for low-income people, as well as combating inflation pressures, the ministry said. 

China's total revenue came to 8.318 trillion yuan last year, including national fiscal revenue of 8.308 trillion yuan and 10 billion yuan from the central budget stabilization fund.

Expenditure totaled 9.318 trillion yuan last year, including national expenditure of 8.9575 trillion yuan and spending from the central budget stabilization fund of 2.248 billion yuan. 

—  Liu Li contributed to this article.

