BENTIU, Sudan—This week's independence referendum in southern Sudan marks an apparent victory for U.S. foreign policy in east Africa—one that has secured for Washington a deeper advisory role in what is expected to be the birth of a new, impoverished nation. 

As southern Sudanese cast votes through Saturday on whether to separate from Sudan's north, they are expected to choose independence overwhelmingly. Southern officials said Wednesday that turnout for the referendum—the culmination of decades of civil wars between the mostly Christian south and predominantly Muslim north that has left millions dead and millions more displaced—had reached the 60% threshold required to validate the results.

Key events in Sudan's political development

A key player in this effort is retired Air Force Gen. Scott Gration, the U.S. special envoy to Sudan. In pressing for the vote, he came under criticism for negotiating with the administration of Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir, a northerner indicted for war crimes and under U.S. sanctions.

Now the top U.S. diplomat on Sudan is at the center of the U.S.'s next challenge here—assisting in the delicate process of helping to secure what many hope will be a lasting peace among two sides entangled by oil disputes, territorial disagreements and decades of violence.

Sudan is a top U.S. foreign-policy priority in Africa, seen as a bulwark in a volatile east and central Africa beset by terror threats and rebel groups. Should Sudan return to conflict, it could cost thousands of lives, set back the region's nascent economic progress and cost as much as $100 billion over a decade in peacekeeping efforts and regional economic losses, estimates Frontier Economics, a London-based research firm. 

Even if the south secedes as expected, the north and south must still decide on how to share oil revenues. Production and concessions in the oil-rich south have long been controlled by the north, and it will take time before the south is able to assume control of the business or open its doors to Western companies. 

An independent south Sudan would depend on U.S. and other Western support to build its infrastructure, which is now almost nonexistent. Other unresolved issues include ethnic divisions within the south's own territory as well as the fate of Abyei, a region disputed between north and south where territorial clashes between rival ethnic groups broke out this week. 



The distance left to cover was clear during a visit this week by Gen. Gration to Bentiu, a dusty regional capital alongside a sleepy river.

Taban Deng, the local governor, sat alongside Gen. Gration in the shade of an old tree, away from the sweltering heat and the town's mud-and-stick huts and metal-shack shops. When, the governor wanted to know, would the diplomat bring American investors to town?

"You need to have security, infrastructure, first," Gen. Gration said, adding: "And swimming pools—Americans love swimming pools."

The governor laughed. But his question underscored the expectations southerners have placed on the U.S. amid its larger role as a mediator and adviser. The south still struggles to provide basic services for its people—about 90% live on less than $1 a day. For now, much of the government budget is spent on salaries and equipment for its security forces, which it views as essential to keeping the peace.

A referendum over the fate of south Sudan was a condition of a peace agreement brokered in 2005 to end the last civil war between the north and south. Many in south Sudan were skeptical that it would ever be held. 

"When I took this job, very few people thought we'd have an opportunity to have a referendum on time," said Gen. Gration, a former fighter pilot who is the son of missionaries to Africa.

"I'm not saying I did it—I don't think that I did," Gen. Gration said in a conversation aboard a charter plane as it flew over vast, unpopulated stretches of southern Sudan, a region slightly larger than Texas. "But the Obama administration's approach has yielded some positive results."

The vote was pushed over the past six months by longtime U.S. Africa diplomat Princeton Lyman and U.S. Sen. John Kerry, who in part cajoled the central government in the northern city of Khartoum. In a letter to the government, President Barack Obama wrote that if Khartoum let the referendum proceed peacefully and on time, the U.S. would consider removing Sudan from its list of terrorism sponsors.

Gen. Gration has been criticized by groups like the Enough Project, an antigenocide group that focuses mainly on the Darfur region in western Sudan. These people have said he has been too soft on Mr. Bashir's regime, which has been for decades accused of committing atrocities against civilians. Within the administration, U.N. Ambassador Susan Rice also favored a more forceful approach to Khartoum.

John Prendergast, an Enough Project founder, credited Mr. Obama's leadership and the southern government's determination. The cajoling of Mr. Bashir's representatives by Gen. Gration and others, he adds, was "important" but less significant than the efforts from other players. 

Gen. Gration said talks with the north have been essential to advancing the peace process. Mr. Bashir "is the president of the sovereign nation where we work," he said. "There's no question he's calling the shots. Obviously, there are things we don't like. But we work with what we like, and try to influence change with what's not acceptable."

Southern officials haven't always all welcomed Gen. Gration's outreach to Khartoum. But on Monday, Riek Machar, the charismatic vice president of southern Sudan, said he approved of the U.S. efforts. 

Now that the referendum is out of the way, Mr. Machar said it would be easier for the south and north to resolve outstanding issues—Abyei, he said, being the priority. "This time we will devote our time to it more," he said, speaking from a plastic chair set out in the shade near his home. "We have this issue to address squarely, without trying to get trade-offs."