I am sick of reading about rich people in Forbes.

The magazine came out with its "2011 World's Billionaires" list last week and all I can say is Carlos Slim Helu,  Bill Gates, Warren Buffett, Larry Ellison, the Walton family, and blah, blah, blah can shove it.

The odds that capitalism will get anybody where they are today aren't even as good as Powerball.

If you want to be a billionaire, but have no talent, no ideas, no technology and nothing really to offer the world besides misery, the best way to get there is to become a Middle Eastern dictator.

Why revolutionize something, or suffer brain damage analyzing investments, when you can just be Moammar Gadhafi?

All over the world, countries are freezing the Libyan dictator's assets. Tens of billions here. Tens of billions there. (My favorite headline: "Canada Freezes Gadhafi's Assets." Doesn't Canada freeze everything?)

There's a snowball's chance these freezes will matter. This terrorist head of state has secreted away "tens of billions" more, according to a report in the New York Times on Thursday, citing unidentified sources.

Mr. Gadhafi must be quite a saver considering he once said his salary was 465 dinars, or about $380. Of course, the line where Mr. Gadhafi's billions end and where Libya's billions begin is not even something a Big Four accounting firm could find.

The easiest calculation is to count everything as his -- or he will send in his jets to kill you. He is no ordinary billionaire, you see. He is a killionaire.

Richer than all the world's richest people -- at least according to some estimates -- is none other than deposed Egyptian President  Hosni Mubarak. Some media reports have put his net worth at more than $70 billion, which would put Mr. Mubarak billions ahead of all the others on the Forbes list.

Mr. Mubarak reportedly made an annual salary of about 4,500 Egyptian pounds, or $765. But if he had saved every penny he made over the last 92 million years....

It's doubtful Mr. Mubarak is worth $70 billion, according to Forbes' wealth tracker  Kerry A. Dolan. "The biggest problem with these estimates is they are just guesses," she writes, "with no proof backing them up."

But every estimate is a guess, and when you get right down to it, any billion is too many billion for a propped-up blight on humanity -- even if we were the ones who propped them up.

If a U.S. president left office with a $1 billion net worth, it would be considered evidence of a crime. And there would sure be a lot of hearings -- at least until the next president issued a full pardon.

OK, so perhaps I'm suffering another bout of class envy. But it hacks me off that  Osama bin Laden, the son of a Saudi billionaire, will die far richer than me, if he hasn't already.

Or how about that Saddam Hussein? His net worth was once estimated at more than $2 billion. But I have come to think of him as the world's first trillionaire.

Actually, he was worth more than $3 trillion. Or at least that's what it cost to hang him.

—Al Lewis is a columnist for Dow Jones Newswires in Denver. He blogs at tellittoal.com; his email address is al.lewis@dowjones.com.