  Seeing photos of the floods in Australia made me realize I don't know much about that country (I liked the movies "Breaker Morant" and "Crocodile Dundee"). What books (fiction or not) would give me a good picture of "the land down under"?  

— C.R., Eugene, Ore. 

There was a time when the phrase "Australian literature" was—wrongly—dismissed as a contradiction in terms. Australia has long been a land of readers, but for much of the country's history, those readers were in the grip of their colonial parent's publishing industry. Aspiring Australian writers felt they had to leave their country to succeed. An Australian critic, Donald Horne, wrote that in Australia in the 1940s, there was no market for serious homegrown literature—and no one to publish it anyway. "There seemed something so dull about Australia that it might not be possible to write well while living in it," he said.

It seems odd to me that a country whose first settlers were criminals wouldn't produce interesting characters and high drama. If you start with Peter Carey's historical novel, "True History of the Kelly Gang," you'll get a taste of the outlaw spirit of the 19th-century bushranger. Kate Grenville's novel "The Secret River" gets inside the harsh, often violent lives of the early British convicts sentenced to the penal colony. A quirkier and thoroughly entertaining nonfiction book, "The Floating Brothel" by Sian Rees, tells of the year-long voyage of a ship carrying 240 female criminals to Sydney Bay in the 18th century; unsurprisingly, when the ship arrived, a number of infants disembarked.

Patrick White ("Voss"; "The Vivisector") was the first Australian to win the Nobel Prize for Literature (in 1973). David Malouf, sometimes referred to as White's successor, has written several superb novels including "The Great World," which won the Commonwealth Writers' Prize. 

Australia is vast, remote and sparsely populated, and perhaps no one feels the effects of the country's extreme geography more acutely than children. Two engaging childhood memoirs are Jill Ker Conway's "The Road from Coorain," about the author's early years on a 30,000-acre sheep farm and her escape to Sydney and the U.S.; and Clive James's "Unreliable Memoirs," his reminiscences of growing up in suburban Sydney after World War II: "The young hero of the book is not a sociopath, a natural delinquent or an incipient libertine," Mr. James wrote in a preface to a recent edition. "He is just young."

—Send your questions about books and reading to Cynthia Crossen at booklover@wsj.com.