HOUSTON—Rep. Gabrielle Giffords was moved from a hospital to a rehabilitation facility here as her speech and other functions continued to improve, less than three weeks after she was shot in the head at a public event in Tucson, Ariz.

"We have noticed daily improvements in her neurological condition," said neurosurgeon Dong Kim, adding, "It really is lightning speed."

Continued cerebral spinal-fluid buildup in her skull had kept Ms. Giffords in the intensive-care unit of Memorial Hermann-Texas Medical Center after she was transferred to Texas from a Tucson hospital on Friday, but doctors were able to remove a drain that was no longer needed to relieve pressure on her brain.

They moved Ms. Giffords by ambulance shortly after 9 a.m. Wednesday to Memorial Hermann's Institute for Rehabilitation and Research, a 119-bed facility that is renowned for treating survivors of traumatic brain and spinal-cord injuries. Her husband, astronaut Mark Kelly, accompanied her on the short trip to the rehabilitation center.

Ms. Giffords is gradually following more complex commands and can breathe independently of the tube in her throat, which was replaced with a smaller version and will eventually be removed altogether, doctors said. The tube makes it hard for her to speak, but doctors said they are seeing continuing evidence that she is capable of voicing her thoughts.

Ms. Giffords is working with a team of therapists to improve her speech and strengthen her endurance and range of motion, including her ability to stand and sit upright for long periods. She has handled the treatment well and is starting to resume normal sleep patterns, her doctors said. Doctors described Ms. Giffords as "very interactive" with visitors to her room, especially family.

"It's a busy afternoon already, and we anticipate it getting longer," Gerard Francisco, the rehabilitation center's chief medical officer, said of her treatment schedule.

Doctors once again called her progress remarkable, echoing statements from physicians who initially treated Ms. Giffords in Arizona. They cautioned that she faces many months of recovery and has many milestones to pass, both at the rehabilitation center and later as an outpatient.

Jared Lee Loughner, the suspect in the shooting rampage Jan. 8 that killed six and wounded 13 others, pleaded not guilty Monday in a Phoenix federal courtroom to charges that he attempted to murder Ms. Giffords and other U.S. employees. He is expected to face further charges.

 Write to  Miguel Bustillo at miguel.bustillo@wsj.com 