The swollen Mississippi River rose to its highest level in nearly 75 years near Memphis, Tenn., Monday, inundating low-lying neighborhoods and acres of farmland and pushing up wholesale gasoline prices as fuel terminals along the waterway closed.

Authorities warned residents in about 1,350 homes across Shelby County to move to higher ground, and more than 380 people took refuge in four area shelters amid a deluge fed by runoff from melting snow and heavy spring rains. The river was expected to crest at a height of 48 feet late Monday or early Tuesday, just shy of the city's record of 48.7 feet set in 1937. The river's typical depth this time of year is 28 feet to 30 feet.

Floodwalls and levees along the river showed no signs of stress. But the Wolf and Loosahatchie rivers, less-fortified local tributaries, backed up as they met a "wall of water" at the Mississippi, a county official said. 

Downtown Memphis sits atop a bluff and remained dry, as did the nearby musical landmark Graceland. And the floods weren't expected to halt Monday night's scheduled NBA playoff game in the city. 

See the latest data from flood gauges throughout the Midwest and South.

But other parts of the metropolitan area bordering the Mississippi have suffered flooding, including at least four trailer parks. County officials said about 3,500 homes could be affected by flooding.

Some poorer neighborhoods in the northern part of the city were underwater, with raw sewage leaking from backed up sewers and pools of trash eddying in the current. But most homes appeared untouched as children walked home from schools.

"There is no concern of a levee failing, no concern of a levee overtopping," said Steven Barry, chief of emergency operations at the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers for the Memphis district.

Local authorities reported no casualties as of Monday afternoon, though flooding could be seen from the air for miles along the Mississippi. Bends and adjacent farmland near Memphis had disappeared beneath an expanse of brown water. 

The closure of several fuel terminals along the Mississippi and possible U.S. Coast Guard restrictions on barge traffic have spurred worries about disruptions in supply. Bids for unleaded conventional grade gasoline in the Chicago market were 20 cents a gallon above June prices on the New York Mercantile Exchange, up more than 10 cents from Friday, despite last week's dramatic drop in oil prices. One terminal in Vicksburg, Miss., is expected to run out of product early next week, a fuel trader said. The river in that area was higher than 50 feet, or seven feet above its flood stage, making barge traffic difficult. 

The Mississippi was about three miles wide Monday near Memphis, three times as wide as normal, according to the National Weather Service. 

Huge pools of trash littered the expanded banks. Riverside Drive along the Mississippi and below downtown Memphis lay underwater. Several roads in the northern part of the city were closed, but the main airport remained open and the Mississippi was open to barge traffic.

Floodwaters spread along streets and into homes in working-class north Memphis neighborhoods near the Loosahatchie Monday. Arthur Burton and Penny Cumbie sat on the steps outside their home, which was still dry, though their yard was a lake full of foul-smelling sewage and bloated drowned worms.

"We didn't expect to have no lake on this property," Ms. Cumbie said. 

The couple had moved some furniture and sentimental items to the upper floor, but considered themselves lucky, since neighbors had been forced into shelters. 

"There's nothing to do but sit here and ride it out," Mr. Burton said. 

—Ben Lefebvre contributed to this article.

 Write to  Mike Esterl at mike.esterl@wsj.com 