 Hong Kong 

Last Sunday, the Chinese-American composer Bright Sheng walked onstage at Hong Kong's Academy of Performing Arts to introduce a concert of contemporary chamber music. After the customary thanks to musicians and sponsors came an unusual addendum. He thanked "Hong Kong, an open city. And when you a sign a contract here, it means something." That's not typical composer-speak.

Granted, it was no ordinary concert. Chosen from dozens of applicants, six young composers traveled to Hong Kong last month for the inaugural year of an elite musical workshop at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. Older, more prominent musicians, Grammy- and Pulitzer-winners among them, rehearsed and critiqued the youngsters' works. Such a program's very existence in Hong Kong challenges the conventional view of the former British colony as a cultural desert more suited to Hermès handbags than Handel or Han Dynasty sculpture.

Received wisdom holds up mainland China as the real cultural heavyweight in this part of the world. Classical-music circles in particular have been abuzz for the past few years over how China's booming middle class could revive the genre's flagging fortunes. Obscure cities like Zhengzhou and Wuhan are throwing up new concert halls, and every upwardly mobile family wants a piano to keep up with the Wangs next door.

Beijing has garnered economic and military might, and now craves "soft power." It has become a national-policy goal: Section Ten of the Twelfth Five-Year Plan, approved in March, exhorts cadres to "Promote Great Development and Great Flourishing in Culture" and to "strengthen the international competitiveness and influence of Chinese culture, increasing soft power." The government pumps enormous sums into high-profile cultural undertakings, like the roughly three billion yuan ($460 million) for Beijing's egg-like National Center for Performing Arts (NCPA).

Mr. Sheng, a Shanghai native, would seem an ideal draftee in Beijing's quest for creative prestige. In 1978, he joined China's first crop of college freshmen since the Cultural Revolution shuttered schools the decade before, enrolling in the Shanghai Conservatory. He was also among the earliest Chinese students sent abroad in the post-Mao era, landing at Columbia University and later becoming a protégé of Leonard Bernstein.

Mr. Sheng's 2001 MacArthur "genius" grant propelled him into an elite circle of globally famous Chinese composers. His peers include Tan Dun, an Oscar-winner for the "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon" soundtrack, also with a premiere at New York's Metropolitan Opera to his name; Chen Qigang, a student of the late French composer Olivier Messiaen who returned from Paris to oversee music for Beijing's 2008 Olympics; and Zhou Long, winner of this year's Pulitzer Prize for music.

China's cultural commissars dangle plum opportunities—like star turns in Olympic pageantry, lavish commissions, or prestigious academic perches—to entice such luminaries to return, and many do. "It's certainly true that the pull of working in China is very strong. I consider myself a patriot, and I feel a bit guilty for leaving China and living in the West [during the] thirty years of economic reform," explained Mr. Sheng, who now teaches full-time at the University of Michigan.

So why is his workshop based at a 20-year-old science university with no music department, in a city pegged as a cultural laggard? Why not the warm embrace of a prestigious Chinese conservatory?

Mr. Sheng is blunt: "Well, you don't have to bribe anyone here. We can focus only on quality, nothing else." The political undertow of life in the mainland often takes a toll on musicians and other artists.

In China's musical world, just as in the country's business sphere, political connections matter, corruption is rife, and a corrosive cynicism rewards political cronies. So, the quality of artistic output is often akin to melamine milk or leaden toys. Patrons of the arts, mostly within China's business-political elite, exercise a high degree of control early and often when making artistic commissions. Instead of art-by-artist, mainland audiences frequently get art-by-committee. Room for experimentation decreases—what government official or businessman will support a risky experiment or outspoken work? No wonder, say, that new operas commissioned for the NCPA in Beijing over the past few years have been mostly saccharine, lumbering monstrosities.

The undertow can be sudden and severe. Persuaded to return from France for the Olympics, the mild-mannered Mr. Chen found himself dragged into a controversy over a little girl's lip-syncing an opening ceremony song, "Ode to the Motherland"—a scandal that resulted from intense political pressure for the event to look flawless. Cellist Yo-Yo Ma, raised in the West, found himself banned from performing in China for several years after recording the film score to "Seven Years in Tibet." The artist Ai Weiwei, who has been outspoken about Beijing's human rights record for the past few years, has not been seen for a month.

Hong Kong may lack a prestigious cultural pedigree, but it does offer artists basic protections and freedoms. "It's quite normal here, just like anywhere else we would come to play," said Ara Gregorian, a violinist with the Daedalus Quartet. The ensemble came to Hong Kong from New York last month for Mr. Sheng's workshop. 

A careful observer will also discover in Hong Kong facets of old China, such as classical turns of phrase and folk art, which have been lost or mutilated in putative cultural centers like Beijing. Preoccupied with trade, Hong Kong's former British masters never saw fit to launch upheavals like the Cultural Revolution. That's why Hong Kong has generally been spared the forced, Disney-fied quality that comes with regime-sponsored culture in the mainland.

If more musicians like Mr. Gregorian come to create in Hong Kong, will the arts world sustain its interest in the mainland after the novelty fades? Mr. Sheng is optimistic about the long term. "I think China can get there, but it will take time for legal and educational reforms to catch up." For now, though, he anticipates keeping his program, slated to return yearly, in the relative safety of Hong Kong. On May 8, Mr. Sheng's program will showcase another week of creativity, just over a month after Mr. Ai disappeared.

 Mr. Frisch, a 2009-10 Fulbright Fellow at the Central Conservatory of Music in Beijing, is a writer in Hong Kong. 