March has been billed as a decisive month for the euro zone. An avalanche of summits and finance ministers meetings are scheduled in coming weeks, culminating in a summit of European Union leaders at the end of the month.

By then, governments have pledged to amend the currency bloc's current bailout fund to increase its lending capacity and make it more flexible, settle a permanent €500 billion ($693 billion) facility to come into operation in 2013, and agree on a so-called competitiveness pact to fix weaknesses in the frailer economies. 

"At stake in the coming weeks is whether we will finally turn the corner," European Council President Herman Van Rompuy said this week. He confidently predicted that would be the case. "This month will be a turning point" for the euro zone, he said.

But his audience, at a Brussels conference organized by the London-based Centre for European Reform and insurer Allianz, were less sure. Some members expressed a fear that again euro-zone governments would "overpromise and underdeliver" in the face of the crisis.

Others argued that the diagnosis of the currency area's crisis and the proposed remedies, largely set by the bailout funds' largest paymaster, Germany, were incomplete and one-sided.

Mr. Van Rompuy argued that an "invisible loss of competitiveness was at the heart of the problem." Low interest rates and monetary stability had hidden a decline in competitiveness of euro-zone economies. Curing that loss of competitiveness, while ensuring a return to sustainable government finances, is thus at the heart of the solution.

But the diagnosis, and therefore the solution, both have weaknesses, according to some at the meeting. 

Mario Monti, a former prominent member of the European Commission and a champion of the European single market, argued that, in some respects, the competitiveness pact doesn't go far enough. It's "full of good instincts but it's pretty chaotic in economic and institutional terms," he said.

He suggested one of the pact's potential weaknesses was that it was being put together as a political fix to help satisfy Germany, where bailing out weak economies is deeply unpopular, rather than addressing real economic issues. 

"I think the worst thing would be to put together something that, in order to satisfy in the short term the urge for discipline felt in particular by German citizens, turns out to be hard to implement in the longer term," he said.

That would risk a repeat of what happened to the original euro-zone stability pact, designed in the 1990s to keep budget deficits and government debts low, but whose strictures were ignored when they became inconvenient in 2003 for France and Germany.

One key omission: the effort to reinforce the European single market as a way to open up sectors of the euro-zone economy that are shielded from the winds of competition, such as services, energy and the digital economy. In some of these areas, Mr. Monti said "euro-zone countries are behind non-euro-zone countries" such as the U.K. and need to raise their game. 

The pact aims to "shift to a higher level of economic integration and policy coordination, but offers only perfunctory respect to the single market, which is the very essence of integration," he said.

But the shielded sectors he views as most needing competition are not all at the periphery of the euro zone, but also at the core. One important example: Germany's inefficient retail sector.

That reinforces another criticism from others at the conference: that the competitiveness pact appears to be a lopsided effort designed to give Germany and other core economies none of the burden of economic adjustment.

In fact, said Philip Whyte of the Centre for European Reform, "the word competitiveness seems to have become a substitute for that of imbalance." It is the euro zone's imbalances—the big current-account surpluses run by Germany and the other core economies and the big deficits being run by the peripheral economies—that he sees at the root of the euro zone's problems.

"The political significance is that defining an imbalance as a problem of competitiveness shifts all the onus on to deficit countries to reform. Surplus countries face no such pressure, since their external position is interpreted as a mark of their competitiveness," Mr. Whyte said.

Seeing macroeconomic imbalances through the prism of "competitiveness" creates all sorts of problems. There are high-productivity economies, such as the U.S., that run large external deficits. One highly competitive economy—Ireland—is in deep trouble, and some supposedly highly competitive economies, such as Germany, have big problems of domestic productivity.

This month's agreement won't go into the imbalances debate. In fact, Mr. Van Rompuy indicated some of the original ideas floated unofficially by the German government for the competitiveness pact wouldn't be adopted: "For instance, the end of wage indexation would concern only three or four countries, and the way it operates in those countries is not necessarily a problem." 

But that was not a softening of ideas, he said. "No, on the contrary, it broadens them." Whether the financial markets agree, we shall soon see.

 Corrections & Amplifications: Philip Whyte said: "The political significance is that defining an imbalance as a problem of competitiveness shifts all the onus on to deficit countries to reform. Surplus countries face no such pressure, since their external position is interpreted as a mark of their competitiveness." In the initial version of this article, the quote was incorrectly attributed to Mario Monti.

 Write to  Stephen Fidler at stephen.fidler@wsj.com 