The majority of New York City restaurants are earning the top mark under a letter-grading system that took effect about six months ago.

According to the city's Department of Health and Mental Hygiene's six-month analysis, 57.2% of restaurants have earned A's under the grading system, while 30.2% received B's and 12.7% were given C's, the lowest grade. 

The results are based on inspections, through Jan. 12, of about 10,000 of the city's 24,000 food establishments subject to the grading system.

While the department lauded the results as exceeding its initial expectation that 30% of restaurants would receive A's the first year, those in the industry—most of whom staunchly opposed the system—were not as optimistic.

"Our goal is that the vast majority of New York City restaurants receive A's. However, the current structure of the letter grade system makes it difficult for even the most sanitary restaurant in New York City to receive an A on all inspections, not because they are not absolutely safe to eat at but because of the inherently misguided letter grading system," said Andrew Rigie, director of operations for the city's chapter of the New York State Restaurant Association. 

The city launched its restaurant-grading system last July. During inspections, food establishments are given violation points related to cleanliness and food-safety practices; the lower the score, the better the grade. 

Restaurants that don't receive an A on the first inspection are re-inspected about a month later. After the second inspection they must either post their letter grade at the entrance of the restaurant or appeal their grade to an administrative tribunal, during which time they can post a "Grade Pending" sign.

The department's analysis shows that restaurants are improving their performance between the first and second inspections. 

Only 27% of restaurants received A's on their first inspection, compared with 57.2% as a final grade. The percentage of restaurants receiving C's initially—32%—drops to 12.7% as a final grade. 

The news follows a marked change in the grading system announced by Mayor Michael Bloomberg in his State of the City speech last week. The change eliminates fines against restaurant owners whose establishments earn A grades at their first or second inspection. 

Each violation brings with it a fine of between $200 and $2,000.

Those in the industry had complained about more frequent inspections, which resulted in what they viewed as excessive fines. Previously, restaurants were inspected on average about once a year.

But even with the revised system, restaurant owners who receive an A on their re-inspection must pay the fines associated with their initial inspection. That led some restaurant owners to point to the city's statistics as proof that they are slapping restaurants with violations at the first inspection, and then going easier on the second inspection.

"Very few people will get that A upfront," said Bennett Orfaly, owner of about six Pita Grill restaurants and an Italian eatery. "They do that so you can get the A eventually but you still have to pay the initial fines. So it's a pat on the back."

Rafael Mateo, chef and owner of Pata Negra, who has chronicled his dealings with the health department inspectors on his blog, said he ultimately ended up with an A.

"I still think the system that is employed right now is so arbitrary," said Mr. Mateo, who said he paid several thousand dollars in fines over the past year. "I just feel like in this economy it's too punitive."

"I feel like I had to pay for my A," he added.

Robert Bookman, an attorney for the New York City chapter of the New York State Restaurant Association, called the results "disappointing."

"I think it's an embarrassment for the city of New York…that we're saying that 43 % of restaurants, almost half of them, don't qualify as an A restaurant according to our health department," he said.