NABLUS, West Bank—Two rival Palestinian factions felt the strains of implementing a unity pact after the West Bank's government ran out of money to pay tens of thousands of workers and Hamas accused Fatah of making political arrests of its members.

Meanwhile, a debate over who will be prime minister and the release of prisoners loomed as the first sensitive issues in the coming negotiations between Hamas, which is based in the Gaza Strip, and Fatah, of the West Bank.

A swift consensus on a cabinet and the freeing of imprisoned activists on both sides is viewed as crucial to countering widespread skepticism among Palestinians that the deal will advance.

The Palestinian public wants to end the feud and the regional turmoil of the so-called Arab Spring has raised the risks of continued division. But there are many unresolved details of reconciliation that the sides are just starting to address with multiple teams that they appointed over the weekend for follow-up negotiations in Cairo and Gaza scheduled to begin within days. 

Palestinian confidence is being strained by widespread anxiety about public-sector salaries that the Palestinian Authority said Monday had been delayed by a freeze on tax and customs revenue that Israel collects on its behalf. 

The Israeli government halted the payments last week, saying it didn't want the money to reach Hamas, which Israel and the U.S. consider a terrorist group. The Palestinian government said it couldn't pay the salaries of 160,000 government workers.

"Pessimism is the mainstream, unfortunately,'' said Bashar Azzeh, a leader of the youth protests that raised pressure on Palestinian leaders to seek a unity deal. "If the money situation persists, people could respond in a negative way to the reconciliation. Palestinians might come out in the streets to demonstrate, and it might look like they are protesting the reconciliation.''

Meanwhile, Hamas officials in recent days have accused the Palestinian security forces of making political arrests in the West Bank towns of Jenin and Hebron even after the signing of the unity pact last week. 

A Palestinian Authority spokesman said he wasn't aware of the arrests and said the security forces don't make politically motivated arrests.

The release of prisoners on both sides is considered a good-faith gesture that could be carried out relatively quickly. However, a large-scale clemency by the Palestinian Authority of Hamas activists could jeopardize security coordination with Israel's military and draw new fire from Israeli political leaders. 

"I know the [Palestinian Authority] security forces are not happy with the agreement, and some of them might fight it,'' said Abderrahman Zaidan, a legislator from the West Bank backed by Hamas. Mr. Abderrahman said he expected the release of 180 activists in Palestinian Authority jails within days as a sign that the authority is serious about the unity pact. "We are waiting for the first step," he said.

After helping sponsor the unity deal signed last week, Egypt's new government has substantial regional and international capital riding on successful implementation. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has assailed the deal as a blow to the peace process.

The prime minister appointment is considered crucial to reassuring the international community about sound public policy as the Palestinians campaign to get United Nations recognition of statehood in September.

Salam Fayyad, the existing prime minister, is the first choice of President Mahmoud Abbas, said Nabil Shaath, a Fatah negotiator, who added that he hoped a deal would be reached in two weeks. Mr. Fayyad, an independent politician regarded by the international community as moderate and pragmatic, is credited with overhauling Palestinian finances and security services.

Hamas officials have signaled their preference for a candidate from Gaza, the coastal enclave which the Islamic militants have controlled since 2007. In the past, Hamas has criticized Mr. Fayyad for cooperating with the U.S. in training Palestinian security forces who have arrested Islamist activists in the West Bank.

If Hamas persists in opposing Mr. Fayyad, Mr. Shaath said Fatah might agree to electing Munib Masri, a 78-year-old Palestinian business tycoon who has campaigned for unity, as a compromise. Mr. Masri said this year will be a turning point for the Palestinians as they try to implement unity and get international recognition for statehood.Both sides are supposed agree on a cabinet of technocrats that will serve until elections can be held within a year.

In the days after the accord there has been the first easing of political restrictions in years, as Hamas supporters have been permitted to hold demonstrations in the West Bank and Fatah activists have been allowed to fly party flags in Gaza.

Beyond that, little has changed, as Hamas and Fatah continue their divided rule over Gaza and the West Bank. Israeli newspapers have reported that Palestinian and Israeli security cooperation has continued.