Yield-starved investors soon may have another place to reap higher dividends: bank stocks.

The sector has long been popular with retail investors because of its healthy dividends. But banks were forced to cut or suspend their payouts during the financial crisis. Now, many are anxious to raise dividends or buy back shares to underscore their improved health. But before they can, banks must pass the Federal Reserve's latest "stress test"—the results of which will be disclosed to them later this month. 

  Bank of America Corp.
BAC


3.47
%




 and  J.P. Morgan Chase
JPM


0.13
%




 & Co., for example, have recently said they hope to raise their dividends soon, pending approval from the Fed.

That is prompting fund managers and other investors to load up on financial stocks to capture bigger payouts and potentially higher share prices.

Average dividend yields were typically 3% or more before the financial crisis; today, they are about 0.9%, says  Nancy Bush, an industry analyst and contributing editor at SNL Financial LC, a research firm based in Charlottesville, Va. "The fact that they have not been allowed to pay a normal dividend has been a stigma on the industry," she says. "These companies are very anxious to begin to return cash to shareholders who have been very, very patient." 

Last November, the Fed said the nation's 19 largest banks would have to submit new capital plans by early January to demonstrate that they have enough cash on hand—even in various stress scenarios—to raise their dividends or buy back shares. (All 19 banks had to submit plans even if they weren't planning to raise dividends or repurchase shares.) 

The Federal Reserve is expected to privately notify those banks on or before March 21 of the results of its review. Analysts expect many of these financial institutions will raise their dividends soon after. 

Bank stocks have run up in recent months partly on anticipation of higher dividend yields. On Tuesday, shares of Bank of America, whose current dividend yield is 0.28%, jumped 4.7% on news that it had asked the Fed to allow it to approve a "moderate" increase in its dividend in the second half of the year. Other financial stocks, including J.P. Morgan,  American Express Co.
AXP


-0.19
%




,  PNC Financial Services Group Inc.,
PNC


0.64
%




 Citigroup Inc.
C


1.20
%




 and  Wells Fargo
WFC


1.50
%




 & Co. also rose in trading on Tuesday. 

The dividend yields are currently 0.44% for J.P. Morgan, 1.64% for American Express, 0.64% for PNC and 0.62% for Wells Fargo. Citigroup hasn't issued a dividend in two years.

Of course, banks still need to work through a lot of issues, such as nonperforming loans, new regulations and stubbornly depressed housing prices. Investors, says Morningstar Inc. analyst  Timothy Strauts, should limit bank stocks to a small portion of their portfolio. "Financials are not for the weak of heart," he says.

Nevertheless, experts say there still is room for bank stocks to run if the banks can lay out details of plans to increase their dividends. 

"You'll see the stronger companies come out with decent-sized dividends and articulate a road map to potentially doubling it over the next couple of years," says  Gus Zinn, who co-manages the  Waddell & Reed Core Investment Fund. The fund has been building up positions in J.P. Morgan, Wells Fargo, and  Capital One Financial Corp.
COF


1.54
%




 Financial stocks now make up about 11% of the fund, a 50% increase from last summer. 

But investors may want to temper their expectations since banks aren't likely to return to their precrisis level of dividends—at least initially. "The bottom line is that bank stocks used to be about 30% of all dividends in 2007, but make up only 9% today," says  Howard Silverblatt, senior index analyst at Standard & Poor's. For one, the number of financial common shares is up 92% from 2008, diluting the potential impact of any dividend increase, he says. 

Banks also are likely to be cautious, in part because the Fed has said that any requests for dividend-payout ratios above 30% of after-tax net income will receive particularly close scrutiny. Since payout rates have typically been in the 35% to 45% range, SNL's Ms. Bush says, "I'm a bit more concerned that investors are going to be disappointed," which could initially hurt stock prices. Rather, she says, the "more interesting" opportunities for stock-price appreciation are banks that are "on the margin of being strong"—such as Bank of America—and aren't likely to be in the first wave of banks raising their dividends.

Some actively managed mutual funds with an income focus have been adding more bank holdings. The  Franklin Income Fund, for one, has been reducing its bond positions because it sees more opportunities in dividend-paying stocks. "We have been increasing our equity and preferred exposure in financials largely because of our view that we are on the cusp of seeing some dividend enhancements," says lead manager  Edward Perks, who has been buying the common and preferred stocks of J.P. Morgan, Wells Fargo and other financials for the past six months. 

  Dave Ellison, manager of the  FBR Large Cap Financial Investor Fund, says he has been buying banks mainly because of the improvement in their earnings. "The fact that they're going to start paying dividends implies the earnings are better," says Mr. Ellison, who has been picking up shares of Bank of America, J.P. Morgan, Citigroup, PNC and  U.S. Bancorp, among others, which each make up between 4% and 6% of the fund. 

Another way to play the banking sector is through exchange-traded funds, such as  Financial Select Sector SPDR,
XLF


0.88
%




 Vanguard Financials ETF and  iShares Dow Jones U.S. Financial Sector,
IYF


0.63
%




 which offer broad-based exposure to banks, insurance companies and real-estate investment trusts. Investors seeking more of a pure play on bank dividends can look to  SPDR KBW Bank,
KBE


0.79
%




 which tracks the nation's largest banks. In December, Morningstar added the KBW ETF to its model ETF portfolios in part, Morningstar's Mr. Strauts says, because of anticipated dividends and because financials seem finally to have turned the corner. 

 Write to  Jane J. Kim at jane.kim@wsj.com 