Think of a world without music. No  Beethoven or Beatles. Not even  Taylor Swift. It would be a sadder, even pathetic place. Well, that's what my world had become since my stereo upstate broke a few weeks ago.

Yes, my stereo. Circa 1968. We've got a Bose Wave radio/CD player. And a kitchen-counter speaker system with iPod dock. But I can't play my vinyl collection on them. 

Before I go further I probably ought to admit that I'm not a vinylphile or vinylfanatic or whatever the term of art is for someone who swears that records sound better than anything that's happened since. My library is composed of my own meager collection from the '60s and '70s, hand-me-downs and a bunch of 25-cent garage-sale finds—probably not a single one without a scratch. 

Also, more than a few skip at inopportune moments, such as  Bob Dylan's "It's Alright, Ma" from "Bringing It All Back Home," where, in the last verse, it jumps to "They'd probably put my head in a guillotine" from "And if my thought dreams," omitting the sense-making "could be seen."

And the instrument upon which they're spun? A portable KLH stereo that—I'm not making this up—conveniently transforms itself into a handsome, Samsonite-style suitcase, clips attaching the speakers to the turntable, for easy lugging. I think it sounds pretty good for its age and the modest size of the speakers, but not so good that the scratches greatly annoy you. 

However, it's not the same lad it was in its youth. Every half decade or so it starts to slow down from 33 1/3 to, say, 32 1/3. You'd be surprised what a big difference that makes to the music. Fortunately, there's still a place in my city neighborhood with the skills to fix such antiques and restore my Saturday nights to their normal riotousness—Cosmophonic Sound on First Avenue and 84th Street.

To confirm that they still existed I searched for them on the web before I went—it's been a few years since my stereo last started moving in slow motion. Luckily, they were there but had moved a few doors north, throwing me into temporary panic mode until I spotted their awning. 

These days, the bulk of Cosmophonic's business is installing high-end sound systems. But owner  Tom Papadopoulos said he still does a brisk business in codgers such as me who arrive with their college stereos. The problem isn't diagnosing them—Mr. Papadopoulos, 74 years old, studied electronics in the Greek army, went to the RCA Institute technical school when he moved to the U.S. and opened his own shop in 1975—it's finding parts, or improvising parts when he can't find them.

"Sometimes you find a broken one on  eBay,
EBAY


0.49
%




" he said, "and buy it for the parts." He was referring to machines such as the noble if careworn TEACs, Pioneers, Grundigs and Thorens he has for sale, or stacked in his storeroom belonging to customers and waiting to be repaired. They hearken back to an era when people debated and devoted the mental energy to their turntables, amplifiers and speakers (the bigger, generally, the better) that the Ancient Greeks did to questions such as the ideal form of government. 

I, obviously, wasn't among them, since I had the same all-in-one system I'm still listening to today. But my best friend in college was a stereo aficionado, which was a good thing. ("Metz Preens" was scrawled on classroom desktops the way "Kilroy Was Here" had been during World War II, a reference to his fanatical cleansing of the record surface with a disc preener to remove sound-distorting dust and debris.) 

Some of the most memorable moments of my college experience were spent with a bunch of sophomores piled into his cramped dorm room, deconstructing Simon and Garfunkel's "At the Zoo" or the soundtrack to "A Clockwork Orange" that careened from Beethoven's 9th to "Singin' In the Rain." Needless to say, some of us weren't entirely sentient. But the superior sound quality certainly enhanced the experience. 

I'm not going to debate what's superior—vinyl or digital—but one thing of which I'm reasonably confident is that it's pretty hard to crank up your average iPod speakers to the decibel levels of my friend's concert-level speakers.

Another advantage of the stereo equipment of yore, and the reason some of it is still around today, is that it's fixable. Mr. Papadopoulos said he contacted one manufacturer about a broken iPod-compatible speaker system a customer had dropped off and they told him to toss it. "It's not meant to be opened," he explained. "It doesn't pay for them to put screws on. They don't want to waste time carrying parts. If you want service, they say, 'Buy a new one.'"

Another reason the old equipment has survived, he said, is that the parts were metal. "Now it's all plastic," he said. 

He can fix just about anything. "A young couple from Brooklyn brought me a 1950s radio," he said. "They loved the sound."

He restored my KLH to its former adolescent glory, its problems remedied by cleaning, lubricating it and replacing some bearings. "It'll last you another 20 years," he predicted. 

Unfortunately, my wife was reading the first time I tried to crank it up after I got it back, an unpleasant scene ensuing where she accused me of peaking at 20. Luckily, she went home the following night to put our older daughter on the plane back to college, my buddies  Neil Young and  David Bowie dropping by to do shots and reminisce about the old days. 

It wasn't quite as amusing as doing a soft-shoe for your accommodating college buddies to "Singin' in the Rain" or turning off the lights and screaming in mock terror to  Wendy Carlos's creepy moog synthesizer experiments on the "Clockwork Orange" soundtrack. But it's a hell of a lot better than going gently into middle age. 

— ralph.gardner@wsj.com 