Board members of  Clearwire Corp. believed they had secured some of the best bankers in the business when, last summer, they hired  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS


-0.18
%




 to advise them on their most pressing strategic issue: Should they sell to wireless carrier  Sprint Nextel Corp.
S


-3.75
%




 or not?

Then the Goldman bankers got in touch in February with bad news. They were resigning the Clearwire assignment for a new job: working for Sprint, Clearwire's majority owner and, from Clearwire's point of view, a possible buyer of the rest of Clearwire.

Investment banking can be a sharp-elbowed business, where allegiances and assignments are routinely coveted and then dropped for better opportunities. But Goldman's switch has drawn special notice in recent weeks. Even in the no-holds-barred world of Wall Street, it is rare for banks to jump sides between a potential seller and buyer.

A spokeswoman for Goldman declined to comment on its general practices in establishing client relationships. 

Goldman's move with Clearwire upset members of the special board committee of Clearwire that had retained the bank to explore options for the company, according to people familiar with the matter.

Goldman's contract allowed the bank to exit in case it needed to represent another party. But the Clearwire board members felt the change left Clearwire in the lurch, the people said. They added that the switch also set up the possibility that the bankers could take advantage of their knowledge of the views of the special committee, whose members are independent from Sprint.

The issue has become more pressing since the announcement earlier this month of  AT&T Inc.
T


-1.22
%




's $39 billion planned acquisition of  Deutsche Telekom AG's T-Mobile USA. If the AT&T deal goes through, it would leave Sprint a marginalized No. 3 player in the U.S. wireless market, which could pressure it to put more money into Clearwire or buy it outright. Clearwire is expanding a high-speed data network that Sprint uses. 

It isn't clear whether Sprint would use Goldman as an adviser if it decided to buy or invest more money in Clearwire.

Clearwire hired Goldman last summer to help the company's independent directors explore ways to raise more capital and evaluate a potential sale to Sprint or T-Mobile USA, people familiar with the matter said.

But the agreement didn't preclude Goldman from leaving Clearwire to work for Sprint. When Sprint sought Goldman's advice earlier this year, it was not specifically tied to an acquisition of Clearwire, according to these people.

They note that while Clearwire was considering selling to Sprint, Sprint said in a statement last December that it "continues to hold discussions with Clearwire regarding further investment in the company but has no plans at present to acquire Clearwire." 

These people say Goldman bankers were helping Sprint draw up different combinations, including a potential tie-up with T-Mobile.

Goldman followed a number of procedures when it decided to drop Clearwire and work for Sprint, two of the people familiar with the matter said. Goldman lawyers reviewed the relationships before allowing Sprint to engage the bank's services, these people said. Two different Goldman teams worked on Clearwire and Sprint, these people added. Whether the teams reported to separate executives couldn't be learned.

Goldman made a similar switch from the "sell" side to the "buy" side just months ago in the $3 billion buyout of J. Crew Group Inc. Goldman was informally advising the retailer on strategic options in September, according to a J Crew filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, but wasn't officially retained by the company. It began working for the buy side in October. 

Bankers say it is rare for a financial adviser to move between the sell side and the buy side of the same potential transaction. It is more common for banks to choose their "best horse" in a given merger situation early, usually picking the client they expect to pay the most fees.

One issue is that, when a firm is hired for advice, its bankers typically have access to the client's confidential financial information and strategic plans. The fear among corporations is that the information can leak, on purpose or unintentionally, to the other side of a negotiation. That is why banks are routinely "conflicted out" of multiple assignments in the same industry.

 Write to  Anupreeta Das at anupreeta.das@wsj.com and Gina Chon at gina.chon@wsj.com 