Base salaries for senior positions in the City of London rose sharply at the end of last year, according to research released today, amid the intense public and political pressure over the way financial firms compensate their staff.

The average wage of a senior professional or director at a financial-services company was £98,785 ($157,542) in December 2010, up 27.5 % from October levels, according to a report released today by City of London recruitment firm Morgan McKinley

December's peak average salary for senior staff was the highest since Morgan McKinley began recording the data in January 2008. The company uses the starting salaries of successfully placed candidates to compile monthly average wage figures.

The findings chime with moves made by some of the industry's biggest banks over the past 12 months to increase base salaries as a proportion of overall compensation in a bid to tackle new rules governing the payment of bonuses. 

U.K. banks including Barclays, Royal Bank of Scotland and HSBC are all known to have upped the basic pay of top earners at a time when the payment of bank bonuses is under intense scrutiny from the public, policy makers and regulators. 

Under new rules set out by the U.K.'s Financial Services Authority, no more than 20 % to 30% of a year-end bonus can be paid in cash, with the rest deferred for at least three years or paid in shares.

During the course of 2010, mid-level financial salaries increased from an average of £46,654 to £47,077, while support and administrative wages fell from £26,063 to £25,900, Morgan McKinley said. 

Morgan McKinley also surveyed HR professionals at financial services firms about the prospects for hiring in 2011. Just 12% expected recruitment levels to fall in the first half of the year, while 58% said hiring would increase or significantly increase. 

HR managers were also more concerned about losing employees to competitors than last year—37% said that preventing the poaching of staff was the biggest challenge they faced. Twelve months ago remuneration was the most pressing issue. 

The Morgan McKinley report follows a separate survey this week by recruitment firm Robert Half UK, which found that financial services firms were preparing to battle it out for staff needed to fill a growing number of roles that have emerged as a result of impending financial regulation.

Robert Half found that there is now a high demand for qualified accounting and audit and compliance professionals among London's financial firms, as they strive to ensure regulatory controls are in place to meet the requirements of new legislation, including Basel III, affecting their industry. Top candidates in accounting can expect to be offered base salaries of as much as £90,000 a year for their services.