

BEIJING—Hunkered down in a middle-class neighborhood of central Los Angeles, 36-year-old Chinese filmmaker Eva Jin finds herself in the enviable position of working on not one but two projects backed by major Hollywood studios.

"I love being in L.A.," said Ms. Jin in a recent telephone interview. "It's the center of the filmmaking world." 

Ms. Jin is working on a cross-cultural romantic comedy for Paramount, as well as producing a pilot in conjunction with Will Smith's Overbrook Entertainment for Fox Television about an American student in China who becomes a campus crime fighter. 

It's too early to say what stars might be attracted to the projects but, if all goes according to plan, Ms. Jin will soon be among the few Chinese filmmakers with a foothold in Hollywood.

The director made her name in China with the 2009 movie "Sophie's Revenge"–starring Zhang Ziyi—a romantic comedy she wrote and directed about a Chinese comic-book artist getting back at the man who proposed to her then dumped her. The movie was the 10th ranked Chinese-language film at the domestic box office, and also earned Ms. Jin the attention of Hollywood. Soon after the commercial success of "Sophie's Revenge," Ms. Jin signed with the Creative Artists Agency, which represents A-listers such as Tom Hanks and Meryl Streep.

"What I think is working for me in Hollywood right now is that Hollywood sees something different in me but also plenty that's familiar," Ms. Jin said.

The director was born in Harbin, a city in Northeast China famous for an annual winter festival that features massive ice sculptures and draws hundreds of thousands of visitors. Her parents pushed her toward the arts, and from 1993 to 1998, she studied Italian opera at the China Conservatory of Music in Beijing. She also took to cartooning—just like the heroine of "Sophie's Revenge"—and published four books partly inspired by Gary Larson, creator of the popular syndicated comic "The Far Side."

In 2001, Ms. Jin moved to the U.S., where she studied film at Florida State University for two years. FSU, she says, was right for her: "Not a party school. No distractions." 

It was there she met Cuban-born cinematographer Armando Salas. "Eva didn't speak much English when she arrived and I took time to understand where she was coming from," Mr. Salas says. "Being an immigrant gives you more patience." 

After graduation they each moved to Hollywood separately, but in 2007 Ms. Jin sought out Mr. Salas and took him to China to shoot her debut feature, "Sailfish," a love triangle involving a competitive swimmer. In fact, the movie's backers never found it a theatrical distributor—Ms. Jin says the unknown cast was a problem—but it aired recently on China's state television. Mr. Salas says that just finishing a coherent, independently financed feature film opened doors for Ms. Jin in China's entertainment industry. "It was a real calling card," he adds.

The director's big break came soon after, when producer Beaver Kwei, sent the script for "Sophie's Revenge" to Ms. Zhang, the actress who starred in "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon." 

"Ziyi was impressed by the script and agreed to meet Eva right away," said Mr. Kwei. "I remember well that one winter night in 2008 when Ziyi came to meet Eva. She wore a woolen hat that she thought was something Sophie would wear. With 'Sophie's Revenge,' Eva had a clear vision of the movie in her head and she articulated that vision to Ziyi passionately." Ms. Zhang liked the pitch so much she agreed to produce and star in the movie.

Chinese film critic Raymond Zhou Liming says that "Sophie's Revenge" also proved something new was possible in China: "Jin's success mostly lay in her ability to reproduce the Hollywood model in the format and presentation of a mainstream romance just as the market was taking off."

Meanwhile, Ms. Jin says she hopes her two new projects—both will be shot in English in China— will "do something for Chinese cinema," helping to expand its international appeal and also to show that Chinese movie makers can write and produce Hollywood-quality films.

"The most important thing is not how much freedom [from censorship] to give Chinese writers but how to teach them a three-act storyline. There are lots of investors out there now, but too few writers. Writers in China should stop complaining and focus on technique."