Facing one of the biggest budget shortfalls of any state, Illinois took the risky step of jacking up income and corporate taxes even as its economy struggles to shake off the recession.

In a deal hammered out by the state's Democratic leadership, the lame-duck legislature pushed through a 67% increase in the state income tax and a 45% increase in the corporate tax. 

The new income-tax rate would add about $1,040 to the tax bill of a family of four earning $60,000 a year, and the new corporate rate would move the state into the top 10 among corporate taxers nationally. 

Skeptics worried the increase has the potential of chasing both businesses and residents out of the state, and Democrats face the possibility of losing political support in 2012. 

In some respects, the move wasn't a surprise: Democratic Gov. Pat Quinn defeated a weak Republican candidate in November after pledging repeatedly to raise taxes. And the state's fiscal crisis had become increasingly untenable after years of using short-term borrowing to close budget gaps and short-changing its pension liabilities. 

"The state was careening toward bankruptcy, fiscal insolvency," said Mr. Quinn, who pledged to the sign the bill. "We're in a period now of reform and recovery."

Republicans blasted the vote. "The General Assembly has found a way to maintain its runaway spending in the short term without addressing the fiscal crisis facing our state," said newly sworn-in state Comptroller Judy Baar Topinka.

The tax increases will begin to close a projected budget gap now estimated at $13 billion and expected to grow to $17 billion in fiscal 2012. 

But the failure in the legislature of a proposed $8.75 billion restructuring bond means the state won't immediately be able to start paying off its backlog of about $6 billion in unpaid bills. That leaves hundreds of state vendors, including hospitals, schools and the maker of bullets for the state prison system, facing continued uncertainty

"We're left in the lurch," said Harry Wells, president and chief executive of Chicago Youth Centers, a nonprofit owed $500,000 by the state.

Investors have closely monitored Illinois's financial woes. The spread on the state's municipal bonds, a measure of the perceived risk of its bonds above a broad market benchmark, is the widest in the country. 

Investors have been concerned about the state's willingness to right its finances. Ratings firms said they would review the state's creditworthiness in light of the legislature's actions.

The bill's passage comes as lawmakers in other states are opening their legislative sessions and confronting what experts say will be the toughest budget session of the economic downturn. Illinois's move on taxes could be rare in the current political climate.

"The great majority of states have been trying to avoid broad-based tax increases, and there is little evidence that that will change," said Robert Ward, deputy director of the nonpartisan Nelson A. Rockefeller Institute of Government at the State University of New York. 

Illinois's tax increases took final shape last weekend as Democratic leaders held closed-door meetings to hash out a plan to raise revenue before a new crop of lawmakers were sworn in Wednesday. State leaders were fretting about Illinois' low bond rating,

"Illinois is in crisis, absolute financial crisis, and there is no way we can dig ourselves out of the crisis without increased revenues," said House Majority Leader Barbara Flynn Currie. 

Democrat leaders rallied their members with a series of impassioned speeches about the need to pull together for the sake of the state.

Republicans were equally adamant about the long-term impact of the tax increases, saying they didn't address the legislature's failure to cut state spending.

"We're saying to the people of Illinois, 'For eight years we've overspent, now we're going to make it your problem,'" said Rep. Roger Eddy. "We're making up for our mistakes on your back."

The measure includes a rise in the income-tax rate to 5% from 3% and a boost in the corporate tax to 7% from 4.8%. It passed the House late Tuesday night 60-57 without a single Republican vote. 

The Senate passed the bill early Wednesday 30-29—again with no Republican vote.

The new corporate tax rate would bring the total percentage Illinois corporations pay on income, including a separate personal property replacement tax, to 9.5%, one of the highest in the nation.

That would make the corporate income-tax rate in Illinois the third-highest in the country when combined with an assumed 35% federal corporate income tax, following Pennsylvania and Minnesota, said Scott Hodge, president of the Tax Foundation, a conservative-leaning Washington research outfit. Illinois currently ranks 21.

As other states cut taxes and Illinois raises them, the state "will be even more of an eyesore by comparison," Mr. Hodge said.

A spokesman for Caterpillar Inc., one of the largest manufacturers in Illinois with 23,000 employees in the state, said in a statement that "such a tax increase will make it more difficult for Caterpillar to compete in today's global economy from our operations in Illinois."

On Wednesday morning, newly inaugurated Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker sought to capitalize on the tax increase: He said he would renew a long-ago campaign to lure tourists to Wisconsin called "Escape to Wisconsin"—but target it at Illinois companies. His state's corporate tax rate is 7.9%. 

Responded Mr. Quinn: "Lots of luck to them, but that's not going to happen."

He added that Chicago is the capital of the Midwest, and "if we want to talk about the capital of the Midwest, the state that is the strongest is Illinois."

 Write to  Douglas Belkin at doug.belkin@wsj.com, Lauren Etter at lauren.etter@wsj.com and Ilan Brat at ilan.brat@wsj.com 