LIMA—Peru's race for president has become extremely tight, with the most-recent polls showing a statistical tie between the two diametrically opposed candidates before the June 5 runoff.

On Sunday, leading pollster Ipsos Apoyo showed center-right Congresswoman Keiko Fujimori with 41% support, compared with 39% for left-leaning nationalist Ollanta Humala. Pollster Datum showed Mr. Humala with 40% compared with 39.1% for Ms. Fujimori.

"Basically it is tie. The trend for Keiko is positive, while there is a certain stalling out for Humala," said Guillermo Loli, polling director for Ipsos Apoyo, on Monday.

Pollsters point to a high level of undecided voters or those who plan to leave their ballots blank, which is some 20%. Voting is mandatory in Peru.

Pollsters say the fight continues to persuade many of those undecided voters.

In the April 10 general elections, no candidate gained a majority, leading to the runoff vote.

"I believe there is a trend for Keiko, although it is not definitive. We are content," said Fujimori spokesman Jorge Trelles on RPP radio Monday.

Late Sunday, Mr. Humala said in a television program the polls are only a photograph of the moment and the campaign is more like a movie.

"What will decide the elections are proposals," Mr. Humala added.

In a poll released April 24, Mr. Humala had 42% and Ms. Fujimori 36% support.

In his media appearances, the 48-year-old Mr. Humala has continued to attack Ms. Fujimori, 35, by referring to the corruption and human rights abuses in the decade-long government of Alberto Fujimori. Keiko Fujimori's father is now jailed in Lima after being found guilty of human rights abuses and other crimes.

Opponents of Mr. Humala, a former military officer, are focusing most recently on the political support he gave his now-jailed brother, who led an attack on a police station in 2005 with the aim of toppling the government of ex-President Alejandro Toledo. In that revolt, which Ollanta Humala supported in two radio interviews, four policemen died.

Mr. Humala acknowledged late Sunday his support for the rebellion, but said he withdrew that support once the violence started with the attacks on the police station.

His opponents are also criticizing his Gana Peru party's governing plan, which outlines a radical shift in economic policies to give the state a larger role in the economy. That includes higher taxes in Peru's key mining sector.

In an interview in newspaper El Comercio's Monday edition, former Finance Minister Luis Carranza said various populist proposals outlined in the Gana Peru plan will chase away investments in the mining sector and lead to declining tax collections and a fiscal collapse.

"If we look at the overall plan what can be seen are strong increases in [public] spending and measures that are a disincentive for private sector investments, driving down tax collections," Mr. Carranza was quoted as saying.

Mr. Humala's Gana Peru expects to reveal modifications to the party's governing plan shortly, but some political analysts say this will add to an image of inconsistency.

Keiko Fujimori, meanwhile, promises to keep to the same economic policies pursued in Peru's recent past. Peru's economy expanded 8.8% last year.

 Write to  Robert Kozak at robert.kozak@dowjones.com 