

TOKYO—Faced with global markets consolidation and the risk of being marginalized, Japan's two major stock exchanges have agreed to bury the hatchet on their long-running rivalry and instead look to merge their operations. 

Tokyo Stock Exchange President  Atsushi Saito said Thursday he will meet with Osaka Securities Exchange Co. President  Michio Yoneda to explore the possibility of integration. In terms of the value of shares on the exchanges, a merger of the TSE and its rival in western Japan would create the world's second-largest exchange operator, outpacing  Nasdaq OMX Group Inc.
NDAQ


-0.08
%




 and behind market leader  NYSE Euronext.

"Considering Japan's size, its economic conditions and the decline in population, it would be good to have a single strong major bourse," Mr. Saito told reporters. 

He said that there was no specific timing for merger talks, but Mr. Yoneda was quoted by Japanese media as saying that he hoped to see some sort of tentative agreement within three months. 

The TSE, which is currently the world's third-largest exchange by market capitalization, is seen as lagging behind a trend toward the global consolidation of exchanges, hampered in part by repeated delays in plans for its own initial public offering. 

Last month, NYSE Euronext and Deutsche Boerse AG said they were in advanced talks for a deal, creating a dominant global exchange operator. London Stock Exchange Group PLC and Toronto-based TMX Group Inc. also said that they had agreed to combine. 

The consolidation drive is also taking place in Japan's own backyard, with the Singapore Exchange Ltd. last year proposing a $8.3 billion bid for the operator of the Australian stock exchange, ASX Ltd. 

"The time is ripe," said Shoji Hirakawa, chief strategist at UBS Securities. "They're pulling out the cards that they both need for survival." 

A merger between the TSE and OSE would allow each to capitalize on their complementary areas of strength. The TSE focuses on cash stock transactions, while the Osaka bourse operates a derivatives trading platform that carries the widely traded Nikkei 225 share index futures contract. 

"Instead of engaging in cutthroat domestic competition, the competition needs to be about whether Japan's exchange is more attractive compared to Singapore or Hong Kong," said Masayuki Kubota, a senior fund manager at Daiwa SB Investments. 

While the flurry of global activity seems to have pushed the long-passive Japanese exchanges nearer to consolidation, the road ahead appears both uncertain and long. Mr. Saito emphasized that a TSE listing would precede any integration with the Osaka exchange, adding that talks between the bourses hadn't started yet. He added an integration wouldn't include smaller regional exchanges, such as those in Sapporo and Nagoya. 

"We are not even standing at the starting line," a TSE official said, adding that various regulatory and screening procedures may make the listing of the TSE shares during this year challenging. 

While Mr. Saito has previously said the TSE is open to the possibility of integrating the cash and futures markets, the Osaka bourse has long been seen as more passive, pursuing other partnerships including with Nasdaq OMX.

"The integration alone will not mean foreign firms will be more enthusiastic about listing in Japan," Takuo Yamamoto, chief strategist at Mitsubishi UFJ Asset Managment Co., said. 

News of the merger talks pushed OSE shares sharply higher on the Jasdaq Securities Exchange for start-up firms. The stock finished the day 6.9% higher at 460,000 yen, or about $5,545. 

As of January, the value of shares on TSE totaled $3.84 trillion, behind NYSE Euronext's $14.02 trillion and Nasdaq OMX's $3.95 trillion. The value on OSE stands at $271 billion, according to data provided by the World Federation of Exchanges. 

—Gina Chon in New York contributed to this article.