'We define first, and then see," wrote Walter Lippmann, explaining the media's reliance on "stereotypes" to decipher the onrush of events. Lippmann, who wrote in the 1920s, was describing the news industry's habit of fitting every novel set of facts into existing, off-the-rack narratives. With this in mind, let's review the stereotypes that got a workout last week when journalism's collective brain encountered the great Facebook-Goldman Sachs deal of 2011.

Is Facebook a bubble? Is bubble even a meaningful term? Most companies fail. Few ever get close to the $50 billion value that the Goldman deal puts on Mark Zuckerberg's company. But there is nothing irrational about the view that Facebook, five years hence, might be as valuable as Google based on its potential to extract revenue from a membership already numbering half a billion users.

Nor is the opposite view irrational, that Facebook by then will have gone the way of the hula hoop or MySpace. 

Nobody knows the future. Where a wide dispersion of possible futures is imaginable, you get cases in which the bears can only sit on the sidelines while the optimists put their money to work. Facebook is clearly such a case.

The devil theory of Goldman Sachs, at bottom, rests on the premise that Goldman knows the future better than its customers or the rest of us. When Goldman sells anyone something, it's because Goldman knows the price is going down.

In fact, the firm's real talent isn't knowing what the price will be, but what the price is. And Goldman clearly hit the mark with the $50 billion valuation implied by its $450 million investment in Facebook last week. The firm also rigged up a deal to make $1.5 billion in Facebook shares indirectly available to its well-heeled clients, and every sign is that the offer was oversubscribed. 

Yet Goldman not only makes no warranty about the future value of Facebook, it would be utterly un- Goldman-like to do so. This is the part that so befuddles its critics. So instead we get accusations of bad faith because Goldman reserved the right to hedge its Facebook position (Ah ha!) or because certain Goldman managers rejected the deal as unsuitable for their clients (Ah ha!) or because Goldman's own private-equity arm declined to participate (Ah ha!).

These facts are supposed to reveal a Goldman scam to exploit a Facebook bubble, never mind the contrary indicator (though equally disapproved) that Goldman also offered participation in the Facebook deal to its own employees and on somewhat relaxed eligibility terms.

What this behavior actually reveals is a firm agnostic about the future value of Facebook, but diligent in zeroing in on what it takes to make a sale today. 

Here's a professional secret for seeing past stereotypes: Facts are what you should pay attention to in daily journalism, much like condiments give a Big Mac its flavor. Narrative structure is just the burger and bun, a vehicle, and often a carelessly constructed one, not to be taken too seriously. Much of last week's Facebook commentary amounted to little more than premonitory versions of the standard hindsight fallacy. Thus when Goldman wasn't guilty of puffing up a Facebook bubble to soak the public in a future IPO, it was robbing small investors of their rightful Facebook bonanza by depriving them of an IPO. Pick your storyline. Either way, the Goldman-Facebook deal is proof that "the world of finance" is "rigged for insiders," raged a typical commentary in the Washington Post.

Uh huh. The choice of whether Facebook will go public now, later or never isn't Goldman's. If anything, Mr. Zuckerberg deserves a pat on the head for deciding his company's shares shouldn't be dangled in front of the public just yet. Mr. Zuckerberg is a young, unseasoned CEO, already wrestling with the media furies over his own image (see the movie "The Social Network") and the inflamed politics of privacy. Nagging questions remain about how Facebook will spin its huge audience into advertising gold or some other kind of gold without driving its audience away. The last thing the company arguably needs right now is the distraction and hoopla of an IPO.

Facebook is private property. Its owners have every right to decide who can invest alongside them and on what terms. That said, if you were out to build a relationship of lasting trust with the public, you might do just as the company is doing. Keep it closely held. Don't throw shares out there widely among the public when the company inevitably will be valued on hopes and dreams rather than revenues. 

This strategy may be right for building Facebook's business, but it's extraordinarily poor wealth management by Mr. Zuckerberg. An IPO is perhaps the only realistic way to take a sizeable piece of his paper fortune off the table, optimizing his chances of remaining a billionaire no matter what Facebook's future holds. An IPO would let him transfer a big chunk of his risk to public investors. Instead he continues to bear the risk. That's one conclusion you can accurately draw from the Facebook-Goldman deal by seeing first, defining later.