Canada's opposition parties are expected to bring down the minority government of Prime Minister Stephen Harper in a vote of no-confidence Friday, a move that would trigger a short campaign ahead of May parliamentary polls and could see Mr. Harper's Conservatives—who have led a minority government for five years—capture a majority.

But recent polling data suggest that while the Conservatives are within striking distance of a majority, they aren't there yet. That makes the campaign, likely to officially kick off over the weekend and last just over a month, one of the most important races in years.

Voters went into the previous two campaigns, in 2006 and 2008, with relatively clear preferences, analysts said. This time around, a larger-than-usual bloc of undecided voters could swing the polls either way.

"The campaign could have a significant bearing on the outcome," said  Peter Harder, a former senior civil servant and now senior policy advisor for Canadian law firm Fraser Milner Casgrain.

Mr. Harper, 51 years old, has already staked out Canada's robust recovery from the global recession as his biggest campaign issue. His party has rolled out in recent weeks a series of ads touting his government's economic stewardship.

In a budget his government unveiled earlier this week, he signaled an official end to most of the stimulus spending that he spearheaded to get Canada through the crisis. The budget also forecast better-than-expect progress on the government's deficit-reduction measures, at a time when most of Canada's industrialized peers struggle with ballooning debt.

Mr. Harper also peppered the budget with a series of targeted spending measures that analysts said could appeal to a wide variety of voters. That budget failed to win support from any of the three opposition parties this week, all but ending any chance of the government surviving. No longer a government spending plan, the budget document now serves as an economic manifesto for the Conservatives.

"We've laid out a good fiscal track for Canada that is maintainable," Finance Minister Jim Flaherty told reporters this week.

The opposition is expected to emphasize a series of alleged ethical lapses by the government, including a finding of contempt of parliament on Monday by a committee of lawmakers. The finding alleges the government withheld from lawmakers key cost data related to anticrime legislation. The government has said the committee's work is politically motivated.

If the finding is approved by the House of Commons, it would be the first such censure of a government in Canadian history. All three opposition parties have signaled they would support the finding, in a vote Friday that will double as a no-confidence motion. 

Because Mr. Harper's Conservatives hold a minority of seats in the House of Commons, the measure is expected to pass.

The no-confidence measure would allow the opposition to avoid officially voting against the budget, and could help it frame the debate around the behavior of Mr. Harper's government, instead of economic matters.

"We're going to call them out for both the mistakes they've made, for the abuses of power that have happened in this place, the contempt that we believe they've shown for parliament and its institutions," Mark Holland, a lawmaker for Canada's biggest opposition party, the Liberals, told reporters this week. 

After a vote of no-confidence, Mr. Harper would be required to report to the country's governor general, the official representative of Queen Elizabeth II, the head of state, and ask to dissolve parliament, kicking off a campaign that must last at least 36 days.

Mr. Harper's government faces another censure in an unrelated matter. A Conservative government minister is accused of doctoring a document to retroactively deny funding for a church-based human-rights group. She has blamed the matter on "sloppy paperwork" in recent testimony before the committee.

In another embarrassment, Mr. Harper himself announced an investigation into a former aide, Bruce Carson, who has been accused of using his influence among top officials to lobby for a company connected to his fiancée. Mr. Carson's fiancée's mother has defended him, saying he wasn't lobbying. Mr. Carson didn't respond to an emailed request to comment. 