

Japan's massive quake is triggering debate in Turkey over plans to build the country's first nuclear power plants, and reviving fears over the earthquake risk to Istanbul.

Turkey's Energy Minister Taner Yildiz told Turkish TV stations on Monday that the government plans to go ahead with building two nuclear power plants, seeking to reassure viewers that Turkey—home to two major earthquake faults—would not be at risk of the safety failures Japan's Fujishima plant is experiencing.

"The earthquake in Japan ill not impact our decision to construct nuclear plants," Mr. Yildiz told the Turkish CNBC-e channel, noting that the 40-year-old Japanese plant used a far less-developed generation of technology. "You cannot built a bad third generation nuclear plant even if you want to, but we want a good one."

Turkey has agreed with the Russian state nuclear power monopoly Rosatom to build a plant at Akkuyu on the Mediterranean coast. It is also negotiating with Tokyo Electric Power Co. and Toshiba Corp. of Japan to build a second plant at Sinop, on Turkey's Black Sea Coast.

Environmental groups and Turkey's Chamber of Electrical Engineers called on the government to drop its nuclear-construction plans in the light of the Japanese experience.

"The disaster that has occurred in Japan shows that the arguments made by supporters of nuclear power plants regarding security are not valid in the case of a real natural disaster," the Chamber said, adding that the Akkuyu site was 25 kilometers to 30 kilometers from an earthquake fault.

Turkey's nuclear plans are part of a strategy aimed at reducing the country's large dependence on imported fossil fuels for its energy needs, at a time when Turkey's electricity consumption is forecast roughly to double over the next decade.

The government got some support for its argument Monday from one of the country's top seismologists, Mustafa Erdik, Director of the Kandilli Observatory and Earthquake Research Institute in Istanbul. In a phone interview, Mr. Erdik said he was involved in the original seismic safety evaluation of the two proposed sites. He said they were "two of the safest places in Turkey, in term of earthquake risk."

The Japanese quake has particular resonance here. After a 1999 quake 69 miles from Istanbul killed at least 17,000 people, Japanese seismologists were heavily involved in drawing up studies and making recommendations to retrofit Istanbul's bridges, tunnels and buildings for the major tremor that seismologists believe is likely to hit the city.

Newspaper columnists worried on Monday over a perceived lack of preparation—including Japan's early warning system—for the major earthquake that the Kandilli Observatory estimates to have a 64% chance of occurring by 2030.

Mr. Erdik said he saw relatively few lessons to draw from the damage inflicted in Japan, because most of it was caused by a massive tidal wave. While Istanbul is situated on the sea, the Sea of Marmara is too small to throw up a Tsunami on the scale seen in Japan.

But in terms of discipline and training in response to the quake, the Japanese example was likely to hold important lessons for cities such as Istanbul, he said.

The old city of Istanbul and before it Constantinople suffered 120 recorded earthquakes over 2000 years, but the city has grown exponentially in recent decades—from a population of 1.5 million in 1955, to more than 13 million today—and much of the housing is of substandard construction, according to Turkish civil engineers.

Until the 1999 earthquake, much housing construction was unregulated and in many cases illegal. Since then, building codes to ensure earthquake safety have been adopted, but a report to parliament last year by the Turkish Association of Civil Engineers said the measures often went unenforced, leaving thousands of buildings unsafe. 

—Erkan Oz contributed to this article.