John McEnroe is 52 years old. That number lands with a cold thud, but then you see him, on a late February evening at Madison Square Garden, playing tennis like a hummingbird: floating, darting, agile, never lingering in the same place. He still turns his back and arcs his body into a lower case "m" before a serve, and his game, as always, is a flurry of touch and angles. Even after a half century, he uses every sliver of the court.

He remains pretty to watch. That was the paradox of McEnroe in his prime: behind the boorish exterior, the unruly puff of brown curls and the distracting tantrums ("You cannot be serious!" etc.) was a delicate, cunning artist. Every Mac shot had a spin, a slice, or an elegant curl; his serve-and-volley attack was balletic. He was not the biggest, or the strongest, and he lost many heartbreakers, but there were moments when he was the best, because he played complete.

He was at the Garden Monday to perform in a bank-sponsored exhibition, against his old, taciturn rival, Ivan Lendl. The two '80s legends were on the undercard of the BNP Paribas Showdown headlined by Pete Sampras and Andre Agassi, and the night had the gray feel of a school reunion.

Before the match, the 61-year-old disco diva Gloria Gaynor walked onto the court in a sparkly black jacket and sang "I Will Survive." She was sponsored by Euflexxa, an injection for knee osteoarthritis.

Earlier, McEnroe had injured his left ankle practicing with Sampras, and as he warmed up with Lendl, he was stiff and tentative. He wore a simple white T-shirt and matching pair of shorts, and as everyone knows from watching him analyze tennis on TV, his hair is gray and cropped. Occasionally he would wipe his face with his shirt, revealing a pale, firm midsection.

Lendl, crumpled by back pain late in his career, appeared less fit. He is 50, and in his post-tennis life he became a superb golfer, and a golfing dad, guiding several of his daughters up the amateur ranks. As a tennis player, Lendl seldom gets his complete due. A baseline punisher, he won eight grand slams and spent much of Reagan's second term as the world's number one, but he is equally remembered for his dour, sunken-cheeked expression. Some of this was an unfair casting cliche—the wiry, humorless terminator from hard-knock Czechoslovakia (Lendl actually became a U.S. Citizen in 1992)—but he was never a crowd pleaser. And, as the tennis grouches always point out, he never won Wimbledon.

But Monday at the Garden was going to be McEnroe's crowd no matter what.

He and Lendl had played memorable matches there before, during the '80s, in the long-departed Masters Grand Prix tournament. In retirement, the Queens-raised McEnroe has evolved into a kind of "Only in New York'' polymath—rock star husband, father, talk show host, game show host, art dealer, Saturday Night Live walk-ons, a tennis academy on Randall's Island. Though his mouth can still cause trouble—last year he caused an uproar when he suggested women pros should play less—the snarl is mostly toothless.

But he continues to play tennis to win. The Garden match was a first- to-eight-games "pro set" competition, and McEnroe pounced on Lendl immediately. The ankle was no longer tender, and he moved fluidly. He rushed the net on second serves, put away volleys, pumped his fist after a winner.

There was no power, but it was dominant. He went up 4-0, until Lendl finally wrangled a point, throwing his arms sarcastically into the air.

A few games later, McEnroe's ankle kicked up. He had it taped in a changeover, but he slowed to a Willis Reed hobble. With the score 6-3—two games short of "pro set" victory—he motioned for Lendl, and ended the match prematurely.

"It meant so much to come play Ivan here," he said in a courtside interview with his brother, the ESPN tennis analyst Patrick McEnroe "I'm so bummed right now."

He did a little pre-planned gag where he dropped his long, modern shorts to reveal a pair of vintage white short-shorts. "I came prepared for playing Ivan circa 1980," McEnroe said.

The crowd roared. He had technically lost the match, but no one will remember that. They will only recall the flashes of a past rebellious magic. Before an ankle's rude interruption, John McEnroe at 52 looked ageless.