If the Giants were smiling Thursday night, they were positively giddy Friday night. 

One round after consensus Top 10 cornerback Prince Amukamara of Nebraska fell to the Giants at the No. 19 overall pick, the talented Marvin Austin stayed on the board until their second-round pick, at No. 52. Then with their third-round pick, the Giants snatched up speedy Troy receiver Jerrel Jernigan.

"We had these three guys sitting out there as guys we had to take," said Marc Ross, the team's director of college scouting. Calling his scouting team "brilliant," he grinned and said, "We felt we took the best players."

Austin is somewhat of a question as he did not play this past season. The North Carolina defensive tackle was investigated for accepting improper benefits from an agent and was subsequently kicked off the team in October. The Giants are not generally known for taking fliers on players of questionable character, and the night before Ross specifically cited Amukamara's never having been in any sort of trouble.

But they did draft the previously arrested Ahmad Bradshaw in the seventh round of the 2007 draft. General manager Jerry Reese had a stern sit-down with the now-starting running back then and coach Tom Coughlin said the Giants are confident the same blueprint will work with Austin.

"We're in a high-risk business," Coughlin said. "I think anybody's a risk until they come in and prove exactly what they can do."

The last time Austin, a 6-foot-2, 309-pounder, could do that was in 2009, when he started 11 games at defensive tackle and even played one game on the other side of the ball at left tackle. Reese repeatedly praised his "nasty demeanor," while Coughlin promised "he's a talented football player who now has the opportunity to show the world what he can do."

"Let me say this to you, his grade, just strictly looking at his football ability, is very high," the coach said.

Jernigan, a former high school quarterback, graded well too as a multiple threat who could go long, play the slot and return kicks.

Amukamara's grade was the highest, though, and after he made his first visit to his new team earlier Friday, Coughlin pronounced himself "very impressed."

The reigning Big 12 Defensive Player of the Year was as big as advertised (6-feet tall, 206 pounds), as self-assured and definitely as hungry, asking Coughlin for a playbook almost immediately. 

Ultimately, he could not leave with one because of the Eighth Circuit's earlier granting of a temporary stay that reinstated the NFL's lockout. Still, he got some paperwork and Coughlin spoke to him as he would have liked to all his rookies, shaking Amukamara's hand and saying, "This is only the beginning."

 Write to  Aditi Kinkhabwala at aditi.kinkhabwala@wsj.com 