Everything's good and delicious and right about pasta risotto except its name—somehow it got saddled with a moniker that only half fits it.

"Pasta" is perfectly fitting. The dish starts with pasta cooked in broth and gets finished with heavy cream, mascarpone and a handful of grated Parmesan. It's simple and quick to make, a chic take on macaroni and cheese that you could savor dressed up at a dinner party or in pjs in front of a fire. 

But "risotto"? No way. No how. For starters, there isn't a grain of rice in it. Never mind that the word for rice and risotto are synonymous in Italy. No one cares about that in France, and it was a French friend who first told me about this dish, which fits right into a current Parisian trend to embrace things Italian and then play fast and loose with them.

These days a carpaccio is just as likely to be made of pineapple as the classic see-through-thin slices of beef; minestrone can be cold and made with fruit rather than hot and thick with vegetables and beans. Recently in Paris, I was served tiramisu made with chestnut purée.

In a closer-to-the-truth risotto (and I'm hedging here, because risotto's a dish that even in Italy, or maybe especially in Italy, can't be nailed down with precision), you cook a little onion in butter or olive oil, then add short-grained round rice and cook until each grain is glossy with fat. Then comes the moment to begin the wet-dry-stir-repeat vigil, adding white wine, waiting for the pot to go just about dry and then, ladleful by ladleful, adding warm broth and stirring until each successive addition disappears into the rice until it's creamy, but still slightly al dente. It's a masterful dish best prepared with a partner to spell your stirring arm.

But its faux cousin is swell, too. In a definite flip of perceived national character, the often technique-obsessed French have beaten the carefree Italian cooks at their own game: Pasta risotto delivers all the satisfaction of the original without the danger of carpal tunnel syndrome.

Just as in the original, a little onion is cooked until softened in some butter. Then the pasta is added. If you wanted to come closer to traditional risotto, you could add a few spoonfuls of white wine before tossing in the pasta (I like tubetti, but elbow macaroni is fine) and cook it, stirring all the while, until it evaporates. Now, instead of standing over the pot, ladling and stirring, you just add the broth, turn up the heat so that it bubbles steadily, and cook until the pasta has softened and absorbed almost all the broth. (I know this might come as a surprise, but chez most French home cooks, that broth would be made with bouillon cubes. There, the secret's out.) All that's left is to mix in the cream, mascarpone and Parmesan—which are often added to classic risotto—cover the pot and let it rest a few minutes before serving. 

Since all the rules of risotto have already been broken, you're free to do what you want with this dish. You can infuse the heavy cream with a favorite go-with-pasta flavor: Before you start the risotto, bring the cream to a boil, turn off the heat and add, for instance, pieces of dried mushrooms or cracked peppercorns. Another easy flavor-add is fresh herbs—toss some into the pot when you're cooking the onions and then, to buck up their flavor, toss in some more just before serving.

Tweak the recipe enough and you'll do away with the whole name issue— you can just call it your own.

—Ms. Greenspan's latest cookbook is "Around My French Table," from which this recipe was adapted.



 In truth, this is a risotto the way that finely sliced apples are a carpaccio, which means not at all. This faux risotto (it's really macaroni mixed with cheese) is simple and quick to make, yet chic enough to be served at fancy dinner parties. 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter  1 small onion, finely chopped  Salt and freshly ground pepper  3¾ cups chicken broth (or 3¾ cups water and 2 chicken bouillon cubes)  1 1/3 cups tubetti (my preference) or elbow macaroni (traditional)  ½ cup heavy cream  ½ cup freshly grated Parmesan  3½ tablespoons mascarpone

 What to do: 

 1. Melt butter in a large skillet or saucepan over medium-low heat. Toss in onion, season with salt and pepper, and cook, stirring, until soft and translucent, about 10 minutes. (Or, if you'd like, go ahead and cook the onion until it's golden.) Pour in chicken broth or water and bring to a boil; if you're using bouillon cubes, drop them in now and stir to dissolve. Add pasta, stir it around, and let it cook at a steady simmer until it has absorbed almost all the broth, 20 to 25 minutes. (There should be just ¼ inch or less of liquid bubbling at the bottom of the pan.)

 2. Pour in cream and allow it to simmer for about 3 minutes, until it thickens slightly. Stir in Parmesan and mascarpone, cook for 1 minute, and taste for salt and pepper (it should be generously peppered). Pull the pan from the heat, cover, and let rest for 3 minutes before serving.

You can certainly serve this as a side dish to a roast of almost any kind, including chicken—think of it as a fancy macaroni and cheese—but it's elegant enough to come out on its own as a starter or main dish. It can be eaten plain or with a dusting of parsley or a little more Parmesan; of course, if you have some truffles to grate over each portion, go for it. 

About 30 minutes before you start the pasta, bring the cream—plus another 2 tablespoonfuls—to a boil in a saucepan and drop in some dried mushrooms, chopped fresh thyme or rosemary, black truffle peelings or even a spoonful or two of crushed black peppercorns. Turn off the heat, cover the pan and let the cream infuse for 20 minutes or more. Strain the cream before you pour it into the pasta pan (check the amount—if you don't have ½ cup, top it off) and proceed with the recipe.

This version of pasta risotto came from my friend Sophie-Charlotte Guitter in France. Heat 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet or saucepan, add 1 onion, finely chopped, and cook until soft. Pour in 3 tablespoons white wine and cook until it almost disappears. Add 1½ cups elbow macaroni and stir to coat with the oil and onion. Pour in about 3½ cups beef broth and bring to a boil. Cover the pan, lower the heat so that the liquid simmers and cook until the pasta is done, about 15 minutes. (Check as the pasta cooks to see if you need to add more broth; you may need up to ½ cup more.) While the pasta is cooking, put some coarsely chopped bacon in a heavy skillet over medium-low heat. When the bacon is almost cooked, add some chopped leeks and cook just until they are tender; keep aside. As soon as the pasta is ready, stir in 2 tablespoons butter, cut into bits, and season with salt and freshly ground pepper. Lift the bacon and leeks out of the skillet, leaving the fat behind, and stir them into the risotto. Sprinkle the top with ½ cup grated Parmesan and head for the table. 