  Google Inc. surprised the technology world by naming co-founder  Larry Page to replace longtime Chief Executive  Eric Schmidt, the biggest management shake-up since the Internet search giant was an obscure California start-up.

Mr. Schmidt, who has been chairman and CEO but shared decision-making with Mr. Page and co-founder  Sergey Brin, is stepping aside in April into the new post of executive chairman.

The company, which has grown into the world's biggest Web company by market capitalization since its 2004 initial public offering, said it was making the changes to "streamline decision making and create clearer lines of responsibility and accountability." 

In a letter posted on Google's blog, Mr. Schmidt, 55, said the company's rapid growth has made managing business "more complicated." He said that a decision was made "over the holidays" to change the company's structure.

Mr. Page, 38, will take over day-to-day operations April 4. The computer scientist was Google's founding CEO before handing the reins to Mr. Schmidt in August 2001. Google said Mr. Brin will focus on strategic projects such as new products. 

As executive chairman, Mr. Schmidt said he will "focus wherever I can add the greatest value," such as partnerships and government affairs, and that he will remain "an advisor to Larry and Sergey." 

"I have learned a ton from him over the years," Mr. Page said of Mr. Schmidt in a conference call. "I cannot be more excited about moving us forward, and we are really only at the beginning."

The transition has long been contemplated, according to a person familiar with the matter, and planning for it accelerated last year. People briefed on the matter said aspects of the personal relationship between Messrs. Page and Schmidt had also grown rockier over the past year.

Google spokeswomen said there has been no friction between the men, and some other people close to the men also said they didn't detect a difference.



An acquaintance of both men said there was no blow up but there has been tension for a while "over who has day-to-day decision making" authority. This person said this mainly results from Mr. Schmidt being more formal and process oriented. He "has more of a corporate mentality," the acquaintance said. 

Mr. Page is an introvert who keeps a low public profile and sticks to the product side of the business, taking the lead on the company's biggest product initiatives. Since the birth of a child in recent years, he has adopted an even lower profile outside Google, according to several Silicon Valley executives.

Mr. Schmidt was viewed as actively cultivating a broader profile, giving more public speeches about economics and establishing greater ties in Washington. People close to Mr. Schmidt say he has long contemplated and is still deeply interested in playing an advisory role in the public sector.

Messrs. Schmidt, Page and Brin sought to play down any personality differences on Thursday. In an interview, Mr. Schmidt said there had been no friction between the three that led to the change, and that they "have been running particularly well in the last six or nine months because of this shared goal in efficiency." He added: "We actually agree on, I think, everything."

The shake-up changes the face of one of the world's biggest tech companies and comes as a new generation of founder-CEOs has risen in Silicon Valley, including Mark Zuckerberg at Facebook Inc. It comes amid a week of major shifts at the helms of Silicon Valley giants, with  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.34
%




 disclosing Monday that CEO  Steve Jobs had gone on medical leave for unspecified health reasons.

With the changes, Google is moving past the triumvirate structure that has propelled the company to become the dominant player in Internet search and Internet advertising. 

Mr. Schmidt joined Google as an experienced technology executive charged with helping the two young founders navigate Silicon Valley and the business world. Their success had sparked many others in Silicon Valley to follow the same management model.

In a nod to how he was regarded as Google's elder statesman, Mr. Schmidt tweeted wryly after the management shifts were announced, "Day-to-day adult supervision no longer needed!"

In the decade since Mr. Schmidt joined Google, the company blew by competitors such as  Yahoo Inc.
YHOO


0.44
%




 and  Microsoft Corp.
MSFT


-0.07
%




 in the search-ad business. Google has since moved into mobile-device software with Android, which powers millions of phones and is challenging Apple, as well as operating software and online applications that compete with Microsoft's Windows and Office businesses.

But Google, founded in 1998 by Messrs. Page and Brin when they were Stanford University computer-science graduate students, increasingly faces competitive threats—particularly from the new wave of Web companies such as social-networking giant Facebook. Facebook has aggressively poached personnel from Google over the past few years, among other moves. 

Most of Google's revenue still comes from search advertising, and the company's growth has slowed in recent years. Google has also faced increasing scrutiny from regulators across the globe, which have blocked some of its acquisitions and forced the company to change how it safeguards consumer data. Google recently made an unsuccessful attempt to land its biggest-ever acquisition, a more than $5 billion offer to acquire daily-deal site Groupon Inc.

For the past decade, the working relationship among Messrs. Schmidt, Page and Brin helped stave off competitive threats. Major decisions were debated jointly by the three, and they often swayed each other's views. Last year after intense debating, for instance, Mr. Page eventually came around to support Mr. Brin in wanting to stop censoring Google's Chinese search engine, a move Mr. Schmidt resisted, according to people familiar with the matter. 

 I wonder what they have planned in the future that required Page to take over Maybe he wants more control in the direction of the firm or worse,the product side is drying up. It'll be interesting to see how this plays out.. 

—Gautam Bakshi

At Google, Mr. Page has long called the shots on products. He was the last word on product strategy and investment. He showed little care for matters like budgets and policy, functions that Mr. Schmidt gravitated towards, people familiar with the company said. 

Meanwhile, Messrs. Schmidt, Page and Brin have overseen major changes at the company and personally over the past decade. Google's 2004 IPO made the executives multi-billionaires. Messrs. Page and Brin have gotten married and had children. Many of Google's early employees have left and the company has since become sprawling as the business has diversified.

The change overshadowed the company's quarterly results released Thursday. Google reported fourth-quarter profit surged 29% to $2.54 billion, or $7.81 a share, up from $1.97 billion, or $6.13 a share, a year earlier. Revenue jumped 26% to $8.44 billon.

On Thursday, Google showed some of the diversification was paying off. While the company still makes the majority of its revenue from search ads, it has made inroads into the display ad market. Research firm eMarketer said Google grabbed 13.4% of the growing U.S. display ad market in 2010, which totaled $8.9 billion, up from 4.7% in 2009. Revenue at video site YouTube, which sells graphic and video ads, also more than doubled in 2010, Google said on Thursday, though it didn't give specifics.

The executive changes sparked talk among high-tech recruiters that Mr. Schmidt would eventually leave Google. A CEO who becomes executive chairman typically holds that post for a year, and Mr. Schmidt likely will follow that pattern, said Dennis Carey, a vice chairman of search firm Korn/Ferry International.

Mr. Schmidt, however, indicated he is staying put—at least for now. He said he and Messrs. Page and Brin will remain "a powerful triumvirate" and "best friends and partners." 

—Joann S. Lublin contributed to this article.

 Write to  Amir Efrati at amir.efrati@wsj.com and Jessica E. Vascellaro at jessica.vascellaro@wsj.com 