Iceland, which will begin talks to enter the European Union this summer, would be better off staying out of the bloc, said the country's finance minister, because most residents oppose it and joining could damage the Nordic nation's vital fishing industry. 

"Iceland is probably better off with other forms of agreement and connections with the EU than full membership," the minister, Steingrimur Sigfusson, said in an interview. "I am still very skeptical when it comes to the overall benefits of membership." 

Iceland has "very special interests" when it comes to fisheries, agriculture and "many other things," the minister, who heads the Left Green party, said. 

Some fear joining the EU would force the North Atlantic nation to reduce its catch, in line with the bloc's rules. 

Turning to the state of the euro zone, Mr. Sigfusson said the currency union would survive the challenges it faces after Portugal became the third member of the euro area to request a bailout. 

"I rather expect they will find solutions to the problems," Mr. Sigfusson said. "Other big economies have a keen interest in Europe being successful and it would obviously be negative for Japan and the U.S. if Europe is not successful. I rather expect they would find support if needed from elsewhere." 

Mr. Sigfusson also repeated his view that Iceland would be better off keeping the Icelandic krona, which has "served the country well" because it helped the economy recover by making Icelandic goods cheaper abroad.

"Devaluation is never without a cost but it definitely has created a good competitive advantage for our exports and it is supporting the real economy through the crisis," he said. 

Mr. Sigfusson said opposition to joining the EU was "strong" in Iceland. This was reflected in a recent poll for the business paper Vidskiptabladid, which showed 55.7% opposing accession. 

Nonetheless, Iceland's Parliament voted in 2009 to start the process of joining the EU, when the country was amid a financial crisis triggered by the collapse of its banking sector. Iceland will start formal talks on accession this summer when its legislation has been screened for compliance with EU laws. 

Mr. Sigfusson said it was "no secret" his party opposes EU membership even though it agreed "to follow the guidance of Parliament and the majority decision taken that we should negotiate…and we stick to that." 

The Left Greens govern Iceland as the junior partner in a coalition with Prime Minister Johanna Sigurdardottir's Social Democratic Party, which favors EU membership. 

The government survived a vote of no confidence recently, which was brought after voters in a referendum rejected a Parliament-backed proposal to compensate U.K. and Dutch authorities for losses during the financial crisis. 

The losses came after the two governments stepped in to compensate their savers who had money in Icelandic bank Landsbanki and its Internet arm Icesave, which collapsed in 2008. 

Mr. Sigfusson said the government could now put the issue in the past. "I don't see any opposition being so irresponsible as to repeatedly bring in a no-confidence vote, I just don't see what good that would do," the minister said. "Now we have plenty of work on our hands…and the one thing Iceland does not need is political instability." 

The Icelandic president has twice triggered a referendum by vetoing deals the country's government had struck over how to pay back the U.K. and Dutch authorities. Some 60% of voters rejected the latest deal in March, despite the more favorable rates of interest negotiated the second time around. 

The "no" vote was "not really a surprise in the end," Mr. Sigfusson said. "We had indications in the days before that it was turning to the 'no' side and it was always a very difficult case to sell to the public," he said. 

Some have suggested that anger against British authorities over the way they used antiterror laws to freeze Icelandic assets after the Icesave collapse made a "no" vote inevitable. The finance minister said there was "no doubt this was still fresh in people's memories." 

The minister said wider European relations should be kept separate from the Icesave debate. 

"The Icesave dispute is solely a problem between Iceland, the U.K. and the Netherlands and should not be mixed into anything else—be it the EU application process or our cooperation with the International Monetary Fund," he said. 

The prospect that the U.K. or Netherlands would veto Iceland's EU entry was "very unlikely" Mr. Sigfusson said, adding that it would also be "very unwise." 

The finance minister said the rejection of the Icesave deal hadn't affected Iceland's return to capital markets. "We still have this year in mind for returning to the capital markets...we have by no means postponed this," he said. "We want to show the outside world that Iceland is in a position to do so." 

Iceland isn't in immediate need of funding and the minister is "very optimistic" that the country has secured a continuation of its IMF program, which is coming to an end this summer. 

The IMF approved a program of emergency loans in November 2008 of up to $2.1 billion to help Iceland recover from its economic collapse. The funds are being released in installments after a series of reviews of Iceland's financial situation by IMF staff. 

"We hope to get the fifth review of the program with very little delay in May," Mr. Sigfusson said. 