DORTMUND, Germany—If it seems like Borussia Dortmund is a surprise candidate to win the Bundesliga championship this year, you're not mistaken.

Before this season, the team hadn't occupied top spot in the standings in almost a decade, had a 28-man roster which included 17 players aged 22 or younger, and had posted an average finishing position over the last six seasons of eighth place.

But as Dortmund prepares to play host to Nuremberg on Saturday, it is on the verge of an unlikely triumph. Thanks to a high-tempo, attacking style that draws on the speed and energy of German football's youngest team, Dortmund has bamboozled opponents all season, currently sits five points clear at the top of the table with three games remaining, and can clinch the title with a win at its Signal Iduna Park stadium this weekend.

"We all know what's at stake," said Roman Weidenfeller, the Dortmund goalkeeper. 

"We are an extraordinary team, with an extraordinary season behind us and we want to have an extraordinary end to it." 

As meteoric as Dortmund's rise may seem to outsiders, the team's emergence this season is actually the result of a careful long-term strategy and signals the club's recovery from a period of financial recklessness that saw it tumble from the summit of the European game and almost go broke.

Only a decade ago, Dortmund was one of Europe's leading clubs: In 1997, the team won the Champions League with a 3-1 defeat of Juventus and, in 2002, celebrated its third Bundesliga title in seven years and reached the final of the UEFA Cup, losing to Dutch side Feyenoord.

But in an effort to maintain those standards, the team gambled on a bunch of expensive foreign stars—and quickly fell apart. The following season, it failed to qualify for the lucrative Champions League and Dortmund soon found itself in the lower reaches of the table, some $140 million in debt and on the verge of insolvency.

The club escaped bankruptcy in 2006 through a last-minute deal with Morgan Stanley and subsequently drew up a bold new blueprint to return the team to the upper echelons of German football.

"We wanted maximum success in our sport without adding a single cent of debt," said Dortmund chief executive Hans-Joachim Watzke, who played a key role in orchestrating the club's rescue in 2006 and has helped to bring Dortmund back on solid financial footing. 

"[So] we focused on young, highly talented players to play modern, high-speed football."

The decision to focus on youth was a timely one. Following the country's humiliating first-round exit in the European Championship in 2000, the German Football Association, or DFB, had implemented a broad initiative to foster young talent and rejuvenate the national team.

Since then, the 18 Bundesliga clubs have almost doubled their annual spending on youth development, from €48 million ($70.4 million) in 2002-03 to €83 million last season, according to data from the league association.

The result has been a new generation of faster, technically superior players uniquely suited to the system imposed by Dortmund coach Jürgen Klopp, who joined the team in 2008—an organized, fast-paced style that is equal parts inspiration and perspiration and preaches constant movement. 

Armed with a roster of young guns who don't tire easily and regenerate quickly, Klopp's team has taken the Bundesliga by storm: Inspired by forwards Mario Götze and Kevin Grosskreutz, midfielder Nuri Sahin and full-back Marcel Schmelzer, Dortmund has won 21 of its 31 games this season, scored 62 goals and surrendered just 19, and has led the standings since November.

More important to the fans of this 101-year-old club, which draws an average attendance of roughly 76,000 fans to its home games, the second-highest figure in Europe, it has allowed Dortmund to steal the spotlight from its bitter rival Schalke, whose own run to the semifinals of the Champions League has helped put Germany's industrial Ruhrgebiet region back on the football map.

"We don't envy Schalke for being successful in this year's Champions League," said Dirk Zimmermann, a 31-year-old member of Borussen Fans Herne fanclub. 

"Dortmund will win the national league and let Schalke come closer to the Bundesliga trophy than they have been in previous decades." 

Zimmermann says today's young squad is more accessible for the fans as they relate much more to the club than the players ten years ago used to. "Back then, the players were mainly concerned about themselves," he said.

For all that Dortmund looks certain to win the title this year, the biggest challenge could be finding a way to retain its core of young players. 

Inter Milan and Real Madrid have both sent scouts to watch the team's midfield general, Nuri Sahin, in recent weeks, while Götze has been linked by some newspapers with a summer move to Barcelona or Manchester United.

Dortmund can't match the resources of the world's richest clubs—the team is the world's 22nd-biggest football club by revenue, with $155 million during the 2009-10 season according to Deloitte's Football Money League report. 

However, Watzke hopes the club's stable structure and commitment to developing its players will persuade the top stars to stay put. In addition, five of Dortmund's youngsters joined Germany's national squad this year.

"It might sound anachronistic, but values such as trust and loyalty are important for us," he says