HONG KONG— UBS AG lost one of its top Asia dealmakers Thursday to Bank of America-Merrill Lynch, the latest in a series of defections that has rivals hoping they can dethrone the region's longtime No. 1 bank.

The investment banking arm of  Bank of America Corp.
BA


-0.79
%




 said Thursday it named UBS banker  Matthew Koder as head of global corporate and investment banking for the Asia-Pacific region, a newly created role. Mr. Koder has nearly 20 years of experience in investment banking and capital markets and most recently worked with UBS for eight years as head of global capital markets—a position that included initial public offerings, debt offerings and other fund-raising activities around the world.

Mr. Koder is one of the biggest names yet in a series of departures from the Swiss bank over the past year. He couldn't be reached for comment. A UBS spokesman declined to comment.

UBS kept its Asian franchise thriving despite earlier defections and the 2008 financial crisis. But regional management shifts as well as pay restrictions in the wake of the crisis led to departures by UBS old-timers. UBS said recently it was cutting its banking staff bonus pool for 2010 by 10% from a year earlier following public and shareholder criticism.

UBS has long been No. 1 in the region in terms of investment bank revenue, according to data provider Dealogic. The bank has been especially strong in initial public offerings—a growing source of industry revenue as regional markets have matured—and in China, where it has helped a number of major Chinese companies raise capital in Hong Kong.

UBS was the top-earning investment bank in the region for an eighth straight year last year, generated an estimated $607 million this year in investment-banking revenue in the Asian-Pacific region outside Japan with a 5.1% market share, ahead of No. 2  J.P. Morgan Chase's
JPM


-0.09
%




 $554 million, Dealogic said.

The Swiss bank benefited from a rash of initial public offerings last year, thanks to investor confidence in the region's economic outlook. It took central roles in the $3 billion IPO of Singapore's Global Logistic Properties and the $4 billion IPO of Australia's  QR National. It also was boosted by rights offerings from Chinese banks, including  Bank of Communications, China Merchants Bank and  Industrial Bank,
601166


0.70
%




 which raised a total of $10.65 billion.

But it didn't play a role in the region's biggest IPO, the $22.1 billion July offering of  Agricultural Bank of China, in July last year. UBS played a secondary role in the region's No. 2 IPO, the $20.5 billion offering of  American International Group's
AIG


0.87
%




 AIA Group
AAGIY


1.00
%




 arm, which generated $408 million in fees.

The Swiss bank's former Asia head of global capital markets,  Steven Barg, quit in May to join Goldman Sachs as its co-head of equity capital markets for Asia excluding Japan, days after Mr. Barg's subordinate,  Mark Williams, moved to Japanese bank  Nomura Holdings. Mr. Williams was UBS's Asia head of equity capital markets.

  Henry Cai, UBS's former Asia investment-banking chairman who is known for his strong political and business connections in Beijing, left to join  Deutsche Bank AG in July as corporate finance chairman for Asia.

In September, Bank of America-Merrill Lynch said it hired  Michael Benz from UBS to be its head of wealth management for the Asia-Pacific region.

Mr. Koder is one of the biggest hires in the region since annual bonuses were given out by banks in recent weeks, and follows a number of reshufflings in the region as banks pay up for talent in their biggest growth market. He will join the firm in the summer and report to the firm's Asia-Pacific president,  Brian Brille, Bank of America-Merrill Lynch said in a statement. Mr. Koder, who was based in London and Hong Kong at UBS, will be based in Hong Kong.

The unit of Bank of America Corp. has been building out its Asian platform with a series of hires. In July, it hired  Peter MacDonald, who helped set up Goldman Sachs Group Inc.'s Chinese securities business, as vice chairman of the Asia-Pacific region.

 Write to  Nisha Gopalan at nisha.gopalan@dowjones.com 