'Nearly-New St. Thomas sofa" read the note push-pinned along with a Polaroid to the bulletin board at Condé Nast where I worked as design editor at Mademoiselle in 1966. It was my first sighting of the sofa that would move in with my husband and me, acquire a mate and inhabit our serial—and very different—living rooms for the next 16 years. 

I immediately thought the look of the sofa was perfect for the new apartment we had just found; so I grabbed the Polaroid, located the seller, put a day's hold on the sofa and rushed home to confer with my husband Mark. He agreed on its perfection, but felt, in an early instance of the Hampton tendency toward "more is more," that we would need two sofas for the scheme evolving in his mind for our living room-to-be. After we bought the bargain sofa, Mark commissioned the master craftsmen/upholsterers at Guido De Angelis Inc. to build another sofa to match it, and had both covered top-to-toe in a black wool hopsacking.

Our departure from a tiny two-room, no-kitchen (unless you count a cabinet with a mini sink, stove top and half-fridge as one, which I do not), fifth-floor brownstone walk-up on 60th Street was mandated by Mark's recent decision—after completing graduate work in art history and internships at MoMA and the Met—to do what he had really always wanted to do: become a decorator. The timing was ideal, since David Hicks had asked Mark to be his American associate and help launch David's geometric carpets in the U.S. Our sleek new apartment, in fact, would become the oft-photographed launching pad.

We moved from the wedding present and hand-me-down furniture of our student years to a highly stylized modern look in an apartment in a '50s yellow-brick building on East 63rd Street. We were on the fifth floor again, but this time with an elevator! Surrounded by gray flannel walls, placed upon the space-enlarging optical illusion of the Hicks carpet, our two black sofas (supplied with over-sized white duck pillows in the corners and smaller hot pink and orange accent pillows) faced each other across the narrow width of the living room. Their size provided seating for six—or even eight, when the side and back pillows were tossed on the floor, which they often were, to prop up various extra guests lounging about. Remember, we were young. As icing on the cake, with their generous dimensions (96 inches long by 38 inches deep by 34 inches high), the St. Thomases were long and deep enough to use as beds for occasional overnight guests. 

Two years later we moved again when we were expecting our first daughter Kate, and we needed room for a nursery. We found a two-bedroom apartment on 89th Street and Madison Avenu in an intriguing 19th-century building with winding corridors, interesting shapes and sizes of rooms, pocket doors, unusual alcoves—rumored to have been designed for use as either a hospital or brothel. (We hoped the latter, of course.) The sofas were separated here for the first time; one was placed perpendicular to the fireplace, the other centered in an alcove at the end of the room. The modern furniture we brought with us, augmented by the silver geometric wallpaper, gave a contemporary feel to the more traditional space. 

Finally, just before our second daughter Alexa's birth, we made our last move to the apartment we Hamptons consider Home. Our indispensable pair of black St. Thomases came with us, and were again sent to opposite ends of the living room: a 25-by-30-foot rectangle painted a glowing lacquer red. Modernity reigned supreme for a time. Then, bit by bit, hard edges disappeared and coziness and livability seeped in. Fragile plexiglass cube tables fell apart, to be replaced by a sturdy, low Chinese wooden table. Several comfortable Odom club chairs covered in red paisley were added to the mix; while on the stark, shiny, dark-waxed floors, rugs began to appear beneath both the low wooden table and the red lacquer Chinese chest—a wedding present from my mother that had been banished from gray flannel 63rd Street and had resurfaced on 89th Street—claimed a permanent place before one of the sofas in the room. New slipper chairs were placed on either side of the fireplace. Something was happening—were we growing up? Or old? Or tired of modernism? Or all of the above? 

In 1981, we decided to go in a quite different direction for the look of our room—in the mood and arrangements of furniture, pictures, collections and lighting. We left spare "contemporary"—or it left us. We surrendered to comfort and light, to surrounding ourselves with things we really loved, objects that meant something to us. Starting with our honeymoon trip in 1964, we visited English country houses and cottages whenever we could, as well as practically any house here or abroad that we could get in to see. Year after year in our reading group (which is 40 years old this year), we had been immersed in Proust, Trollope, Dickens, Powell, Balzac, Tolstoy, Stendhal, Murasaki and many others, who depicted all manner of other cultures, times and ways of living. Sightseeing and reading were undoubtedly elements that contributed to our new outlook. But probably the most significant factor in our desire for something different was that we had begun to admire more and more the cozy eclecticism, softened profiles and layered ease realized so admirably in the Regency era. We wanted our own version of that mood and style. Whatever the cause, change was in the air.

So, the living room floor was bleached and covered with a large sisal rug, a neoclassical mantel with columns replaced the flat, modern fire surround, and the room burgeoned with flowery chintz-covered walls and furniture. We clung to our stalwart friends, the St. Thomas sofas... at least for a while. We decked them out in celadon green with red, white and green trim, plopped some chintz pillows in their corners and tried to make them a part of it all. But it didn't work. They looked wrong—just a little bit clunky and makeshift and, frankly, leftover. When they were replaced, both Mark and I experienced more than a pang or two of sadness in saying goodbye to those two old friends who had been such an integral part of our family's daily life for so long. 

Neither of us could bear to be around when the movers came for them. 

—Ms. Hampton is the author of "Mark Hampton, An American Decorator."

•The Frame. The most important element of a good sofa is the frame, which should be made of solid kiln-dried hardwood, such as maple. All of the joints should be doweled and glued, then corner blocked—to keep the structure rigid and strong. Using screws, staples and other metals with wood can loosen the structure over time.

•The Springs. Individual coils, hand-tied to the frame, are key. Premade units with zig-zag springs often cause the frame to warp or break because of added tension. 

•The Filling. Look for filling made of horse and/or hog hair. Man-made materials like foam disintegrate after about 10-15 years, whereas horse hair lasts forever. 

—Advice from David Michaud of the New York upholstery company Jonas