 Nairn, Scotland 

The first shoots of new garlic are sprouting on  Glen and Gilli Allingham's field in the Scottish Highlands. For British grocery stores, they can't grow fast enough.

The Allinghams are among the U.K.'s only farmers of porcelain garlic, a sweet and subtle variety. Marketing products from the Allinghams' 10-year-old business, the Really Garlicky Company, is part of a strategy at British supermarkets to profit from the craze for eating local. The supermarket giants are courting farmers, and adding in-store marketing and special packaging to showcase local vegetables, fruit and meat.

Britain is far ahead of the U.S. in selling local food in supermarkets. As big U.S. stores and packaged-food companies start taking steps to market more local food, Britain offers a lesson in the benefits and challenges.

For farmers supplying the big chains, "unless you make a muck-up of it, the volumes are immense," Mr. Allingham says.

At Britain's biggest grocery chains, sales of local food are rising. Market-leader Tesco PLC expects sales of local food to reach £1 billion ($1.6 billion) this year, up from £870 million in 2010. Its research shows that 44% of U.K. shoppers are buying more local food than five years ago. At rival Asda, the British arm of Wal-Mart Stores Inc., sales of local fare rose 25% last year. All major food retailers are expanding their local ranges.

Such growth is unusual in the mature supermarket industry anywhere. It comes despite the higher prices commanded by some local foods. A mesh bag of three Really Garlicky bulbs, for example, costs £1.69 at Tesco, compared with 90 pence for garlic from Spain or China.

U.K. supermarkets are known for their innovation, partly because the industry is so concentrated and competitive, with five chains controlling over 80% of the market. Tesco alone accounts for nearly one in every three pounds spent on groceries in the U.K.

In the U.S., where distances from farm to store are often greater, local-produce marketing is less developed. Some stores are expanding, though. Whole Foods Market devotes space in stores and online to tout its support for local producers. Asda parent Wal-Mart in October said it aims to double locally grown food to 9% of its total produce offerings by 2015. The store encourages farmers to supply produce that local shoppers request, says spokesman  Kory Lundberg.

Offering produce from local farmers lets supermarkets stand out from the competition and is a lure for shoppers other than low prices, says  Martyn Jones, group services director at Wm Morrison Supermarkets PLC, which sells fresh pork, beef and lamb only from Britain, and labels its fish with the origin and method with which it was caught.

Morrison's is working with farmers in mild areas of Britain such as Devon and Cornwall to move up the breeding times of British sheep. This would allow the retailer to offer fresh local lamb in late April and early May, when rivals are still selling New Zealand lamb.

At a Tesco store in Elgin, near Nairn, shelves are dotted with signs with tales of nearby producers. "Enjoy the Taste of Scotland," says one showing a map of the region, a picture of Mr. and Ms. Allingham holding a garlic bulb with children running in the field behind them, and a description of their business.

Tesco stocks about 4,000 locally sourced foods at any given time. Last month, the retailer launched a special website that lets shoppers search for produce from within 30, 50 or 100 miles from their local stores.

"It's a big investment for Tesco," says  Sarah Mackie, category manager for regional and local foods, about the new website. She declined to say how much Tesco is spending.

When Ms. Mackie first approached the Allinghams about buying their garlic in 2004, the couple say they worried how delis and farm shops would react to them doing business with such a big corporation, and feared that they couldn't meet Tesco's needs. Eventually, the Allinghams were swayed by the sales volumes a Tesco listing would offer. Tesco started carrying their garlic in 2005.

The Allinghams lost a few small customers who objected to their relationship with Tesco, but Tesco proved to be a flexible partner. The Allinghams don't have long-term contracts or minimum quantities they must produce. Tesco sells Really Garlicky products in 69 Scottish stores. The Allinghams stopped selling at farmers markets in winter because Tesco and Waitrose Ltd. buy most of their gourmet garlic.

To supply a supermarket chain, each year farmers must pass two food safety exams. Auditors from industry-backed and independent certification programs can make surprise inspections to make sure farmers document the origins of all raw materials, among other measures. Supermarkets offer higher sales volumes but lower margins than farmers markets. And there is no guarantee that they will keep buying from one year to the next.

"They could quite easily remove it at the drop of a hat," said Mr. Allingham, in a checked shirt, green fleece vest and mud-caked boots as he inspected a field bathed in pale winter sunlight one recent morning. 

The stores define locally grown produce differently. At Tesco, food is labeled local if it comes from the county where a store is located, or a neighboring county. At Asda, local implies the item originated within a 25-mile radius of a store. 

The benefits of cutting the distance food travels may be fewer than many consumers realize. The Allinghams' garlic, for instance, carpools with carrots grown by a nearby farmer. The garlic and carrots go 100 miles to a Tesco depot near Edinburgh. From there, they are shipped to stores, but some travel back to stores near the fields where they were grown.

Still, Ms. Allingham says the system is more environmentally friendly than farmers driving—sometimes half-empty—trucks to stores. 

Asda, based in Leeds, has a local-food team of 28 buyers and marketers, up from just one person six years ago. It courts local food suppliers at farm shows, food fairs and open days, and runs a "supplier development" program with the Scottish government, says  CJ Antal-Smith, category director for emerging markets.

Overall, research firm Mintel forecasts sales of local food in Britain to reach £6.2 billion by 2013, up from an estimated £5.1 million in 2009, the most recent data available. Retailers say sales of domestic food were more resilient in the recent economic downturn than those of other premium foods.

At their farm near Loch Ness and a castle named in Macbeth, the Allinghams' business has grown to 35 acres and they produce items such as garlic mayonnaise and garlic bread.

 Write to  Cecilie Rohwedder at cecilie.rohwedder@wsj.com 