 New York  

Fame caught up with Lynn Nottage when she won a Pulitzer for "Ruined," but by then she was already known in the world of theater as a writer of real quality. One of her most noteworthy talents is the ability to write "political" plays in which the focus is not on abstract ideas but on ordinary people whose lives have been shaped—or twisted—by those ideas. "By the Way, Meet Vera Stark," a portrait of a black film actress of the 1930s, is a choice example of her method. In the hands of a less accomplished artist, it could easily have become a droning study of Discrimination in Action. Instead, Ms. Nottage has given us a sharp-toothed comedy that makes its points through indirection rather than with self-righteous indignation. As ingeniously constructed as it is amusing, "Vera Stark" is a worthy successor to "Ruined," and though Second Stage's production doesn't do justice to the play's multilayered subtleties, you should see it anyway.

In the first act, set in 1933, we meet the title character, a spunky young black woman (Sanaa Lathan) who works as a maid for a white film star (Stephanie J. Block) but longs to break into the movies herself. When Gloria, Vera's employer, gets a shot at the lead role in a high-calorie weeper called "The Belle of New Orleans" that also has a small but choice part for a slave, Vera contrives through elaborately silly means to audition for the part. Then we flash forward to 2003 and learn that she not only got it but became one of the most successful black actresses in Hollywood—though she was never allowed to play anything other than slaves and maids. The second act is set at an academic colloquium called "Rediscovering Vera Stark" in which three pseudo-hip film-studies professors (Daniel Breaker, Kimberly Hébert Gregory and Karen Olivo) wrangle over the meaning of Vera's career and show a clip of a 1973 talk-show appearance in which she and Gloria are reunited for the first time in years.

This too-tight précis only hints at the barbed irony with which Ms. Nottage sketches the proliferating complexities of Vera's life. Desperate to become a star, she learns that Hollywood stardom is a better-paid form of enslavement in which stereotypes are the shackles. As one of her friends tartly observes, "I'm up for a good laugh as much as the next fella, but why we still playing slaves? Shucks, it was hard enough getting free the first time." By the time Vera resurfaces on "The Brad Douglas Show" in 1973, she has become a disillusioned, hard-drinking caricature of herself, unwilling to play the nostalgia game but no less willing to allow young blacks to denigrate her career: "It's easy for people to point fingers today, but honey, should I not have taken that role and cleaned toilets and made beds in someone's home instead?"

Second Stage Theatre

Through May 29

The Public Theater

Through June 12

What makes all this more than just another hectoring lecture is that Ms. Nottage shrewdly plays Vera's story—most of it, anyway—for laughs. Though the farce-tinged comedy of the first act gives way to harsher satire, "Vera Stark" is funny all the way from the opening scene to just before the final curtain, when Ms. Nottage turns over a hole card that adds yet another layer of irony to the plot, deepening the comedy with a touch of cunningly prepared surprise.

Jo Bonney has staged this premiere production too broadly, encouraging the cast to flash hey-everybody-this-is-a-comedy signals at the audience instead of allowing the laughter to emerge naturally from the unfolding action. The paradoxical result of her approach is to make the second act of "Vera Stark" feel heavy-handed, at times to the point of outright didacticism. It doesn't read that way on the page, and in a more sensitively directed production, it wouldn't have played that way on the stage.

That said, "By the Way, Meet Vera Stark" is still very much worth seeing, not least for Ms. Lathan's delicious performance as Vera. She's a classy actor, and Ms. Nottage has written her a plum of a part.

If you think that Tony Kushner is a genius, then you're likely to be surprised and disappointed by "The Intelligent Homosexual's Guide to Capitalism and Socialism With a Key to the Scriptures," which is a garrulous, rambling mess. If, on the other hand, you think that Mr. Kushner is a flawed artist who's never learned how to make fully effective use of his gifts, then you're more likely to see "The Intelligent Homosexual's Guide" as all of a piece with his earlier plays. Like "Angels in America" and "Homebody/Kabul" before it, "The Intelligent Homosexual's Guide" is too long—three hours and 40 minutes, to be exact—and too diffuse to be easily endured by anyone lacking the patience of a secular saint.

"The Intelligent Homosexual's Guide" is the story of the Marcantonios, an Italian-American red-diaper family from Brooklyn, N.Y., whose aged patriarch (Michael Cristofer) is a Communist longshoreman turned union organizer. Having grown tired of his increasingly meaningless life, Gus calls together his children and tells them that he wants to commit suicide—but being a good Communist, he's decided to let them vote on his plan and will abide by their collective decision. It's a rich premise, a bit contrived but potentially effective, and the hard-left milieu in which the play is set is no less intriguing, though playgoers who know little of the history of the American Communist Party may get lost in the kudzu of CPUSA trivia. (This must be the only play ever written in which Herbert Aptheker is namechecked.) But Mr. Kushner has drowned his promising plot in endless verbiage, for his characters are talking machines à la George Bernard Shaw who mostly sound like robotic replicas of one another, and his promiscuous use of overlapping dialogue renders large stretches of the second act all but unintelligible.

To be sure, Mr. Kushner hasn't lost his knack for writing exciting scenes, and there are isolated moments in "The Intelligent Homosexual's Guide," most of them in the last act, that are as gripping as anything in "Angels." In addition, Michael Greif, the director, has put together a cast so fine as to suggest the intuitive unanimity of a permanent ensemble. (I was especially impressed by Linda Emond, who plays Empty, Gus's lesbian labor-lawyer daughter, with quiet simplicity and restraint.) Had Mr. Greif also taken a hatchet to the script, he might well have chopped out a two-hour-one-set show that was worth seeing.

Alas, Mr. Kushner has no sense of proportion whatsoever, and his chronic inability to cut to the chase is on agonizing display all evening long. As usual, watching one of his plays is like falling into the clutches of what the Brits call a club bore: Even when he says something interesting, he keeps on talking until you forget what it was.

 Mr. Teachout, the Journal's drama critic, blogs about theater and the other arts at www.terryteachout.com. Write to him at tteachout@wsj.com. 