Anita Lo, chef and owner of Annisa in Manhattan, doesn't play it safe. Her sophisticated dishes, rooted in classical French technique, incorporate exotic ingredients that blur cultural boundaries (Annisa's winter menu pairs scallops with loofah and sea urchin, while braised wild boar belly comes with unagi, daikon and apple).

Since opening Annisa in 2000, Ms. Lo has earned and maintained a Michelin star and enjoyed both critical and popular success (Ms. Lo finished fourth on the Bravo series "Top Chef Masters"). Despite her accomplishments, when asked what she's proudest of, Ms. Lo says, "just being here." In 2009, a fire destroyed Annisa and the restaurant had to be rebuilt. 

The setting, though spruced up, remains intimate and understated. As for the food, Ms. Lo continues to explore flavors and ingredient combinations that surprise diners.

This week, she shares a recipe for seared duck breasts with prunes and hoisin sauce. "Prunes and duck are a classic French combination," Ms. Lo says. "On some level, the dish is also Peking duck with prunes and red wine." 

At Annisa, Ms. Lo cooks duck three ways and pairs it with green papaya, cashews and herbs. Here, she keeps the chopping to a minimum and simply serves sliced duck breast with sweet, nutty hoisin sauce and syrupy red wine prunes. 

The trick to successfully cooking duck breasts lies in the rendering, Ms. Lo explains. Start with a very hot pan and set a container next to the stove for fat drippings. Once the duck is laid skin-side down in the pan, turn the heat to low to slowly crisp the skin and cook off the fat, which should be poured off as it accumulates. Just before flipping the breasts, turn the heat up and give the meat side a good sear. 

As far as ingredients go, Ms. Lo warns, "not all hoisin sauces are created equal" and recommends brands sold in Asian markets and foregoing anything marked "all natural." 

Dried fruits, she explains, come in handy when market pickings are slim. Here, the prunes, soft and dense, provide a textural contrast to the medium-rare duck. It's an approachable dish that demonstrates Ms. Lo's ability to meld flavors from different cultures through clever ingredient pairings. 

THE CHEF: ANITA LO

HER RESTAURANT: Annisa in Manhattan's West Village.

WHAT SHE'S KNOWN FOR: Weaving multicultural flavors with classic French themes.

4 duck breasts, about 2-1/3 pounds, trimmed and skin scored 

Salt and pepper 

1 tablespoon butter 

Pinch of Chinese 5-spice powder 

16 pitted prunes 

1-1/4 cup red wine 

1/4 cup hoisin sauce 

1 tablespoon water 

1/2 teaspoon sesame oil

What To Do:

1. Season both sides of duck breasts with salt and pepper. 

2. Set a large sauté pan over high heat.Once very hot, lay duck breasts, skin side down, in the pan. Turn heat to low. As duck cooks, pour off accumulated fat. Rendering takes about 20 minutes and requires degreasing the pan several times. 

3. When skin is browned and crisp, degrease the pan once more and turn heat up to medium-high. Flip breasts and add butter and 5-spice powder to the pan. Baste breasts with butter. Cook until medium rare, about 5 minutes. 

4. Set breasts aside to rest. Pour off excess fat. 

5. Set pan back over medium-high heat and add prunes and wine. Cook until wine is reduced and syrupy, about 5-7 minutes. Season with salt and pepper.

6. Meanwhile, mix hoisin with water and sesame oil. 

7. Divide hoisin sauce among four plates. Slice duck and arrange slices over the sauce. Top with prunes and red wine reduction.