It's hard to anticipate the direction of financial markets. Even knowing where economies are headed sometimes is of no help to an investor.

Two of the best-performing major economies in 2010 were China and Brazil, with growth estimated at 7.5% and 10.5%, respectively. But as of Dec. 23, stock markets of both nations were in the red for the year.

By contrast, the U.S. economy is likely to have expanded at only about 2.6% for the year. Despite that limp growth, major U.S. stock-market indexes are up between 11% and 20% for the year. Despite problems in many European economies, Germany's main stock index, the Dax, rose about 16% in 2010.

The unpredictable nature of markets is a reason to focus on possible surprises for this year. Big profits generally come in being early to the next trend, or by predicting events that catch others by surprise. Last year, The Wall Street Journal Sunday anticipated a number of surprises, such as the resilience of the U.S. dollar and problems for municipal bonds. But expectations of gains for health-care shares and weakness for oil prices proved misplaced.

Here's a look at what could surprise the market in 2011, according to a group of investors and analysts.

 Steady gains for stocks: Markets melted down in 2008, surged in 2009 and engineered an unexpected and impressive rally during the second half of 2010.

The last thing many investors expect this year is a slow, steady grind higher. But that could very well happen this year. The key reasons: The U.S. economy is showing signs of improvement, though housing and employment woes will keep growth under wraps. Inflation remains tame, so interest rates are unlikely to surge. And U.S. shares aren't at expensive levels, but they're also no longer bargains.





Many cautious investors will return to the stock market in 2011, three years after the market's collapse in 2008, argues market strategist  Mike O'Rourke of BTIG LLC in New York. Concern about the health of municipal bonds could drive some investors out of bonds and into stocks, others say.

That all could set the stage for a market that slowly moves higher.

"There is a high likelihood it will be a calm year, and we will grind our way to a low double-digit return amidst low volatility," says Mr. O'Rourke. "It will be a surprise to most if we have low volatility, but I believe there is a very good chance 2011 will play out this way."

 January boost: Some analysts are growing worried about the stock market's near-term outlook. They're concerned that gains of 22% over the last six months, a still fragile economy and concern about Europe don't bode well for stocks. The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index plunged 8.4% during January 2009 and fell 3.6% in January 2010.

But  Jack Ablin, chief investment officer of Harris Private Bank in Chicago, relies on data tracking the trading of institutional and retail investors. These numbers suggest that institutions are becoming more upbeat about stocks and January could be strong.

 Interest rates rise: If the U.S. economy slowly improves, volatility drops and stock markets edge higher, the Federal Reserve will be tempted to signal a possible rate hike, perhaps by the latter part of 2011.

Some, such as  James Paulsen, chief investment strategist at Wells Capital Management, even predict the economy's improvement will spark the Fed to start raising interest rates by late summer, a dramatic shift from its recent efforts to push rates lower.

That could send short-term interest rates higher, something that would hurt bank shares like  Citigroup
C


0.67
%




 and  Bank of America,
BAC


0.65
%




 which have been rallying in recent months. Bonds also could be hurt in that scenario.

The possibility of higher U.S. interest rates could help the dollar, putting pressure on exporters and keeping a lid on gains for the overall market, another reason to expect a year of unremarkable gains.

 Precious-metals pressure: Gold and silver prices have surged over the past two years as the dollar and other major currencies have come under pressure and economic problems hounded leading economies. Nervousness about future inflation also has grown.

But if the economy slowly improves in 2011 and the likelihood of a Fed rate hike increases, the dollar will strengthen and gold and silver could tumble, some analysts say. A reason for concern: Precious-metals prices are climbing, analysts say, not because of supply problems. Rather, investor demand has surged.

If the dollar rises, some of these same investors who have become enamored with gold and silver -- many of whom held none of these investments in their portfolios just a year or two ago -- could head for the sidelines. And if the U.S. government ever gets serious about attacking its debt problems, it could prove to be another boost to the greenback and setback for the yellow metal.

The Obama administration "will have its 'Sputnik Moment' on the deficit and debt overhang as they watch the euro come unraveled and worry the sovereign-debt crisis is coming to the U.S. as long-term rates begin to move higher," predicts  Gary Evans, a former trader and author of the Global Macro Monitor blog.

 Chinese success: The Chinese government is struggling to tame inflation, which is at an annual pace of more than 5%. Some say the government could slam on the brakes, crippling growth.

But  Daniel Alpert, managing partner of Westwood Capital, is more optimistic about the outlook for China, a good sign for the global economy. He predicts the "Chinese will prove substantially more adept in reining in their own inflation than people are generally assuming."

He argues that the command economy in China is better able to stem excess capital flows leading to inflation. And if the Fed does begin to raise rates, it will reduce capital flowing into Asia.

 Obama popularity boost: If the economy stabilizes and markets edge higher, President Obama could see a rebound in popularity. "President Obama will rise like a phoenix as he moves to the center and looks unbeatable in 2012," Mr. Evans predicts.

As Americans feel better about the economy and their president, it could encourage them to spend and hire, providing a lift, he says.

—Email: gregory.zuckerman@wsj.com 