Director Julie Taymor made some of her first public comments concerning "Spider-Man: Turn Off the Dark" in a Tribeca Film Festival event Sunday evening, defending what she characterized as the musical's broad audience appeal and hinting at some of the creative tension that may have lead to her dismissal from its helm.

"I think it's very important to be true to your heart and true to your vision," she said in a Tribeca Talks Directors Series event about her career. "I am passionate about the projects that I do, and I would hate, even if they fail in certain ways…" she trailed off. "There are many questions about why things don't work."

Though Ms. Taymor and her interviewer, Antonio Monda, an Italian film director and professor at New York University's Tisch School of the Arts, covered much creative ground concerning her work in both film and theater, the epic drama surrounding the $70 million "Spider-Man" was at times the overt focus--and more often the inescapable subtext--of the evening.

Asked about how audience expectations affect the creative process, Ms. Taymor responded by focusing on "The Lion King," but her comments quickly lead to her more recent Broadway pursuit.

"The Lion King" ultimately proved wildly successful, "but it could have been awful, too. It could have not worked and been embarrassing. But when we did it, I did it the way I thought it should be done. And I thought that would appeal to a lot of people," Ms. Taymor said. 

Perhaps sensing the elephant in the room, she added: "Same with 'Spider-Man,' which did--does--did"--Ms. Taymor flip-flopped about whether to refer to the production in the present or past tense--"appeal to a very wide variety of people."

In another exchange concerning "The Lion King," Ms. Taymor described former Disney Chief Executive Michael Eisner's support of her interest in using puppetry to translate the tale from screen to stage. 

"Michael said, the bigger the risk, the bigger the payoff," she recalled. "And that was an incredible moment, because that's not always the way it is, is it?" she said pointedly, to gentle laughter from the audience.

While Ms. Taymor has faced many accusations concerning her work with "Spider-Man," she couldn't be accused Sunday evening of lacking a sense of humor about the project, as she described an "odd award" she received on Friday at the George Eastman House Film Festival in Rochester, N.Y.: the Susan B. Anthony "Failure is Impossible" award.

"I thought, well that's timely!" she said. 

The Tony Award-winning director concluded on a less facetious note. "I like to take people to a place they didn't know they wanted to go," she said. "I'm not interested in doing something that everybody knows, already been there, seen that, done it. That just doesn't interest me."

Asked by an audience member about the line between struggling with an artistic vision and knowing "when you get a little off-track," Ms. Taymor responded, "Off-track, according to who?"

She added: "Off-track--that's so wide an expression. I do think it's important that your collaborators are all together. I do. I think that's absolutely critical....But as far as the vision, that's something different. If people want to work with me, and they want the idea, we work a long time to create something." She paused, then said: "And I could be talking about any of my films, not just a play."

 Write to  Erica Orden at erica.orden@wsj.com 