Ancient egypt has been misunderstood since Herodotus put pen to papyrus in the fifth century B.C., though its appeal has never flagged. Exhibitions of Egyptian artifacts still draw large crowds at museums, and the "documentaries" on cable channels continue to flood in. But much of this attention feeds into an idea that Egypt is "other" and "exotic"—a changeless, mysterious world of tombs, temples and sorcerers. Hollywood is guilty of promoting this image, but so are scholars, who are prone to emphasize mummies and royal tombs to the exclusion of topics such as agricultural production, social organization and, broader still, economic history. 

In fact, ancient Egypt—a term encompassing a culture that lasted for more than 4,000 years—offers an incomparable opportunity to study how and why civilizations change over a long period of time. The comparison to China may be appropriate: Egypt, like China, has a long and extensively documented history. The ancient Egyptian language was written and spoken for two-thirds of recorded human history, and a great volume of economic and legal records are preserved in papyri and inscriptions, including some spectacular documents that go back to 2000 B.C.

Remarkable, then, that Egypt has been given short shrift in the current trend for "big history." For instance, the Nobel Prize-winning economist Douglass North has championed an approach, called New Institutional Economics, concerned with the connection between institutions, institutional change and economic performance. Egypt should be at the center of such discussions. Why is it left out? Chiefly because, by the first millennium B.C., it had already come under the control of foreign empires: a case of victors writing history. 

Egyptian civilization had always absorbed influences from other nearby civilizations, ever since the first establishment of a unified state around 3100 B.C. But after the death of Ramses XI (ca. 1069 B.C.), the Nile valley was dominated by outside political forces whose advanced technologies gave them a military advantage. By the time Alexander the Great arrived, in 332 B.C., Egypt had experienced Libyan, Nubian, Assyrian and Persian rule. 

The founding of an Egypt-based empire by Ptolemy, one of Alexander's greatest generals, and the annexing of Egypt by Octavian in 30 B.C., shaped the legacy of ancient Egypt. Greek became the administrative language under the Ptolemies, which slowly made the hieroglyphic script increasingly recherché. Egypt's history would be interpreted through the lens of Greece and Rome for centuries, until the lucky find of the Rosetta Stone, which contains a Ptolemaic decree written in hieroglyphics, demotic Egyptian and ancient Greek. Only a feat of brilliant decipherment by Jean-François Champollion, working in the 1820s, allowed us to understand ancient Egypt again in its own terms.

From that day to this, scholars have been diligently uncovering ever more details of Egypt's history, and popular books on the topic have proliferated. One can still profitably turn to a classic account such as James Henry Breasted's "A History of Egypt" (1905). But the study of Egypt has advanced remarkably over the past century, thanks above all to archaeological research. In particular, finds in the region west of the Nile River, west of modern Aswan, have changed our understanding of how Egyptian civilization first arose. 

Toby Wilkinson's "The Rise and Fall of Ancient Egypt" stands in the great tradition of Breasted but incorporates much new archaeological information. With a literary flair and a sense for a story well told, Mr. Wilkinson offers a highly readable, factually up-to-date account of what we know about Egyptian political history. He organizes his narrative by ruling family or "dynasty," following a design first set down by the Egyptian priest Manetho, whose account of Egyptian history (written in Greek ca. 270 B.C.) survives in summary form.

 A History of Egypt   By James Henry Breasted 

One of the very finest literary narratives of pharaonic civilization that has ever been produced. Breasted was the first Professor of Egyptology in the U.S. and the founder of the Oriental Institute at the University of Chicago. Published in 1905, his book has rarely been surpassed in style.



 An Introduction to the Archaeology of Ancient Egypt  By Kathryn A. Bard 

This 2008 volume surveys sites dating from pre-dynastic to Roman times. Color photos, timelines, and 22 maps make it an excellent introduction to the current state of Egyptian archaeology.

 Reflections of Osiris  By John Ray 

A marvelous 2002 book about real ancient Egyptian lives, by a leading British Egyptologist. The individuals Mr. Ray writes about include Hekanakhte, a farmer who wrote letters home while away on business, providing details about managing an Egyptian household and insights into daily struggles and rivalries. Agatha Christie used them to write "Death Comes as the End."

 Cleopatra: A Biography  By Duane Roller 

Several Cleopatra biographies have been published recently, though little new information has appeared to alter our basic understanding of Cleopatra, the last ruler of the last ruling family in ancient Egyptian history. This 2010 book is an excellent scholarly account to balance Stacy Schiff's highly literary "Cleopatra: A Life." Take your pick, then read Dorothy J. Thompson's "Memphis Under the Ptolemies," to understand why Cleopatra matters.

 The Egyptian  By Mika Waltari 

First published in 1945, this is one of the great historical novels. Set in the time of the reformer Akhenaten, it is actually based on two ancient Egyptian stories: "Sinuhe," a classic adventure story written during the Middle Kingdom ca. 1980 B.C., and the Ptolemaic "Tale of Setne Khaemwaset"—a priest with a fatal attraction for the wrong woman. It became a movie starring (who else?) Victor Mature in 1954.

There were three "classical" phases of a centralized Egyptian state. First, the Old Kingdom (the age of the pyramids) embodied by one of the greatest rulers in history, Sneferu, the builder of three pyramids. Next, the Middle Kingdom, a time of political reforms in the wake of the first state collapse. Finally, the New Kingdom, which arose out of the ashes of a second collapse of centralized rule and an invasion (ca. 1630 B.C.) by the Hyksos tribes from the Near East, began an age of imperial expansion and of some of Egypt's most famous rulers, including Tutankhamun (famous only because of his tomb surviving), Queen Hatshepsut and Ramses II (the "great"). 

Mr. Wilkinson energetically chronicles the deeds of the great kings, as when he recounts the pivotal Battle of Kadesh, where the two greatest armies of the second millennium B.C.—the Hittites and Egyptians—met each other in 1274 B.C. When Ramses II learned from captured spies that the Hittite army was much closer than he thought, Mr. Wilkinson writes, he "erupted in fury." "Minutes later the attack came. A huge detachment of twenty-five hundred Hittite chariots, their warriors fearsome in ankle-length mail coats, swept across the river and struck the division of Ra as it was marching northward toward the Egyptian camp." 

The author also brings us, intimately sometimes, into a world of everyday Egyptians, one revealed only in the last century by the work of scholars systemically studying Egyptian material culture. Documents give glimpses, all too occasionally but clearly, of labor camps, workers strikes and—at the end of the New Kingdom—even robbery of the royal tombs. The official investigation of these robberies and the execution of the captured robbers are preserved in some of the most remarkable documents from the ancient world. 

Mr. Wilkinson puts too much emphasis on the importance of the dynasties. This is still the norm in Egyptian history, but it does not tell us much about the driving forces of historical change, which included climatic crises—manifested in wild Nile flooding—and exogenous shocks such as invasion. (These could occasionally bring benefits: Such was the case with the Hyksos invasion, which brought the chariot and the horse.) 

Mr. Wilkinson claims that ancient Egypt was the world's first "nation-state." But this is misleading: Even in its centralized phases, ancient Egypt did not come close to being a nation-state in terms of culture. A nation-state is a quite distinctive entity that appears much later in history. Nationalism was not a feeling of antiquity, and casual comparisons between ancient Egypt and the modern world—especially Europe— should be avoided. We can be attracted to ancient lives without thinking that they were just like we are, or forgetting millennia of hard-won social, political and economic development.

Elsewhere in "The Rise and Fall of Ancient Egypt," Mr. Wilkinson rightly stresses the brutal nature of the Egyptian state. "Autocratic regimes," he says, "live and die by force, and ancient Egypt was no exception." "The most chilling example of this tendency," he suggests, "can be seen in the tombs of Egypt's early rulers . . . where dismembered bodies of several individuals had clearly been interred with the tomb owner."

Ever since Aristotle's "Politics," Asian states have been viewed as "despotic," in contrast to more open democratic city-states like Athens. But the contrast can be too sharp, conflating various realities into a single, artificial comparison of fifth-century Athens and Pharaonic Egypt. In the long run, Egyptian history shows that local elites often served as a counterweight to royal tendencies to absolutism. I am not at all certain, as Mr. Wilkinson is, that the Great Pyramid is merely an example of "folies de grandeur." Were it so, we should certainly have to put Chartres Cathedral in the same category.

Mr. Wilkinson's account shares with Breasted's one unfortunate flaw— epitomized by this book's title. Mr. Wilkinson sees the first millennium as one of great decline, a "fall" from a supposed golden age. (Breasted's "History" ends, rather poetically, with the Persian occupation of Egypt in 525 B.C.) But in fact this was a crucial period in the evolution of Egyptian civilization. Known as the Saite period (ca. 650-525 B.C.) because the Egyptian capital was located at Sais in the western Nile Delta, this period saw the first Greek merchants and soldiers arrive in Egypt, the introduction of coinage and (as Herodotus tells us) the circumnavigation of Africa. A period of change, no doubt. But "change and decay," as Mr. Wilkinson has it? I demur.

 By Toby Wilkinson  Random House, 612 pages, $35

Likewise, the Ptolemaic age (305-330 B.C.) was a spectacular time of inter national trade, great building projects and considerable new achievements in science, medicine, philosophy and technology. It was also the first age of global ization, which brought with it social unrest and continuous war. The era was brought to a close only by Roman military power, experienced firsthand by Cleopatra—the last ruler of the last ruling family in ancient Egyptian history.

The Ptolemies were not a purely external colonial power, but one that established itself firmly within the long history of legitimate kingship while building a new socio-economic system. That fact alone suggests the longevity of one of the most important features of ancient Egypt: the idea of a king (sometimes, it's true, merely a warlord in a kilt) ruling in harmony with both gods and nature over one of the most remarkable civilizations in human history.

Egyptian civilization did not even end with Cleopatra. It was merely transformed, continuing to be not only a center of Jewish and classical learning but also a hub first of early Christianity and then of Islamic civilization. After the death of Cleopatra, Egypt would not be the center of empire again until the Fatimids in the 10th century A.D., when Cairo became a leading light of the Islamic world. Yet even today Alexandria and Cairo continue to be the leading cities of Egypt, and both preserve in many ways the great legacy of ancient Egypt.

—Mr. Manning is a professor of history and classics at Yale and the author of "The Last Pharaohs" (Princeton).