BRUSSELS—European Union leaders agreed to explore further steps to squeeze the finances of Libyan leader Col. Moammar Gadhafi, including cutting off his oil revenue, but gave no sign that they were ready to back military action.

The caution of European governments, coupled with reticence in Washington, suggested momentum for the imposition of a no-fly zone over Libya was waning, some officials said. After a heated discussion, France and Britain failed to get language into the leaders' statement mentioning explicitly a possible no-fly zone or airstrikes.



German Chancellor Angela Merkel, supported by leaders from Eastern Europe, said she was "fundamentally skeptical" about intervention in Libya. "Now is in no way the time for military action," she said. 

The heads of state and government said Col. Gadhafi's regime "has lost all legitimacy" and called on him to step down immediately.

The EU leaders also edged toward endorsing the Libyan opposition as legitimate partners, saying they viewed the Benghazi-based Transitional National Council as "a political interlocutor."

European Council President Hernan Van Rompuy called the rebel council's leaders "sufficiently reliable at this stage to work with."

Secretary of State Hillary Clinton is scheduled to meet with Libyan opposition leaders next week.

The European leaders, meeting for an extraordinary summit to address the conflict in Libya, didn't rule out military action entirely, saying they would examine "all necessary options, provided there is a demonstrable need, a clear legal basis and support from the region."

Military action would need a clear endorsement from the Arab League, the African Union and the United Nations, as well as unequivocal calls for military action against Libyan forces by rebel authorities, diplomats said.

Steps toward seeking support are under way. The U.S. and its allies in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization are preparing a range of military options for delivering humanitarian relief, increasing enforcement of the arms embargo on Libya, and for a possible no-fly zone. These plans will be presented next week at NATO, the White House said.

The Arab League is scheduled to meet in Cairo on Saturday; the EU has called for a summit with the Arab League and African Union but a date has yet to be set.

Western nations on the U.N. Securty Council are looking into three military options, diplomats said.

The first, arming the rebels, would require the advance approval of the U.N. sanctions committee, which consists of all 15 members of the Security Council and acts by consensus.

Permanent Security Council members Russia and China are unlikely to agree to military action; they have generally opposed intervention in what they see as the internal affairs of other nations. 

The second option, imposing a no-fly zone, would require a new U.N. Security Council resolution authorizing it, the U.S. and Nato say, as would the third option, carrying out airstrikes on Libyan government targets.

France and Britain, which had surprised other European governments by calling Thursday for preparations for targeted air strikes, claimed they were satisfied with the summit's conclusions on Friday.

French President Nicolas Sarkozy said: "Europe is sending a signal and we didn't want to rule out" a military option. "I am opposed to a massive military intervention in Libya through NATO. But between that and letting civilians be massacred, surely there must be room to ask oneself what can be done," he said.

France, which became Thursday the first government to grant diplomatic recognition to the Transitional National Council, remained the only country to have done so. However, the EU leaders said that while they may speak with moderate members of Col. Gadhafi's regime, they aren't interested in dialogue with him, saying he is "no longer an interlocutor for the EU."

With forces loyal to Col. Gadhafi escalating attacks on rebels, British Prime Minister David Cameron said "things may be getting worse, not better, on the ground." But he insisted the agreement to consider "all necessary options" was strong language.

"Do we need to do more? Yes, of course we do, because the fact is this man is brutalizing his own people and we can't stand by while that happens."

Mr. Cameron said Britain, which has frozen £12 billion ($19.2 billion) in Libyan assets in response to EU and UN sanctions, supported further moves to hit the regime, which "is still in receipt of a huge amount of money, including oil money."

An EU official said the summit considered two options on energy: creating an escrow account for Libyan oil revenues or extending the sanctions to impact Libya's National Oil Corporation. The official said there was no decision yet, with Italy having particular concerns about such a move.

"It's in the works," he said of a proposal on extending sanctions to Libya's state oil company.

Also Friday, the EU extended sanctions that initially included a travel and arms-sales ban and an asset freeze on 26 individuals. The sanctions now also target five entities, including the Libyan sovereign-wealth fund, its central bank and one more individual.

—Adam Entous and Joe Lauria contributed to this article.

 Write to  Stephen Fidler at stephen.fidler@wsj.com and Laurence Norman at laurence.norman@dowjones.com 