A speedy rush to surgery and the location of Rep. Gabrielle Giffords's wounds enhanced her chances for a strong recovery, although dangers loom, neuro-specialists said Sunday.

Ms. Giffords was in critical condition Sunday at the University Medical Center in Tucson, Ariz., after being shot in the head Saturday at a community event. G. Michael Lemole Jr., the hospital's chief of neurosurgery, said she was "responsive to verbal commands" upon arriving at the hospital.

Doctors said the bullet probably entered the back left portion of the brain and exited the front left. "She is very lucky that the bullet apparently went through what is often called ineloquent brain" that is less crucial to speech and thinking, said Stephan A. Mayer, chief of neuro-critical care at New York-Presbyterian/Columbia Medical Center. The biggest immediate risk is from swelling, bleeding and seizures, he said.

Ms. Giffords, 40 years old, was in surgery within 38 minutes of the shooting, and other surviving victims were arriving around the same time, an unusually rapid response that should enhance recoveries, doctors said.

Ms. Giffords's immediate responsiveness to commands, such as squeezing a doctor's hand, suggests that she wasn't in a coma and that her brain stem and the brain's core structures had relatively little damage. Such signs bode favorably for a strong recovery, though potential difficulties remain.

"The fact that she was able to follow commands is absolutely huge for her outlook," said Dr. Mayer of Columbia-Presbyterian. Even some patients who don't respond early to pain stimuli or bright lights still recover, and Ms. Giffords's case doesn't appear as dire.

However, it was still unknown Sunday whether nerve connections might have been severed by the bullet and skull fragments propelled through her brain. Those possibilities leave open the chance she could suffer cognitive problems, mood difficulties and, over the long term, epilepsy, Parkinson's disease and dementia.

Just as the shooting already has raised issues about the tenor of public debates, it could raise awareness of a lack of readily available cognitive and other rehabilitation for people with brain injuries, including shootings, accidents and stroke. Potentially, "this is the start of a chronic illness for her," said Gregory J. O'Shanick, chairman and former medical director of the Brain Injury Association of America.

Dr. O'Shanick described patients like Ms. Giffords as "at a high risk of seizures because of the penetrating injury." A seizure can raise pressure in the brain and cause further damage.

"The rapid treatment she received needs to be matched by a seamless course of rehabilitation such as cognitive rehabilitation," Dr. O'Shanick said. "We would expect problems with verbal language and problem solving."

Because the area of the brain affected also is where mood regulation occurs, he said, Ms. Giffords could face physiologically-caused depression.

Owen B. Samuels, director of neuroscience critical care at Emory University in Atlanta, said portions of the left brain control speech and understanding language. "If the damage is isolated to the left side, language would be the biggest potential problem," he said. 

When the brain is injured, tissues swell. So Arizona doctors actually removed, temporarily, a portion of Rep. Giffords's skull to prevent this swelling from impeding blood flow to the brain and causing further tissue damage beyond that from the bullet. If necessary, they'll also use an intra-cranial pressure monitor inserted into brain tissue, doctors at the Tucson hospital said.

As with many such patients, the congresswoman was placed in a medical coma and on a ventilator to allow the brain to recover.

 Write to  Thomas M. Burton at tom.burton@wsj.com 