HELSINKI—True Finns Chairman  Timo Soini on Monday reiterated he won't support the European Union's bailout for debt-ridden Portugal and acknowledged that could mean the party doesn't form part of Finland's next government. 

"Unfortunately, we don't believe in the durability and fairness of the [EU bailout] measures presented so far," Mr. Soini told a news conference in Helsinki. "There have been attempts to control the crisis with these measures for more than a year, with no success; now we're on the brink of collapse. Every step forward on this strategy increases risks for losses by Finnish and other taxpayers." 

The comment came in response to preparations to form Finland's next coalition government, led by the outgoing Finance Minister  Jyrki Katainen of the National Coalition Party. 

Finland's mainstream parties face difficult talks to form a new coalition government without the True Finns party, which took 19% of the vote in general elections on April 21. The True Finns finished third in a tight contest, behind the Social Democrats with 19.1% and the center-right NCP on 20.4% of the vote. 

"Let's hope Finland gets a majority government, but we don't expect to get an invitation to form part of the next government," Mr. Soini said. 

Mr. Soini said it is ideologically impossible for the True Finns to support Finland's contributing to both the temporary European Financial Stability Facility and the permanent European Stability Mechanism. "We cannot accept these measures as they are steps towards a federation of Europe," he said. 

Four other parties—the National Coalition Party, the Center Party, the Greens and the Swedish People's Party—have said they would support the Portuguese bailout. Together they have 98 seats out of a total of 200. 

An ordinary majority of more than 50% of parliamentary votes would be sufficient for Finland to approve the bailout. Against this background, the Social Democratic Party—which won 42 seats—holds the key. 

The Social Democrats on Monday in effect gave their support to bailing out Portugal by saying that international agreements approved by the government must be honored. "International agreements processed by the parliament must be respected and everyone should commit to them," the party said. 

Formal talks to form a coalition are set to start Tuesday with Finland's president expected to name a new government for Finland on May 19. 

The parliament can only vote on its participation in Portugal's bailout after the government has proposed it. 

Last week, the EU's Economics Commissioner  Olli Rehn said Finland will have to decide before May 25, allowing the EU time to give the first tranche of aid to Portugal in June. 