HONG KONG—Japan's  Sony Corp. said Friday six of its manufacturing plants that make various devices and components, including Blu-ray discs and lithium-ion batteries, remain closed following the massive earthquake and tsunami that struck the country last week. 

The statement from the consumer electronics maker is a further sign that the earthquake and its aftermath are continuing to roil the electronics supply chain. It also solidifies the view of many analysts that the technology industry may suffer from supply shortages of key components that are typically manufactured in Japan. 

Sony joins several Japanese technology firms that have in recent days said they are seeing production disruptions due to power outages and disruption to supply networks from the 9.0-magnitude earthquake that struck northeastern Japan March 11. 

Research firm IHS iSuppli Corp. said in a report that at least five components of  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.85
%




's iPad 2 are sourced from Japanese suppliers, adding that electricity and transportation disruptions in Japan could potentially impact global shipments of the tablet device launched earlier this month.

"While some of these suppliers reported that their facilities were undamaged, delivery of components from all of these companies is likely to be impacted at least to some degree by logistical issues now plaguing most Japanese industries in the quake zone," the research firm said. 

Sony spokeswoman  Mina Minami said the company has evacuated all staff at the six facilities that remain closed. Depending on the facility, these sites make magnetic tapes, optical devices, integrated circuit cards, and semiconductor lasers. 

One plant in Kuki, Saitama prefecture, has fully recovered and resumed operation, while another plant in Ibaraki, Ibaraki prefecture has partially resumed production, said the spokeswoman. 

She said the company expects that in the near term there will be an impact on Sony's ability to supply components and devices. On the matter of whether a disruption in component supply will impact the company's ability to deliver and make electronic gadgets, she said: "we're currently investigating the matter." 

The comments came after Sony, which makes the PlayStation game console and Bravia liquid-crystal-display televisions, said Monday manufacturing operations have been suspended at eight production sites in Japan. 

On Thursday,  Toshiba Corp.
TOSYY


-2.05
%




, a major manufacturer of flash memory chips widely used in smartphones and tablets, said one of its liquid-crystal-display manufacturing plants in Japan suffered damage from the quake and production isn't expected to resume for one month. 

  Sharp Corp.
SHCAY


-2.87
%




, which makes LCD panels, as well as LCD TVs, said this week its panel production facilities in Japan are operational, however. 

"There are no extensive damages to Sharp's buildings or production facilities in Japan, including our audio-visual product plant in Yaita city, Tochigi prefecture. We are currently checking manufacturing equipment within the Yaita plant," the company said. 

Sharp also said it is investigating component procurement. 

 Write to  Yun-Hee Kim at yun-hee.kim@dowjones.com 