Banks and borrowers surely can agree that they didn't have one of their best decades together.

The difference is that one group clearly learned its lesson, while the other seems content with business as usual.

As the new year begins, two new surveys show that U.S. consumers are full of regret over their financial mistakes of the last few years. They recognize that they didn't save enough--and spent too much.

They are committed to changing, and when it comes to their misfortune, most consumers don't blame anyone but themselves.

Financial firms, of course, couldn't agree more. In their view, it was a failure of borrowers, not indiscriminate or misleading extensions of credit, that led to the financial crisis and Great Recession. It's a disconnect that has fueled the foreclosure wave rather than stemmed it.

The majority of Americans concede making mistakes, but Bank of America Corp. Chief Executive, Brian Moynihan, faced with charges that the Charlotte, N.C., bank pawned bad mortgages on investors, promised "hand-to-hand combat" on loan repurchases.

With his bank accused of sloppy-to-fraudulent paperwork on mortgages gone bad, Mr. Moynihan promised a "diligent" fight to keep the foreclosure machine at Bank of America running.

Former Citigroup Inc. executive Robert Rubin told the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission in July that no one on Wall Street saw the risks in mortgage finance. Mr. Rubin also said to the panel that he didn't "hold significant operational responsibility" at Citigroup, which eventually got a $45 billion bailout and nearly $300 billion in government guarantees.

Similar explanations flowed throughout 2010 from current and former bankers at Goldman Sachs Group Inc., Washington Mutual Inc. and Countrywide Financial Corp.

Even James Dimon, the chairman and chief executive of J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. who once admitted that banks did "some really stupid things," has been feeling less culpable, especially when it comes to his own bank's practices.

On Oct. 13, Mr. Dimon laid the blame for the foreclosure wave with borrowers. Mr. Dimon told analysts and investors that "maybe mistakes were made" with foreclosure paperwork, but "not where someone got evicted out of a home that shouldn't have been."

Really? Out of more than 100,000 loans that J.P. Morgan has said it was reviewing, not even one?

Mr. Dimon's inflating confidence is a jarring contrast to downtrodden borrowers who feel guilty and take full responsibility for failings in their handling of personal finance.

According to a survey released Tuesday by online broker TD Ameritrade, more than half of Americans wished they could turn back the clock and do things differently.

Seventy-one percent said they would've spent less and saved more, while 65% said they would have "lived within their means" and 60% would've have taken more personal responsibility for managing their money, the survey showed.

In addition, many responded that they have paid a price for their mistakes. Between 17% and 36% said weren't able to travel, pay down debt, invest and save for retirement and had to forego purchases.

A separate survey of 1,000 adults, this one sponsored by J.P. Morgan and U.S. News & World Report, found that most Americans, especially younger ones, made New Year's resolutions aimed at saving more, spending less and living within a budget.

If anything, the self-reflection of consumers fits neatly with the narrative presented by big finance firms and some political voices. They argue that a lack of personal responsibility was the main cause of credit woes, including the recent wave of foreclosures, not banks playing fast and loose with credit.

They argue that it is strategic defaults, which make up as much as 31% of foreclosures, not hardship and falling home prices, that really hurt the housing industry.

It's certainly true that some borrowers have "walked away" from their commitments. But many borrowers who sought to salvage their mortgages failed.

The U.S. government's loan-modification program has reached 1.4 million of the more than three million borrowers estimated to be eligible. More than half of the modifications have failed, and only 35%, or about 500,000 loans, had been permanently modified at the end of November, according to the Treasury Department.

Among the banks with the biggest failed modification rates: Bank of America and J.P. Morgan.

This isn't to pass judgment on the banks. After all, borrowers blame themselves, too. But as Brent White, a professor at the University of Arizona and author of "The Morality of Strategic Default" points out, double standards are at work.

Banks operate to maximize profits and minimize losses, but most borrowers have a moral and ethical obligation to pay. Knowing that, it shouldn't come as a surprise that most Americans feel responsible. They're the only ones who are capable.