NEW DELHI – Two of India's top telecom companies Wednesday signed separate pacts with two leading banks to offer banking services through mobile phones, a move that will expand the lenders' reach and open new revenue streams for a telecom sector hit by fierce competition. 

Bharti Airtel Ltd., India's largest mobile-phone operator by subscribers, and the State Bank of India, the country's top lender by assets, agreed to invest 1 billion rupees to form a joint venture to offer banking and financial services through mobile phones. 

State-run SBI will hold a 51% stake in the joint venture, Deputy Managing Director Diwakar Gupta told reporters at a news conference. 

SBI will appoint the chief executive of the joint venture and Bharti Airtel will name the chief operating officer, Gupta said, adding that the new company will be registered by March 31. 

Separately, Vodafone Essar Ltd., India's third-largest mobile phone company by users, tied up with  ICICI Bank Ltd., the country's top private-sector lender by assets, to offer mobile banking products. 

They didn't provide financial details of the pact. 

The two agreements come at a time when India's central bank has been urging lenders to expand more into rural and semi-urban areas. And riding piggyback on the telecom industry works--India has 700 million subscribers and is adding more than 15 million a month. 

ICICI Bank and  Vodafone said in a joint statement that there is huge potential for offering mobile banking in rural regions, and that their tie-up will "facilitate access to the financially excluded parts of society." 

Telecom operators will benefit, too, as mobile banking will likely bring in additional revenue at a time when intense competition has hurt tariffs and profitability. 

The upcoming launch of third-generation telecom services will also help these operators as these services provide faster internet access and data transfers, making mobile banking easier. 

While limited mobile banking transactions are already available, the new tie-ups go a step further in allowing customers to open bank accounts and use several other products and services through the telecom companies' retail outlets. 

ICICI Bank will also offer banking products such as savings accounts, pre-paid instruments and various credit products through Vodafone Essar's 1.5 million retail outlets. SBI will offer services through Bharti's 1.5 million retail outlets in a phased manner. 

Vodafone Essar, the local unit of U.K.-based Vodafone Group PLC, had more than 121 million users at the end of November while Bharti Airtel had nearly 150 million subscribers in the country. 

 Write to  R. Jai Krishna at krishna.jai@dowjones.com, Dhanya Ann Thoppil at dhanya.thoppil@dowjones.com and Ameya Karve at AmeyaAnil.Karve@dowjones.com 