 Film Society of Lincoln Center 

 165 65th St., (212) 875-5601 

 Through Monday 

Too madly prolific for every movie to be a uniquely personal statement, the Japanese filmmaker Takashi Miike has been long overdue for proper appreciation. His iron-man work ethic has produced more than 80 films since 1991, ranging from serialized crime dramas to fiendishly sophisticated entertainment for children, costume Westerns to contemporary folk tales. But the director remains most notorious for the visceral extremes of a pair of cult favorites. 

The 1999 "Audition" is justifiably regarded as a shocker. It's the story of a lonely middle-aged widower who contrives to find a new love by staging phony auditions for a TV show, then dating the most appealing actress. She turns out to be the shy, mysterious Asami (played by the remarkable Eihi Shiina), a willowy former ballet dancer haunted by dark occurrences in her past. As budding romance turns to a game of psychotic cat-and-mouse, the jump scares escalates into scenes of horror that revulsed some moviegoers and thrilled others. Yet, there's a genuine tone of melancholy that carries the film beyond raw-nerved gasps, and hallucinatory flourishes that are as masterful as anything by David Lynch. 

The hyper-violent "Ichi the Killer" (2001) is a postmodern yakuza caper that trades in the gleeful splatter that has become a staple of underground Japanese cinema, achieving unparalleled levels of sheer psycho-sexual insanity. But then this sharply curated retrospective rolls out "The Bird People in China," a gentle fable about a Japanese salaryman out of his element in China, where he stumbles across a mystical village whose occupants may possess the power to fly. 

And there's "The Great Yokai War," a children's fantasy adventure saga, and a nod to Preston Sturges in "Shangri-La," a comedy that pits a community of homeless people against a greedy businessman. The series also gives New York audiences a chance to catch up with Mr. Miike's more recent work. "Crows Zero II" (2009) is part of the director's highly acrobatic franchise about high school wars. 

The new "13 Assassins," which gets a sneak preview before wider theatrical release, is a rousing, old-school samurai epic. This remake of Eiichi Kudo's 1963 film strides familiar but satisfying turf, as an unlikely assortment of swordsmen band together to stop an evil heir to the Shogun from ascending to power and leading Japan into doom. The final 40 minutes is a stunningly choreographed battle royale that will makes audiences gasp – in amazement, not fright or disgust. Mr. Miike was due to visit New York for the retrospective, but has chosen to remain in Japan as his family copes with the aftermath of the recent earthquake.

 IFC Center 

 323 Sixth Ave., (212) 924-7771 

 Friday through March 24 

As profound and poetic as a film can be, this unusual documentary is a visually breathtaking meditation on cosmic mysteries and the tragic facts of history. Chilean director Patricio Guzmán, best-known for the epic political documentary "The Battle of Chile," begins with an astronomical theme: a visit to the Atacama Desert, 10,000 feet above sea level. It's the best seat on the planet for scientists to observe the heavens. The site also is unique as the driest place on earth. Its arid plateaus harbor mummified bodies of the dead, including the bodies of political prisoners "disappeared" after the military coup of 1973. Eternity has a different meaning for the mothers, wives and children of the dead, who gaze not at the skies but the sands. Mr. Guzmán will be present for Q&A sessions on Friday and Saturday.

 reRun Gastropub Theater 

 147 Front St., Brooklyn  (212) 797-2322 

 Monday 

"Higher than God and lower than Satan," the actor and director  Jose Majica Marin—aka Zé do Caixão:  Coffin Joe—invented the Brazilian horror genre in the 1960s with films like "At Midnight I'll Take Your Soul" and "This Night I'll Possess Your Corpse." In this 2008 comeback, the then 72-year-old performer reprises his role as a demonic undertaker, newly sprung from jail and on the prowl for a bride. Garbed in a top hat and a black cape, his untrimmed fingernails curling in grotesque spirals, Coffin Joe is a nightmare vision of a sideshow magician with the ominously resonant voice of a vampire DJ. Not for the squeamish, "Evil" is a spirited throwback to grindhouse excess of the 1960s and '70s, laced with blood orgies, rat attacks and sepulchural funk.

 BAMcinématek 

 30 Lafayette Ave., Brooklyn  (718) 636-4100 

 Monday 

Giant radioactive ants threaten mankind in "Them!" But sometimes insects are more than insects. The 1954 sci-fi thriller, which spawned generations of cinematic monster-bugs, is screened as part of a series curated by Village Voice film critic  Jim Hoberman, who considers the larger social implications of the film in his new book, "An Army of Phantoms: American Movies and the Making of the Cold War."  Joan Weldon, who plays a heroic entomologist in the film, will be present to introduce it. Paranoia returns in 1953's "The Wild One," with the entry of renegade bikers.  Marlon Brando and  Lee Marvin play the leaders of rival gangs (the Black Rebel Motorcycle Club and The Beetles), menacing the squares.

 Anthology Film Archives 

 32 Second Ave., (212) 505-5181 

 March 24 

Avant-garde filmmaker Michael Snow leads off a new series devoted to the art of the slide show. The Canadian director, known for his conceptual wit and imaginative explorations of the form, visits with three presentations. They include "Slidelength" (1969-'71), in which Mr. Snow projects 80 35mm slides at 15-second intervals, investigating the nature of perception and memory. "A Casing Shelved" (1969) consists of only one slide: an image of the filmmaker's bookshelf, accompanied by his detailed narration. The program will be followed by a screening of "Wavelength," Mr. Snow's "greatest hit."