SCOTTSDALE, Ariz.—When Bryan Price joined the Arizona Diamondbacks as their pitching coach in 2006, he started hearing rumors about Jeff Motuzas, the team's longtime bullpen catcher. But the Legend of Motuzas remained largely a mystery to Price until one fateful afternoon at spring training. 

"Someone pulled something out of their nose and he ate it for $400," Price said. 

Baseball lends itself to colorful characters. Its languorous pace and 162-game schedule lead to long stretches of boredom. Motuzas likes to fill these stretches (and pad his bank account) by taking dares. 

In 1998, not long after Motuzas's minor-league playing career came to a close, the Diamondbacks hired him as their bullpen catcher. He soon had a revelation about the big leagues. "These guys have money," Motuzas said. "They'd be like, 'Hey, how about I pay you to eat this, drink this or let me whip you with that? I'll give you $400.' And I'm like, 'Okay!'"

Bullpen catching is not a particularly lucrative field; most who do it earn less than $60,000 annually. Motuzas declined to reveal his salary, but he said his various stunts have helped him pay down two mortgages and make healthy contributions to his two children's college funds. "I don't act like this at home," he said. "I'm a responsible father." 

A recitation of Motuzas's money-making exploits should come with a disclaimer: Kids, don't try this at home. He has snorted wasabi and eaten horseradish by the bowlful. He has devoured a dozen donuts and guzzled 13 bottles of water. And this is the PG-rated version. "Tooz will eat anything except poop, urine and vomit," Diamondbacks reliever Sam Demel said. "No, wait—I'm sorry. He will eat vomit."

Demel cited the memorable day when a former teammate regurgitated some yogurt and slathered it on a potato chip for Motuzas. Demel also said he once saw Motuzas ingest a concoction of chewing tobacco dip spit and 3-day-old chili.

Pitcher Livan Hernandez became something of a sadistic benefactor when he arrived in Arizona in 2006. Motuzas said Hernandez once paid him $3,000 to drink a gallon of milk in 12 minutes. The two also hammered out a deal that permitted Hernandez to punch Motuzas in the groin for $50 a pop whenever he felt the urge. Motuzas would receive a $300 bonus after every 10th punch.

Motuzas, 39, freely volunteers his feats. How about the day he dry-shaved his armpits and left a thick coating of medicinal hot balm on them for an entire game? ("It burned so bad.") Or ate 11 bananas in four minutes? ("That's easy stuff.") Or the time he let pitcher Dan Haren fire at him from close-range with a BB gun? ("He'd shoot me right in the earlobe.") 

Away from the ballpark, Motuzas describes himself as a health nut. His chiseled frame belies the fact that he's spent 20 years crouching for a living. On a daily basis, he throws batting practice, warms up six or seven pitchers and lifts weights. 

His locker is stocked with vitamins. He avoids red meat and sticks to a gluten-free diet, in part because he had some recent stomach problems. "Hard to believe, I know," said Paul Lessard, a close friend and the Cincinnati Reds' head athletic trainer.

The question Motuzas hears most often is: Why? Why eat someone else's chewing gum? An entire box of Saltines? And, our apologies, boogers? 

As he explains it, he began taking on dares as a catcher in the minors, where he was a .183 hitter over six seasons in the New York Yankees organization. The summers were long and he found that teammates valued his unique skills—his inability to throw up, to name one—as a way of breaking up the tedium of life down on the farm. He performed these stunts for free until he reached the majors and players made clear they were willing to pay him.

Things got really interesting one season when Hernandez got his hands on some rubber nunchucks. ("A gift from a fan," former Diamondbacks pitcher Brandon Webb said.) Hernandez, who now pitches for the Washington Nationals, would put them to use now and then by blindfolding Motuzas. "And then he'd come up and whip the s--- out of me," said Motuzas, who was compensated for this, as well. "That was just his thing. Great guy, though." 

Hernandez, through a Nationals spokesman, opted to "politely take a pass" on an interview request.

By all accounts, Motuzas takes his job seriously and the team's coaching staff leans on him for insight and support. Price, who was the Diamondbacks' pitching coach until 2009, said Motuzas has a keen eye for pitching mechanics. "He's the last guy you'll find goofing off when it's time to get work done," said Price, now the Reds' pitching coach.

At the same time, Motuzas views these shenanigans as part of his role. Baseball, he said, can be a frustrating game—especially when a team is losing. (The Diamondbacks lost 97 times last season.) "It's all done to relieve stress and entertain the guys," he said.

Motuzas has become something of an underground cult figure in baseball circles. During a game last season, members of the Pittsburgh Pirates' bullpen learned of Motuzas's abilities and were eager to test him. 

Evan Meek, a Pittsburgh reliever, said a teammate trapped two large moths in a cup, which he then handed to Motuzas through a fence that separated the bullpens. 

He popped both in his mouth as if he were munching popcorn. "That was impressive," said Meek, who helped collect $200 from his teammates to reward Motuzas.

Webb, who signed with the Texas Rangers over the offseason, said Motuzas has a "nearly 100%" success rate, which makes him the Rogers Hornsby of gastro-intestinal gymnastics. 

But as the saying goes, baseball is a game of failure. Motuzas once engaged in a high-stakes eating competition with Jimmy Garrett, the Diamondbacks' clubhouse assistant. 

The victuals of choice that day were habanero peppers, which Haren likened to "inhaling fire." 

Haren, who now pitches for the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim, has a video of the episode on his iPhone that shows stacks of $20 bills on a training table totaling close to $2,000—the victor's spoils—donated by players who merely wanted to witness the spectacle.

Garrett scored an upset win by consuming eight peppers to Motuzas's six, but Garrett paid a steep price, according to Webb. "I was like, 'Damn, Jimbo, I think you're going to have a heart attack or something,'" Webb said. Haren was concerned, too: "I thought he was going to die." 

Garrett said he actually felt worse after chugging milk in a futile attempt to dull the volcano in his mouth. He described the ordeal as "miserable," albeit lucrative. 

As for Motuzas, he took the loss pretty hard. "I was so disappointed in myself," he said. 

 Write to  Scott Cacciola at scott.cacciola@wsj.com 