NEW YORK—Crude futures posted their largest one-day drop in nearly five months as Japan's earthquake and the ensuing nuclear-reactor crisis threatened to disrupt the economy of the world's third-largest oil consumer. 

Light, sweet crude for April delivery settled $4.01, or 4%, lower at $97.18 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange, the largest one-day percentage drop since October and the contract's lowest settlement in two weeks. 

Brent crude on the ICE futures exchange fell $5.08 to $108.59 a barrel. 

Japanese crews scrambled Tuesday to prevent reactor meltdowns at the earthquake-damaged Fukushima Daiichi nuclear-power plant, appearing to regain partial control of damaged reactors even as worrying signs emerged in previously unaffected areas.

The crisis and its potential to delay already strained recovery efforts in the country pressured oil prices even as tensions escalated in the Middle East.

Bahrain declared a state of emergency a day after Arab Gulf states, including Saudi Arabia, rushed troops to the island in an attempt to stifle antigovernment protesters. A Saudi official said a Saudi soldier has been shot dead by a protester in Bahrain. And Col. Moammar Gadhafi continues to fight back against opposition forces in Libya. 

"Everybody is running for the hills. It doesn't matter if it's stocks, commodities or whatever, everyone is worried about Japan," said  Mark Waggoner, president of Excel Futures. "If it wasn't for [the Middle East], I think crude oil would be down $6 today." 

Oil tumbled along with Japan's main stock index, which fell 11%, amid a broader selloff in risky assets. The Dow Jones Industrial Average recently was recently down 133 points to 11859. Gold futures fell 2.4% as investors fled to the safety of the U.S. dollar.

Japan's nuclear-reactor crisis has exacerbated worries about the long-term impact of Friday's 9.0-magnitude earthquake and the tsunami it triggered. Japan will likely need more imports of oil and refined products to generate power in place of the damaged nuclear reactors. But any expectations of increased demand from Japan's utilities were outweighed by concerns about the impact of the quake and radiation leaks on the global economy. 

BNP Paribas Chief Economist  Ryutaro Kono wrote Tuesday that Japan's gross domestic product in 2011 could be reduced by about 3% should rolling blackouts and slumping economic activity persist.

The U.S. Federal Reserve kept easy-money policies intact Tuesday amid a recovery Fed officials indicated was just beginning to take hold. The impact of high oil prices is expected to be transitory, the central bank said, though it "will pay close attention to the evolution of inflation and inflation expectations." 

 Write to  Jerry DiColo at jerry.dicolo@dowjones.com 