 TUCSON, Ariz.—President Barack Obama called on the nation to resist the temptation to assign blame for a shooting rampage here that may never fully be explained, but to emerge from the tragedy a more thoughtful, civil nation.

Concluding a memorial service for the victims of Saturday's violence, Mr. Obama urged: "Rather than pointing fingers or assigning blame, let us use this occasion to expand our moral imaginations, to listen to each other more carefully, to sharpen our instincts for empathy."

The president spoke at the McKale Memorial Center at the University of Arizona, four days after a gunman left six dead and 14 wounded including Rep. Gabrielle Giffords (D., Ariz.), who authorities said was the target of the attack. The suspect in the rampage, 22-year-old Jared Lee Loughner, is being held in federal in custody without bail. 

  Full video of Obama's speech  

The president chose to dwell on the heroes of Saturday, and the victims of the violence—especially nine-year-old Christina Taylor Green—as he urged the nation to rise above ugly political debates and see civic life "through the eyes of a child, undimmed by the cynicism or vitriol'' of adults.

"I want us to live up to her expectations,'' he said of Christina. "I want our democracy to be as good as she imagined it."

"If this tragedy prompts reflection and debate, as it should, let's make sure it's worthy of those we have lost," he said. "Let's make sure it's not on the usual plane of politics and point scoring and pettiness that drifts away with the next news cycle."

Before the address, the president and First Lady Michelle Obama visited surviving victims of the shootings in a local hospital, including the Ms. Giffords.

In a highlight of the speech, Mr. Obama described seeing Ms. Giffords in her intensive care unit room, and reported to boisterous applause: "She opened her eyes for the first time."

Astronaut Mark Kelly, Ms. Giffords's husband, attended the speech.

 The president's emotionally charged address capped days of debate about whether the nation's heated political rhetoric played a role in inciting the violence. Mr. Obama addressed the point, saying incivility did not cause the tragedy of Tucson. But, he added that "only a more civil and honest public discourse can help us face up to our challenges as a nation."

"At a time when we are far too eager to lay the blame for all that ails the world at the feet of those who think differently than we do,'' the president said, "it's important for us to pause for a moment and make sure that we are talking with each other in a way that heals, not a way that wounds."

The nationally televised speech, delivered to more than 14,000 in the university arena and almost as many in an overflow area, was an opportunity for the president to connect with a hurting nation.

"For President Obama, the public has been trying to evaluate if he relates to the average person,'' said Democratic pollster Peter D. Hart. "There are a limited number of times when the public opens a window and is willing to listen. Times of tragedy are one of those times."

He pointed to President Bill Clinton's address after the Oklahoma City bombing in 1995, which helped restore his standing with the public a few months after a brutal election, and to President Ronald Reagan's remarks in 1986 after the space shuttle Challenger exploded.

While known for their emotional impact, those previous speeches were less ambitious in their scope. Mr. Reagan's speech lasted for four minutes, and Mr. Clinton's for nine. Mr. Obama spoke for more than a half hour.



As Mr. Obama identified people in the audience who had helped stop the gunman, the crowd gave each an extended cheer. They also gave a long ovation to Daniel Hernandez, an intern in Ms. Giffords's office who is credited with tending to the congresswoman's wounds and keeping her alive.

Mr. Hernandez, in his own remarks to the audience before Mr. Obama's speech, said the incident had united Arizona and the nation. He also said the spotlight belonged to others who played a role in responding to the shooting.

"Although I appreciate the sentiment, I must humbly reject the use of the word 'hero,' because I am not one,'' Mr. Hernandez said. The "real heroes,'' he said, included Ms. Giffords, the officials who responded to the emergency call and the doctors providing care to the wounded—"people who have dedicated their life to public service."

 While some Americans are debating gun safety laws, the adequacy of mental health services and other possible factors in the incident, Mr. Obama said, "the truth is that none of us can know exactly what triggered this vicious attack.''

Also Wednesday, Ms. Giffords's colleagues in the U.S. House of Representatives held an extensive session of floor remarks honoring her and other victims, including a member of Ms Giffords' staff who was killed.

Students and community members gathered for Wednesday night's memorial service appeared hungry for Mr. Obama's words. Roy Layne, 30, a Republican, said he was "proud" of the president for coming. "I think it's the right thing to do," said Mr. Layne, a waiter at Red Lobster. "The city is hurting."

It was a nine-year-old child that formed the emotional heart of the president's appeal. Christina Green, born on Sept. 11, 2001, had been featured in a book on babies born that day. In that book, "Faces of Hope," she said, "I hope you jump in rain puddles."

"If there are rain puddles in heaven, Christina is jumping in them today," Mr. Obama concluded. "And here on Earth, we place our hands over our hearts, and commit ourselves as Americans to forging a country that is forever worthy of her gentle, happy spirit."

—Michael Rothfeld contributed to this report.

 Write to  Laura Meckler at laura.meckler@wsj.com, Andrew Morse at andrew.morse@wsj.com and Michael Rothfeld at michael.rothfeld@wsj.com 

'And if, as has been discussed in recent days, their deaths help usher in more civility in our public discourse, let's remember that it is not because a simple lack of civility caused this tragedy, but rather because only a more civil and honest public discourse can help us face up to our challenges as a nation.…I want our democracy to be as good as she [nineyear- old Christina Taylor Green] imagined it. All of us—we should do everything we can to make sure this country lives up to our children's expectations.'

 -- President Barack Obama 

'We are so thankful Gabby is still with us.' 

 -- House Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio) 

'I wish there was one more gun that day, in the hands of a responsible person.' 

 -- Rep. Trent Franks (R., Ariz.) 

'Acts of monstrous criminality stand on their own.… Especially within hours of a tragedy unfolding, journalists and pundits should not manufacture a blood libel that serves only to incite the very hatred and violence they purport to condemn.' 

 -- Former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin 

'When you cross the line from expressing opinions…[to] violent action, that's a hallmark of extremism, whether it comes from the right, the left, from al Qaeda, from anarchists, whoever it is.' 

 -- Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton  

'It was an attack on the very essence of democracy and representative government.' 

 -- House Majority Leader Eric Cantor (R., Va.)  

'I know she is singing with us tonight.' 

 -- Tucson bishop Gerald Kicanas, of Christina Taylor Green  

'I still want to be touched by my constituents, and to touch them.' 

 -- Rep. Sheila Jackson Lee (D., Texas), on public appearances in light of the attack.  