At first blush, the idea that a writer in the 21st century might learn something about English style from the King James Version of the Bible would seem like a nonstarter. The KJV turns 400 this year, and we have long since abandoned "thou" and "thee." Even the famous eloquence of the 1611 translation is something of a barrier for today's readers, who are accustomed to the more supple and colloquial style of modern writing.

But the KJV opened certain new possibilities for English prose that are still very relevant. The translators convened by King James strove for a literal representation of the Hebrew text and generally reproduced its sequence of parallel clauses linked by "and." This is not a natural way to write English prose, which provides many devices ("after," "if," "whose," etc.) for creating subordinate clauses. 

The KJV's method of organizing language has proved to be a subtle literary instrument, compelling readers to work out the precise connections between successive statements without the aid of subordinate conjunctions and qualifying syntax. Ernest Hemingway, Saul Bellow and other American writers clearly grasped the advantages of this approach.

Here is how the KJV renders the beginning of Jacob's nocturnal encounter with the angel. He assembled all of his family, "[a]nd he took them, and sent them over the brook, and sent over all he had. And Jacob was left alone, and there he wrestled a man with him until the breaking of the day." 

Compare this stark forward progress of parallel clauses with these lines of Ernest Hemingway's from his novel "The Sun Also Rises": "It was a forest of cork oaks, and the sun came through the trees in patches, and there were cattle grazing back in the trees. We went through the forest and the road came out and turned along a rise of land."

These side-by-side examples also illustrate the other great stylistic innovation of the KJV: its use of plain, homespun diction. That decision was also in keeping with the Hebrew, but it was a sharp turn away from the fad of "euphuistic" or ornate, purple prose that thrived more than a decade before the publication of the KJV in 1611. The call to overwrite has continued to seduce some English writers.

Against this siren call of purple prose, the KJV repeatedly demonstrates how stylistic restraint and simplicity of diction can generate expressive power. Consider these two verses from the flood narrative in Genesis 7: "And the flood was forty days upon the earth; and the waters increased, and bare up the ark, and it was lift up above the earth. And the waters prevailed, and were increased greatly upon the earth; and the ark went upon the face of the waters." 

What is especially striking is the beautiful understatement—in strict correspondence to the Hebrew—of "the flood was forty days" and "the ark went upon the face of the waters." Various modern translations use "continued" for "was" and "floated" or "drifted" for "went." English has dozens of words for surging, churning, spurting, whelming, but biblical style avoids this maelstrom of synonyms.

The translators of the KJV understood the dignity and moving directness of the original Hebrew, which is why, after 400 years, the King James Bible remains a stylistic model that writers might well want to emulate.

—Mr. Alter teaches Hebrew and comparative literature at the University of California, Berkeley, and is the author of "Pen of Iron: American Prose and the King James Bible."