TOKYO—In the latest sign Japan is moving to actively deploy its massive stockpile of foreign-currency reserves outside the country, the Ministry of Finance said Friday it will earmark $3.9 billion for strategic investments overseas through a government-affiliated financing body.

The funds will be used to finance Japanese companies' infrastructure projects and acquisitions abroad through a government-affiliated lender, the ministry said. The funds are part of Japan's $1.1 trillion foreign-exchange reserves, most of which is invested in U.S. Treasurys and other low-yield securities.

Japan has only recently started to make strategic investments outside the country using its currency reserves, which positions the state-owned Japan Bank for International Cooperation to act more like other nations' sovereign-wealth funds.

Friday's announcement came as a reminder that even though the Japanese government has a massive fiscal debt load, which prompted the ratings agency Standard & Poor's to downgrade its credit Thursday, Tokyo has also amassed a giant pool of reserves from past currency-market interventions.

In October, the government authorized the JBIC to tap into a 1.5 trillion yen ($18 billion) credit line from currency reserves to provide loans to private Japanese companies for foreign mergers and acquisitions, procurement of natural resources abroad and infrastructure-related investments overseas.

In December, Finance Minister Yoshihiko Noda unveiled a plan to let the JBIC to finance deals not only in developing markets—its accustomed role—but also in rich, industrialized nations. Officials in Prime Minister Naoto Kan's cabinet indicated they would propose a law to allow the shift.

Those steps have prompted speculation Japan could eventually seek to transform the JBIC into a sovereign-wealth fund like those in China, Norway and Singapore. Unlike a typical such fund, the JBIC currently has no mandate to take direct stakes in overseas investments. Instead, it provides low-rate financing for Japanese companies involved in what the government decides are strategically important deals, mostly in energy-related infrastructure and acquisitions.

For its part, the Finance Ministry said the extension of reserves would prevent the JBIC's having to issue bonds to raise money, which might crowd out private businesses amid generally tight conditions in the capital markets. A ministry official said the move had no relationship to S&P's decision Thursday to lower Japan's sovereign-credit rating to double-A-minus from double-A.

The concept of a sovereign-wealth fund remains controversial in Japan. Some lawmakers have called for establishing a fund-like entity to take advantage of the yen's strength and diversify Japan's reserve portfolio by making direct strategic investments abroad. But critics, including the Finance Ministry, say sovereign-wealth funds have a mixed investment track record and that such a megafund could roil the financial markets.

The currency reserves allotted to the JBIC on Friday will take the form of a five-year loan, which the lender will parcel out to fund various private sector projects.

Speaking at a briefing to reporters, another Finance Ministry official said he doesn't expect the government to lend more to the JBIC in the current fiscal year through ending March 31. But he suggested the ministry may lend more in the subsequent months, depending on market conditions.

Japan's foreign reserves, the world's second-largest after China's, are the legacy of its efforts to stem the yen's rise against other currencies by, for example, exchanging yen for dollars. A 2008 report by a U.S. congressional office said Japan earns some $12 billion a month in interest on its holdings offoreign currency and other reserve assets.

 Write to  Chester Dawson at chester.dawson@wsj.com 