When Bernard Lagat smashed the record for most wins in the Wanamaker Mile at last year's Millrose Games, he immediately settled on one thought: He would not be back.

The two-time Olympic medalist was ready to focus on longer distances, like the 5,000 meters, and prepare for the 2012 Olympic Games. For months, he was content with the decision that there was little left to achieve at Madison Square Garden; he had other goals.

But as he lay in bed this past December, the thought of not starting his season in New York began to seem unimaginable. Abruptly he texted his manager: He was in.

The Millrose Games, which will be held for the 104th time on Friday, are like that. For the past decade, the event has been on the verge of being dismissed as a major part of the international sporting scene. 

In recent years, Millrose has experienced falling attendance and multiple management changes. It has had to contend with the dimming of indoor track's prestige among the world's elite athletes. Although this year's Millrose Games features an innovative national competition between Jamaican and United States athletes in the men's and women's 60-meter sprint, neither Jamaica's Usain Bolt nor the U.S.'s Tyson Gay will be participating. 

In 1999, attendance at Millrose was 15,800; last year the number plunged to 11,530, the event's smallest crowd of the decade.

"When I came in there were a lot of people in the stands, but [organizers] were telling me then there used to be even more people," said Mr. Lagat, who debuted at the Millrose Games in 2001. 

Many elite athletes now opt to stay away and concentrate on more lucrative outdoor events, like the world championships this summer. "A lot of them skip indoor entirely," Mr. Lagat said. 

Still, the event retains an allure. The crowd may no longer deck itself out in gowns, derbies and suits as they once did, according to former meet director Howard Schmertz. But the officials still wear tuxedos, an old-time dazzle that entrances athletes and spectators alike.

"It was big-time; a lot of show and glitz," said Alberto Salazar, who debuted at the Millrose Games in 1981 as a 22-year-old marketing student at the University of Oregon, fresh off his first win at the New York City marathon. His thrilling race against Olympic silver medalist Suleiman Nyambui, which yielded a world record for Mr. Nyambui, is ranked by many as one of the top 10 moments in the event's history.

"It really got you pumped up and made you feel like you were part of a huge event," Mr. Salazar said. "Not just some rinky-dink little track meet."

As runners stepped to the starting line, smoke hung thick from the cigars and cigarettes puffed by the crowd, Mr. Salazar remembered. "You would cough after the races," he said. "We didn't think anything about it."

In other years, dogs would crowd out competitors practicing in the back alleys of Madison Square Garden; the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show was sometimes scheduled for the following week and the dogs moved in the Thursday before the Games. 

"I'm a big dog lover, so it was fun," Mr. Salazar said.

The circus spectacle that came to define the Millrose Games was surely hard to imagine in 1908, when a group of employees at the Wanamaker Department store in Lower Manhattan banded together to form a social and athletic club. They staged competitions in armories around the city, until growing crowds lead the group to Madison Square Garden in 1914.

Mr. Schmertz's father, Fred, was one of the founding members. He became the meet director in 1934 until passing the mantle to his son in 1974. The younger Mr. Schmertz, who retired in 2003 and now serves as director emeritus, oversaw numerous changes in the sport. Amateur athletes increasingly turned professional, whereas money in the sport shifted to outdoor events. 

Mr. Lagat almost refused to compete in the Millrose Games at all, telling his manager "I've never been to New York City; I don't know if I'm going to be comfortable running there," he said.

With Mr. Lagat's participation this year uncertain for months, organizers generated other plans to renew fan's interest. This year there will be a live band for the first time in 30 years. The Jamaican and American showdown in the men's and women's 60-meter sprints will feature defending indoor 60-meter world champion and two-time Olympic gold medalist Veronica Campbell-Brown, from Jamaica, and 2010 60-meter world indoor silver medalist Mike Rodgers from the U.S. 

Three American medal contenders in decathlon for the 2012 Olympic Games will compete in a miniaturized version of the event, an indoor "triathlon" consisting of the 60-meter dash, high jump and shot put. For the second straight year, professional athletes from other sports will race in the Super 60 II. 

These changes "showcase our athletes, which is our No. 1 priority,'' said Jill Geer, the chief public affairs officer for USA Track & Field. "But they also give the fans a different a way to watch."