  I am looking for suggestions for my book club. They usually do not like to read history books but enjoyed "Mornings on Horseback" [by David McCullough] and Doris Kearns Goodwin—however, Ms. Goodwin's books are very long. Do you have any suggestions?  

—C.K. Wehde,  Des Moines, Iowa

Short history is a tall order. The kind of historian who will, as one critic put it, "cross an ocean to verify a comma," isn't apt to omit any commas. That's true of most biographers, too. I am interested in the suspense writer Patricia Highsmith ("The Talented Mr. Ripley"), but not in the 704 pages of a recent biography, "The Talented Miss Highsmith." As a reader, I value writers as much for what they leave out as what they're convinced they must include.

Although Mr. McCullough often writes tomes, his fascinating "The Johnstown Flood" is a modest 300 pages; similarly, Stephen Ambrose has written some large books, but his "Band of Brothers" is a relatively modest 330 pages.

I also like historians who write with attitude—not political or polemical, but with a storyteller's idiosyncratic interpretation of facts. A favorite of mine in this vein is William Manchester's "A World Lit Only by Fire" (322 pages). 

Sarah Vowell writes elegant and witty short histories; her forthcoming "Unfamiliar Fishes" (March; 256 pages) takes a look at 1898, when, "in an orgy of imperialism," the United States annexed Hawaii, Puerto Rico and Guam and invaded Cuba and the Philippines.

Frederick Lewis Allen (1890-1954) was a magazine editor who also dabbled in popular history, and his two best-known works, "Only Yesterday" and "Since Yesterday," are models of concision and clarity. I also admire the work of Roy Porter, a prolific British historian who wrote short histories of mental illness ("Madness," 250 pages) and medical charlatans ("Quacks," 320 pages). 

The Penguin Lives series of short biographies (most around 200 to 225 pages) are an excellent way to test your interest in a historical character without committing to a magnum opus—Jane Smiley on Charles Dickens and Peter Gay on Mozart are among the best.

Finally, there's E.H. Gombrich's "A Little History of the World," written in 1935 for children. It starts, "All stories begin with 'Once upon a time,' " goes on to tell the history of the world from dinosaurs to World War I in 270 pages, and ends, "We still have the right to go on hoping for a better future."

—Send your questions about books and reading to Cynthia Crossen at booklover@wsj.com.