NEW DELHI – India expects revenue of about 130 billion rupees ($2.9 billion) from the sale of bandwidth to telecom companies next financial year, which starts on April 1, a move that could help bandwidth-starved mobile phone companies and give the government a non-tax route to raise money. 

India plans to auction bandwidth after it is vacated by some state-run companies, a senior government official said Wednesday, asking not to be identified. He didn't elaborate. 

This is part of the 296.48 billion rupees the government expects as non-tax revenue from telecommunications services, which was outlined in the federal budget document, the official added. 

The comments come after India received as much as $22 billion through the auction of bandwidth to offer third-generation, or 3G, and wireless broadband services last year, much higher than the estimated 350 billion rupees.

State-run companies such as Oil & Natural Gas Corp. Ltd., Power Grid Corp. of India Ltd, GAIL (India) Ltd., broadcaster Doordarshan and Indian Railways use bandwidth for their internal communications. 

The auctioning of more bandwidth will help spectrum-starved mobile phone companies such as Bharti Airtel Ltd., Vodafone-Essar Ltd. and Idea Cellular Ltd., whose applications for additional bandwidth have been with the government for more than a year. 

In a recent meeting with top executives from telecom firms, federal telecom minister  Kapil Sibal acknowledged that most of the bandwidth sold for 3G services was still being used for basic mobile services, highlighting the scarcity of spectrum. 

A shortage of bandwidth leads to more call drops and dissatisfied users tend to switch operators, hurting the profitability of mobile telephone firms, who are struggling to attract new customers in one of the world's cheapest and fastest-growing markets. 

However, the extra bandwidth will now come with a fee higher than the companies paid earlier, as the government has decided to sell it through market-determined methods, including auctions. 

An analyst with a Mumbai-based brokerage said some telecom companies may prefer not bidding as they will find it difficult to raise money after already purchasing 3G bandwidth. 

"The government may also look at bringing in an entire policy that allows foreign companies who aren't in India to come in, thus taking a long-term bet on the sector and making raising money much easier," he said, asking not to be identified.

 Write to  Prasanta Sahu at prasanta.sahu@dowjones.com and R. Jai Krishna at krishna.jai@dowjones.com 