BRASÍLIA, Brazil—China's move to gradually allow its currency to appreciate should help in the "rebalancing" of the global economy as countries recover at different speeds from the global downturn, said Dominique Strauss-Kahn, managing director of the International Monetary Fund.

Still, he warned, the future impact of a stronger Chinese currency remains difficult to assess without further clarity on the speed and degree it will be allowed to appreciate. "It's difficult to say if it's enough," said Mr. Strauss-Kahn in an interview. "It depends how gradual it will be."

Chinese leaders have recently said they will slowly allow the yuan, China's currency, to grow stronger against the U.S. dollar and other currencies. The move follows growing complaints from the U.S., Brazil, and other big exporters over China's longstanding intervention in currency markets to keep the yuan weak. A cheap yuan, these countries say, unfairly makes their products less competitive in a global marketplace flooded with low-priced Chinese goods. 

But a stronger yuan, said Mr. Strauss-Kahn, is no "silver bullet" and shouldn't be expected to fully correct imbalances in the global economy. Further equilibrium, he said, would be gained if countries with big trade surpluses, like China, rely less on export revenues and increasingly foster domestic consumption. Countries with trade deficits, like the U.S., should seek to export more, he added. 

Wrapping up a visit this week to Latin America, Mr. Strauss-Kahn said strong currencies are a natural consequence of robust economies in China, Brazil, and other fast-growing corners of the developing world. That's especially true considering the large inflows of capital to these markets from investors still wary of stagnant or sluggish economies in the U.S., Europe, and Japan.

People, he said, "want to invest where the forecasts for growth are high."

In Brazil, where Mr. Strauss-Kahn on Thursday met with President Dilma Rousseff and other government officials, a strong real "is consistent with the fact that people believe in the future of the Brazilian economy." This week, Brazil said its economy in 2010 grew a brisk 7.5%.

Meanwhile, Mr. Strauss-Kahn dismissed suggestions, increasingly common in the developing world, that the U.S. dollar would soon be supplanted as the world's benchmark currency. Despite its relative weakness against other currencies as the U.S. struggles to rebound, the greenback's "remarkable resilience.shows that when people are afraid.they go to the dollar," he said. "For a long time the dollar is going to remain the main currency in international economics."

Mr. Strauss-Kahn, whose five-year term at the helm of the IMF ends in November 2012, declined to comment on whether he will step down early from the post to run in next year's French presidential election. The former finance minister from France's Socialist party is considered a likely candidate to run against President Nicolas Sarkozy, a conservative, and leads Mr. Sarkozy in recent polls gauging the possible matchup.

 Write to  Paulo Prada at paulo.prada@wsj.com 