A further move by the world's major central banks to weaken the yen could come as soon as Monday, though the goal will be to ensure market stability rather than push the yen sharply lower, traders and economists said.

While Monday is a market holiday in Japan, currency traders will be on full alert as trade begins in New Zealand, hours before the Bank of Japan might intervene by selling yen.

On Friday, the currency gained back most of the ground it lost earlier in the day against the U.S. dollar after a rare concerted intervention by the Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank, U.S. Federal Reserve and monetary authorities in Canada and the U.K.

Weekend events in the Middle East could push up assets traditionally viewed as safe havens, including the yen. U.S. and coalition forces launched military strikes against Libya in a bid to knock out loyalist support for leader Col. Moammar Gadhafi. Events there raise the specter of regional conflict and a further surge in the price of oil, another headwind for the Japan, a large importer of energy products.

The Group of Seven industrialized nations on Friday endorsed the need for more orderly foreign-exchange markets, giving Japan's Ministry of Finance a mandate to act on its own. Other central banks can be expected to be on hand to intervene again during their time zones if needed, analysts say, even though Friday's G-7 statement only referred to joint intervention for one day.

The effect of that coordinated intervention—the first in more than a decade—was already waning by late in the New York day. The dollar had come down to ¥80.59, off an earlier high of ¥81.98, and not far from the levels where the Ministry of Finance began intervening on Friday morning. The precise scope of the intervention isn't known, but traders estimated the yen selling was in the neighborhood of $20 billion.

Early intervention Monday is something "we have to be alert to," said  Craig James, chief economist at Commonwealth Securities in Sydney. "Certainly the global powers look bent on supporting Japan. They have to signal the strength of that commitment."

Japan is battling to avert a nuclear crisis in the country in the wake of March 11's massive earthquake and tsunami, which devastated large parts of the northeast and caused a key nuclear power facility to become unstable. Despite the disaster, the yen has risen sharply since the quake hit, partly on the expectation of repatriation flows to Japan for insurance and reconstruction costs, and as speculators try to get ahead of the flows by buying the currency.

Japan's export-oriented economy is especially vulnerable to a rise in the yen, which makes its goods less competitive abroad.

The yen moved higher in anticipation that many corporations and individuals would repatriate their money to Japan to help rebuild. As it moved up earlier this past week, many investors who had been betting against the yen were forced to unwind their trades, adding further pressure.

Early in Asian hours on Thursday, the dollar dropped to a record low of ¥76.25.

  Tony Morriss, a strategist at  Australia & New Zealand Banking Group,
ANZBY


-0.87
%




 said the start of the week will see a gravitation toward safe-haven currencies, with the Swiss franc to benefit. The U.S. dollar may also gain broadly as markets assess the heightened level of risk.

But a break for the dollar back above ¥82.00 will be hard to achieve, Mr. Morriss said, given the yen's status as a safe haven. Markets will be looking at ¥80.00 as a natural re-entry point for the G-7 central banks to buy. 

"I don't think they're going to try and hold any one level, but rather to try and keep dollar-yen in the 80-yen area," said Alan Ruskin, a currency strategist at  Deutsche Bank AG. Should the yen head strongly back toward its new record, the Bank of Japan could get more aggressive again, Mr. Ruskin added.

Historically central-bank intervention often has proved futile. But analysts were less skeptical of the current effort. One reason is that the yen selling was coordinated by central banks around the world. Meanwhile, the Bank of Japan has been flooding the Japanese financial markets with excess money to help keep its economy stable. By essentially printing more money, the Bank of Japan is to some degree diluting the value of existing yen.

—Tom Lauricella contributed to this article.