DOHA, Qatar—Bahrain's King Hamad called Sunday for emergency law in the Sunni-ruled island to be lifted on June 1, a sign the authorities feel they have the country under control after carrying out a brutal crackdown on the opposition and pro-democracy activists during the last two months.

The move to lift martial law that was imposed on March 15 in an effort to quell a snowballing protest movement paves the way for the government to offer dialogue to a heavily weakened opposition, who have indicated in recent weeks they are prepared to water down some of their demands for political overhauls, opposition figures and analysts say. 

It may also signal that Bahrain is responding to criticism by human-rights groups and some governments, including the U.S., of its crackdown on dissent. 

Track events day by day in the region.

See the level of unrest, plus the economic and politic status of some countries across North Africa and the Middle East.

Popular demonstrations in Tunisia toppled a president and spread to countries across the region. See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

"I think the security situation is probably pretty well in hand and they [the regime] feel they can relax," said Jean-François Seznec, a Bahrain expert at Georgetown University. "But the government is beginning to feel there is some pressure from the world community that what they have been doing is unfathomable and they are trying to make some accommodation for the situation." 

Al Wefaq, Bahrain's biggest opposition party, welcomed the king's announcement. 

"We hope this is the beginning of a political solution to deal with Bahrain's problems," said Al Wefaq's leader Ali Salman, adding he thought the move was a step closer to the government offering dialogue to the opposition. 

"The question is whether there will be an effort to have a dialogue," said Mr. Seznec. "This would be the next step."

Bahrain's decision to abolish emergency law comes as prosecutors in the strategic Gulf kingdom Sunday accused 21 leading political activists of plotting to overthrow the government in cooperation with "a terrorist organization working for a foreign country" in a veiled reference to the Iranian-backed militant group Hezbollah. 

The accused include Hassan Mushaima, the radical Shiite leader who retuned to Bahrain in February from self-imposed exile under a government amnesty. 

A war of words has escalated in recent weeks between Bahrain and Iran. The Gulf kingdom in a report to the United Nations last month accused Hezbollah of seeking to overthrow the Al Khalifa ruling family. Bahrain also alleges that Hezbollah has been training Bahraini opposition figures at camps in Lebanon and Iran. 

Since Bahrain invited a so-called Peninsula Shield force consisting of mainly Saudi troops in the middle of March to help it put down pro-democracy demonstrations, the island kingdom has systematically targeted sympathizers of the protest movement, arresting doctors, nurses, journalists, opposition figures and activists. 

Nearly 50 medical staff are being tried in a military court accused of taking part in illegal rallies and late last month four protesters were sentenced to death for killing two policemen during violence in March. 

Human-rights activists in Bahrain said questions remain despite the king's decision to end emergency law. "If they are serious about stopping this law then the army must leave the streets and foreign troops leave the country," said Mohammed Al Maskati, head of the Bahrain Youth Society for Human Rights.