WASHINGTON—The global economy is forecast to grow at a modest 3.3% in 2011, with developing countries emerging as a stabilizing force against the riskier outlook for wealthy nations, according to a new World Bank forecast on Wednesday.

The bank warned that, "serious tensions and pitfalls" remain in the global economy, such as Europe's debt crisis and volatile international capital flows, which "could derail the recovery," the World Bank report said.

"If the financial crisis was a kind of a stress test for the developing economies, then they passed that test with flying colors," said  Hans Timmer, director of the World Bank's Global Economic Prospects 2011 report.

China's growth will temper to a still-steaming 8.7% in 2011 from 10% in 2010. India is set to grow by 8.4%; in many sub-Saharan African countries, growth is expected to exceed 6%.

Rich nations, meanwhile, are still struggling in the aftermath of the global crisis. Growth by wealthy nations in 2011 is expected to be 2.4%, down from 2.8% in 2010. This won't be strong enough to significantly reduce high unemployment and spare capacity, the bank said.

The World Bank forecasts global growth at 3.3% in 2011, down from 3.9% last year. The International Monetary Fund growth forecast, widely used by economists, is for 4.3% in 2011, but this is based on a different methodology that uses "purchasing power parity." Using this method, the World Bank's global growth forecast for 2011 would be 4.1%.

Developing nations' rebound was all the more remarkable because it was also based on internal growth. "Their import growth is much faster than their export growth," he said.

Aside from the ongoing sovereign debt concerns in Europe, the World Bank also highlighted the volatile capital flows as a risk, raising concerns about the movement of money from low-interest advanced countries to high-yield emerging nations.

The bank said that if those flows are left unchecked, they "can lead to abrupt real appreciations an depreciations (of currencies) that are out of line with underlying economies and can do lasting damage to economies."

The biggest increases were in short-term capital debt flows, equities and bonds. Net private inflows into developing countries are forecast to continue their rise, expected to hit $838.6 billion.

The issue has caught the eye of the Group of 20 major nations, which may look to establish guidelines for the use of capital controls.

Mr. Timmer said restrictions on capital flows could in some cases beneficial: "There is no one single policy that can solve this...so capital controls are a part of this, but by themselves are not good enough."

 Write to  Ian Talley at ian.talley@dowjones.com 