STATS: A 1,978-square-foot, three-bedroom, one-bath home on 34½ acres asking $995,000, or $503 a square foot. Property taxes in 2010 were $6,675.30.

A three-bedroom home on 34.5 acres in Keystone, S.D., is asking $995,000.

DETAILS: Once the site of the Glendale Tin Mill, this cabin has been in the same family since it was built in the early 1930s. The current owner says that his grandfather was deeded the property to settle a $600 debt with the owners of the failed mill and used the mill's wood to build a summer lodge. The family has carefully preserved the Work Projects Administration outhouse that dates back to the Great Depression (new toilets were part of the New Deal). "It's shiny-clean and we repaint it every summer," says the owner. A separate log cabin that the owner says goes back to the 1860s could be turned into a guesthouse. Nearby is a stone well from the same era and the flume from the mill. In addition to horse trails and hiking, there is a large swimming hole on the property and a small waterfall. 

SELLERS: Dick Knecht and his wife, Ting. Mr. Knecht is an interior designer with his own company, Third Generation Interiors, in Rapid City. His wife works with him.

THE NEIGHBORHOOD: It's about an hour to the Rapid City Regional Airport, and 30 minutes to dinner at the Corn Exchange in downtown Rapid City, where they serve buffalo porcini bolognese ($19). In the summer months, Mount Rushmore offers an evening lighting program. During the day, tour the Big Thunder Gold Mine or visit the bison at Custer State Park. 

WHAT WE PAID: Mr. Knecht inherited the property in 1985 and estimates that he has spent more than $80,000 maintaining and updating it. 

WHY WE'RE SELLING: Mr. Knecht, 75, said that he and his wife have no heirs and want to know who the house winds up with.



WHAT WE'LL MISS: The tranquility. "The minute you drive through the gate there's a long trail down to the house and all your cares go away," says Mr. Knecht.

WHAT WE WON'T: While the Knechts' full-time home is just 20 miles away, they still say that as with any weekend home the packing and unpacking of groceries and other household supplies gets tiresome. 

I REMEMBER WHEN: "When I was little I'd climb the mountain behind the cabin and watch them carving Mount Rushmore," says Mr. Knecht (the carving of the monument started in 1927 and finished in 1941).

OTHERS SAY: Jim Peterson, a broker and the owner of Integrity Realty in Hill City, thinks the price is fair considering the size of the property, its location in a prime spot in the Black Hills and its history. "You have to appreciate the value of that type of seclusion and that type of access," he says. "It's a great property to pass on from generation to generation."