BANGALORE -- India's third-largest technology services firm Wipro has agreed to acquire a majority stake in Brazilian hydraulic-cylinder maker RKM Equipamentos Hidraulicos. The company will become a part of Wipro Infrastructure Engineering; financial details of the deal were not disclosed.

The story of how Wipro has morphed from a vegetable-oil company into a soaps-to-software conglomerate is well chronicled. A little-known fact is that Wipro's first diversification away from vegetable oils was not into software services but into engineering and designing pneumatic cylinders.

This unit, originally called Wintrol, after many iterations has transformed into Wipro Infrastructure Engineering, which makes hydraulic cylinders and components.

Wipro has stopped providing the engineering unit's revenues separately. Pratik Kumar, the division's president and executive vice-president of human resources at Wipro, said its contribution was "a little less than 10% of the overall revenues."

Wipro's overall revenue in the 2011 financial year was $6.9 billion. In a phone interview from Brazil, Mr. Kumar outlined the rationale for Wipro's latest acquisition and Wipro Infrastructure's growth plans. Edited excerpts:

 Mint: Wipro Infrastructure's revenue nose dived to $150 million in fiscal 2010 from $300 million two years earlier. What went wrong?

 Mr. Kumar: Yes, things did go wrong because of the global recession. But I am happy that revenues have again reached and may even surpass what we had done at the peak. Lot of our (original equipment manufacturer) customers underwent some tough times but growth is now back. Europe, from where we continue to get about 40% of our revenues, is still either static or growing at a slow pace. But markets like India, China and other emerging countries have more than helped offset that.

 Mint: Is that the reason for the RKM acquisition?

 Mr. Kumar: Brazil, and Latin America in general, is one of the fastest growing markets for the segment in which Wipro Infrastructure operates. We had been scanning the marketplace (for an acquisition) for some time. Like always, it was either a buy or build choice. 

We are very happy to get RKM as it is not just a strategic and technological but a cultural fit. Initially, we have purchased 80% of the company for a sum which we have not disclosed. We will purchase the other 20% at the end of three years. RKM has around 200 employees. The current management will continue to help grow the company in this market. 

 Mint: Wipro Infrastructure in 2006 similarly acquired Hydrauto in Sweden for $31 million to grow in the European market. But in China you decided to go on your own and set up a manufacturing facility.

 Mr. Kumar: China is a different market. And also, we have to come across the right target at the right price. So, it is horses for courses. I think in Brazil, by acquiring RKM we have cut our go-to market by at least 18 to 24 months, which is a very substantial period. Today, India, from where Wipro Infrastructure gets nearly half of its revenues, plus the growth in China and now Latin America, will help us propel into becoming a global leader.

 Mint: While you have three manufacturing locations in India, four in Europe, and one each in China and now Brazil, you still don't have a footprint in North American or African markets. What are your plans for these regions?

 Mr. Kumar: Yes... we could have better presence in North America or Africa. In North America, a lot of our (original equipment manufacturer) have their own captives (or in-house units). Africa still mostly imports its requirements and our don't have much of local manufacturing, but we continue to evaluate all markets to maximize our growth.

 Mint: What is the roadmap for Wipro Infrastructure?

 Mr. Kumar: Today, we have a global market share of around 5% in hydraulics. We intend to take this to 15% in the next four years. Our intention is to grow this to a $1 billion business by 2015.