WASHINGTON—The Obama administration is delaying a proposal to require power plants to install equipment that would protect fish in nearby waterways, amid warnings from industry and some lawmakers that the rule could raise energy prices. 

The reprieve for industry appears only temporary, however. Instead of proposing the new regulation Monday, as called for under a federal consent decree, the Environmental Protection Agency now plans to wait until Friday and possibly as late as March 28 to propose the regulation, according to an attorney for an environmental group who was briefed on the agency's plans. 

An EPA spokeswoman confirmed the attorney's remarks Sunday but didn't immediately respond to a request for comment on the reason for the delay. The attorney, Reed Super, who represents the group Riverkeeper, said the agency didn't explain why it needed more time to complete the proposal. 

The proposal at issue seeks to protect fish that can be killed when power plants draw water from rivers, lakes and estuaries for use in their cooling systems. It could require companies to install new systems that would recycle the cooling water, using far less of it than the standard systems. 

The power industry and its congressional allies have warned for months that the regulation could raise energy prices and prompt the closure of some facilities. In a letter to the EPA in December, the new chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, Rep. Fred Upton (R., Mich.) said the rule's potential costs to the economy "could be devastating," perhaps running as high as several hundred million dollars per plant. Environmentalists say the technology to recycle water has been in use for decades. 

"The regulations are critically important because power-plant intakes kill enormous numbers of fish and damage the ecology of our water," said Mr. Super, whose client sued the EPA in federal court to force the agency to issue the rules. "The old, dirty plants have refused to modernize and have made enormous profits while externalizing their costs." 

 Write to  Stephen Power at stephen.power@wsj.com 