HANOI—Vietnam's Communist Party reappointed Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung to its elite Politburo at a secretive congress Wednesday, in a move that paves the way for the nation's top leader to serve a second term, despite economists' concerns about his willingness to apply tough measures to tackle double-digit inflation rates.

Political analysts say the decision of the party's 175-person Central Committee to reappoint Mr. Dung—whose second term as premier requires confirmation by the country's National Assembly in May—indicates Vietnam will likely continue its pro-growth policies. In recent years, that has meant plowing billions of dollars into subsidizing lending programs and other state-driven spending plans to maintain rapid expansion despite bouts of inflation.

Across much of Asia, inflation has become a hot-button issue. It also has spurred fears about whether government efforts to prevent sudden price rises will stunt regional growth, which has helped drive the global recovery. 

China last week introduced new reserve requirements to slow credit growth and imposed selective price controls in some areas, while India began importing onions from Pakistan and banned the export of many kinds of rice, pulses and cooking oils to contain inflation. In Indonesia, authorities have called on residents to grow their own chili peppers in an effort to help limit price rises of the nation's key ingredient.

But Vietnam presents a troubling vision of what can happen in other fast-growing parts of the world if policy makers fail to put on the brakes in time. 

Vietnam's inflation rates steadily increased in 2010, hitting 11.75% on year in December, and worsening a crisis of confidence in the dong currency, which already had been hit by a series of devaluations. 

Vietnamese individuals have responded by buying up dollars and hoarding gold, or speculating on land in the hope of retaining their savings. Private businesses, meanwhile, have struggled to compete with powerful state-owned enterprises for bank loans as policy makers belatedly try to slow credit growth, which expanded more than 27% last year.

"With inflation hitting double digits and the stock- and foreign-exchange markets so unstable, people are speculating on land to try and get higher returns," says Vu Quyet Thang, who runs a travel company, Hoang Viet Travel, in Hanoi. "It's difficult getting credit, too, but with some new faces in government hopefully the problems can be resolved."

Not much seems to be changing, though. The Communist Party's conclave is a grand event held once every five years, and is celebrated with giant red-and-gold billboards and murals up and down the length of Vietnam. The outcome is largely prearranged, people familiar with its workings say. This time the party appointed its chief Marxist theorist and head of the national legislature, Nguyen Phu Trong, as the party's new boss—a move analysts said would strengthen Mr. Dung's hand. 

Another high-ranking candidate for party boss, Truong Tan Sang, who is widely perceived as one of Mr. Dung's main rivals, was expected to move to the largely ceremonial post of president. 

Both Mr. Dung's and Mr. Sang's positions will likely be confirmed by the rubber-stamp National Assembly in May. 

The challenge for Vietnam's leadership is to adjust its policy to better contain the debilitating effects of inflation, as rising energy and food prices in global markets threaten to put further upward pressure on prices at home.

"A lot depends on how much Mr. Dung's ears are burning from what he has been hearing in the Central Committee," says Carlyle Thayer, a Vietnam scholar and professor at the Australian Defence Force Academy at the University of New South Wales.

Mr. Dung, 61 years old, in recent months has faced stinging criticism and a leadership challenge over his handling of Vietnam's boom-bust economy. Since taking power in 2006, the former central bank governor and security chief has encouraged state-owned enterprises to expand into large conglomerates to keep large parts of the economy in Vietnamese hands while the country opened up more to foreign investment. But state-directed lending bred inefficiency and reckless expansion at many state-owned companies, and one, Vietnam Shipbuilding Industry Group, came to the brink of collapse this summer after amassing $4.4 billion in debt.

Mr. Dung went before a televised session of Vietnam's National Assembly to acknowledge his shortcomings in the debacle shortly before the concern, better known as Vinashin, defaulted on a $60 million repayment on a $600 million syndicated loan, potentially making it more difficult for Vietnam and its companies to raise money offshore.

Vinashin officials couldn't be reached to comment.

Vinashin's debt problems triggered worries about the viability of Vietnam's other state enterprises, which account for about a third of the economy, and for the stability of the banks lending to them. Moody's Investors Service last month downgraded Vietnam's government debt to B1 from Ba3 after similar downgrades from Standard & Poor's and Fitch Ratings. 

Now, with inflation again rearing its head, economists say Mr. Dung faces a decision over whether to give up the party's ambitious growth targets and tighten monetary policy or risk a deeper crisis.

Many economists say Mr. Dung should tackle price increases first, which will help shore up confidence in the faltering dong, then the private sector will help drive growth.

He also may face increasing pressure from the party's policy-setting central committee to do more to contain inflation in coming months and deal with rising scrutiny from the country's legislature.

So far, it seems that despite the party's concern about inflation, the committee is sticking to its target growth of 7% to 7.5% for 2011 to 2015, up from 2010's 6.78% growth rate—a rapid pace economists say will make it difficult for government to get inflation back into single digits, let alone hit its own target of 7% this year.

"It's difficult for the party to let go of its mind-set," says Nguyen Quang A, who headed Vietnam's only independent think tank, until its founders closed it in protest after it was prohibited from examining the Communist Party regime.

—Nguyen Anh Thu  contributed to this article.

 Write to  James Hookway at james.hookway@wsj.com 