 Music Hall of Williamsburg  66 N. 6th St., Brooklyn  (718) 486-5400  Friday 

Encouraged by one-time tourmate Elvis Presley to sing the tougher strain of rhythmic country music known as rockabilly, Wanda Jackson was peerless in her field from the start. Bob Dylan deemed her "an atomic bomb in lipstick." Now, despite being nearly six decades removed from her raucous and feisty first sides (as well as a long detour into gospel music), Ms. Jackson remains the Queen. In 2003, she cut a comeback album with longtime devotees like Elvis Costello and the Cramps, and toured the revival circuit with other early rock 'n' rollers. But it's her forthcoming album, "The Party Ain't Over," recorded in Nashville with another big fan, Jack White, that promises new thrills from this septuagenarian. Whether she's tackling Dylan for a rollicking first single ("Thunder on the Mountain") or taking on "Rum and Coca-Cola" and Amy Winehouse, Ms. Jackson still sounds regal and evergreen.



 Bowery Ballroom  6 Delancey St., (212) 533-2111  Monday 

Since its 2007 eponymous debut and its 2009 follow-up, "Machine Dreams," Swedish band Little Dragon has only grown bigger—not just in sound but in audience. That's impressive considering the group still doesn't have an American label behind it. Its cult-classic debut indulged in hip-hop beats and jazz piano but was foregrounded by a brand of lithe R&B, while its second album was immersed in tingly, 1980s-indebted synth-tinged pop. Its breakout success is due to the band smartly funneling all of its sounds through sensuous, smoky-voiced Japanese singer Yukimi Nagano. Having just wrapped a world tour supporting Damon Albarn's cartoon supergroup Gorillaz and hip-hop heroes De La Soul, Little Dragon returns with three triumphant dates in the City. 

 Webster Hall  125 E. 11th St., (212) 353-1600  Thursday-Friday 

Since their inception in 1985, Minneapolis folk-rockers the Jayhawks have flown beneath the radars of critics and listeners alike, releasing meticulously crafted, country-tinged albums like 1995's "Tomorrow the Green Grass" and 2000's "Smile" on major labels while missing out on wider successes. Instead, they were a band's band, influencing a generation of "Americana" artists with an expert balance of jangle and fuzz. Songwriter Mark Olson left the fold in 1995, while Gary Louris continued on. Funny enough, around the same time the Jayhawks went on hiatus in 2005, the duo began to bill shows as "From the Jayhawks: An Evening with Mark Olson & Gary Louris, Together Again." By 2009, the group had reconvened on festival stages and released an anthology of its music, and it spent 2010 in the studio. 

 Beacon Theatre  2124 Broadway, (212) 465-6500  Monday-Wednesday 

The Decemberists are the rare indie folk-rock act with a major label contract, especially given bandleader Colin Meloy's penchant for the ambitious and obscure, which would seem to not translate into sales. Named for a failed uprising in 19th-century Russia, the group has made intricate, winsome, at times tediously proggy music that extrapolates on source material like "Táin Bó Cúailnge" (an early 12th-century Irish mythological epic) and Japanese folk tales. Forgotten British folksinger Anne Briggs served as muse for the band's 2009 rock opera, but from the opening salvo on the Decemberists' latest album, "The King Is Dead," one might determine their latest muse to be…Tom Petty?! The overarching concept this time around appears to be none at all, save the influence of peers like R.E.M. and Gillian Welch, who contribute. Expect the band to dig into this countrified new material with aplomb and pedal steel.

 Highline Ballroom  431 W. 16th St., (212) 414-5994  Tuesday 

While the country's economic collapse remains world news, Iceland's penchant for breathtaking and adventurous music-making continues to enthrall. There's Björk and the majestic post-rock swells of Sigur Rós, of course, but emergent artists from that country are capturing new listeners as well. Case in point is Ólafur Arnalds, who began his career punishing drums and ears in hard-core and metal bands before allowing his compositional strengths to shine through in the classical-music world. Not that he's abandoned the drums: Mr. Arnalds could be considered a "post-rock" composer, his music as evocative as that of thunderous ensembles like Explosions in the Sky and fellow countrymen (and one-time tourmates) Sigur Rós. His latest album, "...And They Have Escaped the Weight of Darkness," offsets its portentous title with an elegant hand, mixing pianos and string sections with heart-quickening drums and subliminal electronic processing.