Private-sector workers filed a record number of discrimination charges against employers during fiscal 2010, an increase business groups and attorneys attributed primarily to the strained economy.

The number of charges filed with the EEOC rose to nearly 100,000, up 7% from the year-earlier period and 21% from fiscal 2007.

"When times are good, people are happy and when they're not, they aren't," said Joe Trauger, vice president of human-resources policy for the National Association of Manufacturers, a business trade group. "Anytime we go into a recession or the economy gets a little shaky the numbers seem to spike a bit," he said.

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, which reported the uptick Tuesday based on the number of accusations filed with the agency in the year ended Sept. 30, also had a bigger budget and more staff, which may have boosted the numbers. The agency used a portion of the money to educate employees about their workplace rights and "make ourselves a little more user friendly," EEOC spokeswoman Justine Lisser said.

"Discrimination continues to be a substantial problem for too many job seekers and workers," EEOC Chairwoman Jacqueline Berrien said. "We must continue to build our capacity to...ensure that workplaces are free of unlawful bias."

"I think it's an overstatement to assume there has been an increase in discrimination in the workplace," said Michael Burkhardt, a partner with law firm Morgan, Lewis & Bockius who works on behalf of employers. He noted that the percentage of charges determined to have a reasonable cause has hovered around 5% for the past several years.

Last year, the number of accusations of employer retaliation—allegations that an employer retaliated against an employee for complaining internally or with the EEOC—outnumbered racial-discrimination charges for the first time since the EEOC started operating in 1965. 

Michael Delikat, chairman of the employment-law practice group at law firm Orrick, who represents employers, said retaliation claims in recent years have tended to fare better before juries and get higher settlements than complaints about underlying acts of discrimination.

Retaliation "is easier to prove," said the EEOC's Ms. Lisser.

The agency also saw a spike in allegations of disability discrimination, which lawyers and the EEOC attributed to legislation that made it easier for employees to establish that they are disabled.

The EEOC said it resolved 104,999 private-sector charges and filed 250 lawsuits in the fiscal year. It also resolved another 285 lawsuits. In all, the agency said it collected more than $404 million from employers on behalf of employees, its highest annual total ever.

Any marked increase in charges that could lead to litigation is a concern to small business owners, said Molly Brogan, spokeswoman for the National Small Business Association. "Small businesses that are having to lay off employees—and therefore getting hit with these charges—are already in financial distress," she said.

 Write to  Melanie Trottman at melanie.trottman@wsj.com 