 Paul Gigot: This week on "The Journal Editorial Report," President Obama delivers a message to Republicans in the State of the Union: It's your budget problem now. Should the GOP take the bait? Plus, a union chief attacks CEOs who dare to back pro-reform governors. Will the intimidation work? And from Tunisia to Egypt to Yemen, unrest spreads across the Arab world. Who is behind the uprisings, and how should the U.S. respond? 

  President Obama: So now is the time to act. Now is the time for both sides and both houses of Congress, Democrats and Republicans, to forge a principled compromise that gets the job done. If we make the hard choices now to rein in our deficits, we can make the investments we need to win the future.  

 Gigot: Welcome to "The Journal Editorial Report." I'm Paul Gigot. 

That was President Obama in his State of the Union Address, saying hard choices must be made to rein in the deficit. But it looks like it's the GOP that'll have to come up with the cuts first. The president didn't offer any new ones of his own on Tuesday night. So should Republicans take that bait? 

Joining the panel this street, Wall Street Journal columnist and deputy editor Dan Henninger, Washington columnist Kim Strassel and assistant editorial page editor James Freeman. 

So Kim, did you detect any hard choices there that the president said he's going to take? 

 Strassel: None whatsoever. You know, he cares a great deal about the deficit, but he isn't going to offer any specific proposals. Now we'll get a better idea in a few weeks when he puts his budget out, but there certainly wasn't any specifics in his speech. 

 Gigot: You know, I think that, Dan, the president may have missed a moment here, because I think--particularly with some of his language on Social Security and Medicare. It was all in the negative: You can't do this, you can't do that, you can't do this, you can't do that, but we still need to reform it. So I think he misjudged the fact that a fair number of Republicans really actually do want to tackle these problems. And had he gotten ahead of that and said, "You know, I'm willing to do this, let's think anew about this," he might have been able to hold out an olive branch that they could have responded to. 

 Henninger: Yeh. The problem, though, Paul, is, he does not want to do these things. He just doesn't want to. 

 Gigot: So you think he is actually--he does not want to do really anything substantive on entitlement problems? 

 Henninger: No, I don't think so. I mean he said as much in the State of the Union, that he wouldn't even touch benefits for future generations. 

 Gigot: For Social Security, which was astonishing, since those benefits are actually, in real terms, going to increase under the current formula-- 

 Henninger: Yeah.

 Gigot: --because of the cost of living. 

 Henninger: But I agree that--I think he missed an opportunity. As I say, the first part of the speech, in which he talked about competition and individual choice, was very strong. And I was sort of sitting there saying, "Boy, he's really capturing the other side's ideology, and if he does anything substantive, like make a move on Social Security or taxes, he is going to have occupied the center. It's going to make it really difficult for them." But then he didn't do that. He resorted back, as we say, to proposing things like high-speed trains and solar shingles. And I thought it was a tremendously missed opportunity, and I think the reason is, he does not want to be in the center. 

 Gigot: James? 

 Freeman: Well, I think, even though he's not going to lead, the fact is that the American people seem to be ready to take this issue on, even if the timing isn't right in terms of the president. You've seen Rasmussen and the other polls where Americans are really saying we're ready for smaller government, and not just lower taxes but lower spending, too. And so I think this is an opportunity for Republicans to start to make the case, to hold hearings, to explain--you know, why don't we make some changes? 

 Gigot: OK, but could they be walking into a trap? You hear Chuck Schumer and the Democrats saying the Republicans want to privatize Social Security, and they say that means do away with it, get rid of it, which is preposterous, but there you are, some people will believe it. Medicare, they say they want to cut it drastically. Will--if Republicans volunteer to do that and take those tough votes, are they walking into a trap? 

 Freeman: Well, I think a lot of the conservative excitement about Paul Ryan, the House Budget chair--and, you know, his voting record isn't perfect from a small-government perspective--but I think what conservatives see in him is a man at the right time with a message who can sell reform to the American people. And I think what the message would be along lines of: We've got this horrendous budget crisis. Your benefits are going to be there, and they're going to grow every year at the rate of inflation. We're just not going to have them grow even faster, because we are going bankrupt. I think people are ready for that. 

 Gigot: Kim, do you agree with James that people are ready for that? Are Republicans going to move ahead and respond to this speech in that way? 

 Strassel: You know, I disagree, and I do think that this is a bit of a trap. Here's a fundamental truth of Washington. If you want to deal with an entitlement program, the president has to lead. The president has to be on board. And what we saw from that State of the Union is that this president--he made a couple of brief references to it, but this is not what is going to occupy his mind over the next two years. While on the other hand, there are a lot of Democrats are waiting for the Republicans to bring up the Social Security debate--

 Gigot: Right, rght. 

 Strassel: --and the Medicare debate, and say, "Yeah, look, there they are. You let them be in control, you give them the presidency, you give them the Senate, they will throw Granny off of the cliff." It also doesn't help, too--Republicans do not have a leader of the party. They don't have a nominee running for president who can help to crystallize some of these ideas. So, yeah, they need to talk about it, but to go running out there and throw a lot of legislation on the map and say, "Here's what our plan is,"--I don't think it's going to help the country, and it's certainly not going to help them.

 Gigot: Well, what's going to happen? What are they going to do? 

 Strassel: I think what they're going to do is talk about the here-and-now spending, discretionary spending, which is what they focused on this week--bringing back down the budget to 2008 levels in that area, that realm. And also making contrasts with the president, saying, "You claim you want to get rid of wasteful government spending. Here's a bill we just passed. Are you going to put pressure on Majority Leader Harry Reid to put it through and sign it?"

 Gigot: OK, but they're not going to do anything on entitlements, is what I hear you saying, at least not anything really major, because they're afraid they're walking into a trap. 

What about taxes, Dan? We've got the tax reform that the president talked about, at least in theory endorsed it, talked about a lower corporate tax rate, which is amazing for a Democratic president. Any more possibility of cooperation there? 

 Henninger: Well, you know, this is an area, Paul, where I think the American people, unlike entitlements, really do clearly want some kind of reform. And the new head of the Ways and Means Committee, Dave Camp, wants to do that. And I think if--this is going to be a battle of definition. The Democrats and the White House are going to try to define the Republicans, as they always do, as being obstructionists: "We're offering these things, why won't you come deal with us." On entitlements, they're not dealing because it is a bad deal. But I think they can define the tax debate, define a new tax system, and be aggressive in pushing that in a way--don't expect anything to happen necessarily, but I think they can define it in a way that benefits them. 

 Gigot: All right, Dan, thanks. 

When we come back, unions turn up the heat on business groups who dare to back pro-reform governors. Will their intimidation work? 

 Gigot: Well, Big Labor is spoiling for another fight. Its target this time: business leaders who voice support for pro-reform governors, including Democrat Andrew Cuomo of New York, who has pledged to break the union stranglehold on Albany. In a speech last week, AFL-CIO president Richard Trumka denounced business groups who support these governors, calling them, quote, "shadowy committees aimed at depriving all workers, private and public sector, of the basic human right to form strong unions and bargain collectively to lift their lives," end quote. 

So who exactly is Tumka talking about, and what does he hope to accomplish? 

We're back with Dan Henninger and Kim Strassel, and also joining us, Wall Street Journal editorial board member Mary Kissel. 

So Mary, what is Trumka aiming at? 

 Kissel: Well, as you said, Paul, he's out attacking pro-reform governors, but also businesspeople who support that reform. And in the speech last week at the National Press Club, he named names. He named Goldman CEO Lloyd Blankfein and he also named our owner, Rupert Murdoch. 

 Gigot: That's right, indeed he did. And now, his objection is that they are raising money, or contributing money perhaps, some of these business executives are, to something called the Committee to Save New York, which is going to, at least in theory, support Gov. Cuomo and some of his reforms.

 Kissel: That's right. The Committee for New York is a nonprofit that aims to raise about $10 million, and they call themselves an educational institution. They want to educate New Yorkers about the fiscal problems that the state faces. And Trumka doesn't like that, and he's is pushing back hard. But of course, he's not just pushing back against New York. He's pushing back against a raft of pro-reform governors, mostly in the Midwest. 

 Gigot: And what are some of those up to, maybe in Wisconsin and Ohio, where they're talking about removing collective bargaining rights for public-sector unions. What else? 

 Kissel: That's correct. Ohio is actually doing a number of things, including trying to change the way that the state can arbitrate with public unions. You have Gov. Chris Christie, of course, in New Jersey, who's looking at pension reform. You have a raft of states that are looking at things like teacher tenure, raising the retirement age. There are just a number of initiatives out there. 

 Gigot: Kim, why is Trumka being so aggressive here? I mean, are they really worried that some of these things could actually pass and set back the union strength in these state capitals? 

 Strassel: Yeah, this is called an abject fear, what is going on here. It's remarkable. Over the past two years, you've had a lot of states that have simply hit a tipping point where governors and legislators have understood that the public employee unions that basically run these states are living a life of benefits and pay that no one in the private sector is entitled to, that the taxpayers are paying for it, and that the government simply cannot afford anymore. So you are seeing these movements, like Mary just described, across all these states--in particular, ones in the Midwest, where now the legislatures and the governorships belong to Republicans. So there's a very big possibility that some of the things, whether it's right-to-work legislation or collective bargaining rules, could go through in a way that would damage the unions.

 Gigot: I think that the unions, Dan, are particularly worried about New York because you have a Democratic governor. They know they probably can't do too much to stop Republican governors, because they don't support them for election. But if they lose Andrew Cuomo, and Cuomo can succeed without their--despite their opposition, that's a big defeat for them. 

 Henninger: Yeah, but they're on the defensive in New York, Paul, and Gov. Cuomo has asked the business community to raise a war chest of $10 million. What do you need the money for? You need that money because the public unions will start running television ads berating and excoriating--they did it to Gov. Spitzer, and they rolled Spitzer when he tried to do this. Cuomo is making sure that he has a counteroffensive ready--

 Gigot: Level the playing field. 

 Henninger: To level the playing field. But the real reason--as Kim was saying, the fiscal wolf is at the door of all of the states, especially those states around the Great Lakes, like Ohio, Michigan, Illinois. This problem has been building for 45 years. It has basically been swept under the rug for 45 years. And now, what is one of the biggest issues we are talking about? Can states go bankrupt? Legally, no. But effectively, they are bankrupt. 

 Gigot: I want to show you an ad that Gov. Chris Christie's running in Illinois, trying to solicit from Illinois after the recent tax increase--to New Jersey, of all places, Mary. [Print ad on screen: "Choose New Jersey; We mean business. Had enough of outrageous tax increases?"] What was the response from the Illinois governor? 

 Kissel: The Illinois governor didn't like it one bit. He said--

 Gigot: I can imagine. 

 Kissel: Yeah. He said, "I don't want to take advice from that guy." Well, he might have to start taking advice from that guy, because businesses are talking about moving to states where they'll be treated better. 

 Gigot: Well, but if--I mean, New Jersey isn't exactly a paragon of entrepreneurship. I mean, their tax rates are higher--still, despite the tax increase. 

 Kissel: Right. 

 Gigot: Their property taxes are higher. New Jersey still has a lot of work to do. I mean, is Christie setting himself up to be a comparison that might not be too favorable for the state? 

 Kissel: That's true. It is something like No., what, 48?

 Gigot: I think 49 or 50--

 Kissel: Forty--

 Gigot: --on most of the tax categories. 

 Kissel: --on most of the tax categories. Sure, but I think it's the direction of reform in New Jersey--it's moving in right direction, whereas a state like Illinois, it's moving backwards. 

 Henninger: Well, what these unions understand is, we're not living in East Germany. There are not armed guards at the border. People can move out. Then who's going to pay those pensions? No one. 

 Gigot: All right, when we come back, turmoil in the Middle East. Protesters take to the Arab street as the unrest spreads from Tunisia to Egypt, and now Yemen. Was the Obama administration caught by surprise, and how should they respond? 

 Gigot: Well, it started last month in Tunisia, when a frustrated street vendor set himself on fire, sparking protests that ultimately brought down a dictator. And this week, the unrest spread to other parts of the Arab world. In Egypt, thousands calling for the end of Hosni Mubarak's 30-year rule clashed with security forces across the country. And in Yemen, scores of antigovernment protesters turned out in the capital of Sanaa, demanding the ouster of their president, Ali Abdullah Saleh. 

For more, we're joined by Wall Street Journal foreign-affairs columnist Bret Stephens and editorial board member Matt Kaminski. 

So, Matt, Mubarak has been a longtime U.S. ally, supports American interests in the Middle East, deals with Israel. How much trouble is he in? 

 Kaminski: I think he's in serious trouble. He's also 82 years old, been in power for 30 years, and the majority of Egyptians know no one but Mubarak. It is a very unhappy and a very angry place, as we're seeing on television. And what Tunisia did was it showed to the entire Arab world that the status quo does not need to last, and it is possible to do something. 

 Gigot: Who are these demonstrators, Bret? I mean, are these--the Muslim Brotherhood has said, which is a fundamentalist group, is saying, so far, they had nothing to do with it, but now they are getting in. Who are these demonstrators? 

 Stephens: Well look, there is a real activist community in Egypt consisting of people who keep blogs, people who are sort of civil society as it is called, people who are just fed up, middle-class people who've seen the standard of living decline over the last 10 or 15 years. And they're being joined by various streams, including the Muslim Brotherhood, which is the politically well-organized part of society. 

 Gigot: And are not natural small-D democrats.

 Stephens: No, they are--well, they take advantage of democracy because they have a huge constituency. Whether they would be democrats once they're in power is really the central question you have to deal with.

 Gigot: Do you agree with Matt that Mubarak is really in trouble here and that this could be something like a Tunisia situation? 

 Stephens: Well, we have to distinguish Mubarak from the regime, because--I mean, Mubarak has been the president for 30 years, but really the regime is a military regime. He represents the interests of the military, which is much more powerful than it is in Tunisia, much better entrenched, has much greater prestige in Egyptian society. So you could see a scenario in which the Mubarak family exits the scene but the regime itself remains in power with new arrangements with various political players. 

 Gigot: Are you saying the regime is backed by harder, tougher-minded people than in Tunisia, so that they're likely not to go down as easily? 

 Stephens: Well, exactly. In Tunisia, basically, you had a family of kleptocrats, who wanted live well and did so, and were perfectly happy to move to Saudi Arabia and live well there. In Egypt, that's a different story. You've got a class of officers who are well entrenched, who believe in Egypt, who believe in the regime, and who aren't about to, you know, head off for a fancy hotel in Dubai to spend the rest of their lives. 

 Gigot: Matt, it sounds to me like you think it's actually a more volatile situation, that this may be more difficult for the regime to control. Why? 

 Kaminski: Well, I think Bret's absolutely right, that the army is much stronger in Egypt. They've been in power since 1952, and they may want to put their own guy in power. But the great uncertainly here is that you have--and this is the real great danger here. You have a disorganized leaderless opposition on the street, unlike in Poland in the '80s, or in South Africa, where you had the ANC for decades organizing the opposition and essentially preparing themselves to take power. That does not exist in Egypt. 

 Gigot: And that--part of the reason there is because Mubarak has made it difficult for political parties to form, very difficult for alternative voices that aren't Islamist to develop and become an alternative to his rules. 

 Kaminski: Exactly. And he's ignored our calls--I mean, calls by the U.S., both the Bush administration and Obama now, to try to open up space for more free speech, to allow freer elections. I mean, he has not really been thinking of what comes after him, except for his son, who he's trying to groom--

 Gigot: He wants a dynastic succession. 

But, Dan, here's the thing--here's the history hovering over this for a lot of Americans in the foreign-policy establishment: the shah of Iran--

 Henninger: Right. 

 Gigot: --and what has happened when that revolution was co-opted by extremists, and we've lived with that for 30 years. What--

 Henninger: That's the argument that's being made by critics of supporting these movements. 

 Gigot: That's right. 

 Henninger: The difference is, Paul, this is 2011. That was 1979. And a lot has changed in the world. And the foreign policy--

 Gigot: Technologically, you mean? 

 Henninger: Technologically. 

 Gigot: How do you mean? 

 Henninger: Well, because these demonstrations--the way these regimes are governed, by and large, is through brutality, physical control. It's harder now to keep the information about that from the population because you have these patriots out there blogging and sending it in. And while Egypt, yes, has shut that down the last couple of days, they can't do it indefinitely. People know what is going on inside these regimes. 

Our foreign-policy community has been caught off guard by this because, with a dictator like Mubarak, you stop thinking about the country. This is going to happen again. And if it happened here and in Tunisia and in Yemen, of all places, it is going to keep happening. And we need a policy to deal with that. 

 Gigot: Is there a danger, Bret, that if the U.S.--Secretary Clinton, she's been on both sides of this, but more recently supported some of the sentiments, at least--

 Stephens: Yeah.

 Gigot: --of the demonstrators. Is there a danger that we could end up helping to destabilize this government? 

 Stephens: Well, look, I think that the policy of this administration and previous administrations has to be to support the democrats, but that means, on one hand, you don't simply give a blank check to the Mubarak regime. You don't give a blank check either to the demonstrators. There's a big difference whether the demonstrations are going to bring a democracy into power that's going to respect the ordinary rules of democracy, or whether we're just going to usher in a new dictator, à la Ayatollah Khomeini. But there's a way of doing that. We could have been spending the last five or six years, and we can start today, really supporting pro-democracy movements in Egypt and not just "the opposition."

 Gigot: All right, but it's dangerous at this particular moment. I mean, I agree with you, five years ago we should have done it. But this period is very volatile. I mean, it's a very fine line we have to walk. It is a very difficult situation. 

We have to take one more break. When we come back, our "Hits and Misses" of the week.  

 Gigot: Time now for our "Hits and Misses" of the week. Bret, first to you. 

 Stephens: Well, you know, as we all know, Guantanamo prison shut down exactly a year ago on the orders of President--oh, wait, sorry. No, actually Guantanamo prison is still open under President Obama. And the story is that we are now going to have military tribunals taking place to try some of the terrorists who are being held here. This is a sign that the Obama administration, despite all of the rhetoric of its candidacy, has extended, has continued the tradition that was established by President Bush. Kudos to the administration for gaining a sense of the reality that we're dealing with some of these prisoners. I'm only sorry it took so long. 

 Gigot: All right. Kim? 

 Strassel: A miss to the Hollywood academy for this week refusing to give nominations--Oscar nominations to two of the most profoundly influential and popular documentaries of this last year, "Waiting for Superman" and "The Lottery." Both dealt with the appalling state of public education, the teachers unions, and about the hope of school choice. Maybe this isn't a surprise for an industry that itself is under the thumb of unions, or from an academy that routinely uses its nominations to score liberal political points. But if you were looking for an excuse not to watch the Oscars again this year, there you have it.

 Gigot: I don't need that excuse, Kim. All right, Matt. 

 Kaminski: I think one of the silliest ideas of this week goes to--courtesy of state senator from New York Carl Kruger, who hsa introduced a bill this week to ban the wearing of headphones, for your iPod or anything else, while you are crossing the street. You will get a fine for $100 if a policeman catches you. He thinks that this is going to stop traffic accidents. It's the nanny state gone to absurdist lengths. 

 Gigot: Ah, New York. 

That's it for this week's edition of "The Journal Editorial Report." Thanks to my panel and to all of you. I'm Paul Gigot. We hope to see you right here next week. 