LONDON— Helena Morrissey is sometimes hesitant to voice her opinion. She frequently finds herself the only woman in a group of powerful businessmen. And the chief executive of London-based money manager Newton Investment Management Ltd., with roughly $71 billion of assets under management, admits she has sometimes held back on expressing her views because of the danger of becoming "the annoying" woman in the room.

"I have been conscious of feeling that where I did have different views from the rest of the [all-male] group, I may be being perceived as the 'difficult woman' rather than being listened to for what I was saying," she says.

There has been, she says, "no evidence that the men were actually feeling that, but a doubt in my mind has caused me to hold back."


‘I am personally not in favor ofquotas. Quotas undermine the whole principle of equality. There will always be a suspicion that women only got there because of the quota.’


When she recently attended a lunch with a senior member of the Bank of England, she was, she says, "the only woman out of 20 people. This is not a good dynamic because you do feel—probably wrongly—that when you speak, you do so as a woman, rather than as one of the 20. It makes me somewhat hold back when wanting to speak up."

There have been other times when, she says, she has had moments of doubt. Until last month the only female board director at the Investment Managers Association, she has often disagreed on certain issues, but has been reticent about saying so. "At a recent meeting I wasn't comfortable with a controversial point and I spoke up, but I also had a different view on the next item on the agenda but instead of speaking up I held back."

Experiences like these have led this top fund manager to create the 30% Club, a group of board chairmen and organizations committed to bringing more women into company boardrooms in the U.K. She wants to see 30% of senior executive positions—positions that influence a company's culture and decision-making—occupied by women by 2015.

The number of women in boardrooms is low. Only 9% of directors of companies in the FTSE-350 are women, according to data from Boardex, a board-room networking tool, and just 12.2% of FTSE100 directors were women in 2009, according to a report published by Cranfield School of Management. Roughly one in four firms have all-male boards, including power generating giant International Power PLC and food and beverage behemoth  Associated British Foods
ASBFY


-0.04
%




 PLC.

But this mother of nine believes the argument for getting more women into boardrooms goes beyond feminism and the quest for equality; it's also better for the bottom line. Mrs. Morrissey cites a report by management consultants McKinsey that shows businesses with more than three women on their board have an 80% higher return on equity, and firms with female leadership have a 35% higher return on equity.

She says the 30% Club will seek the support of company chairmen, who are usually involved in hiring board members. She has so far managed to enlist a few household names, including  Lloyds Banking Group Chairman  Sir Win Bischoff, David Tyler, the chairman of supermarket chain J. Sainsbury PLC, and  David Cruickshank, chairman of Deloitte LLP. 

Her own career in the investment sector also lends weight to her cause. She joined Newton in 1994 and worked her way up, finally becoming chief executive in 2001. She has received the recognition of her peers—being given the "Most Influential Woman in Asset Management" award last October, a month after Financial News had named her one of the most influential women in the City.

Despite the lack of women in the City's top jobs, Mrs. Morrissey says "momentum" is gathering around the issue of gender diversity in the boardroom.

Late last week,  Lord Davies, the U.K.'s former trade minister, said in a report that the U.K.'s 100 biggest public companies should promote voluntary targets to double the current number of women on boards. His research, which the government commissioned last summer, revealed that 18 out of the 100 largest firms have no female representation at board level, while about 50% of FTSE 250 firms have no women in their boards.

Lord Davies's report was careful not to suggest mandatory quotas, which are already used in Norway, France and Spain, but proposed companies set a voluntary target of 25% female representation in boardroom.

"I am personally not in favor of quotas," says Mrs. Morrissey. "I am hopeful that introducing them won't be necessary. Quotas undermine the whole principle of equality. There will always be a suspicion that women only got there because of the quota. I wouldn't want to be sitting on a board thinking I'm there only because I am a woman." 

But the process of creating more diversity begins long before board-level appointments, she says. The entire process of recruitment needs to be changed. It has often happened, she says, that when recruiting for a position, headhunters would come to her with a short-list completely devoid of women. "There has been a vicious spiral in which companies don't stipulate that they really want more diverse people in a senior role, and recruiters aren't clear on what to do."

But there are signs things are changing in Europe and elsewhere. In the U.K., the Professional Boards Forum has been arranging meetings in which they bring together leading company chairmen and outstanding female board candidates, as part of a broader push to include more women in powerful posts. In Australia, an initiative was launched in 2009 to encourage more women in directorships. As a result, a total of 27% of appointees to company director positions last year were women, compared with 5% a year earlier.

Still, some say all these initiatives, along with the recommendations of the Davies report, don't match businesses' needs.  John Purcell, of executive search firm Purcell & Co., says we are heading for a "car crash" in which "political wishful thinking doesn't match the commercial reality." 

"These are all very good and noble ideas, but they are divorced from the practicalities of the real world. There are highly talented women on boards already, and besides, some very talented women decide to leave the career ladder for their own reasons," he says.

  Anita Skipper, corporate governance director at Aviva Investors, says companies are unlikely to abide by hiring recommendations gracefully. "Most boards want to have total freedom on who they put on the board," she says.

Given this harsh reality, isn't Mrs. Morrissey's 30% target too ambitious? She doesn't think so. "I do really think that it's good for businesses to have more women at senior levels in a company, and not just on boards. I also think I have a certain responsibility, given that I maybe can help make it happen. I am not afraid about putting myself on the line."

Mrs. Morrissey also believes having more women on boards would lessen the self-doubt she and others often suffer when making tough decisions. "If you get to the point when nobody is challenging the group-think, then it's been a waste of time," she says. "We aren't trying to turn women into men intellectually, but we are trying to remove some of the self-doubt; but this is still a challenge.

"We want them to be themselves and not clones of existing men."

 Write to  Javier Espinoza at javier.espinoza@wsj.com 