PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla.—The scar begins on Chris Young's forehead, just above his eyebrows. It meanders down between his eyes, stopping at the bridge of his nose, which is slightly dented.

It is only about an inch and a half long, too small to detect on television. The redness that made it noticeable initially has long since faded. But the mark that remains tells the story of how Young got here.

It explains how he went from an All-Star pitcher for the San Diego Padres in 2007 to a man seeking reclamation with the Mets in 2011. And it shows how one night, one pitch, one fraction of a second can alter the course of a career.

The reason Young appeared in only 18 games the last two seasons is a series of injuries to his right shoulder. But to him, everything traces back to May 21, 2008. That was the night a line drive off the bat of Albert Pujols struck him square between the eyes. His skull was fractured. His nose was shattered. His face was bloodied. And for a variety of reasons, he hasn't been the same since.

"I had a string of bad luck, and it started with that," Young said. "I was always rehabbing, and that was a challenge. I think it kind of led to the shoulder stuff. I don't think it was the main cause, but I think it was part of it."

* * *

The pitch was a slider, down and away. Young had gotten ahead of Pujols, two strikes and no balls, in the third inning. And with two runners on base and one out, Young wanted no part of the barrel of Pujols' bat.

He chose the slider to draw a swing-and-miss or, at worst, a grounder to the left side of the infield. No one, he thought, hits that pitch, in that location, hard up the middle. And had it been any other hitter, he may have been right.

But Pujols, the St. Louis Cardinals first baseman and arguably the game's greatest slugger, hit the pitch with authority. Young saw the ball briefly before it disappeared. Then he felt it. He dropped to the ground.

"I didn't know where the ball had gone," he said. "I just looked down and my pants and jersey were covered in blood. I didn't even feel the pain at that point. I was just sitting on the mound mad, like, 'Uh, come on, I don't want this to happen.'"

What told Young the injury was serious, more than his own instincts, was the look on Adrian Gonzalez's face. The first baseman ran toward the mound. Then, he turned away in horror.

Young's wife, Elizabeth, watched from her seat in the stands at Petco Park, gripped by shock more so than fear. Finally, a friend sitting next to her said, "Liz, I think you need to go down there."

A short while later, Chris and Elizabeth Young were in the back of an ambulance. Somehow, the driver got lost on the way to the hospital. Chris, ever the thinking man's ballplayer, sat up, bloodied and bandaged, and gave the driver directions.

* * *

Young has never seen video of the incident. He didn't want to see it. There were so many questions about how it would affect him on the mound when he returned. He resolved to put it out of his mind.

Greg Maddux, his teammate at the time, told him, "Think of it as a one-in- a-million chance, and your one is up." And that was how Young reasoned with himself. The next time a ball was hit in his direction, he would not flinch. To do so would be illogical.

It wasn't until Aug. 8, 2008, in Young's third game back from the disabled list, that he got a glimpse of how the ball that struck him in the head would impact him.

After throwing 37 pitches in one inning in Colorado, Young felt pain not in his head but in his right arm. He went back on the DL with a forearm strain.

"My arm just wasn't conditioned for that," he said.

The skull fracture had created a significant risk of infection. When the line drive struck him, doctors told Young to sit still for two weeks. No running, no lifting weights, no throwing. More than a month would pass before Young could throw off a mound again. Even in August, his arm was not as strong as usual.

The forearm strain proved to be relatively minor, but it foreshadowed the next two years. 

A shoulder impingement ended Young's 2009 season after 14 games. Arthroscopic surgery followed. The 2010 season was worse. Young was limited to four games because of ongoing tightness in the shoulder.

The strength of the joint is paramount. It is impossible to know for sure, but both Young and his former pitching coach believe that had Young not been struck by that pitch in 2008, had his strength and conditioning not been disrupted, perhaps the shoulder injuries could have been avoided.

"The actual line drive didn't affect him as much as missing the time," Padres pitching coach Darren Balsley said. "Chris is a creature of habit, more so than a lot of other guys. When you get hurt and you're on the DL that long, your routine goes away, and it's hard to get back on the ball. The shoulder is very fragile."

* * *

Two or three times a year, Young gets a sinus infection. It is a lingering effect of the line drive, an occasional reminder of that night. But otherwise, it no longer affects him.

If he were out of baseball, this might be told as the story of Young's demise, of how a freak injury led to a series of others that ended his career. But with the Mets, Young, 31, can write his own ending.

His shoulder is healthy again. He says so with conviction. There is no evidence to the contrary.

In the balmy refuge of spring training, Young can allow himself to feel once again like the pitcher he was on May 21, 2008, winding up for an 0-2 pitch to Albert Pujols.

"I don't want to go through the rehab again," Young said. "I'm not going to say I won't, but I don't want to. I really believe that great things are ahead."

 Write to  Brian Costa at Brian.Costa@wsj.com 