When the news landed that Charles Barkley would be making his debut this week as a commentator for the men's NCAA basketball tournament, there was one immediate question that echoed throughout the land: What, exactly, does Charles Barkley know about college basketball? 

During a radio interview earlier this month, former CBS analyst Billy Packer, who has called 34 consecutive Final Fours, said he'd "probably forgotten more about college basketball than Charles Barkley ever knew existed."

Even in his day job as an NBA color analyst for TNT, the 48-year-old former NBA MVP and hall-of-famer has, at times, said things that might compel people to entertain the notion that he doesn't always do his homework. In the fall of 2008, for instance, he asserted on air that the Los Angeles Lakers weren't contenders, even though they'd just won five of their last six games (the Lakers won the title that season). 

"I don't think they hired me to worry about the facts—they asked me to do me," Barkley said in an interview last week. He added, for the record, that he's never actually gotten the facts wrong. "When you look at these teams, you assume they're going to play well, and when they don't play well you look like you don't know what you're talking about. But it doesn't make you wrong."

Barkley said he's asked several former coaches for scouting reports, but he insists he doesn't need to do any extra studying. There are college games on in the studio every day, he said, and he's been a college fan for years (he played his college ball at Auburn). As an NBA analyst, he said, he's forced to watch more college hoops than ever now that so many college players enter the NBA after their freshman year. 

With the NCAA tournament approaching, we decided to ambush Sir Charles with something that (we assumed) would make him break out in hives: A college basketball pop quiz.

For the first question, we asked Barkley how many Big East teams were contenders for tournament bids (11, he correctly said—many of them "overrated"). We asked which key player Purdue has been missing for much of this year. "That Hummel kid," Barkley responded, also correctly. 

To our surprise, he knew the name of San Diego State's leading scorer ("that Leonard kid," he said) and identified Kansas as the team that stars a pair of twins—a pair he called the Morris boys. "That's the team I think is gonna win it all," he said. 

Barkley's only slip on the quiz was a seriously wonky one (and one that even serious wonks might fight over). He didn't think there was a difference between college and the NBA when it comes to the statistic that correlates the most to winning. "Defense, rebounds and turnovers, same as in the pros." (Statisticians might argue that the key number in college is scoring margin). 

While he passed the test with flying colors, Barkley wasn't unduly impressed with himself. He said he actually feels less pressure to be right during March Madness. "In the NBA the best team always wins because you play the team seven times—but college is a crap shoot. That's actually the beauty of this whole NCAA tournament thing." 

"They want to tell me I'm unprepared?" he asked. "They got no idea."

 Write to  Hannah Karp at hannah.karp@dowjones.com 