GENEVA—The U.S. joined other governments Monday in calling for Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi to step down immediately, as Secretary of State Hillary Clinton discussed ways to ramp up pressure on his regime.

Mrs. Clinton, on a day trip to Geneva to address the United Nations Human Rights Council, said she had discussed with foreign ministers of European and other governments further steps to follow on from a UN Security Council resolution passed Saturday. The unanimous resolution established an arms embargo and imposed an asset freeze on people close to the Libyan leader.

"Nothing is off the table so long as the Libyan government continues to threaten and kill Libyan citizens," she said. She demanded Col. Gadhafi leave office "without further violence or delay."

One idea under consideration is a 60-day freeze on all payments to Libya, proposed by the German foreign minister Guido Westerwelle to squeeze the finances of the Libyan leader.

In a five-way meeting, Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Westerwelle and the foreign ministers of France, the U.K. and Italy also discussed setting up a UN-controlled zone for humanitarian assistance in Libya and a no-fly zone over Libyan airspace.

"A no-fly zone is an option we are actively considering. I discussed it today with allies and partners," Mrs. Clinton said.

Italy's Franco Frattini said a no-fly zone would require another UN mandate, while British foreign minister William Hague said it would need "very strong international support."

Earlier Monday, British Prime Minister David Cameron said his country would not rule out the use of "military assets" in confronting Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi. Mr. Cameron told Parliament that he has asked the Ministry of Defence to work with "our allies" on plans for a military no-fly zone. 

"We do not in any way rule out the use of military assets," Mr. Cameron said. 

The International Criminal Court in The Hague, meanwhile, said it had begun to gather information about civilian deaths in the Libyan uprising with a view to opening a formal investigation into possible crimes against humanity by the Libyan leadership.

Prosecutor Luis Moreno Ocampo said the court would decide within days whether to open an investigation, saying that "there will be no impunity for leaders involved in commission of crimes." Saturday's unanimous UN resolution referred the case to the court.

Mrs. Clinton said financial measures should be addressed at Col. Gaddafi and the government but not stop ordinary Libyans from meeting their needs. She said priorities for the U.S. were to avert a humanitarian disaster, to deal with people fleeing the country and to make sure adequate food and medicines were available inside the country. 

Mrs. Clinton said the U.S. is pledging $10 million from aid funds to help refugees, and is sending two specialist emergency teams to the Libyan borders to help those fleeing the country.

Asked about whether Washington would back Col. Gadhafi seeking refuge in another country, she said that "might be a good step." But it wouldn't lift demands for him to be held accountable for his actions, she said.

Mrs. Clinton joined other ministers praising the Arab League for suspending Libya's membership. The UN General Assembly will decide Tuesday on whether to take the symbolic step of suspending Libya from the UN Human Rights Council.

British foreign secretary William Hague said the U.K. is "very sympathetic" to a 60-day payments ban, but would need to examine whether it could be implemented.

Britain imposed an asset freeze on Col. Gaddafi and five children Monday, while European Union ministers formally passed measures to implement an arms embargo, travel ban and assets freeze. Mr. Hague said the European Union was preparing measures to extend a travel ban to more individuals and to add 20 people in the Libya government to the asset freeze.

European governments will bear the greatest burden in imposing financial sanctions on Libya. Germany, France and Italy are the biggest oil importers from the country, while the Libyan governments and members of the Gadhafi have significant holdings of assets in the country.

Mr. Frattini said Col. Gadhafi's "regime is losing ground, even in the peripheric areas of Tripoli... even in Tripoli."

In her speech, Mrs. Clinton sought to link the international condemnation of Col. Gaddafi with the Iranian government's repression of anti-government demonstrations there: "Why do people have the right to live free from fear in Tripoli, but not in Tehran?" 

 Write to  Stephen Fidler at stephen.fidler@wsj.com 