Does all wine improve with age? The answer is invariably no. Most wines—and I include sparkling, rosé, red and white—are made to be drunk young, within one or two years of the date they are bottled. After that, the wine tends to taste a little flat, losing some of its primary fruit flavors that show so well in the immediate flush of youth. 

A few years ago, I had to move my cellar, lock, stock and barrel. It gave me a chance to pull the cork on some wines I have to admit I would never have gotten around to drinking. Sadly, a lot of the white wines had passed their best; some were quite clearly off, tasting more of vinegar than grapes. But the vast majority of wines in my cellar still had a long way to go until they reached full maturity, that sublime moment when the tannin, fruit and acid are all tasting at their best, in harmony, and the wine is most approachable. 

 Isole e Olena, Chianti, Italy  Vintage: 2007  Alcohol: 12.5%  Price: About £20, or €23

For those who know their Chianti, the name Paolo De Marchi will be as familiar as Sangiovese. His Isole e Olena estate in Chianti Classico DOCG has earned a reputation for producing delicate, refined Chianti with gentle spicy fruit. The De Marchi family has been making wine in Tuscany for more than 40 years and espouses a philosophy of meticulous attention to detail and a commitment to keeping the wine making simple. They believe it is the soil and the vineyard that express the final character of the wine, not trickery in the winery. The wines have a finesse far removed from the sometimes chewy and hard Chiantis on the market.

Why? How does one identify these wines? And when is the best time to pull the cork? After five, 10 or 15 years?

To answer these questions, it helps to have a little knowledge as to what is happening to the wine inside the bottle. Any winemaker will tell you that wine is a living entity; it doesn't cease to live when bottled. The wine in those neatly stacked, cylindrical glass containers sealed with a cork is daily reacting with tannins, enzymes, acidity and, in some cases, bacteria. Without getting too carried away with the chemistry, once inside the bottle, the tannins—those bitter-tasting compounds found in the pips, skins and stems—soften with time, while the primary fruit aromas recede. The importance of acidity is that it helps the wine keep its freshness, allowing the fruit and tannin to evolve.

A wine that has been made to contain a lot of tannin, fruit and acidity by extending the time the juice sits in the vats will age considerably longer than those where these components are less prevalent. As a general rule, these are only expensive wines (€20 a bottle or more), which, as a quick thumbnail guide, include the red wines of Bordeaux (a blend of Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot and Cabernet Franc), Burgundy (Pinot Noir) and the Rhône (Syrah). One can also add Barolo (made from the Nebbiolo grape variety) in Italy, top-end white Burgundy (Chardonnay), Riesling and Loire wines (made from the Chenin Blanc grape variety). 

The elephant in the room is sugar which, in the case of sweet wine from Sauternes, late-bottled Riesling and sweet wines from the Loire, can act as a preservative. In the case of vintage port, the residual sugar is enough to keep it drinking for 50 years after bottling.

A quick flick through the tasting book shows that in the past year I have tasted wines from every decade since World War II in the form of a 1943, 1946, 1959, 1964, 1976, 1983, 1990, 2000 and 2010. 

The 1943 was a Château Grand-Puy-Lacoste served from a magnum. Two things stood out: The initial aroma of white walnuts and the length on the palate, which seemed to go on and on. The 1959 was a sparkling wine from Vouvray in the Loire, produced by Domaine Huet. A demi-sec (medium-dry), it was the color of golden syrup, with a honeyed character finished off with just the faintest trace of fizz.

What was evident in two of those wines, the 1946 and the 1976, was the brightness and freshness they both retained. In short, tasted blind, it would be very difficult to correctly identify their age. The 1946 was a searingly dry Riesling from Germany's Rheingau region that was a bright golden color in the glass, with a trace of citrus fruit and a thrilling acidity. Meanwhile, the 1976 was a red Burgundy Pernand-Vergelesses Premier Cru from Domaine Rollin Père & Fils, which impressed with its bright ruby color and silky texture. They both inspired with their youthfulness.

There is no exact science to estimating when the wine will be reaching its peak. The only way to know is to keep in touch with those who regularly drink such wines (high-end wine merchants). Some specialist fine-wine magazines also hold regular tastings of these sorts of wines. Another option is to continue pulling the cork every year or so and watching the wine evolve.

 Write to  Will Lyons at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 