Ludacris and 50 Cent are joining a growing crowd of celebrities lending their names to headphones. 

At the Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas this week, the rappers announced ventures with electronics companies looking to cash in on a booming trend. 

Monster Cable Inc. was first on the scene a couple of years ago, complementing its Miles Davis "Trumpet" with lavender Bieber buds and tricked-out Lady Gaga earpieces, ventures with Beats by Dre, the producer's company with Interscope Records' Jimmy Iovine. This week, Monster announced a line with NBA star Yao Ming, to be sold in China later this year. 

Curtis "50 Cent" Jackson suited up Thursday to roll out "Sleek by 50 Cent," in conjunction with Sleek Audio. Prices weren't announced but Skullcandy Inc.'s Snoop Dogg and Jay-Z products range from $79.95 to $149. All tout a studiolike experience.

Signeo USA's launch with Ludacris promised "deep bass without sacrificing clarity" but no word on the price. Dre Beats are said to pump up the bass while the $150 Diddybeats produce "more universal" sound.

Even deceased musicians are fair game. The House of Marley unveiled 51 multicolored electronic offerings this week, named for songs by Bob, the late reggae artist. They included the "Smile Jamaica" earbud, large "Easy Skanking" headsets and a "boombox in a bag." Suggested retail prices are $29.99 to $499.99, and promise "superior audio products for young gongs to conscious connoisseurs," partner HoMedics said in a statement. 

The "eco-conscious" accessories—made with recycled cotton, aluminum and even hemp—are expected to ship in the next quarter, said Rohan Marley. "Hemp is one of those things that's a sustainable product," he said. The Marley family said they will donate proceeds to their 1Love foundation. 

But "Head Monster" Noel Lee, known for his lavish parties at the annual trade show, was quick to dismiss the competition.

"We didn't choose Bieber because he's popular," Monster's founder and CEO said in an interview. He's educating young people that sound really matters, which is why we don't charge more," he said of the young singer's earbuds, which are $99 and $199. 

"It's not just taking a person's name and slapping it on the headphone." Monster's highly successful line includes headphones for the Boston Red Sox—unveiled at last year's season opener in Fenway Park—but none for the Yankees.

"For those who copy us, it'll just be a name. It might be gone in a year," said Mr. Lee. "It has to look good but it has to be built like it can withstand a bomb. People tell us they have a more intimate experience with the artist."

Is there, perhaps, a Kanye West line planned that interrupts the flow? "I love Kanye," said Mr. Lee, who declined to release specifics about upcoming lines. 

 Write to  Monica Williams at monica.williams@wsj.com 

  