TEL AVIV—Israeli officials have remained quiet amid spreading domestic unrest in Arab states from Tunisia to Yemen, but the silence belies the concern that a weakening of pro-Western neighbors—most importantly Egypt—could destabilize the region.

Though ties are far from warm, Israel's three-decade peace with Egypt is a key pillar of its military posture in the region, providing a diplomatic bridge to states in the Middle East that share the Jewish state's worry about the growing influence of Iran.

See where key events took place in Cairo Friday.

A succession of rallies and demonstrations, in Egypt, Jordan, Yemen and Algeria have been inspired directly by the popular outpouring of anger that toppled Tunisian President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali. See how these uprising progressed.

As President Hosni Mubarak's regime hangs in the balance, Israelis are concerned about Egypt's continued commitment of the treaty, and the worries could spread to other neighbors like Jordan if the government comes under the same stress.

"We look upon it as a domino game, and Egypt is the greatest stone in this domino game," said Eli Shaked, a former Israeli ambassador to Egypt. "Even though there is not direct contact between Israel and Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, [Egypt] is a strong common denominator that binds these countries together with Israel against Iran and the Shiite threat on Sunni Islam led by Saudi Arabia and Eygpt," he said.

While Israel's government monitored the turmoil closely, spokespersons hewed to a policy of keeping a low profile in order avoid saying something that might recast a domestic crisis into an Arab-Israeli one.

"The protests have taken unusual dimensions. This is not a situation that we've seen in the past...This is the time to remain vigilant and observe," said an Israeli official. "There's nothing for us to be gained by making public statements. We know the way we are perceived."

Egypt has also played a prominent role as a regional mediator between Israel and Palestinians. 

Indeed, as Israel's diplomatic ties have frayed in the region over the ongoing deadlock in peace talks, Egypt is one of the only Muslim countries to keep an ambassador posted in Israel.

Mr. Mubarak and Israel have cooperated in enforcing a blockade and shutting weapons tunnels into the Gaza Strip, which has been ruled by Islamic militant group Hamas since 2007.

But Israel's long frontier with Egypt's Sinai Peninsula has remained a point of instability. Sinai has been targeted by militant groups to launch rockets into Israel and Jordan, and Israel is currently building a fence to plug up an open border that is easily infiltrated by Bedouin smuggling drugs and migrants.

Israel's worst case scenario involves the ascension of the opposition Muslim Brotherhood, which could strengthen Hamas, a Palestinian offshoot, in the West Bank against the U.S. backed Palestinian Authority as well as Jordan's Islamic opposition.

Though the unease at the popular rallies around the Middle East seems counter-intuitive for a nation that promotes itself as the only democracy in the region, elections in the region have strengthened adversaries like Hamas and Hezbollah.

"Israel likes their neighbors to be stable, and the democratic experience in this region is not a happy one," said Bruce Maddy-Weizmann, a senior fellow at Tel Aviv University's Moshe Dayan Center for Middle Eastern and North African Studies. "There are no easy formulas here."