  Pino Pozzuoli says he is no ordinary Joe when it comes to making pizzas. 

For more than 35 years, the 73-year-old native of Italy has owned Joe's Pizza, a Greenwich Village institution.

"Joe's my name, pizza's my game," said Mr. Pozzuoli on a recent day at the Carmine Street pizzeria he has operated since the 1990s. 

He closed his original Bleecker Street location about five years ago.

"We've had dozens of pizzaiolos walk through here but there's only one Joe," proclaimed his son,  Pino Pozzuoli Jr.

And herein lies the conflict, now the source of a federal court lawsuit. There is another "Joe": Mr. Pozzuoli's former son-in-law,  Guiseppe Vitale. 

Mr. Vitale worked with Mr. Pozzuoli at both locations, leaving the business shortly after he divorced Mr. Pozzuoli's daughter in 2004, according to court papers.

Mr. Vitale owns three restaurants called "Joe's Pizza of Bleecker Street," one in Brooklyn, and two in California. He also trademarked the names "Joe's Pizza" and "Joe's Pizza of Bleecker Street."

Now, the once family members are battling over who has the right to claim the fame and name of Joe's Pizza in a legal case that highlights the intense competition in the world of pizza branding.

Singas Famous Pizza, a Long Island-based franchise, is waging a similar battle. In November, it filed a suit in federal court against a former franchisee holder for opening up a "Famous Pizza" in Jackson Heights, less than two miles from three Singas stores. The suit alleges that the defendants are using a similar logo and menu, breaching a franchise and noncompetition agreement.

The defendants couldn't be reached for comment. In a court filing, their attorney said they changed the name of their store to "Queens NY Famous Pizza" and "never used any of the Singas trademarks" after negotiations broke down with the Singas.

Singas Famous Pizza has had numerous similar "famous" pizza places open up before but rarely do they resort to litigation, said  Enrique Almela, director of operations for the company. 

"The food business is very competitive, especially the pizza business in New York," he said. "You have to weigh whether it's worth the financial effort to move towards closing a store down… or allowing them to just open and fail."

The most famous pizza name case goes back to 1991 when three rival Ray's Pizzas banded together to trademark their name in a quest to eliminate competitors of the same name. In that case, none of the men in question were actually named Ray. 

In the Joe's Pizza lawsuit, the ultimate question is: Who is Joe and who deserves credit for its fame?

"It's a family squabble and lawsuit all rolled up into one big ball of pizza dough," said  William Hochberg, Mr. Vitale's California-based attorney.

Mr. Vitale didn't return calls for comment.

Mr. Hochberg says that his client had been the manager of both Joe's Pizzas and was instrumental in their success. He also said his client's former father-in-law was long aware that Mr. Vitale had his own restaurants.

Mr. Pozzuoli's suit against Mr. Vitale's pizza parlors alleges trademark infringement, and unfair competition, among other things.

Last month a judge issued a preliminary injunction prohibiting the defendants from using photographs and reviews of the original Joe's Pizza—as well as its address—on its website, pizza boxes and other promotional materials. 

The court found that some of the defendants' actions, including uses of photos and marketing materials, were "intended to deceive the public" and that they were causing "actual confusion."

The injunction, however, didn't prohibit the defendants from using the name "Joe's Pizza" or "Joe's Pizza of Bleecker Street."

The injunction also says that "the plaintiff has not established that the very generic name of 'Joe's Pizza' is protectable."

Nevertheless, shortly after the suit was filed the defendant changed the name on its website, dropping the Bleecker Street reference. 

It also removed the Carmine location from its Web site. Its press kit, which once included reviews and photographs from the Manhattan locations, is now empty.

Mr. Hochberg said his client was happy with the injunction's terms. 

"The lawsuit was completely unnecessary," he said, "especially when you consider my client's sons work at the pizza restaurants of both the plaintiff and the defendant."

Mr. Pozzuoli and his son say they became aware of the full extent of Mr. Vitale's business operations last year when they were exploring a business deal. Until then Mr. Pozzuoli said he had never even been on the Internet. 

"After so many years I'm entitled to this," he said of the trademark. "Joe is my name."

 Write to  Sumathi Reddy at sumathi.reddy@wsj.com 