TUNIS—Tunisia's caretaker prime minister said a new coalition government would be announced Monday that includes members of the country's opposition and some leaders, like himself, from the previous regime—a move that could fill the country's power vacuum and help stabilize the tense North African country.

Throughout the day Sunday, the country's security agencies moved to extinguish what officials described as last-ditch attempts by forces loyal to the deposed President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali to undermine the emerging government.

The director of Mr. Ben Ali's presidential security force was arrested in the afternoon, and after nightfall army special forces battled armed units loyal to the former president that had holed themselves up in the presidential palace on the outskirts of Tunis.

Speculation had been swirling all weekend that allies of Mr. Ben Ali were directing roving militias through the capital in the wake of his surprise departure from office Friday evening, and fears of civil unrest have increased tensions throughout the country after a month of nationwide civil disobedience forced the autocratic leader from power.

The state prosecutor opened a judicial inquiry against the former presidential security chief, Ali Seriati, and is investigating his role in organizing "suspicious attacks" and looting around the capital, according to a statement from the state news agency.

Additionally, Tunisia's former interior minister, dismissed from office last Wednesday before Mr. Ben Ali left Tunisia, has been arrested, according to state television. It wasn't immediately clear what charges he was facing.

U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton called on the Tunisian government to re-establish order "as quickly as possible" and said the country should hold "credible democratic elections."

State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley dismissed talk that U.S. diplomatic cables discussing alleged corruption in Tunisia, which were made public by the website WikiLeaks, led to the president's overthrow.

"Tunisia is not a Wiki revolution," Mr. Crowley said in a Twitter post. "The Tunisian people knew about corruption long ago. They alone are the catalysts of this unfolding drama."

Tunisians are still trying to come to grips with the historic changes that they have witnessed since Mr. Ben Ali fled the country for Saudi Arabia on Friday after 23 years of autocratic rule. On Saturday, the head of Tunisia's constitutional council declared the presidential post vacant and announced that new elections would be held within 60 days.

The caretaker government set to be unveiled Monday will run the country until those polls, and for the first time in modern Tunisian history members of the opposition are expected to take major posts of power.

"Tomorrow we will announce the new government, which will open a new page in the history of Tunisia," said Prime Minister Mohammed Ghannouchi, a holdover from Mr. Ben Ali's regime who has earned the respect of many diplomats and opposition leaders here.

On Saturday, the speaker of Tunisia's parliament was named interim president and asked the prime minister to form a caretaker government. Discussions that began Saturday between Prime Minister Ghannouchi and opposition leaders have been civil, according to officials familiar with the situation. But opposition leaders have been vocal in their view that the nation's election laws should be rewritten to ensure fairness before any new polls occur.

According to the constitution, elections must be held within 60 days. But opposition leaders say that isn't enough time to hold a free and fair vote given the legacy of Mr. Ben Ali's police state, in which most parties had been banned and nongovernmental societies were almost nonexistent.

During the day Sunday, the mood around Tunisia appeared to brighten after the uncertainty and excitement witnessed over the past three days. Mr. Ben Ali's departure from office marks the first time in a generation that a sitting Arab leader has been removed from power by a popular uprising.



Since Friday, a state of emergency has been in effect throughout the country, and although security services and the army had been called into major municipalities to secure the peace, looting became one of the biggest worries for regular Tunisians.

Checkpoints popped up on major roads and the highways leading into Tunis—some manned by uniformed members of the National Guard and some by self-appointed neighborhood militias. These local groups—armed with wooden batons and homemade spears—patrolled their neighborhoods overnight to defend against packs of young men walking with oversized gym bags, apparently to stash their looted goods.

Tanks blocked the boulevard where the Interior Ministry is located, and army vehicles guarded the major government buildings around the capital. Balaclava-wearing snipers had taken position on the ministry roof. Plainclothes security police armed with wooden batons barked at pedestrians not to stop, allowing only residents of the street to enter the area which on Friday had witnessed the largest public demonstration against Mr. Ben Ali.

Mr. Ben Ali, 74 years old, came to power in a bloodless coup in 1987 and was only the second president in the country since Tunisia gained independence from France in 1956. He and his family held close control over politics and major swaths of the economy, diplomats here say.

Known as a strong-man president, he consistently won elections that were often criticized for their fairness. Most opposition parties were banned under his rule. In 2009, he was re-elected for a fifth five-year term with 89% of the vote.

The events that immediately preceded the president's exit, including whether he left of his own volition, remained unclear.

 Write to  Margaret Coker at margaret.coker@wsj.com 