Real estate broker  Eric Agosto would hear the same complaints about narrow layouts whenever he showed certain apartments at an East Harlem condo building. "People had a hard time understanding where they could put a couch or a table," says Mr. Agosto, a Corcoran associate broker. 

Then he called  Susan Chan. She has worked with half a dozen brokers to design model apartments that offer a commitment to balance, light and spatial harmony—otherwise known as good feng shui.

These days, it's not always enough for an apartment to have great fixtures or a panoramic view of the skyline. Some buildings, like the new condo in East Harlem known as Embelesar 118, are hiring feng shui specialists to provide tours of the premises and offer design tips. 

"Everyone thinks of feng shui as an ancient Chinese practice," says Ms. Chan, who estimates she's worked on about 50 residential and commercial real-estate projects. "I'm trying to modernize it."

Dressing up an empty apartment to make it more attractive or appear more livable is hardly a new idea. And real estate agents selling to Chinese and other East Asian clients learned long ago that they often have to pay attention to this Chinese belief system that dates back thousands of years.

"About 90% of my clients, when they enter a new apartment, they start talking about feng shui," says  Sherri Shang, a Prudential Douglas Elliman broker who works primarily with Chinese buyers. One client, she says, was spending $800,000 a year on a feng shui master. "For that price, you could buy by an apartment in New York City."

Ms. Chan is one of the few area feng shui practitioners whose focus is primarily Western buyers and sellers, steering them away from unbalanced combinations that she says radiate bad energy. 

In the highly competitive brokerage world, agents who once might have scoffed at the idea of using a belief system that the West has sometimes scorned as superstition are giving it a try. "It's a challenging market these days, so people are open to new ideas," Ms. Chan says.

Still, to some real-estate veterans, there's little revelation here. After all, they wonder, don't most people like well-lighted apartments and soothing colors? 

Detractors say it's just the latest marketing gimmick.



Even Douglas Elliman's Ms. Shang says she has had her doubts about the role of feng shui. Sometimes, when a Chinese client says he doesn't want an expensive apartment because of bad feng shui, "I wonder if maybe it's just an excuse," she says, allowing a client to save face after viewing an apartment he might not be able to afford. 

For Ms. Chan, feng shui has been both a profitable business and a calling. 

"I would definitely put a plant there," she said one recent morning at the Embelesar 118, motioning toward a windowsill. The window directly faces the door, Ms. Chan points out, and without something between the two, feng shui suggests chi, or life force, could fly out the portal. 

In the apartment's bedroom, she's placed a mirror at the foot of the bed so that someone can view the front door even while reclining, maintaining what feng shui calls the command position. In the building's lobby, dominated by steel and brick, Ms. Chan has ordered yellow paint, green plants and wood tables to offset the industrial look. 

The Queens native was working as an art director while living in a cramped Manhattan apartment filled with too much stuff and "bad energy" when she first became interested in feng shui a decade ago. This year, Ms. Chan will complete a three-year feng shui certification, something akin to a college degree on the subject.

Her professional break came in 2008, when Corcoran broker  Rachel Field met Ms. Chan and hired her to help sell an East Village apartment after the previous owner had passed away. She brightened it up, and it sold after the second open house in a tough market. 

After that, Ms. Field says she began using Ms. Chan regularly with her listings, paying her out of her own pocket. Word spread about Ms. Chan inside the brokerage firm. 

Ms. Chan also assists buyers looking for new homes, studying floor plans with an architect's intensity. She usually doesn't criticize any particular building for bad feng shui, but couldn't help herself when it came to a Cooper Union building at 41 Cooper Square. 

"It seems as though the building has been slashed with a knife while it is hanging precipitously over its feeble foundation," she wrote on her website of the property's unorthodox design. "It does not evoke a sense of serenity for me."

Corcoran is hosting a tour next month of two Embelesar 118 apartments designed by Ms. Chan, and anyone who attends the event and ends up signing a contract will get a free feng shui consultation. 

The developer is offering a more traditional incentive, too. "On top of the feng shui," Mr. Agosto says, "we're offering six months of maintenance fees paid by the sponsor." 

 Write to  Craig Karmin at craig.karmin@wsj.com 