When  Apple
AAPL


0.90
%




 introduced its newest laptops last month, the company bragged about faster processors, dazzling graphics, new connectivity and a better camera. But all these improvements -- to a series of computers that was already by most accounts pretty good -- left some critics with a pointed question: Who really needs all that?

It's a question that nags the tech industry with almost every new advancement. But experts say the pitch for faster, more tricked-out technology has reached a new peak.

Here, in four categories, is what you need -- and what you don't.

 Broadband. Most Internet service providers now offer different levels of high-speed connectivity. If you want to stream TV shows or movies, play games or download big files, you may need more juice. Ditto if you have an entire household that's trying to get online after dinner. Before you change plans, however, make sure you're actually getting the speed that your provider promised. You can assess the speed of your current connection via a free test website such as Speakeasy.net or Speedtest.net.

 Computers. Even a basic computer these days has enough storage space and processing power to satisfy the average user, says  Michael Carnell, an independent technology consultant in Charleston, S.C. The only consumers who might need to buy more space or power are avid gamers and those working with memory-intensive software.

Not sure where you fall? If you use Windows, you can check the properties of your hard drive in "My Computer" to see how much space you've used relative to its capacity. Mac users can make a similar assessment through the "Finder."

 TVs. Manufacturers have begun focusing more on higher-resolution models, with an additional push on models that have Internet connectivity, says  David Berman, director of training at the Home Technology Specialists of America. Trade up only if you watch movies via Blu-ray, get the highest-resolution 1080p content through a Fios or satellite subscription service or have a high-definition camcorder that records in 1080p. An Internet-connected model may be worth the extra money to stream movies and TV shows and browse online, if you don't have a Blu-ray player or videogame system.

 Cameras. Camera makers have shifted their focus to new features, including zoom, HD video, 3D image capture and touch screens. To get most of those features in a  Sony Cyber-Shot, consumers will pay around $170 -- about 70% more than a model with almost all the megapixels and plenty of zoom. HD video is one extra that may be worth it, if it's good enough to eliminate the need for a separate camcorder, says  Bradley Dever Treadaway, a digital media coordinator for the International Center of Photography.

—Kelli B. Grant  SmartMoney.com 

Want an airline seat that reclines more? Access to speedy airport security lines and early boarding? Soon you might be able to get that and more -- for a price.

Airline fees for a host of services are on the horizon -- on top of the fees for checked bags, snacks, pillows and other items that carriers started charging in a big way in 2008.

A rich new vein for airline fees is early boarding, which American Airlines and United Airlines already sell to their nonelite frequent fliers. As more passengers avoid paying checked-luggage fees by hauling their bags on board, overhead bin space is at a premium. That means getting to board ahead of other travelers can be worth a few extra bucks.

  Delta Air Lines
DAL


0.69
%




 recently said it will remove some seats from its international planes by summer to create an Economy Comfort zone that offers up to four inches more legroom and 50% more recline than regular coach seats. Seating there will cost an extra $80 to $160 each way.

  United Continental Holdings
UAL


0.13
%




 said it plans to expand the roomier Economy Plus seating it already offers in coach cabins of its United Airlines planes to the aircraft of merger partner Continental Airlines. Elite frequent fliers get access automatically, but other travelers can "buy up" to these seats.

Airlines also are experimenting with improving the options and quality of cuisine in coach. Delta says it plans to begin a test of high-end meals in coach this spring on its New York to Los Angeles flights. United has started selling, for $24.95, champagne brunches in coach on its premium service flights from New York to Los Angeles and New York to San Francisco.

—Susan Carey  The Wall Street Journal 

Attention, IRA owners who turned 70[frac12] last year. If you haven't already started tapping your individual retirement account, here's another Internal Revenue Service deadline you need to heed this year: You're required to take your first minimum withdrawal no later than April 1.

The tax law states that you must start taking mandatory payouts from traditional IRAs (but not from Roths) no later than April 1 of the year after the year you turn 70[frac12].

If you fail to take at least the minimum withdrawal amount by April 1, the IRS can sock you with a penalty equal to 50% of the shortfall. To help you calculate your initial required minimum withdrawal, use a joint life-expectancy figure which is generally based on your age and someone 10 years your junior.

The IRA minimum-withdrawal rules also apply to simplified employee pension (SEP) accounts and SIMPLE IRAs.

—Bill Bischoff  SmartMoney.com 

—The Aggregator features news and commentary from The Wall Street Journal and other publications. Email: cristina.lourosa@wsj.com 