KIEV, Ukraine—A prominent Palestinian engineer from the Gaza Strip turned up in an Israeli prison shortly after his midnight disappearance from a train in Ukraine last month, according to a United Nations official and an Israeli legal defense group.

Ukraine's Interior Ministry said Thursday it was investigating the disappearance "in unknown circumstances" of Dirar Abu Sisi, who holds a key position in the Hamas-ruled Palestinian enclave. Israeli officials declined to comment on the case, which appeared to fit a decades-old pattern of abduction-style arrests by Israeli agents operating abroad.

Mr. Abu Sisi is not a member of Hamas, an Islamist group hostile to Israel, members of his family said. But as operations manager of Gaza's main power plant, he has worked to overcome an Israeli blockade that restricts the enclave's fuel supplies and to keep the plant working.

The 42-year-old engineer had come to Ukraine to apply for a residency permit. Relatives said he intended to return to his job in Gaza, where his Ukrainian wife and their six children live.

Veronika Abu Sisi said Ukrainian transport police told her that her husband was taken from a Kharkiv-to-Kiev train by two unknown men at the Poltava station around 1 a.m. on Feb. 19. Transport police officials could not be reached for comment.

Later that day, Mr. Abu Sisi arrived in Israel and was jailed, according to Dalia Kerstein, head of the Israeli legal defense group HaMoked. Ms. Kerstein and Maksym Butkevych, a spokesman for the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees in Ukraine, said Mr. Abu Sisi is now in Ashkelon's Shikma prison, a facility used for interrogation of security suspects.

"We have strong concerns about the way he traveled from Ukraine to Israel," Mr. Butkevych said.

Michal Orkabi, a public defender representing Abu Sisi, said an Israeli court issued a gag order in the case on Feb. 21, and she couldn't comment further.

The reason for his arrest is unclear. Family members said the lawyer told them Mr. Abu Sisi hadn't been charged with a crime.

Ms. Abu Sisi said she believes her husband was seized by Israeli security services to hamper the power plant, which she said cannot work effectively without him. Gaza smuggles most of its fuel through tunnels from Egypt – which cooperates with the Israeli blockade – even though Israel last year loosened its restrictions.

"He is far from politics," she said. "He's a fan of work and his family."

Israel's Mossad spy agency is known for abduction-style arrests abroad. In 1960 it spirited Nazi war criminal Adolf Eichman out of Argentina to bring him to trial in Israel. In 1986 it seized Mordechai Vanunu from Italy after he divulged details of Israel's nuclear weapons program. Israeli agents botched a 1997 attempt to assassinate Hamas leader Khaled Meshaal in Jordan, sparking a crisis with its neighbor.

—Richard Boudreaux contributed reporting from Jerusalem.

 Write to  James Marson at j.r.marson@gmail.com 