Medical facilities offering fewer services than an emergency room, but more than most walk-in clinics, are cropping up in strip malls and medical office buildings nationwide.

Known as urgent-care centers, they offer consumers a convenient and potentially cheaper option for treating sprains, migraines and other minor ailments and injuries.

They're generally open for extended hours and on weekends, and don't require appointments. The centers are staffed by physicians and nurses and are equipped with X-rays, electrocardiograms and, sometimes, on-site laboratories.

But some medical groups say urgent-care centers often can't provide the continuity of care that a regular physician can and are inappropriate for life-threatening emergencies.

Insured consumers should check with their health plan about coverage before using an urgent-care center, though they generally are covered, either in or out of network.

More health plans are requiring lower copayments or co-insurance for urgent-care visits than for nonemergency ER visits, according to benefits consultant PricewaterhouseCoopers. For instance, many plans charge a $25 copay for an office visit, $50 for an urgent-care visit and $100 for an ER visit, unless you're admitted to a hospital.

There are more than 8,700 urgent-care centers nationwide and the number is growing about 5% annually. Some centers are affiliated with hospitals, such as the Beth Israel Medical Group in New York City, a part of Continuum Health Partners. Most are independent, or part of a chain, such as national chain Concentra Urgent Care. A small fraction are franchises, according to the Urgent Care Association of America, a trade group based in Warrenville, Ill.

Many urgent-care facilities charge less for examinations than either physicians' offices or emergency rooms. A Rand Corp. study published in 2010 estimated that 17% of emergency-room visits could be treated at urgent-care or walk-in clinics instead, potentially saving about $4.4 billion annually.

But the American Academy of Family Physicians said the study was too narrow to draw such a broad conclusion.

Urgent-care centers offer a wider range of medical services than walk-in clinics, which are operated by retailers such as  CVS Caremark
CVS


-0.18
%




 and  Walgreen. Also, urgent-care centers usually are staffed by physicians; retail walk-in clinics are more often staffed by nurse practitioners and physicians' assistants.

About 65% of urgent-care centers have at least one physician on location at all times, according to the Urgent Care Association of America. In some states, including New York, New Jersey, Texas, California and Colorado, a physician owner is required.

Unlike hospital emergency rooms, however, urgent-care centers -- except for those in hospitals -- can't admit patients who require life-saving interventions or surgeries.

Some medical groups have expressed concern about whether consumers can reliably distinguish between a potentially life-threatening emergency and nonemergencies. Chest pain, for instance, could indicate a heart attack or indigestion. But experts say urgent-care centers usually are equipped to refer a patient for emergency care quickly.

"If it is serious but not life-threatening then an urgent-care center can be appropriate," says  Roland Goertz M.D., president of the American Academy of Family Physicians.

—Email: mp.mcqueen@wsj.com 