BEIJING—The use of the yuan in foreign trade is likely to grow only modestly this year, a Chinese bank regulator said, suggesting that Beijing still has a long way to go in its drive to internationalize its currency.

Zhang Guangping, deputy chief of the Shanghai branch of the China Banking Regulatory Commission, told a forum Wednesday that about 8% of the country's foreign trade may be settled in yuan by the end of the year, compared with 6.84% in the first quarter and 0.5% in the first quarter of last year.

China began to allow the yuan's use in cross-border trade in 2009 under a pilot program, but the volume of yuan-denominated trade remains low due to the limited availability of yuan parked offshore and risks associated with Beijing's tightly controlled currency regime. Beijing has been trying to promote use of the yuan in international trade even as it maintains curbs on the currency in the capital account.

China's foreign reserves, the largest in the world, grew to $3.0447 trillion at the end of March from $2.8473 trillion at the end of 2010, official data showed.

Foreign-exchange regulators have repeatedly fretted over the risk of depreciation of the U.S. dollar, and some officials have suggested that the role of the dollar as the world's dominant reserve currency will have to change.

The key problem in China's quest for a more important role for the yuan in world trade is that not enough of the currency is available offshor.

Although China has been keen to see greater use of the yuan, only Hong Kong—the de facto offshore yuan center—has gained much traction. More than 84% of the first quarter's yuan-settled trade was with Hong Kong, Mr. Zhang said. He added that he expects the yuan's wider use in trade to boost the volume of yuan deposits in Hong Kong to 861 yuan billion ($132.6 billion) by the end of the year from 451 yuan billion at the end of March.

Use of the yuan for imports far outweighs its use in exports—by about eight to one in the first quarter, according to the People's Bank of China. Mr. Zhang said this is partly a consequence of the yuan's appreciation, which makes trading partners more willing to accept it; the yuan has risen 5.2% against the dollar since June, when Beijing unpegged its currency from the U.S. unit.

The central bank now aims to boost the role of the yuan in exports, according to analysts.

"Faced with the successful but still lopsided conversion of trade invoicing to dollars," said Standard Chartered Bank in a research note, the PBOC is encouraging exporters to invoice and settle in yuan rather than dollars, which would eliminate exporters' foreign-exchange risk, and their need to sell dollars to the PBOC. The note adds, though, that creating the necessary offshore yuan liquidity will take time.

A landmark initial public offering in Hong Kong last month was the latest step in China's effort to let banks and individuals trade the yuan freely abroad. Hui Xian Real Estate Investment Trust, controlled by Hong Kong tycoon Li Ka-Shing, was the first yuan-denominated IPO outside of mainland China. The REIT fell sharply on its debut partly due to concerns that the market won't have access to enough yuan to allow significant trading.

Banks in Hong Kong are not permitted to lend yuan to their retail customers, although nonbank financial institutions, such as brokerages, can provide yuan financing.

The cross-border yuan-trade settlement program will expand from selected areas to cover the whole country this year, local media reported last month, citing Li Bo, head of the second monetary policy department of the PBOC.

In January, China's central bank also launched a pilot program for outbound yuan investment, in another significant step to liberalize the country's capital account.

—Wynne Wang and Jean Yung