The United Nations Security Council voted unanimously to deploy 2,000 more peacekeepers to Ivory Coast, moving to bulk up its presence in the West African nation as President Laurent Gbagbo clings to power and neighbors consider the use of force to oust him.

The fresh U.N. troops will be deployed in the commercial hub of Abidjan and near the western border with Liberia, where ethnic tensions are high. Their arrival date isn't known.

There are currently 9,100 U.N. troops in the country, with 750 circling the Golf Hotel in Abidjan to protect Alassane Ouattara, the U.N.-declared winner of the Nov. 28 presidential election. Mr. Gbagbo has rejected those results and refused to relinqish the presidency.

The Security Council also authorized the transfer of three attack helicopters from the U.N. mission in Liberia. A U.N. diplomat said they would be used to defend against pro-Gbagbo mortar emplacements surrounding the hotel. The resolution approved the deployment of 60 U.N. police units "to meet threats posed by unarmed crowds."

The imminent U.N. deployment signals rising concern that the Ivory Coast political crisis could spiral toward another civil war in the world's largest cocoa producer. 

The standoff has led to mediation efforts from African nations, with some threatening to use force to topple Mr. Gbagbo's government.

The West African regional bloc Ecowas has said it is considering the use of military force, but several countries have publicly stated that they wouldn't send troops. Ecowas officials this week began visits to Russia, China, the European Union and the U.S. to solicit support for a military intervention.

The U.N. has defied an order from Mr. Gbagbo to leave the country, but it hasn't been able to halt a mounting civilian death toll. More than 200 people have been killed since the crisis began last year.

U.N. troops have been blocked from visiting sites of alleged mass graves, and they have been unable to protect civilians during street battles by opposing sides in several Abidjan neighborhoods. 

On Wednesday, three people were killed during clashes in the Adjame and Attecoube neighborhoods, near the U.N. mission. Two people with injuries were brought to the U.N. headquarters, where they later died. Reporters witnessed one man, bleeding from the torso and the leg, being brought into a U.N. infirmary. It hasn't been common for injured victims in Abidjan to be brought to the U.N.

On Monday, U.N. troops fired in the air to disperse a mob that surrounded them. Last Thursday, pro-Gbagbo forces burned four U.N. vehicles. 

Meanwhile, diplomatic efforts have failed to dislodge Mr. Gbagbo from power. On Wednesday, Kenyan Prime Minister Raila Odinga left Ivory Coast after a second mediation effort failed.

"The breakthrough that was needed did not materialize," Mr. Odinga said after his visit, during which he met with Mr. Gbagbo and Mr. Ouattara.

Mr. Odinga said Mr. Gbagbo had guaranteed the lifting of a blockade around the Golf Hotel but "broke that promise—for the second time in two weeks." A Gbagbo government spokesman accused the mediator of bias against the incumbent. "The fact that he already calls Alassane Ouattara the president-elect shows that he's already made his choice. There's no point him continuing," the spokesman said.

Mr. Gbagbo has resisted financial pressure as well. The EU has imposed economic sanctions on Mr. Gbagbo and key allies. On Friday, the E.U sanctioned the major oil refiner in Ivory Coast and threatened measures against European companies dealing with the country's two major cocoa -exporting ports. 

The U.S. has also imposed sanctions on Mr. Gbagbo and his family and close associates. On Wednesday, the U.N. Security Council resolution said the council was "ready to impose measures, including targeted sanctions against those who obstruct the work" of U.N. forces.

The arrival date of the new U.N. deployment isn't known. U.N. spokesman Martin Nesirky said: "Time is of the essence."

—John James in Abidjan contributed to this article.

 Write to  Joe Lauria at newseditor@wsj.com 