It is a survivor's tale more than 200 years old: To protect illuminated manuscripts in the Vatican from Napoleon Bonaparte's raiding armies, a Spanish archbishop spirited the books away in 1798 to Toledo, Spain.

 From there the brilliantly decorated texts disappeared from view for centuries, only to resurface in the late 1990s. They'll make their U.S. debut Sunday at the Meadows Museum in Dallas. 

 Popes and other members of the ecclesiastical hierarchy used the 40 liturgical books to conduct masses over the course of the year. Dating from the 11th to the 18th centuries, the texts, known as codices, contained personalized messages for their powerful readers, including the popes who turned their pages.

One image in a text of more than 20 pages, "The Seasonal and Festal Missal of Urban VIII," includes a reverent nod to Urban, a poet and patron of the arts whose family was widely symbolized by the golden "Barberini bee," after the pope's family name. In the manuscript, which dates to 1634, those same bees can be seen pulling a plow, a symbol of the pope's authority. "It is an exaltation of good government: sowing fields, cultivating land and producing honey," said Nicole Atzbach, assistant curator for the Meadows Museum. 

Not all of the brilliantly decorated texts exalt papal power. An illustration also created during the reign of Urban VIII contains allegories of death, including a skull with snakes slithering through its eye sockets. The image accompanies a mass for the commemoration of a deceased pope. Meadows Museum director Mark Roglàn said its message was clear: Even the leader of the church must prepare to be judged.

The manuscripts resurfaced when the Italian scholar Elena De Laurentiis saw photos of the texts and began investigating their whereabouts. She traced the codices—some marked with the Barberini seal, complete with bees—to sites around Toledo. "I was just spellbound," Ms. De Laurentiis, a 42-year-old art-history professor, said through a translator, recalling her moment of discovery. 

The texts, once housed in the sacristy of the Vatican's Sistine Chapel, were on exhibit in Madrid last fall before getting packed in cases and flown to Dallas this month. Nearly all the texts will be displayed as open books, set to different pages than in Madrid to avoid excessive light exposure. "The Lost Manuscripts From the Sistine Chapel: An Epic Journey From Rome to Toledo" will run through April 23 at the museum, which is located at Southern Methodist University. 

—Ellen Gamerman