FLORHAM PARK, N.J.—Rex Ryan was making his debut as the Baltimore Ravens' defensive coordinator when Peyton Manning eviscerated him for the first time. Mr. Manning threw for 256 yards and a pair of touchdowns as the Indianapolis Colts ran away with a 24-7 victory on Sept. 11, 2005, and Mr. Ryan said he later learned that Mr. Manning was unconventional in his pregame approach.

Because Mr. Ryan was a rookie coordinator, there was no catalogue of film through which Mr. Manning could dissect Mr. Ryan's tendencies. So Mr. Manning did the next best thing: He studied old game tape from the days when Mr. Ryan's father, Buddy, was coaching the Chicago Bears defense.

It was another indication that Mr. Manning was unique. He has since emerged as Rex Ryan's personal nemesis, a quarterback who has consistently shredded the coach's high-powered defenses. Mr. Ryan will get another crack at Mr. Manning on Saturday night when he coaches the sixth-seeded Jets (11-5) against the third-seeded Colts (10-6) in a first-round playoff game at Lucas Oil Stadium.

"To say I want to beat him worse than anyone in the league, yeah, that's probably true," Mr. Ryan said.

Easier said than done. In six career games against defenses led by Mr. Ryan, Mr. Manning has completed 61% of his passes for 1,513 yards with 12 touchdowns and thrown just three interceptions. Mr. Manning, an 11-time Pro Bowl selection in his 13th NFL season, has come out victorious in five of those games. His only loss came late last season when the Colts already had secured a top playoff seed and he sat out most of the second half.

Saturday's game has been billed as a rematch of last season's AFC Championship Game, which was business as usual for Mr. Manning. He carved up the Jets for 377 yards and three touchdowns in a 30-17 Colts victory, and Mr. Ryan said the memory still makes him "sick."

Defensive coaches have spent years trying to figure out how to beat Mr. Manning, and Mr. Ryan is no different. Over the offseason, the Jets acquired cornerback Antonio Cromartie and safety Brodney Pool in an effort to shore up their secondary, partly with Mr. Manning in mind. But Mr. Ryan acknowledged that the team's problems against Mr. Manning last season started up front.

"We never disrupted him enough, and he got comfortable," Mr. Ryan said. "But I feel like we're going to give him everything we have."

The key to any defensive game plan against Mr. Manning is the pass rush, according to David Cutcliffe, who was Mr. Manning's offensive coordinator at the University of Tennessee. And this, in his opinion, is the matchup to watch this weekend: Can the Jets' linebackers and defensive ends mount enough pressure on Mr. Manning to upset his rhythm?

"I don't care how good your coverage is, and I don't care how tight they are in the secondary," said Mr. Cutcliffe, now the head coach at Duke. "He's too accurate. If he has time, he's going to put the ball right in there. His guys may not always catch it, but that's the secret with the great ones: It all starts with the pass rush. Any quarterback loses a certain amount of accuracy when you make him move in the pocket."

The numbers back this up. According to Stats Inc., a firm that tracks statistical trends in sports, Mr. Manning struggled during the regular season when he was "hurried" by defenses, completing just 17 of 40 passes (42.5%) with one touchdown and four interceptions. When Mr. Manning was "pressured," which Stats Inc., defines as plays when a quarterback is hurried or knocked down, he completed 37 of 76 passes (48.7%) with three touchdowns and four interceptions. His quarterback rating in those situations was 59.8.

By contrast, Mr. Manning completed 413 of 603 passes (68.5%) with 30 touchdowns and 13 interceptions when he was neither pressured nor hurried. And his quarterback rating was 96.0. "If he gets hot, you can't stop him," Mr. Ryan said. "Nobody can."

Mr. Cutcliffe said he spoke with Mr. Manning on Tuesday morning, and Mr. Cutcliffe praised him for piecing together what he assessed as one of Mr. Manning's finest seasons, considering the circumstances. "He had to find a way, so it's been pretty amazing," Mr. Cutcliffe said.

First and foremost, Mr. Cutcliffe cited the Colts' lack of a running game. They rank 29th in the NFL in rushing, averaging 92.7 yards per game. Running back Joseph Addai, injured for much of the season, has finally showed glimpses of his old self, rushing for a total of 89 yards on 23 carries over the Colts' last two games, and he figures to provide a boost this weekend.

But without a reliable ground attack, Mr. Manning often has had no choice but to throw the ball, and throw the ball a lot. The Colts have been predictable, and that allows opponents to drop additional defenders into pass coverage. But slowing Mr. Manning has been just as difficult as always.

During the regular season, Mr. Manning attempted a career-high 679 passes—104 more than his previous high and 21 more than any other quarterback this season—while completing 66.3% of them for 4,700 yards.

The numbers are even more impressive when taking into account that Mr. Manning has been working without two of his favorite targets, tight end Dallas Clark and wide receiver Austin Collie. Mr. Clark underwent season-ending wrist surgery in October, and Mr. Collie sustained a pair of concussions before he was shelved last month for the remainder of the year.

Against all odds, the Colts finished the regular season by winning four straight—four games they needed to win to qualify for the postseason. Colts coach Jim Caldwell likened the situation to a playground basketball game.

"You had to keep winning to stay on the court," Mr. Caldwell said. "That's the way we were looking at things."

In the absence of Messrs Clark and Collie, Mr. Manning has leaned on wide receivers Reggie Wayne and Pierre Garçon, who have combined to catch for 178 passes for 2,139 yards. At the same time, Mr. Manning has developed a rapport with third-year tight end Jacob Tamme, who has 67 receptions for 631 yards. A former unknown out of the University of Kentucky, Mr. Tamme had all of six career receptions before this season. Mr. Manning has shaped him into a bright young star.

"It's a cram session when you're working with new players," Mr. Manning said.

Darrelle Revis, the Jets' All-Pro cornerback, is expected to match up against Mr. Wayne. Mr. Manning said he has noticed that most quarterbacks avoid even throwing in Mr. Revis's general direction, a show of respect for a player whom Mr. Manning described as "big, strong and fast." Of course, Mr. Manning stopped short of saying he would shy away from Mr. Revis's side of the field.

The question is whether the Jets can make Mr. Manning jittery in the pocket and force him into rare mistakes. Even though the Jets once again rank among the league's top defenses—sixth in total defense, and third in yards allowed—Mr. Ryan wants more pressure on Mr. Manning. This has been Mr. Ryan's primary focus, and unabashedly so.

"I respect this kid, but I will beat him one day," Mr. Ryan said. "I just hope it's this Saturday."

 Write to  Scott Cacciola at scott.cacciola@wsj.com 