HONG KONG—Japanese stocks fell for the third time this week as officials struggled to deal with the earthquake's aftermath, although hopes that a radiation-leaking nuclear facility may get under control helped to trim stock losses.

The Nikkei Stock Average, down as much as 5% at one point, ended 1.4% lower at 8962.67. It has plummeted 13% this week.

Asian stock and currency markets were roiled in early trade by remarks from  Greg Jaczko, chairman of the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, who said the risk of radiation was more serious than Japanese officials had outlined in public, and recommended a "much larger radius" for evacuations.

But markets regained ground as the day progressed amid Japan's latest attempt to cool down the reactors, by having military helicopters drop seawater on them. The nation's nuclear safety agency said it was continuing to work on a power line to bring electricity to the plant from outside; restoring electrical power there would improve the chances of cooling the reactors.

"There will be further relief for the markets if we can confirm this measure will lead to an actual drop in temperatures" at the reactor, said  Toshikazu Horiuchi, an equity strategist at Cosmo Securities.



After senior Japanese government officials said there may be broad power blackouts as they called for more efforts to save electricity, the Tokyo Stock Exchange said after the close that it will remain open should there be a blackout in the Tokyo region because it has a backup system in place.

Among other Asian markets, Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index slid 1.8% to 22284.43, China's Shanghai Composite fell 1.1% to 2897.30, and India's Sensex lost 1.1% 18149.87, weighed by a gloomy inflation forecast by the Reserve Bank of India, which also raised policy rates, as expected, by 0.25 percentage point. South Korea's Kospi climbed back from early losses to edge up 0.1% to 1959.03.

In Tokyo, shares in  Tokyo Electric Power, operator of the troubled nuclear-power plant, finally traded—they had been limit-down for the first three days of the week, with too large a gap between bid and offer to allow for a transaction. They fell 13%, not bad by recent standards; this week's total losses come to 62%.

Among other stocks,  Canon dropped 3.3%,  Toyota Motor shed 2.2%,  Fanuc slid 4%,  Fast Retailing gave up 3.1% and  Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group sank 4.7%.

In Australia, uranium miners resumed their tumble after Wednesday's recovery, with  Paladin Energy slumping 9.5% and  Extract Resources plummeting 23% on news China has halted approvals for new nuclear power plants pending changes to safety standards.

Building materials stocks were hit by a 23% slump in U.S. housing starts during February;  James Hardie Industries lost 1%. 

China's suspension of approvals for new nuclear power plants pushed non-nuclear energy producers higher in a downbeat Shanghai market.  China Yangtze Power rose 3.8% and  Huaneng Power International rose 1.1%.

In Seoul, shipbuilders rose on hopes for new orders after Samsung Heavy Industries Co. late Wednesday said it received a 1.25 trillion won ($1.1 billion) order to build two drilling ships for an unidentified U.S. firm. Samsung Heavy added 1.8%, while Hyundai Heavy Industries rose 3.9%.

Among interest-rates sensitive stocks in Mumbai, mortgage lender Housing Development Finance Corp. fell 3.7% while DLF, the sole real estate constituent in the Sensex, closed 2.1% lower.

 Write to  Colin Ng at colin.ng@dowjones.com and V. Phani Kumar at phani.kumar@dowjones.com 