MADRID—Spain's cycling federation said Thursday it will request a one-year ban for  Alberto Contador, a move that would strip the rider of his 2010 Tour de France win, in the latest doping scandal to hit Spanish sports. 

The federation is accusing Mr. Contador, a three-time Tour winner, of having taken clenbuterol, after tiny traces of the banned drug were found during a routine antidoping test during last year's Tour. 

Jacinto Vidarte, a spokesman for Mr. Contador, said the rider "completely disagrees" with the ban request, and is willing to "fight to the end," contesting the ban in every possible court. 

Mr. Contador, who had previously said the drug may have come from contaminated meat, plans to hold a press conference Friday, Mr. Vidarte added. 

Mr. Contador now has ten days to present evidence against the proposed ban, before the federation takes a final decision on the issue in an upcoming meeting, a federation spokesman said. He added that, if the ban is confirmed, Mr. Contador is likely to be forced to sit out key races like the Giro d'Italia and Tour de France this year, but may be allowed to take part in Spain's Vuelta Ciclista depending on the starting point of the ban.

Mr. Contador may become just the second Tour winner to be stripped of his title, after the U.S.  Floyd Landis, the 2006 winner. He would also join a long list of Tour riders found guilty of doping in recent years, as a continued series of cheating scandals has damaged the sports' most prestigious race and led to a steady exit of sponsors from cycling. 

The federation's move comes after a long probe, and just weeks after Spanish police launched its latest large-scale anti-doping sweep, codenamed Operacion Galgo, targeting medical doctors as well as professional riders and track-and-field athletes, including the vice-president of Spain's athletics federation. Operacion Galgo widened the scope of the 2006 Operacion Puerto, a probe that exposed widespread doping in cycling but failed to put an end to a practice believed to be still rampant in cycling and other sports, with Spain serving as a distribution center for banned performance-enhancing drugs also used in other countries.

However, Spain's association of professional cyclists Thursday sprang to Mr. Contador's defense, saying the federation's proposal for a one-year ban shows the evidence against the rider may be too weak.

  Eleuterio Anguita, the association's vice-president, said the customary ban in doping cases is two years. He added that Mr. Contador may take the case to the Geneva, Switzerland-based Court of Arbitration for Sport, looking to have the ban rescinded, and the international cycling federation UCI may also ask the court to extend the ban to two years.

Enrico Carpani, a UCI spokesman, said it's still too early to tell whether UCI will look for a longer ban, noting that Spain's cycling federation must issue a final decision on the matter first.

  Write to  David Roman at david.roman@dowjones.com 