Some academic and other institutions in the U.K. and U.S. are scrambling to determine whether they have received the sort of donations from Libya and the Gadhafi family that led last week to the resignation of the head of one of the U.K.'s most prestigious universities.

On Thursday,  Howard Davies resigned as director of the London School of Economics after coming under intense criticism over LSE's decision to accept donations from a charitable foundation controlled by the Gadhafi regime. LSE also offered economic advice to the regime. 

A number of British universities have admitted to connections with Libya, including a number who helped the country's health service, though few others have yet said they received funds from those linked to Col. Moammar Gadhafi. In the U.S., Demos, a New York-based public-policy think tank, said it received a $20,000 donation in 2009 from the same Gadhafi-controlled charitable foundation that donated to LSE.

Prof.  Malcolm Grant, president of University College London says that universities face a fundamental dilemma. 

"Universities are compelled to operate in real time and with best available knowledge and make difficult judgements. The press operate retrospectively and with benefit of hindsight," he said. 

A spokeswoman said UCL has had no interactions or donations from Libya but added a caveat that highlights the level of paranoia now infecting U.K. institutions: "We have thousands of academics and we cannot be absolute there is no one out there who hasn't had any engagement with Libya."

By late Friday, many universities believed they were in the clear though many were still combing through their accounts.

"We are currently looking into this…but we have checked with our finance and fund-raising departments and they are not aware that the university has received any funding from Libya," a spokeswoman for the University of Edinburgh said. 

One U.S. university has already been in LSE's position. In 1977, Georgetown University accepted a donation of $750,000 from Libya for its Center for Contemporary Arab Studies but returned the money in 1981 after an outcry about accepting the cash. A spokeswoman said the university had not taken Libyan cash since. 

The LSE received a grant of £1.5 million ($2.44 million) in 2009 from the Gaddafi International Charity and Development Foundation, which is headed by Col Gadhafi's son and LSE alumnus Saif al-Islam Gadhafi. 

The trustees of the charity had until recently included a U.S.-based professor,  Benjamin R. Barber. Mr. Barber is currently a distinguished senior fellow at Demos and a former professor at both Rutgers in New Jersey and the University of Maryland. 

Mr. Barber stepped down from the charity's board of trustees in late February, saying in a statement that "the position of the Foundation has now been made untenable by the countrywide repression of protesters" and by Saif Gadhafi's endorsing "the repression and rationalizing the massacre of protesters." Mr. Barber didn't immediately respond to a request for comment.

Demos's president,  Miles Rapoport, said the money his think tank took went towards funding a 2009 debate on the global interdependence attended by academics, students and others. 

A spokesman for Rutgers said the university had not received money from the foundation. University of Maryland did not return calls seeking comment. 

Another of Saif Gadhafi's alma maters, Vienna-based Imadec University, said it had turned down offers by Mr. Gadhafi to link up with Libyan institutions. 

"I was shocked that the LSE did it," said Christian Joksch, the university's president. Mr. Joksch said Mr. Gadhafi's talk of reform had not led to action in Libya.

U.K. universities have found their funding under wider scrutiny as some politicians questioned other money taken from people linked to the governments in autocratic Arab states. 

Robert Halfon, a Conservative Party lawmaker, said the taking of money from undemocratic foreign governments was "akin to the British aristocrats who supported fascism in the 1930s."

 Write to  Alistair MacDonald at alistair.macdonald@wsj.com and Cassell Bryan-Low at cassell.bryan-low@wsj.com 