  Sony Corp. told U.S. lawmakers it found a taunting message left during a recent computer attack, but it still doesn't know who stole personal information from more than 100 million of its online-gaming accounts.

Sony, in a letter to members of Congress released Wednesday, said the hacker or hackers deleted any traces of their attack, which is regarded as one of the biggest data breaches to date. 

But Sony said it discovered a file left on its servers called "Anonymous." The contents of that file said "We are Legion," which is the tagline of a loosely affiliated group of Internet vigilantes dubbed Anonymous.

Sony said it had been defending itself from denial-of-service attacks that sought to disrupt its websites at the time intruders stole customers' personal information from its servers. 

Anonymous, which attacked the websites of credit-card firms in December, had said it would target Sony in retaliation for a lawsuit the firm brought against a popular hacker,  George Hotz. Anonymous took credit for disabling Sony websites but denied involvement in the data breach.

"Whether those who participated in the denial-of-services attacks were conspirators or whether they were simply duped into providing cover for a very clever thief, we may never know," Sony said.

  Barrett Brown, a Texas man who said he was affiliated with Anonymous, said there was no evidence the group had engaged in credit-card theft. "There is no reason to believe anyone involved in Anonymous did that," he said. 

Since the breach, Sony has been under intense scrutiny and its videogame chief,  Kazou Hirai, has been under fire. Adding to the political pressure, New York's attorney general, Eric Schneiderman, Tuesday issued subpoenas to Sony for documents related to its security systems, according to a person familiar with the matter.

Sony's letter to lawmakers was its response to a request from a congressional committee examining data-breach issues.In its letter, Sony said it was the "victim of a very carefully planned, very professional, highly sophisticated criminal cyber attack designed to steal personal and credit card information for illegal purposes." 

Sony said it has been working with the Federal Bureau of Investigation since April 22 and it now understands how the breach occurred, but declined to offer details to lawmakers on concerns that hackers could use the information to attack other firms who have networks similar to Sony's. 

U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder said Wednesday during a Senate hearing that the Justice Department has opened an investigation into the Sony data breach, adding that it is "something that we are taking extremely seriously."

The letter said 77 million PlayStation Network accounts were compromised, but Sony on Monday disclosed that an additional 24 million accounts on another videogame network, Sony Online Entertainment, were also affected. 

Asked whether it knew who had carried out the attacks, Sony responded with a single word: No. 

The company said it has received "no confirmed reports" of the use of consumer credit-card information stolen from the company's servers. The company said 12.3 million credit-card holders had information on its PlayStation Network, including 5.6 million in the U.S.

—Cassell Bryan-Low  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Amy Schatz at Amy.Schatz@wsj.com 