SINGAPORE—The massive earthquake and tsunami that devastated northeastern Japan will slow economic growth to a crawl or even push the economy into contraction over the next quarter or two, but reconstruction efforts should lift the economy by the final months of the year, analysts say. 

The destruction from the record 8.9-magnitude quake and 10-meter wall of water is so huge that economists and the Japanese government haven't yet been able to offer estimates of the economic effect. 

But based on past disasters, they anticipate the impact on export infrastructure and industrial production will hit Japan's gross domestic product in the second and third quarters, while a burst of reconstruction activity will generate growth by the fourth quarter. 

"Natural disasters are immediately negative for growth, but tend to be positive over the medium term," said Glenn Maguire, Asia-Pacific chief economist for Société Générale. 

"In the current quarter, there certainly is a risk that you'll see very weak growth, and you could well see a contraction," he said. "But as we start to see a rebound in investment over the medium term, that will provide a floor under Japanese growth." 

Nomura economists pushed back their forecast for Japan to "exit its current lull," from April-June, which will take the biggest hit, to the third or possibly fourth quarter. 

Prime Minister Naoto Kan said Sunday the disaster is the biggest crisis the country has faced since World War II. The official death so far is almost 1,600, but is certain to rise substantially, as one hard-hit prefecture alone says its death toll will be more than 10,000. 

More than 200,000 people have been moved to relief shelters and millions of homes remain without power. 

Efforts at this stage are focused on finding survivors and locating bodies, as well as preventing a nuclear meltdown in reactors along the eastern coast that were in the tsunami's path. 

Manufacturing was grinding to a halt over the weekend as Japan's auto makers and a broad range of other industries, from consumer electronics makers to steel makers and paper mills, closed plants. Authorities announced that coordinated power outages will start Monday and last at least several weeks. 

Mr. Kan's government and the opposition, at loggerheads over spending bills until Friday, have pledged cooperation on steps to address the crisis, agreeing to consider a supplementary budget. 

The head of the main opposition Liberal Democratic Party, Sadakazu Tanigaki, said Sunday that he and Mr. Kan have agreed to discuss a temporary tax increase to fund reconstruction. Chief government spokesman Yukio Edano said the government wouldn't rule out a tax increase to help meet reconstruction costs but that the government wasn't considering it yet. 

The Bank of Japan cut Monday's scheduled policy meeting from two days to one and has promised to provide ample liquidity to the market and any help needed with transaction settlements. But it's not expected to take any steps to ease policy on Monday unless the yen surges. 

In a research report, Goldman Sachs economist Chiwoong Lee noted the expected blow from closures of oil refineries, steelworks and other facilities, but said "production increases in nonaffected areas may be able to offset the impact. We therefore think it is fully possible that the long-term impact on production may not be that large." 

A number of analysts sought to draw lessons from the 1995 earthquake that devastated the city of Kobe. That quake killed some 6,000 people and caused some 10 trillion yen, or $120 billion in today's exchange rates, in damage. That was equal to 2.5% of Japan's GDP, but it devastated a major port and a larger chunk of Japan's output than Friday's disaster. 

The two regions hardest hit in the Kobe quake accounted for 12.4% of GDP, according to data from Bank of America Merrill Lynch, while the five prefectures hardest hit Friday account for a combined 7.8% of Japan's GDP. 

If Friday's quake and tsunami have a similar impact on the affected areas, analysts from the bank wrote in a report, it would shave 0.2-0.3 percentage point off Japan's growth, "although the actual impact could be larger depending upon the damage in other areas, the extent of the infrastructure destruction and the additional damage of tsunami." 

But, as with the Kobe quake, "there remains a relatively large spare capacity to offset the production loss in Japan now," the analysts said. "In addition, the cost [demand] for the rebuilding of ruined capital could be 1.0% of GDP or larger, although it is very difficult to estimate its size at this point." 

The speed at which activity rebounds in this case will be determined by how quickly restoration efforts start, Société Générale's Mr. Maguire said, and that should be fast. 

"I've been trying to ascertain how similar or dissimilar it is to Kobe, which is the benchmark to asses the economic impact of earthquakes on GDP, but information is still relatively scarce at this stage," he said. "I think it will be several weeks before we can put reasonably good estimates together of the damage bill and the restoration efforts, and how long it will play out for." 