 As much as we'd like to be everywhere that the jet set goes during the holidays, it's impossible, so we asked a few social butterflies to clue us into what was happening in some international hot spots. 

 Fashion designers Nicole Miller and Dennis Basso went off to Aspen; gallery owner Christiane Celle and candle entrepreneur Marjorie Gubelmann headed to St. Barts; girl-about-town Dori Cooperman took Cabo by storm, and Noah Tepperberg partied at a new branch of Marquee in Las Vegas on New Year's Eve. 

—Marshall Heyman



 NICOLE MILLER'S DISPATCH FROM ASPEN   

Our vacation was a whirlwind of dinners, lunches and lots of skiing.

Our first night in Aspen, Caroline Dean organized a dinner at Piñons on South Mill Street. Unfortunately our first day was her last and she jetted back to New York, probably to more snow.

The next day, I swung by a party at O2 sponsored by Aspen Peak Magazine. O2 is a great store that carries everything from yoga clothes to cocktail dresses. It also has a yoga studio. I got some great jewelry. Then it was off to Marcia Mishaan's birthday party at Montagna with Filippo and Karina Brignoni. A few days later, Filippo hosted a party at Matsuhisa and invited Rena Sindi and her new beau—they were in from London—as well as Nathalie Gerschel and Ed Kaplan and Coralie Charriol and Dennis Paul.

My favorite event is always the Cloud Nine lunch at Aspen Highlands, hosted by Marcia and Richard Mishaan. It was very festive. There was lots of fondue, Raclette and wine. Charlie and Sarah Ayres were there. So was Ulla Parker, Carol McFadden and, of course, the Pauls, the Brignonis and the Kaplans. After Dennis Basso's fund-raiser at the St. Regis, it was off to Katie Ford's for a dinner at her beautiful home.

The next night? Tracy and Jay Snyder had a huge dinner at Matsuhisa.

Everyone I've already mentioned and more drank lots of sake, of course!

In the morning, we all headed up the mountain for Carolyne Roehm's book party at Aspen Mountain Club. And on New Year's we had our annual big bash at Jimmy's. The only thing left was to head home!



 DENNIS BASSO'S DISPATCH FROM ASPEN 

The Christmas-New Year's week in Aspen—it never disappoints. It always kicks off with the very chic holiday party hosted by the Crown family at the private Aspen Mountain Club atop Ajax Mountain. The Crown family owns the fabulous Little Nell Hotel, the Aspen Ski Company and Ajax Mountain (!) among other things in town. The private-jet set waits for this coveted invitation to take the gondola up the mountain for some delicious food and drink. All these women you normally see in ski clothes are wearing cocktail clothes.

Yes, there were celebrities in Aspen this year. Who did I see on the street? Simon Baker of "The Mentalist." Felicity Huffman of "Desperate Housewives." Chris O'Donnell from "NCIS: Los Angeles." Melanie Griffith and Antonio Banderas. Jessica Simpson and the one and only queen of Southern cooking, Paula Deen.

But I wasn't just gawking. I was working! I moved my store to a larger location in the lobby of the Little Nell, and I had a full runway show and a Champagne and caviar reception in the St. Regis ballroom for over 500 guests in support of the Aspen Art Museum. Who came? Jamie Tisch, Rena Sindi, Dana Taylor, my partner Michael Cominotto, Patty Findley, Audrey and Martin Gruss and Domenico del Sole. The evening raised $600,000, partly thanks to a Russian sable coat I donated that the art collector and philanthropist John Phelan bought for his wife Amy for $120,000!

Where did I eat? Il Mulino, where I love the shrimp scampi and the mini veal parmiagiana sliders. Ariel is their great new maestro of the reservation book. Meanwhile, Casa Tua—you know, the one in Miami—finally opened on New Year's Eve. Michael and I had a quiet dinner there on New Year's Day. They have an unbelievable osso buco.

Here's my question: Did anyone have time to ski?



 CHRISTIANE CELLE'S  DISPATCH FROM ST. BARTS 

For me, St. Barts is such a magical place, but it's all about relaxing. I love that you can choose to be very "social" or have a very quiet vacation even during Christmas and New Year. I live in a house with solar panels and no air-conditioning. We have chickens and wild goats around us, and a rooster wakes us every morning. I also have two teenagers, so it's family time, but, as I own Clic Gallery in Gustavia, there's also work.

For pleasure, we went sailing with Patrick Demarchelier and his sons Gustaf and Arthur. Patrick owns a "Swan" and she is one of the most beautiful boats on the island. We saw Eclipse, Roman Abramovich's new boat and the most talked about one on St. Barts. It's quite amazing.

For work, at Clic Gallery we hosted a book signing and show for Jean Pigozzi, where we had Paul Allen, Martha Stewart, the artist Thierry Guetta ("Mr. Brainwash"), the photographer Tierney Gearon and Tamara Mellon, who was wearing her new Jimmy Choo fragrance.

As you probably know, Mr. Abramovich made a donation to St. Barts in order to build a real soccer field. I was interested to visit the new stadium, and I discovered there's also an amazing track field there now, too. I was very excited to see that a lot of young people from the Island come every evening and play soccer. The teams were made of locals, tourists, French people and Americans and who knows what nationalities. I was also lucky to witness a game where Harvey Weinstein was the goalie. He did quite well considering that he was wearing a pair of jeans and a shirt.

This is what I love about St. Barts.



 MARJORIE GUBELMANN's  DISPATCH FROM ST. BARTS  

It wasn't a total eclipse, but nothing topped Roman Abramovich's boat Eclipse—over 500 feet—in St Barts. After a relatively subdued 2010, the island is still the epicenter of the billionaire getaways. The Harbor was bumper to bumper with the "smaller" yachts, which usually are under 200 feet.

Each billionaire traveled with his own cultural contingent. In residence were artists Cy Twombly, Julian Schnabel and Donald Baechler. My famous writer friends Bob Colacello and Derek Blasberg were among the island's most invited. The mega moguls holding court on their boats and villas included Aby Rosen, David Geffen, John Hess, Paul Allen, L.A. Reid, Ronald Perelman and Francois Henri Pinault, with his beautiful wife Salma Hayek.

Noah Tepperberg partied with some celebrity friends at the Marquee in Las Vegas.

Uber-dealer Larry Gagosian gave a small, private dinner filled with the rich and powerful. Art-world dynamo Tico Mugrabi got the award for best houseguest present: white truffles from Alba. Shoe Queen Tamara Mellon had a lunch at the see-and-be seen Taiwana that drew makeup guru Pat McGrath, Harvey Weinstein and Nat Rothschild. Afternoon activities included Johnny Pigozzi's book signing at Clic in Gustavia, and stopping by Mandarin in St. Jean to buy Gigi Mortimer's Glamour Puss ponchos. Hermes was completely sold out of everything, and I am happy to report that my Vie Luxe St. Barts candles were found on all the best coffee tables!

Everyone rang in the New Year at Dasha Zhukova and Roman Abramovich's glamorous, well-orchestrated party in a spectacular tent with cascading white Phalaenopsis orchids everywhere. The Black Eyed Peas performed to a select crowd of 250, who didn't stop dancing until four in the morning. Everything good happened after midnight that night.

Joining the band on the stage for their finale with long legged Russian beauties were Demi Moore, Ashton Kutcher, Fergie's husband Josh Duhamel and George Lucas.

On January 2nd, as I took off on a friend's Global Express, 120 other private planes were sitting on the tarmac at St. Maarten's airport.

People, book your slot for 2011!



 DORI COOPERMAN'S  DISPATCH FROM CABO 

Vacation started off in Florida with my family. But then I flew off to Cabo on Barry Gesser's plane. I was with Jennifer Raines; Barry's sister, Helene; his niece Mariel; and his girlfriend Cidney.

We stayed at Esperanza, which is such a great resort. There was a swimming pool for our room and a butler named Louis. Every morning, private chairs were set up for us on a cliff looking out over the water. The service there is just unbelievable.

In town, we loved a restaurant called Edith's. They give you colorful ponchos to wear when it's chilly, and the Caesar salad made tableside is excellent. It's sort of like Morton's—they bring the fish and meats to show you so you can choose your meal. Nothing beats a dive bar in Cabo, either. El Squid Roe, for instance, was so much fun.

There were lots of people in Mexico to see. We saw Paris Hilton and her boyfriend; Nicky Hilton and David Katzenberg; Jason Pomeranc; Peter and Erika Marsh; and Jenny Grubman and her husband, Jamie Rothenberg. On the 30th, Mike Meldman threw a party at El Dorado and we went to Leonardo DiCaprio's house. That night we saw Tony Shafrazi, Bar Refaeli, Jessica Alba and Kid Rock. 

More highlights of our trip: We hired a yacht for the day with a chef and all went jet skiing. We went swimming with the dolphins. And of course, late night, we'd go to the taco stands. I mean, who can miss those taco stands?