To understand the latest twist in HSBC Holdings' strategy, investors need to know one thing: The bank has $1.2 trillion of deposits backing less than $1 trillion of assets, a huge funding surplus that is a long-standing drag on the bank's profitability.

It has more than $100 billion available for lending before it hits its self-imposed 90% loan-to-deposit ceiling, money that is effectively earning zero returns.

HSBC's vast deposit base historically has been both a blessing and a curse: a blessing because it used to enable the bank to generate buckets of cash, pay chunky dividends, mollycoddle staff and ignore shareholders; a curse because it also led the bank over the past decade into an ill-judged international expansion, culminating in the $15 billion acquisition of Household Finance, among the worst financial-services transactions in recent history.

That deal prompted the attentions of an activist investor, and also led to HSBC holding its first-ever investor day in 2007. Now, faced with a different dilemma over surplus deposits, Chief Executive  Stuart Gulliver has held the bank's second investor day to explain what he plans to do differently.

Anyone expecting radical thinking will have been disappointed. One result of last year's decision to promote internal candidates as chairman and chief executive is that the new team was never going to deviate too far from HSBC's existing strategy. A breakup to address the bank's persistent conglomerate discount was never going to be on the agenda.

Instead, Mr. Gulliver had little to offer beyond $3.5 billion of unspecified cost savings; the closing of some underperforming emerging-market retail operations; and a focus on "connectivity," exploiting HSBC's global network to target internationally oriented corporate customers. This may include the sale of the profitable U.S. card business to fund a future foray into the U.S. corporate-banking market.

Whether this incremental strategy, shifting away from its traditional strength in deposit gathering, proves any more successful is hard to tell. While HSBC has built a profitable commercial-banking business around its strong positions in foreign exchange and trade finance, other universal banks, such as J.P. Morgan Chase,  Bank of America,
BAC


3.21
%




 Barclays
BCS


0.81
%




 and BNP Paribas, pursuing similar strategies, have much stronger corporate franchises.

But does it matter? One day, interest rates will normalize and HSBC will hit its 12%-to-15% return-on-equity target and its 48%-to-52% cost/income targets, regardless of how ruthlessly Mr. Gulliver cuts into the 276,000-strong work force.

At that point, too, the bank will throw off the cash to fund an increasingly generous dividend, the shares will pull out of their 10-year trading range, and the pressure to hold future investor days will subside.

—Simon Nixon

 Write to  Simon Nixon at simon.nixon@wsj.com 