TOKYO—The Bank of Japan on Tuesday kept its easy monetary policy unchanged and maintained its view that the nation's economy will gradually return to a moderate recovery path as it overcomes deflationary pressures that have dragged on growth. 

"It is likely that Japan's economy will overcome the deceleration in the pace of improvement and return to a moderate recovery path, although it is difficult to say for sure whether this will happen in the January-March quarter," BOJ Gov. Masaaki Shirakawa said. 

The current economic standstill is largely due to weakening exports and drops in demand after the expiration of government stimulus measures, Mr. Shirakawa added. But "signs are starting to appear that this impact is gradually receding." 

Mr. Shirakawa's comments suggest the central bank has become more confident about its economic recovery scenario, but it is unlikely to change its easing stance as the nation continues to struggles with long-standing deflationary pressures. 

At the end of a two-day meeting, the central bank's nine-member policy board voted unanimously to leave its unsecured overnight call loan rate in a 0.0%-to-0.1% range, as stable financial markets and growing optimism over the economic outlook give it room to gauge the effects of "comprehensive monetary easing" measures announced in October. 

In line with recent projections from its research and statistics department and private economists, the board also boosted its forecast for growth in real gross domestic product to 3.3% this fiscal year ending in March, compared with a 2.1% expansion expected in its semiannual outlook report released in October. The BOJ said the upward revision was mainly due to changes to historical GDP statistics. 

"At the BOJ branch managers meeting last week, some managers sounded positive about the economy bottoming out this quarter, which fits with the BOJ keeping its view that the economy will get out of the doldrums," said Naomi Hasegawa, a senior fixed income strategist at Mitsubishi UFJ Morgan Stanley Securities. 

While there are upside risks in emerging and commodity-exporting economies due to robust domestic demand and capital inflows from overseas, the central bank also sees downside risks in uncertainties over the U.S. and European economies, as well as in international financial markets, it said in a statement released with the rate decision. 

Meanwhile, the board maintained its core consumer price index projection for the fiscal year starting in April 2012 at 0.6%. 

It also upgraded its core CPI forecast for the next fiscal year starting April 1 to a 0.3% rise from a 0.1% rise expected three month ago due mainly to rises in commodity prices. For this fiscal year, it predicts core CPI to fall by 0.3%, compared with a 0.4% drop expected in October. 

The BOJ chief said it seems to be moving in "the desirable direction" of a sustainable growth path under price stability. 

While the policy board revised its consumer price forecasts slightly upward, it will likely keep financial conditions extremely easy for a while since the central bank's expectations are still far from the 1% on-year rise that marks the midpoint of policy board members' understanding of medium- to long-term price stability. 

The central bank said that as part of its "comprehensive monetary easing" package, rates would remain at virtually zero until an end to deflation is in sight. 

—Kazuhiro Shimamura and Andrew Monahan contributed to this article.

 Write to  Megumi Fujikawa at megumi.fujikawa@dowjones.net 