A powerful Nor'easter slammed New York back in December 1992 just as the Cuban rumba group Los Muñequitos de Matanzas was to conclude its 10-week American tour at Manhattan's Symphony Space. Power was out in some areas of the city, subway service spotty at best.

"Yet we had just about every seat in the house filled," said the founder and head of World Music Institute, Robert Browning, who presented that show and will host Los Muñequitos again at Symphony Space Thursday through Saturday as part of the citywide "Sí Cuba" festival. (The group plays in Purchase, N.Y., on Sunday.) No wonder audience members defied the elements. Through a powerful synthesis of drumming, vocals and dance, Los Muñequitos de Matanzas represents both the most advanced expression of Cuban rumba and the richest evocation of the form's ancestry.

In 1992, enthusiasm was high for the group's first visit here, which heralded a wave of cultural exchange between the U.S. and Cuba thanks to a relaxation of travel restrictions. The brilliantly drummed polyrhythms and sonorous harmonies of that Symphony Space show were captured on the recording "Live in New York" (Qbadisc). Still, much is missed without a physical presence: To see the powerfully symbolic and sexually suggestive movements of the group's dancers, and to feel beats pinging and pounding in patterns beyond comprehension from conga and batá drums as well as cajónes (box drums) and claves, is to get the visceral sensation of becoming part of something big, precise and mysterious. 

This week's Symphony Space shows will mark the return of Los Muñequitos to New York City after a nine-year absence, owing to again-tightened and only recently loosened restrictions. The concerts will also conclude Mr. Browning's 26-year tenure at World Music Institute. 

"If my legacy was bringing people together through music," he said, "then this is an especially fitting note on which to end." Those 1992 shows brought members of Los Muñequitos together with Cuban rumbero Orlando "Puntilla" Ríos, who moved to the U.S. in 1980 (and died in 2008), for an emotional reunion. And they introduced the group to a community already rich with variants of expression—from salsa to Santería to Latin jazz and beyond—based on shared African roots.

Ned Sublette, author of the book "Cuba and Its Music: From the First Drums to the Mambo" (Chicago Review Press) and founder of the Qbadisc label, recalled his first exposure to the group during a 1990 trip to Matanzas, Cuba. "I was involved in Latin music in New York, but I had not experienced anything remotely like Los Muñequitos," he said. Mr. Sublette's book traced the appearance of the guaguancó, the rhythmic form by which rumba is best known, to Matanzas in about 1880. "It was a place and a period of great cultural compression," he said, "and Los Muñequitos captures that most clearly. But they also represent the fact that rumba is alive today. It's not museum music—it's a living thing that answers the needs of contemporary people."

The story goes that in 1952, a group of working-class men, dockworkers and bricklayers and such, were listening to bandleader and tres player Arsenio Rodríguez on a jukebox in Matanzas. They began singing along and tapping out rhythms on glasses, bottles and tabletops. It was a spontaneous thing, but it led to the formation of a rumba group with Florencio "Catalino" Calle, a professional musician, as its director. First known as Guaguanco Matancero, the group adopted the name Los Muñequitos (Little Dolls) de Matanzas after the title of the flipside of its 1956 debut 78-rpm recording, which was about popular comic-strip characters. 

Another jukebox in another bar inspired Diosdado Ramos, the current director of the group, to dance to the music of Los Muñequitos while still a young boy. In 1967, then 21 and already a successful boxer, Mr. Ramos climbed onstage during a Carnival performance by the group in Matanzas. "I was just moved to do it by the power of the music," he said. Soon after, he became the first dancer in the second generation of the group. The current group's 15 members span three generations of Mr. Ramos's own family, including two children and a grandson. He credits Los Muñequitos with several innovations within rumba, such as three-part sung harmonies, and with elevating the legacy of the form. "The rumba has been mistreated by history," he said, "because it is the music of the poorest and most humble people. But it is also much more, and we are proof of that."