MUMBAI—SKS Microfinance Ltd. smarting from a stock-market battering over the past few days, on Tuesday used words such as "reinvent," "diversify" and "consolidate" to try and soothe investor fears. 

But it also said it expects more "pain" because it has to make higher provisions for bad loans. 

"The question is, is the pain behind us? The answer is, it's not. There will be some near-term pain for a quarter or two," Chief Financial Officer  Dilli Raj told reporters in the southern Indian city of Hyderabad. 

The comments come just a few days after India's largest microfinance company by revenue said it swung to a net loss of 697.7 million rupees ($15.6 million) in the fourth quarter ended Jan. 31 due to higher provisioning against mounting bad loans in its home state of Andhra Pradesh. 

Microfinance companies borrow funds from banks and offer small-ticket loans of about $200 to the poor to help them start or expand small businesses. Borrowers, who are located mainly in rural areas and don't have bank accounts, typically pay higher interest rates because the loans are made without collateral. 

SKS had one of the country's most high-profile stock-market debuts last year and is the only Indian microfinance company with a stock-market listing. It raised raised 16.54 billion rupees through its August initial public offering and sold shares to investors like  George Soros's Quantum Ltd.
QTM


0.30
%




, Sequoia Capital, venture capitalist  Vinod Khosla and Infosys Ltd. founder  N.R. Narayana Murthy.

 Since then, its fortunes suffered. The southern state of Andhra Pradesh—the largest market for microlenders—imposed tight regulations on the industry following allegations that they overcharged customers and used coercive methods for recovery. Some politicians urged people not to repay their loans.

SKS's repayment rate in Andhra Pradesk plunged to around 10%, while it remains around 98% in the other 18 markets the company operates in,  Vikram Akula, founder and chairman of the company, said Tuesday. The company said in Friday's earnings report that it has set aside 1.06 billion rupees in provisions for bad loans, from 148.2 million rupees a year earlier, hurting profitability.

SKS's shares, which sold for 985 rupees apiece during the IPO, closed Tuesday at 297.85 rupees, up by its 10% daily limit after plunging close to 40% in the two previous sessions. The fall began ahead of its earnings report, sparked by a bearish analyst report.

As the company seeks to turn around earnings, it plans to diversify into new products, such as loans to grocery stores and loans against gold while consolidating its customer base, Mr. Akula said Tuesday.

"SKS will focus this year not on acquiring new customers, but on focusing on serving the needs of our existing customers... on providing them the full financial need they require... this, of course, means that this year it will be a higher cost," he said. 

Mr. Akula sounded upbeat about recent central bank guidelines that cap the interest rates that microlenders can charge at 26% and their margin at 12 percentage points.

This "means only large, efficient [microfinance institutions] that have already reached certain economies of scale will be the ones that will continue to operate," Mr. Akula said. It will be difficult for smaller players to survive, he added. 

The Reserve Bank of India earlier this month broadly adopted the recommendation of a panel that suggested a regulatory structure for the industry. The central bank is now in talks with the Andhra Pradesh government to streamline regulations for the sector. 

The selloff in SKS shares began Friday, after brokerage J.P. Morgan Chase slashed the target price for SKS Microfinance's stock to 200 rupees from 550 rupees, saying the company may need more capital and that its business model has weakened due to regulatory changes. 

Monday, following SKS's earnings report, brokerage Credit Suisse downgraded the stock to "underperform" from "outperform" and cut the price target to 323 rupees from 1,575 rupees. It said it expects 90% of the company's loan book to turn bad in the fiscal year that began April 1. 

 Write to  Nupur Acharya at nupur.acharya@dowjones.com 