SINGAPORE—Strong growth is supporting the in Asian-Pacific region's creditworthiness, but strong capital flows and rising inflation pressure pose important risks, Standard & Poor's Ratings Services said Tuesday. 

S&P's report tipped "upward momentum" in the credit quality of some sovereigns in coming years, and said its positive outlook on Indonesia showed an expectation that an upgrade was likely. 

But the agency noted that climbing inflation in many parts of the region posed a risk to economic and social stability in India, Indonesia and other countries. S&P also highlighted the difficulties of dealing with capital flows, which it said could cause problems in Indonesia, South Korea and Thailand, by complicating currency-rate management or due to "overkill" in trying to tackle such flows. 

"As a general principle, capital controls and other measures to keep a currency's value artificially low are a double-edged sword, as they can result in retaliatory actions in the form of trade tariffs or quantitative restrictions," the report said. 

"China is getting embroiled in such a tussle, and the implications for the rest of Asia have been a major worry for some time," it said, noting that high U.S. unemployment and the approaching mid-term congressional elections sharpen this risk. Any action seriously affecting trade between the world's two largest economies could have important implications elsewhere, although China's recent steps to allow the yuan to gradually appreciate could reduce that possibility, it added. 

The rating agency said it expected Beijing to take more policy steps to stabilize inflation expectations, and that policy makers could allow the yuan exchange rate to appreciate "significantly more than in 2010" if exports remain robust. It said that its stable outlook for the country reflected its view that China could absorb potential balance-sheet losses with little damage to its credit standing, thanks to its substantial foreign-exchange reserves and strong fiscal position. 

"We may raise the ratings on China if structural reforms lead to sustained economic growth that significantly lifts the average income level," the rating agency said. "Conversely, we may lower the ratings if reform efforts weaken, in combination with a markedly weaker economic performance and worsening banking sector credit metrics than what we currently expect."

The report also found that high-debt countries such as India, Japan, Malaysia and the Philippines had scope to tighten fiscal policy. 

More generally, Asia countries could combat high domestic inflation and overheating asset markets by tightening monetary policy and allowing currencies to rise, it said. 

Turning to India, the report found that inflation was the country's biggest challenge in the near term, and said it expected the Reserve Bank of India to raise interest rates further. But it said that more than monetary-policy steps would be necessary to tame Indian price growth. 

"A comprehensive approach that includes reformist fiscal and agricultural policies is key to containing inflation," S&P said. The country's "ballooning" fiscal deficits are a constraint on India's credit ratings, it said, adding that continuing consolidation into fiscal 2012 would be a challenge. 

On Japan, which S&P downgraded to AA- from AA in late January, the rating agency said that if the government managed to consolidate its finances and take action to improve its growth prospects, that would increase "upward pressure" on the country's credit ratings. Another worsening in Japan's fiscal forecasts, however, would create downward pressure, it cautioned. 

"Our assessment is that the current political environment will not allow for essential fiscal and structural reforms needed to stabilize the country's high and still-rising public debt burden," the rating agency said. 

—Arran Scott contributed to this article.

 Write to  Natasha Brereton at natasha.brereton@dowjones.com 