LONDON—The intensification of concerns about the creditworthiness of some euro-zone nations raises the risk of contagion or spillover to the U.K. and other big European banking systems, a senior Bank of England official said Monday. 

Speaking to business people during a visit to Scotland, BOE Executive Director for Banking  Andrew Bailey said that the threat to U.K. banks had been limited so far, largely as a result of their efforts to refinance their debt at longer maturities and raise capital buffers. 

Over recent months, the International Monetary Fund and European authorities have put in place large aid packages first for Greece and then for Ireland, as a slide in investor confidence caused those countries' cost of borrowing to climb beyond affordable levels. 

"This intensification of concerns has raised the threat of contagion ... and the consequent financial-market developments that have affected several other European countries have added to the risk of a spillover to the largest European banking systems, including our own," Mr. Bailey said. "So far, the threat has been limited." 

There is growing speculation that Portugal will also be forced to seek an international bailout. The euro tumbled to a fresh four-month low against the dollar early Monday after weekend reports in the German press suggested that France and Germany were putting Portugal under pressure to accept an Irish-style aid package. 

Mr. Bailey said that over the past 12 months, U.K. banks had taken necessary steps to improve their resilience. 

He said he BOE will stick "firmly" to its plan to allow its special liquidity scheme—launched in the aftermath of the collapse of Bear Stearns to provide emergency, long-term liquidity to the U.K. banking system on a temporary basis—to expire in January 2012. 

Still, "I cannot say that the U.K. is insulated from the risks we observe in other parts of Europe," Mr. Bailey said. "It is in the collective interest of banks to continue to build up progressively their capital and liquidity resilience so that they support not only themselves, but also the stability of the financial system as a whole." 

On the subject of systemically important financial institutions, Mr. Bailey said the development of recovery and resolution plans for major banks was an important step, but that much more work needed to be done to achieve a credible regime in which orderly bank failures could be allowed to occur, without relying on taxpayer funding. 