DUBLIN—The Irish parliament Wednesday narrowly passed legislation authorizing steep tax increases and spending cuts required under the country's international bailout, a bill that had been threatened by the collapse of the governing coalition. 

The decision paves the way for Prime Minister Brian Cowen to dissolve parliament early next week and call elections. Ireland's lower house of parliament voted 80 to 78 in favor of the bill, which will now be debated by a committee and go to the Senate for final approval Friday and Saturday. Should the Senate have any recommendations, the Dail is scheduled to return at 2000 GMT Saturday, but passage in the lower house already gives the measures legal effect. 

The Green Party pulled out of the coalition on Sunday and joined opposition benches, but the party pledged to back the prime minister in his final task of getting the finance bill passed. 

Under the terms of its €67.5 billion ($92.35 billion) rescue package from the European Union and International Monetary Fund, Ireland must pass the bill and implement its austerity budget in the first quarter of 2011. Ireland will contribute an additional €17.5 billion to the package. 

"The enactment of this legislation is absolutely vital to our international credibility," Finance Minister Brian Lenihan told lawmakers ahead of the vote. "That has been made clear by the European Commission. This has also been made clear by all the international commentary." 

The opposition Fine Gael and Labour parties—most likely to form the next centrist coalition government according to opinion polls—voted against the bill, as did the left-wing Sinn Fein party. But it was saved in the vote by a small band of so-called independent lawmakers. 

Mr. Cowen resigned as head of Fianna Fail Saturday, though he remains leader of the country. An impatient opposition threatened to bring the government down in a motion of no-confidence if the finance bill wasn't fast-tracked to allow for a Feb. 25 election. 

Later on Wednesday Fianna Fail elected former foreign affairs minister Micheal Martin as party leader, replacing Mr. Cowen, who stepped down as party leader last Saturday. 

Mr. Martin resigned as foreign affairs minister after he failed to unseat Mr. Cowen as party leader last week, but Mr. Cowen remains in his role of prime minister for the remaining days of the Fianna Fail minority government. 

Finance Minister Mr. Lenihan, Tourism Minister Mary Hanafin and Social Protection Minister Eamon O'Cuiv were also in the running to be the 8th leader of the Fianna Fail party. 

 Write to  Quentin Fottrell at quentin.fottrell@dowjones.com 