The food world has been busy recently, critiquing Nathan Myhrvold's "Modernist Cuisine," his self-published gigantic opus of six volumes, which even without its solid slipcase tops the scales at 18 kilos. This is the last word in Modernist culinary techniques, but also includes state-of-the-art food photography and detailed entries on food history, safety and ingredients, not to mention an entire volume of Modernist recipes. Despite a price tag of $625 (€426), the initial response has been positive, with the first edition of 6,000 copies sold out and an additional 25,000 being printed, while a German publisher is releasing it in six other languages later this year.

When I heard that he was coming to London, I contacted Dr. Myhrvold's office to see if he might be interested in eating a Modernist meal with me and going through his own food history in a more appealing environment than a sofa in a nondescript five-star hotel. The former chief technology officer of Microsoft and a chief advocate of the Modernist Food faith, suggested we meet over dinner at the Fat Duck, his friend Heston Blumenthal's three-star Michelin restaurant just outside London.

In Dr. Myhrvold's universe, there are two chefs who sit at the top table—elBulli's Ferran Adrià and Mr. Blumenthal. In fact, the co-author of "Modernist Cuisine" is Chris Young, the former head of research at the Fat Duck. Mr. Blumenthal wasn't in the restaurant this evening, but then he hasn't really been in the Fat Duck kitchen for the past few years, not that it makes any difference. (When the legendary French chef Paul Bocuse was asked who cooked in his kitchen when he wasn't there, he replied, "The same people who cook when I am there.")

This was Mr. Myhrvold's first visit to "The Duck" in more than four years, but it didn't damp his enthusiasm or desire to record every dish and side plate on his large digital camera. He was quick to point out that he isn't simply a Modernist. 

"I don't just like Modernist cuisine, I like all of the traditional cuisines such as French, Spanish and Italian but I don't need to be an advocate for them," he said. "The critics who hated the first major exhibition of Impressionist paintings in the 1870s were certain that these were the ugliest paintings ever made. Now they are the most loved paintings in the entire world. It is amazing that there are people who have that same hostile attitude toward certain food styles today."

The joy of conversation with Dr. Myhrvold, who has a string of degrees and has done post-doctoral research with Professor Stephen Hawking on quantum mechanics and gravity theory, is that when it comes to any question whatsoever regarding the science of food (or anything else for that matter), out comes a rapid fire account, explained with such lucidity that it even makes the recipient feel more intelligent than they have the right to. Most times, there is a postscript adding—"That is explained in more detail in Volume xxx"—except on the one occasion when he confessed my question wasn't in the book and should have been. It involved why certain flesh or fish is better rare (hare, duck, grouse and tuna) while others in such a state are inedible (rabbit, chicken, partridge and Dover sole). Apparently it all depends on the protein myoglobin.

I am not an enthusiast for Modernist cuisine, but was interested to hear how Dr. Myhrvold would defend it.

"Is food art, or is it craft? You can look at this two ways—art is about manipulating human senses to bring about thoughts and emotions. Food grips our emotions at least as profoundly as sound does, which we term music, or visual things, such as paintings, so food can be an art," he said. "However, most food producers do not have the mentality of artists but have the mentality of artisans or crafts people. 

"Every other aspect of art was convulsed by this notion of Modernism; it was about reform, or art as a dialogue between the artists and the viewer, it was about having an avant-garde movement, which challenged the preconceptions. That didn't properly happen for food, until the arrival of Modernist cuisine a little more than a decade ago."

At this point, we were interrupted by the arrival of a relatively simple dish called Roast Foie Gras—a rectangular lump of slow-cooked foie gras interspersed with crab-flavored wafers and a splash of rhubarb. "Ahhh! This is awesome, this is a dish that's in the book!" and there was a hurried switch to eager photographer mode with rapid-fire clicks.

But, after a fascinating diversion into heavy elements and why gold is so rare on earth, back to the authenticity of food and its relevance: 

"Thirty years ago, there was no sushi in the U.K. or the U.S. Then someone introduced it: It was strange, it was wild—oh my God, it's raw fish with vinegary rice and horseradish—give me a break, why would I want to eat that? But people persevered and now there is sushi in every major city in the world. And it's popular too. 

"What if I said sushi was a fraud, that it was never a traditional cuisine in Japan, and this guy called Mr. Sushi invented it? So instead of it being an authentic regional cuisine, no we lied to you, it is an invention. Would that make a difference or not? If it is really delicious, does it matter and should I care if it comes from Japan or California or even if it has no regional origin?"

I am happy to concede that it makes little if any difference, but again, why is so much of Modernist cuisine to do with jokes and deliberately mistaken culinary identity? Personally, I am not fascinated by beetroot that tastes like bacon or liquids that can be hot on the top and cold on the bottom.

"A fundamental part of art is that you have to surrender something to the artist. Is it valid the way T.S. Eliot refers to Conrad and Guy Fawkes in his poetry? What you term culinary trickery ought to cause you to reflect and confront those implicit assumptions that you thought you had and let you experience it afresh, stripped of those preconceptions."

Well, we will just have to agree to differ. 

Dr. Myhrvold was the perfect host—he laughed at most of my jokes and told quite a few good ones himself. The only time he appeared irritated was when describing food writers' attack on the use of foam in Modernist cuisine. 

"There are food critics who think that Heston's use of foam destroys all his other accomplishments. They never once stop to think that maybe they are the ones who have an issue."

Interestingly, although he has considerable knowledge of many of the greatest wines on the planet, his approach in a restaurant is to simply ask the sommelier to pick an extraordinary wine that Dr. Myhrvold has never heard of. 

Perhaps this shows that regardless of Dr. Myhrvold's wealth and experience, he still remains a curious student who wants to learn more through exposure to the unknown. It could also provide the key to understanding his passion for food that is on the frontier, rather than the well-established cuisines that enthral most of the rest of us. 

 Write to  Bruce Palling at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 