BEIJING—China eliminated a key policy tool in its arsenal to control liquidity and inflation: its annual target for new bank lending, overhauling how it looks at lending and changing the way it regulates banks.

After a year in which the banks made a mockery of the formal loan target with a huge volume of new credit that wasn't factored in, the target was absent from a host of economic goals announced at the start of China's annual legislative session over the weekend. China's banking regulator confirmed Sunday that there won't be a publicly stated target for new lending this year. 

The People's Bank of China last month unveiled a formula to measure total new credit in the economy. Liu Mingkang, chairman of the China Banking Regulatory Commission, said Sunday that until that tool is formally rolled out, authorities will use the broad M2 measure of money supply, the benchmark gauge of how much cash, bank deposits and other money is in circulation, as the main gauge of credit growth in the country. That will make M2 a more important thermometer of China's economy in the short term. 

While Beijing has had an M2 target in past years, it has often overshot that level. The official M2 growth target for 2011 is 16%.

"The central bank is coming out with a new way of thinking, which is to control the total supply of national financing, not simply controlling bank lending," said  Yang Kaisheng, president of Industrial & Commercial Bank of China Ltd., the nation's largest bank by market capitalization. 

The PBOC measure adds yuan loans to trust loans, bank acceptance bills, corporate bonds, funds raised by share sales of nonfinancial companies and insurance payouts among other fundraising avenues. 

China's financial system has grown increasingly sophisticated in recent years but the tools Beijing uses to manage monetary policy have changed little in the face of evolving complexity. While bank lending accounted for almost all formal fund-raising in China's economy 10 years ago, that slipped to a bit over half last year. Instead, bond and share sales by companies—both major fund-raising avenues in developed economies—are on the rise, and off-balance-sheet lending by the banks themselves has resulted in a significant erosion of the importance of the formal new loan data.

Banks formally lent 7.95 trillion yuan ($1.21 trillion) in new loans last year, blowing past the 7.5 trillion yuan target set by the regulators. But in addition, banks created 3.47 trillion yuan in off-balance-sheet credit, according to the central bank's calculations. Such lending includes the use of entrustment loans and bank-acceptance bills, a type of bank guarantee.

Still, the central bank is in the early stages of shifting toward using the new measure to track credit growth. 

In 2009, as part of its emergency stimulus package in response to the international financial crisis, China dropped the lending target, which facilitated a massive credit binge by banks. Despite the absence of a target this year, a similar explosion of credit is unlikely, several of the nation's top bankers said over the weekend. That is because, in lieu of formal quotas, the central bank has moved toward a new system which punishes banks for lending more than they deem appropriate by requiring them to hold additional funds in reserve.

"A higher reserve requirement ratio is not in a bank's interest, so it will naturally adjust its actions," Mr. Yang said.

Bankers and regulators said over the weekend that the new regime is likely to result in slower lending this year. In an interview last week in the People's Daily, the Communist Party's official mouthpiece, Bank of China Ltd. Chairman  Xiao Gang said he expects banks to lend about 7 trillion yuan of new loans this year.

It remains unclear whether China's authorities will set a clear target for total new credit, or if it will remain merely an indicative reference point for policy makers. Many market participants have questioned how any hard limit could be enforced, given that different regulatory agencies have purview over different kinds of financing.

  Tang Shuangning, chairman of state-owned conglomerate China Everbright Group, which includes midsize China Everbright Bank Co., flagged such concerns on the enforceability of any national financing target.

"It's the right direction for the central bank to adopt the national financing index as part of its monetary policy, but I think it will be not easy to manage liquidity with the index because of the complex financial regulatory system," he said.

—Iris Cai and Dinny McMahon contributed to this article.

 Write to  Aaron Back at aaron.back@dowjones.com 