Financial markets around the globe were shaken Thursday by escalating turmoil in the Middle East, fresh reminders that Europe's debt crisis remains unresolved and surprisingly downbeat economic news out of China.

The day's big moves reflect a return in recent weeks to the kinds of big price swings and skittish markets that had been common in the wake of the financial crisis. But before the unrest in the Middle East and North Africa sent oil prices surging in mid-February, many financial markets seemed to be entering a period of relative calm, and investors were increasingly confident the global economic recovery was on track.

Thursday's tumult, however, saw the Dow Jones Industrial Average fall back below 12000, shedding 228.48 points, or 1.9% to 11984.61. 

That marked the Dow's biggest drop since last August and the fourth triple-digit move this month. 

By comparison, there were only three triple-digit Dow days in February, and two each in January and December.

"People had become very complacent," said  Erin Browne director of global macro trading at Citigroup Inc. "Today was a little bit of shock."

Oil prices, which had fallen early in the session on worries about the strength of the global economy, swung violently. At one point during the morning, crude oil was down about 4%, hitting $100.62 before rocketing back up following headlines suggesting protests in Saudi Arabia had turned violent. Light, sweet crude for April delivery ended the day down $1.68, or 1.6%, at $102.70 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange.

Oil investors have been watching events in Saudi Arabia with growing alarm. The kingdom is the world's largest oil exporter, accounting for 10% of the world's crude-oil production and feeding fuel-hungry customers such as the U.S., Japan and China. Analysts worry that any signs of a disruption to supplies from such a key oil supplier would send shockwaves through oil markets.

Worries about damage to Libya's oil ports also weighed on investors. The International Energy Agency said Thursday that recent attacks on Libya's oil region appear to have damaged key infrastructure and herald "a worrying escalation from an oil-sector perspective."

The currency markets also saw a sharp reversal of trends, especially in the euro, which had been surging in value against the dollar thanks to expectations of higher interest rates in Europe. Instead, investors' attention was forced back to Europe's fiscal woes by a downgrade of Spain's debt rating by Moody's Investors Service.

The euro fell against the dollar Thursday, to $1.3789, from $1.3904 late Wednesday. Just last Friday, the euro was brushing up against $1.40.

The Moody's downgrade helped widen the gap between Spanish and German 10-year debt to 2.24 percentage points, from 2.19 Wednesday. While that is still below the peak spread of 2.8 percentage points hit at the end of November, it is up sharply from just a month ago, when the gap stood at 1.84 percentage points.

This was just the latest in a string of bad news for Europe that started last weekend, when Moody's downgraded Greece. On Wednesday, an auction of Portuguese debt saw the country forced to pay sky-high yields to investors, and hopes earlier in the year that European officials would find a comprehensive solution to the crisis have faded.

Worries about Europe have "come roaring back to life," says  Kim Caughey, portfolio manager at Fort Pitt Capital Group. "It's been six weeks or so since we were last worried about it. My bet is that investors are going to get timid again—all these half-measures from the EU haven't gotten us there."

Even before Moody's announced Spain's downgrades, the markets were on edge following data from China showing the country unexpectedly slipped to a trade deficit in February, thanks to a slowdown in export growth at a time when rising oil prices helped lift imports. Although some analysts believe the report was distorted by seasonal factors, it comes against a backdrop of concerns that oil prices, which are up more than 12% this year, will trip up the global economic recovery.

The news out of China sent China's Shanghai Composite and Japan's Nikkei 255 indexes down 1.5%.

China, Europe and the Middle East are the three key hotspots for investors. With bad news emanating from all three on the same day, investors rushed for safe havens. The yield on the 10-year Treasury fell to 3.395%, the lowest since Jan. 31. Yields fall as prices rise.

Some in the market argued that the stock market's pullback since hitting a two-and-a-half-year high Feb. 18—with Thursday's decline, it is now down 3.3%—isn't that surprising.

"This is a market that has been so considerably frothy for such a long time, based on the notion that corporate earnings are going to continue to grow and aren't going to be disturbed by any exogenous forces," said  Dan Alpert, managing partner at Westwood Capital LLP. "Once you get any exogenous force, people get nervous."

Citigroup's Ms. Browne said the violence of the selloff in stocks reflected investors, especially hedge funds, having piled into the same bets on the global economic recovery, especially energy stocks. Energy stocks were hit hard Thursday and were the worst-performing sector in the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index.  Exxon Mobil,
XOM


-0.45
%




 a stock that rarely posts big moves, fell 3.6%.

"Now we're seeing some of these macro headwinds," Ms. Browne said. "People are saying, 'I'm in the same positions as everyone else, and I need to get out.' " 

 Write to  Tom Lauricella at tom.lauricella@wsj.com and Jonathan Cheng at jonathan.cheng@wsj.com 