KENNEDY SPACE CENTER, Fla.—Space shuttle Endeavour's scheduled launch Friday recalls sunny spectacles that marked NASA's former glory. But the sense of excitement surrounding the event masks the uncertain future of America's manned exploration program. 

The launch is expected to be witnessed by a huge crowd, including President Barack Obama and Rep. Gabrielle Giffords, the Arizona congresswoman wounded in an assassination attempt whose husband, Mark Kelly, commands Endeavour.

Lawmakers, contractors and leaders of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration continue to squabble over how to divvy up shrinking space budgets. And with the final shuttle countdown expected this summer, no consensus has emerged on how to meet the administration's goals of exploring an asteroid around 2025, and eventually sending astronauts to Mars. 

"NASA's fundamental problem is a lack of clear-cut direction and goals," said Scott Pace, a former senior NASA official who now teaches at George Washington University. "The current path is a very risky one, and time is quickly running out to correct course."

Almost two years have passed since Mr. Obama roiled Congress and the aerospace industry by seeking to privatize many of NASA's core functions. Both critics and supporters of the agency worry it's embroiled in nagging political battles and increasingly seems out of touch with the deficit-conscious mindset of voters. 

Rep. Giffords, a Democrat, was an outspoken opponent of Mr. Obama's commercial-space initiative before she was critically wounded in January in a Tucson shooting that killed six people and wounded 13. As head of a House subcommittee with jurisdiction over NASA, she argued that relying on untested commercial alternatives jeopardized U.S. space dominance, especially in manned flight. During one early hearing on the White House proposals, she said U.S. human space flight could be "on hold for the foreseeable future." 

Rep. Giffords riled the White House by championing a bipartisan compromise intended to further restrict spending on commercial-space ventures. But the effort fell apart when House leaders accepted a Senate package more favorable to the Obama administration. Before she was hurt in the shooting, Rep. Giffords talked about pursuing the fight and prodding NASA to make good on past commitments to traditional manned projects.

Some officials now hope the personal drama surrounding Rep. Giffords and Mr. Kelly will rekindle public ardor for the agency's mission. But NASA leaders also must walk a fine line to avoid exploiting her appearance: With a gunshot wound to the head, she speaks haltingly and has pronounced weakness on the right side of her body. 

Rep. Giffords and other family members of the Endeavour crew are set to see the blastoff from a private viewing area. Mr. Obama, the third sitting president to attend a space launch, may mingle with them afterward, with reporters looking on. Only two other sitting Presidents (Richard Nixon and Bill Clinton) have attended space launches.

Late Thursday, NASA officials said there was a roughly a 30 percent chance of winds and clouds delaying blastoff, up from about 20 percent previously. But forecasts called for conditions to improve by late-afternoon launch time.

In spite of the extensive buildup for the launch, with crowd projections ranging from 250,000 to 700,000, many space buffs and agency employees say the celebratory trappings won't spark a NASA resurgence. 

Jason Williams, a space center inspector, said senior officials have placed too much emphasis on commercial booster rockets and capsules to take astronauts to the space station. "It sounds wonderful when it's being planned," he said, "but unless there's an actual vehicle to be launched, everything is just a drawing." 

Also adding darkness to the mood: the prospect of thousands of additional space-related layoffs on Florida's so-called Space Coast. Echoing a sentiment heard often in the region, Mr. Williams said the president has turned out to be a major disappointment. "He hasn't done anything for this program," he said. 

NASA years ago awarded more than $3 billion in commercial contracts to blast cargo to the International Space Station. Last year it proposed spending about $6 billion over five years to promote commercial alternatives to take astronauts there, but Congress whittled funding to about half that total. A number of companies are pursuing such manned systems, but hardware won't be available for at least several years.

Frank DiBello, the chief executive of Space Florida—a state-fundedn economic-development agency that normally would be a White House ally—lamented what he called a "circular and endless debate" about NASA's future. What's long overdue, he said, is a "strategic overview for what we want to accomplish as a nation" in space, coupled with "the adequate budget to get there."

For the short term, state and local tourism officials are relentlessly touting Endeavour's launch. Rob Varley, executive director of the Space Coast Office of Tourism, said his group some time ago started placing billboards around the state assuring residents "The Dream Is Alive." 





 Write to  Andy Pasztor at andy.pasztor@wsj.com 