Religion has long provided ample source material for Matt Stone and Trey Parker, best friends who nearly 15 years ago created "South Park," the animated television show about four boys—and a lot of dirty jokes. For that show, Mr. Stone and Mr. Parker have mined Judaism, Catholicism, Islam—and even atheism—to make audiences laugh. Now, the comedic writers have relocated from Los Angeles to New York to stage their first Broadway musical, "The Book of Mormon," which they wrote and directed with "Avenue Q" writer Robert Lopez. 

The production centers on two boys from Salt Lake City who embark on a Mormon mission to Uganda. There, they face the challenges of persuading a God-hating village to embrace the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. In its first month of previews, the musical's performances have nearly sold out. The Mormon Church, rather than protesting the show's comic depiction of Mormonism, has issued a public statement saying that "the production may attempt to entertain audiences for an evening, but the Book of Mormon as a volume of scripture will change people's lives forever by bringing them closer to Christ." The musical opens next Thursday. 

 The Wall Street Journal: So after more than a decade of "South Park," why a Mormon musical? 

Mr. Stone: When you visit Mormon temples and visitor centers in Salt Lake, you realize that it's really a religion [founded in the 19th century] that came of age in the 20th Century at the time of Rodgers and Hammerstein and Disney. Mormonism has this great cheesy aesthetic—when you watch their videos, it's almost as if they're about to flash a smile at the camera and burst into song. One of the things that we talked about early on in the crafting of this show was how Mormon cheesiness is so close to musical cheesiness. 

 Is writing comedy for the stage different than for the small screen? 

 Mr. Stone: It's just a lot more limited. On "South Park," if a joke doesn't work, we can just cut to something else. Or draw eight helicopters coming in and have a bunch of things explode. In a day we can draw anything and make it happen. With a musical, it's tougher and you have to rely on the writing. But having those limitations makes you go deeper into the emotions and themes of the show, so I think in the end the experience has made us better writers. 

 How did you start writing the show? 

 Mr. Parker: Well, first and foremost, even before writing the jokes, we created a bunch of songs that we loved because that's what we think is at the core of any musical. It's really about creating funny songs. So we created an album first—me singing, with Matt and a few others playing the music. We wrote all the songs and then filled in the connective tissue of the story when we had our first workshop. 

 Do you find that different jokes get laughs on stage than on TV? 

 Mr. Stone: Yes, and it can be frustrating. We'll sit backstage and watch the audience laugh so hard at the dumbest thing. Or we'll work on a really heady, abstract joke that we're really proud of and it will get just a few laughs. And then someone will fart, and that will get twice as many laughs. 

 How would you fix more troubled musicals, like "Spider-Man: Turn Off the Dark"? 

 Mr. Parker: When we saw "Spider-Man," it was in its early previews, back in November. It was obvious then that it had story problems, although Bobby [Lopez], who was with us, kept saying, "They can fix this, it could be 'Wicked.' '' And Matt and I are thinking, "Really? They can fix something this bad and still put on a show at the same time?" But I think actually it would be pretty simple to fix. They are basically doing the first "Spider-Man" movie, which has a decent structure to it. So they may as well just do the movie—use the structure of it as their thing—and pay the guy who wrote the movie to help. 

 What kind of research did you do on Mormonism?  

 Mr. Stone: Joseph Smith is from Palmyra [N.Y.], so we went up there to watch the annual Mormon pageant, which is the story of the Book of Mormon. There's this hill where Joseph Smith buried the golden plates, and the Mormons have built this Aztec-y stage. And over the summer, thousands of Mormons come from all over the country and watch this play unfold with Ancient American costumes and prerecorded dialogue that's really cheesy. We tried to recreate the idea in our show by using prerecorded dialogue. 

 Mr. Parker: Jesus flies in it, which is pretty sweet. 

 Mr. Stone: We also got a lot of information when we went to Salt Lake for a field trip and went around to restaurants asking the waiters if they knew anyone who went on a mission. And they were all like, "Me! I did!" And then we'd ask if they knew any gay Mormons because we have this whole gay-Mormon storyline in the show, and they'd be like, "Me! I am! And so is that guy over there!" 

 So what's your religion? 

 Mr. Stone: I'm an atheist. I don't think about it that much, I seem to live my life as an atheist, but it's not that I don't like religion. In fact I kind of admire it and I'm really pretty into it. But whenever I'm having a hard time I don't look for God, I just don't. So I guess I'm an atheist but I have tons of doubt about atheists. 

But this question is really what our musical is about—we are fascinated by the idea that happiness and faith could be higher values than truth. What if the truthfulness of religious stories doesn't matter, but faith in them does? That's something that troubles atheists. I can't prove that those goofy Mormon stories have a positive effect, but the idea at least seems like a good thing to sing and dance about.

 Write to  Lauren A. E. Schuker at lauren.schuker@wsj.com 