Pick your word: Ludicrous. Insane. Unfathomable. Insulting.

"Egregious" is the one preferred by  Christopher Bonavico, who has accumulated $700 million in  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.40
%




 stock at fund company Delaware Investments. Mr. Bonavico can't stop raving about Apple, saying the company still could be undervalued by 30% despite its mammoth stock-market value of $320 billion.



But Mr. Bonavico is going public with deep frustrations over Apple's cash pile, a $50 billion lode that is expected to swell to $70 billion by year-end. The vast sum exceeds the gross domestic product of two-thirds of the world's countries—and all but 36 of the market values of companies in the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index.

Apple won't so much as throw a penny back at shareholders via dividends or buybacks. So far, company executives, including the ailing  Steve Jobs, have offered only vague, nearly dismissive koans about possible acquisitions and the need to remain flexible and conservative.

Mr. Bonavico has had enough. Apple "is destroying value," says the portfolio manager of Delaware's Focus Growth team. "We absolutely love the product strategy. However, they are leaving money on the table by having such a large cash balance well below their cost of capital. The cash is earning near zero." 

In his meetings with Apple management, company officials were "very, very tightlipped" about what they'll do with the cash, he says. "We think there will be more and more pressure, as overall returns of capital start to reflect that such a large part of the asset base is returning zero."

Mr. Bonavico isn't the only dissatisfied Apple investor. Behind the scenes, say people close to a number of top shareholders, dissent is growing over the fruits of the company's historic success.

Few investors have complained publicly, because they've done so well with Apple stock. The shares have risen nearly threefold since the lows of the financial crisis in March 2009.

But it will be hard to avoid the issue when Apple reports earnings Tuesday. Microsoft Corp. faced the same issue before eventually relenting to shareholders with its own $32 billion dividend in 2004.

"Optimal capital allocation doesn't matter until it does," says  Ken Broad, a fellow portfolio manager at Delaware Investments. He points out that the stock-based compensation culture of Silicon Valley has perverted the balance sheets of companies like  Cisco Systems Inc.
CSCO


-0.07
%




 and Apple.

Employee shares, carrying an expected return on equity of, say, 11%, are being issued en masse while cash continues to accumulate, returning less than 0.75% per year. It's like taking a credit-card cash advance and putting it in a passbook savings account.

"Who would ever do this in their personal lives?" asks Mr. Broad.

By virtually any measure, Apple's numbers speak for themselves. Bernstein Research analyst  Toni Sacconaghi, who has been hammering on the issue since last summer, calculates that Apple could pay out a 4% dividend, buy back $20 billion in shares and still add $10 billion to its cash pile this year.

Even a $15 billion acquisition of  Netflix Inc.,
NFLX


-85.70
%




 to name just one example, could be easily financed, leaving room for a massive buyback or dividend, he says.

"I think it has been beyond the point of being rational for a while now," says Mr. Sacconaghi.

If anything, Mr. Jobs's surprise leave of absence only heightens tensions over Apple's cash approach. Apple stock fell immediately in markets outside the U.S. after word of Mr. Jobs's medical leave hit Monday. That's partly because the company is still, incredibly, viewed as a growth stock, making it more volatile on the upside and downside.



Adding a dividend and buybacks might put the stock in the hands of value investors, who would help stabilize the ownership base and diminish some of that volatility, Mr. Sacconaghi says. He recently counted how many of the 10 biggest value-investing funds own the stock. The number: zero.

Apple spokesman  Steve Dowling declined to comment, referring me to previous statements on company conference calls.

Perhaps the best statement on the topic comes from  Benjamin Graham, the doyen of value-stock investing and inspiration to billionaire  Warren Buffett.

Public shareholders have the power to "enforce appropriate standards of capital efficiency in their own interest," Mr. Graham wrote in 1949. "To bring this about they will need more knowledge and gumption than they now exhibit."

 Twitter.com/dkberman or email: dennis.berman@wsj.com 