LONDON—The euro-zone economy grew at a steady albeit modest rate in the final quarter of last year as export and household consumption growth was offset by a slump in new investment and a slowdown in government expenditure, official figures showed Thursday. 

Separately, retail sales in the 17 countries that use the euro rose for the first time in 10 months in January, boosted by sales of nonfood products, official data showed. 

Euro-zone gross domestic product grew 0.3% for the second consecutive quarter in the period from October to the end of December, and was 2% stronger than in the fourth quarter of 2009, the European Union's Eurostat agency said. The data are in line with preliminary figures published Feb. 15. 

Euro-zone economic growth failed to pick up in the fourth quarter of 2010 as Germany was hit by severe winter weather, France's economy failed to accelerate, Italy slowed, and Greece and Portugal contracted. 

Although recent data and surveys suggest growth has picked up in the early part of 2011, economists warn of headwinds from austerity measures in some countries and the possibility of tighter European Central Bank monetary policy later in the year. 

Economists are confident the ECB won't raise interest rates from a record low of 1% at its policy meeting later Thursday, but they say ECB President  Jean-Claude Trichet may respond to the recent sharp rise in consumer prices by hardening his anti-inflation rhetoric. 

The latest Eurostat report showed exports contributed 0.7 of a percentage point to the fourth-quarter GDP expansion and household consumption added 0.2 of a percentage point. But imports subtracted 0.4 of a percentage point, the change in inventories took 0.2 of a point away, new investment subtracted 0.1, and government expenditure was flat. 

On a quarterly basis, household consumption was the bright spot with growth accelerating to 0.4% from 0.1% in the third quarter. Although exports grew 1.8%, that was a slowdown from 2.2% growth in the July-to-September period. 

New investment, or gross fixed capital formation, was the main weak point, with the quarterly contraction increasing to 0.6% in the final three months of the year from 0.1% in the third quarter. Government expenditure growth slowed to 0.1% from 0.4% in the third quarter. 

"But this is likely to have been partly down to a weather-related drop in construction investment, suggesting that growth might rebound in the first quarter,"  Ben May, a European economist at Capital Economics, said in a note. Government expenditure growth slowed to 0.1% from 0.4% in the third quarter. 

The pace of growth in the euro zone's private sector was the strongest for more than four-and-a-half years in February, but inflationary pressures are intensifying in tandem, final results of a survey by financial information firm Markit showed Thursday. 

"These data suggest that the economy is growing at a quarterly rate of around 0.8% in the first quarter, representing a marked upturn from the slowdown in the GDP [gross domestic product] data seen in the second half of last year,"  Chris Williamson, chief economist at Markit, said in a statement. 

The final Markit Euro-Zone Composite Output Index, a gauge of private-sector business activity based on a survey of some 4,500 manufacturing and services firms, rose to 58.2 in February from 57 in January, the highest reading since July 2006. A reading above the neutral 50 level indicates an expansion in activity. The preliminary, or flash, reading published Feb. 21 was based on 84% of the survey responses. 

Markit said the euro-zone Services Business Activity Index rose to a three-and-a-half-year high of 56.8 from 55.9 in January, but that also fell short of economists' expectations of no change from the preliminary reading of 57.2. 

On Tuesday, the final results of Markit's survey of manufacturers showed the purchasing managers' index for that sector rose to its highest level since mid-2000. 

A modest pickup in consumer demand may auger well for the region's economy, which has been held back by weak domestic spending. Eurostat said the volume of sales in the euro zone rose 0.4% in January from December, the first rise since March last year. 

December's figure was revised up to show a smaller monthly decline of 0.4%, from a 0.6% fall previously reported. Compared with January 2010, sales rose 0.7%. December's year-to-year figure was also revised up, to show a fall of 0.4%. 

 Write to  Nicholas Winning at nick.winning@dowjones.com 