Last year, high-level job candidates might have been lucky to get just one job offer. But this year, more than half of executive recruiters say many of the candidates they see already have a competing job offer in hand.

According to a January survey of 380 recruiters by ExecuNet Inc., an online networking site and job board, about 51% of search firms agreed that the high-level candidates they work with often receive more than one job offer. That is up from 2010, when only 35% of search firms said they encountered candidates with multiple offers.

However, this year's results are still far below 2007 levels, when 80% of search firms thought that candidates received multiple offers.

"Competition [for candidates] is heating up in some industries," said ExecuNet president  Mark Anderson.

Mr. Anderson said that executives in the health-care and technology industries seem to be in high demand, while defense and nonprofit companies are growing the slowest.

Among functions, sales and business-development experience are most sought after, although marketing and engineering experience have also seen an increase in demand.

Overall, about 56% of recruiters reported that companies were making more attractive offers, such as increasing compensation or adding perks such as flexible work hours, and 43% said they were adding incentives, such as signing bonuses, to offers. Last year, only 29% of recruiters said companies added incentives.

However, not all search firms are seeing the uptick in job offers: Some 31% of search firms say that they still aren't seeing increased competition for candidates, down eight percentage points from last year.

  Russ Riendeau of search firm East Wing Group Inc. in Barrington, Ill., said he still rarely sees candidates who have more than one offer in hand. Many times candidates will claim to have more than one offer, but after further probing, are really just in the interview process with more than one firm, he said.

He said that some jobs that require technical or scientific skill sets have a lot of competition for candidates, but traditional sectors, such as entertainment and autos, still have the upper hand on candidates.

"Things might be getting better, but we're far from 2006 or 2007 when multiple offers were common," he said.