Brussels—Johan Vande Lanotte resigned Thursday as mediator of talks between Belgium's two main language groups, prolonging a deadlock that has left the country without a government since elections in June and sparking fresh worries on bond markets about the country's ability to repay its debt.

The spread, or difference, between yields on Belgian and German bonds increased Thursday to 113.3 basis points from 100.3 basis points the day before. However, volume was light, and the spreads were below highs of more than 150 basis points in November during the worst days of the European debt crisis. A basis point is 1/100th of a percentage point. 

Although Belgium's debt-to-gross-domestic-product ratio is 100%, behind only Greece and Italy in the euro zone, it has so far encountered no problems issuing new debt, thanks to its high domestic savings rate and its stellar repayment record.

That could change. The stalemate has become the status quo, but the proposed coalition's failure to agree on the key question of how devolve more power to Belgium's three regions has become problematic, even by Belgian standards. Ratings agency Standard & Poor's has said Belgium could be downgraded if it can't form a government in coming months.

The language groups' main disagreements revolve around political control of the Brussels suburbs, regional control of government services and transfers of tax revenue from Flanders to Brussels and Wallonia.

Mr. Vande Lanotte, a 55-year-old Flemish socialist, thought he had a deal sewn up Wednesday but two Dutch-language parties nixed the agreement. It didn't devolve enough power to the regions, they said.

In particular, the New Flemish Alliance, the nationalist party that won the June elections, wanted over 40% of tax revenue returned to the regions. Mr. Vande Lanotte had proposed around 25%.

It was Mr. Vande Lanotte's fifth attempt at a compromise. "You can take a horse to the water but you can't force it to drink," he said at a news conference.

King Albert II said he would respond formally Monday. He doesn't have to accept Mr. Vande Lanotte's resignation. If there are no grounds for political compromise, the king could call elections for later this year.

 Write to  John W. Miller at john.miller@dowjones.com 