HANOI—Vietnam's central bank raised two key policy rates on dong-denominated loans Friday as the government stepped up efforts to tame inflation that climbed in April to its highest level in nearly three years. 

The 1 percentage point increase in the recapitalization and rediscount rates makes it more expensive for banks to borrow from the central bank, potentially crimping credit growth. 

The tightening may intensify the liquidity squeeze many Vietnamese banks are facing, which pushed short-term money market rates to a one-year high of 19% this week, according to central bank data. 

With the consumer-price index rising every month since January, Vietnamese authorities have been weighing whether to temper their emphasis on rapid economic growth. 

The recapitalization rate—the rate the State Bank of Vietnam charges on its loans to commercial banks—was raised to 14% from 13%, the central bank said in a statement. It last raised the rate on April 1, from 12%. 

The central bank also increased the rediscount rate—the interest rate banks pay when they borrow from the central bank by selling it commercial bills on a short-term basis—to 13% from 12%. It last had raised it from 7% on March 8. Both changes will take effect May 1. 

The central bank kept its benchmark rate unchanged at 9%, as it has been since last November. 

Friday's steps show "the government is more aggressive in reining in credit and money growth," said economist Le Tham Duong of Ho Chi Minh City Banking University. "The hikes are expected to help bring down inflation expectations, amid the challenges from rising local energy prices and an increase in salaries for state servants from May." 

Mr. Duong predicted the central bank may need to raise the two rates even further if the National Assembly, the country's highest lawmaking body, raises its inflation target when lawmakers convene again in July. 

Last November the National Assembly set an inflation target of 7% for 2011, but they'll need to raise it to double digits, Mr. Duong said. 

"How high interest rates (must go) will also depend on how far the government can go in cutting public investment this year," Mr. Duong said.

The rate announcement comes after the Ministry of Planning and Investment reportedly proposed that the government cut public investment by 96.89 trillion dong ($4.65 billion) this year—equivalent to 10% of the country's planned 2011 investment and far more than the 50 trillion dong reduction the government approved last month. 

Price pressures, both internal and external, have forced the Vietnamese government to temper its longstanding policy of prioritizing growth to deal with major imbalances in the economy. Inflation rose 18% on-year in April, the fastest pace since December 2009. 

In monthly terms, inflation accelerated to 3.3% in April, the fastest pace since May 2008. 

Inflationary pressure isn't likely to ease anytime soon, after the government raised electricity prices by more than 15% in March and raised fuel prices by more than 20% in the first quarter. The government has said it will allow state-owned Electricity of Vietnam to raise power prices further later in the year. 

Vietnam also is struggling to rebuild confidence in the local currency, which has been devalued four times in the past 15 months. Authorities recently launched a crackdown on trade in U.S. dollars, seeking to bolster dwindling foreign exchange reserves. 

On Friday, Hanoi-based bankers said demand for dong loans has been very strong among banks since the government announced its anti-inflation measures, with interest rates for one-month loans on the interbank market reaching 24% on an annualized basis, from less than 20% in March. 

They said many small banks are facing a shortage of capital. 

 Write to  Nguyen Pham Muoi at phammuoi.nguyen@dowjones.com 