LONDON—The U.K. has raised the security threat level for the country's transport hubs to "severe" from "substantial," according to a person familiar with the matter, the latest reflection of mounting concern over a possible terrorist attack in Europe.

U.K. authorities raised the threat level for transport hubs in the last two days, this person said. The U.K.'s Department of Transport notified the aviation industry about the decision shortly after it was made, the person said. 

In a letter to aviation officials, the transport department said there are indications that al Qaeda "may be considering an attack against a U.K. airport or aviation sector target," the British Broadcasting Corp. reported Friday. The letter added that the "economic, political and psychological significance of the U.K. aviation sector, coupled with the large crowds present within some of its major assets, would enable a successful attack to fulfil al Qaeda's objectives."

The move brings the threat level for the transport sector in line with the national level, which has been at severe since January 2010. Severe means that an attack is highly likely but it is one below the highest level, "critical," which means there is intelligence of an imminent threat. 

A spokeswoman for the U.K.'s Home Office declined to comment on any sector-specific threats levels.

A spokesman for the Department of Transport declined to discuss the nature or urgency of any intelligence the department had received or comment on the specifics of the department's security regime. "The U.K. adopts a multi-layered approach to transport security, which is kept under constant review," the spokesman said. 

A spokeswoman for the British Transport Police declined to comment on the officer deployment but said "the public will not notice significant changes in the deployment of BTP officers and no particular steps, such as the cancelling of leave, have been taken at this time."

London's Metropolitan Police, known as Scotland Yard, said that with the national threat remaining at severe it "will police accordingly and use a range of covert and overt tactics which remain under constant review."

Several of the U.K.'s security chiefs recently have warned about the ongoing threat from terrorists. In November, the head of London's Metropolitan Police, Sir Paul Stephenson, said in a speech that the U.K. faces its most dangerous stretch in the fight against terrorism since two failed attacks in the summer of 2007.

And, the heads of Britain's domestic spy agency, known as MI5, and the U.K.'s foreign intelligence service, MI6, in recent months have both warned that the U.K. faces potent threats from terrorism incubated in the Middle East, North Africa and Northern Ireland. 

In October 2010, the U.S. State Department advised Americans living or traveling to Europe to be wary amid intelligence suggesting that al Qaeda and affiliated groups continue to plan terrorist attacks. The department warned that terrorists could use a variety of methods and weapons, noting a particular threat to transport systems and other tourist infrastructure.

 Write to  Cassell Bryan-Low at cassell.bryan-low@wsj.com 