TOKYO— Sony Corp. apologized Sunday for a security breach at its online videogame service, and said it couldn't rule out the possibility that credit-card information from 10 million customers might have been compromised.

The Japanese electronics company said there is no evidence at this time that the encrypted credit-card data were stolen. However, Sony has said a hacker stole other information about its account holders, including names, addresses, email addresses and birth dates.

At a hastily called news conference Sunday, three Sony executives—including  Kazuo Hirai, the head of the videogame and consumer-electronics unit— bowed deeply to apologize for the inconvenience caused to Sony's customers when the hacker penetrated its PlayStation network database and obtained personal information about the service's 77 million registered accounts.

Sony previously said that credit-card information registered with the service might be at risk, but Sunday was the first time the company indicated how many credit-card numbers might be vulnerable to theft.

The briefing in Tokyo was also the first time Sony executives faced questions from the media about the security breach since the company shut down the PlayStation network and Qriocity streaming-video and -music services on April 20 upon discovering the intrusion.

The news conference followed a request by two members of the U.S. Congress for Mr. Hirai to explain when Sony first learned of the breach, why the company waited days to notify its customers and how it intends to prevent similar incidents in the future. 

Unveiling measures to bolster Sony's online security, Mr. Hirai said the company decided to wait to inform its customers until it had collected information about what happened.

"Sifting through all of that data, unfortunately, took a lot of time," said Mr. Hirai, whom the company has identified as the front-runner to eventually succeed Chief Executive  Howard Stringer. "My mission is to restore the confidence of our PlayStation users," Mr. Hirai added.

Sony said it is working with law-enforcement agencies to track down and prosecute those responsible for the attack. The company said it is creating the position of chief information security officer to oversee the protection of customer data. In addition, Sony said it will take steps to improve detection of future attacks and increase levels of data protection and encryption.



The company also said it plans to implement additional firewalls, expedite a planned move of the system to a new data center and ask users to change their passwords upon signing onto the PlayStation network. 

Sony said it isn't sure about the possible earnings impact from the security breach. The company faces additional costs after the breach related to implementing extra security measures and offering users 30 days of complimentary access to premium services. It expects some of the PlayStation network and Qriocity streaming services to be restored within a week, and a total resumption to occur later this month.

The company's online network of videogames, movies and music—the centerpiece of a strategy to link Sony's content businesses with its consumer-electronics products—has been grappling with security questions for several months.

Programmer  George Hotz was sued by Sony in January after he hacked into the PlayStation 3 videogame console to let it play homemade games. The lawsuit inflamed Mr. Hotz's supporters in the hacker community, including a group called Anonymous, who admitted to organizing attacks on Sony's services in the past. Both Anonymous and Mr. Hotz, who reached a settlement with Sony, have denied involvement in this latest breach. 

Sony said its online services have been under cyberattack over the past six weeks. The company also said personal information of its executives and their children was published online, along with threats against Sony's retail outlets.

"We're still not sure what the goal of these people who entered our system [is] and why they did this dishonest act," Mr. Hirai said.

The Japanese company faces two suits filed by network users in U.S. courts in California over the breach. Plaintiffs' lawyers allege Sony was negligent in protecting its users' personal data. 

 Write to  Daisuke Wakabayashi at Daisuke.Wakabayashi@wsj.com 