Gene Keady sits along the sideline during St. John's games taking notes with the impassive expression of a driving test examiner. There are no shouted instructions, his familiar scowl smoothed into a more neutral expression. While head coach Steve Lavin plunges into the center of timeout huddles, Mr. Keady stands silently on the perimeter. 

It's an unfamiliar position for Mr. Keady, whose 512 wins over a quarter century at Purdue earned him a spot in the school's Hall of Fame; the Boilermakers now play home games on "Keady Court." 

When he agreed to join the St. John's staff as a special advisor to Mr. Lavin, he knew the conditions: According to NCAA rules, Mr. Keady could share insights with the coaching staff during meetings or practices. He could take notes from the bench of every game and analyze game tapes. The one thing he could not do is actually coach players.

"I'm learning how to cope with it," Mr. Keady said. "At first it was kind of frustrating because you know you want to help and it's hard to help if you're not directly coaching." 

Instead, he has become a coach of the coaches, helping to guide Mr. Lavin through an increasingly erratic season. St. John's has toppled ranked teams only to be crushed by others. Against Notre Dame, the team did both: the Irish dismantled St. John's 76-61 on Jan. 8, only to be dominated by the Red Storm in an 72-54 loss eight days later. 

On Wednesday night, St. John's (11-7, 4-4 in the Big East) will seek to avoid a similar split against No. 21 Georgetown (14-5, 3-4); the Red Storm edged the Hoyas 61-58 earlier this season. Tip-off at the Verizon Center is set for 7 p.m. St. John's has not won a road game against a ranked opponent since the 2004-5 season.

Through it all, Mr. Keady has scribbled his thoughts on a yellow legal pad; already he has gone through three, he said, including a brief dalliance with white pads—until the team went on a two-game losing streak after the switch.

"I dumped the white pads," he said. 

He keeps track of 13 statistical categories. After St. John's victory over Notre Dame, Mr. Keady sat outside the team's locker room, studying the stat sheet and slashing circles around select categories.

"You got to keep the opponents under 40% in the field," he muttered, noting Notre Dame's 41% shooting percentage. "That's a minus."

But St. John's held Notre Dame's 3-point shooting under 33%—a plus. He scanned for free throws; Mr. Keady wants the team to earn 25 free throws or more a game (another plus), outrebound the other team (plus), minimize Red Storm turnovers (minus), force opponent turnovers (plus) and limit the other team's leading scorer to fewer than 20 points (plus). 

All told, the final tally after Notre Dame was positive—and a crucial reprieve for a season that seemed on the verge of slipping away. Mr. Lavin walked up to Mr. Keady after he finished his post-game press conference. "Boy, did we need that W," he sighed, settling down beside him in the back alleys of Madison Square Garden. Since then, St. John's has lost two straight games.

There is pressure on Mr. Lavin, who returned to coaching after seven years away in order to lead a program starved for good news. He has drawn comfort from Mr. Keady's familiar presence during staff meetings, "like our yogi or Buddha in the corner," Mr. Lavin said. "Wise old owl."

But Mr. Keady says Mr. Lavin instinctively handles some situations better than he ever did.

After losses, "he doesn't try to whip a dead horse," Mr. Keady said. "He doesn't do road kill like I used to."

Mr. Keady added that if he'd been the head coach after a recent loss to Syracuse, "we might have come back and had practice that night," he said.

It is not an idle threat. Former assistant coach Tom Reiter, now an assistant athletic director at Purdue, could recall several instances of postgame practices during his seven-year tenure as Mr. Keady's assistant coach—something now prohibited by NCAA rules.

As the team traveled home, managers would be in the gym readying balls, Mr. Reiter said. 

"We'd practice when we got off the plane," he said. "You can't do that anymore."

Now, Mr. Keady says, with a touch of amusement in his voice, "I'm the good guy."

Mr. Lavin cultivates that avuncular aura, Mr. Keady added with a mischievous grin. "I think he wants the players to think that so they'll come ask me questions," he said.

While at Purdue, Mr. Keady and Mr. Lavin developed an affection for one another and stayed in touch over the years. Last year, Mr. Lavin placed a call to his old mentor.

He was dissatisfied, he confessed. He still dreamed of being a head coach.

Don't be ridiculous, Mr. Keady replied bluntly.

"I said, 'Are you crazy? You're one of the best analysts in TV. Why would you want to go back to head coaching?" 

They hung up and Mr. Keady turned around to find his wife staring at him. "She said, 'You go call him back and tell him to keep his dreams alive," Mr. Keady said.

So he did. A short time later, St. John's called, inquiring about Mr. Lavin's availability. He accepted and convinced Mr. Keady to come along.

He is now part of an eight-man staff that Mr. Lavin alternately calls the Supreme Court or the gang from Oceans 11.

"He's George Clooney," Mr. Keady said. "I'm the dynamite guy who blows stuff up."

Along with assistant coach Rico Hines, Mr. Lavin's first recruit at UCLA, "they kind of cover my whole professional life out of college, so it's a great perspective," Mr. Lavin said.

That has been especially critical in recent weeks, as St. John's chances at postseason play have become increasingly precarious.

After the loss to Notre Dame, Mr. Keady overheard Mr. Lavin berating himself. He took him aside, he said, and recalled a piece of advice he'd been given by Bobby Knight: "Sometimes it's the players' fault."

But overall, Mr. Keady said he'd been impressed by Mr. Lavin's ability to stay positive.

It's a message he tries to reinforce, though it does not come naturally. "It's hard for me to say because I hate losing," he said. "My wife would always get mad at me.''

His wife Patricia passed away in 2009. Now he spends basketball season living in a Manhattan hotel, driving to work with Mr. Lavin and grabbing breakfast from McDonald's on the way.

It is a shift in lifestyle, a different set of challenges, a new student. But it may be the easiest assignment of all.

"He's easy to teach,'' Mr. Keady said of Mr. Lavin. "He listens.''