 New York 

The high-concept Willy Decker production of "La Traviata" was a hit at the Salzburg Festival in 2005 with Anna Netrebko and Rolando Villazón, but the version that premiered at the Metropolitan Opera on New Year's Eve felt as chilly as its leading lady, Marina Poplavskaya. Mr. Decker's stark, imaginative vision was certainly a relief after the overstuffed Franco Zeffirelli production that it replaced. But at its heart "La Traviata" is about people—the tragic courtesan Violetta who finds love with the impetuous young Alfredo and is forced to relinquish it—and here, humanity was in short supply.

 Metropolitan Opera  Through Jan. 29 

Designer Wolfgang Gussmann's set, a white semicircular arena with a built-in bench and a giant clock at one end, symbolized the emptiness of the consumptive courtesan's frantic waltz toward her demise. Death was physically present as well, in the person of Dr. Grenvil (Luigi Roni), wearing a long black coat and waiting patiently for Violetta, who alternately shunned him and yearned for him. All the chorus members (male and female) were dressed as men, in modern black suits, and staged as a predatory, abusive mob with Violetta, wearing a short red dress and stiletto heels, as their paid entertainer. The crowd scenes were particularly sharp and ferocious: The gypsy and bullfighting "entertainments" at Flora's party in Act III, usually throwaway fillers, became nightmarish attacks on Violetta's lover Alfredo, who is searching for Violetta in her accustomed haunts, and finding out how it feels to be her. A plot interpolation, to be sure, but a dramatic one.

For Act II, set in Violetta's country retreat with Alfredo, cloth depicting cabbage roses was tossed over the furniture and clock; the lovers wore robes made of the same flowered fabric, while the red dress and Alfredo's dark suit hung on the wall, waiting. When Violetta despairingly prepared to return to her old life, she stripped the covers off, and the light (by Hans Toelstede) grew steadily harsher, leeching the color out of the flowers.

Mr. Decker joined Acts II, III and IV by creating a tableau at the end of each act that dissolved into the beginning of the next. It was theatrically effective, but made for a long sit for the audience.

By stripping away the surface decoration that goes with a period staging, Mr. Decker eliminated all pretense from Violetta's situation—she's a prostitute with a limited life expectancy, and her world is ugly. But we also have to care about her, and Ms. Poplavskaya couldn't manage that. Her inconsistent soprano has some clarion notes, but she lacked the warm lyricism required for the hopeful introspection of "Ah! fors'é lui" and the coloratura flexibility needed for the abandoned hysteria of "Sempre libera." Her best vocal moment came in Act IV's "Addio del passato," which she sang with a simple bleakness that matched Violetta's hopelessness—her life is about to end, and her lover will not return in time. She sounded like a dying woman; one didn't miss the warmth or color, because there shouldn't be any at this point. Her acting was also superficial, with much tossing of her trademark long blond hair and doubling over in apparent pain, but little sense of a real woman in existential agony.

The limitations of her performance were particularly glaring in Act II, when Germont, Alfredo's father, arrived like a death knell to separate her from her last chance at happiness. Here, she was paired with Andrzej Dobber, whose dour, monochromatic baritone emphasized Germont's cruelty and self-righteousness, with no hint of his growing respect for Violetta's integrity and his sympathy for her, and the long duet pitted two equally stiff characters against each other. Ms. Poplavskaya simply flailed against Mr. Dobber's implacability, and this sequence, one of the richest in the opera, missed the intense development that Verdi wrote into both these people. It became part of the production's scheme without persuading us of its emotional truth. 

Matthew Polenzani's gentle, lyrical tenor brought a depth of vulnerability to Alfredo, emphasizing the naïveté of this young man who uncannily perceives Violetta's soft center, but is too weak to hold out against the forces that make their idyll an impossible dream. He was persuasive, so his scene with this very unpleasant Germont worked better than Ms. Poplavskaya's. It was unusually physical and realistic—the kind of father-son melée that burns with mutual misunderstanding and disappointment. Still, Mr. Dobber's rendition of "Di Provenza," the famous plea to "come home, all is forgiven," was sung more like a command than an enticement, which was definitely not what Verdi had in mind, and their embrace, the tableau that ended Act II, looked like a wrestling hold.

Under conductor Gianandrea Noseda, the orchestra sounded unusually scrappy, and there were some glaring coordination glitches between the pit and the stage. The chorus sang and acted with admirable gusto and ferocity, even when obliged to wear paper masks (leering men and caricatures of Violetta). They even made an appearance in Act IV, piling into her sickroom instead of remaining offstage, dressing up a new girl in Violetta's abandoned red dress, and carrying her off on the giant clock to take the dying woman's place in their amusements. These touches gave Mr. Decker's staging force. But without a believable Violetta, the production felt like an interesting idea in need of a heart. 

 Ms. Waleson writes about opera for the Journal. 