Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke, after spending much of the past six months formulating and then defending a new central-bank effort to stimulate the economy, is turning his eyes toward an eventual exit from the program. 

Mr. Bernanke faced repeated questions from Republicans and Democrats Tuesday on Capitol Hill about when he would begin to pull back the flood of money the Fed has pumped into the economy in recent months. While not indicating any timetable, he did answer lawmakers' concerns by spelling out in more detail than previously what would get him to take his foot off the accelerator. 

"Once we see the economy is in a self-sustaining recovery and employment is beginning to improve and labor markets are improving, and meanwhile that inflation is stable, approaching roughly 2% or so," Mr. Bernanke said at a Senate Banking Committee hearing, "at that point we'll need to begin withdrawing." 

 Sign up for a daily look at the most popular video from the Wall Street Journal Digital Network via email. 

Interest-rate increases still could be a year away, though Mr. Bernanke offered a relatively upbeat assessment of the economy's performance recently, pointing to rising household and business confidence and signs that lending markets were loosening up.

Trading in the federal-funds futures market, where investors make bets on when the Fed will raise or lower interest rates, suggests investors expect the central bank to begin a small step-up of short-term interest rates early next year. The federal-funds rate, an overnight lending rate between banks which the Fed controls, is now a bit below 0.2%. 

Mr. Bernanke appeared on Capitol Hill for the first of two days of hearings on monetary policy and the economy, a semi-annual ritual. He testifies Wednesday before the House Financial Services Committee.

Consumer prices are moving unevenly across the world. See inflation rates across 50 countries.

The Fed chairman seemed committed to seeing the central bank's latest effort to stimulate growth, a $600 billion bond-buying plan, through to its planned conclusion in June. He said the program has been successful in recharging financial markets and economic growth.

Lawmakers expressed skepticism, with some worrying that the program is causing, or could cause, too much inflation. 

"I'm wondering how this macroeconomic policy is going to get to the average person in a way that changes their lives in a more positive way," said Sen. Robert Menendez, a New Jersey Democrat. Mr. Bernanke worried last year about falling consumer prices, also known as deflation. In New Jersey, Mr. Menendez said, people weren't worried about deflation, they were burdened by high bills for food, gas and tuition. 

Mr. Bernanke tried to allay concerns about recent increases in commodities prices. Though gasoline prices are rising, he said, they appear unlikely to feed through to a broader bout of inflation. They are most likely to result in "at most, a temporary and relatively modest increase" in higher prices for U.S. consumers, he said. 

 Unless we get someone in the Federal Reserve that lives in the real world and identifies housing and energy and health and food prices as inflationary, things aren't going to be solved. 

—Charles Adler

Higher fuel prices cut two ways for the U.S. economy: They could cause some inflation but they also sap consumer spending power and thus slow economic growth. Mr. Bernanke said he was monitoring these developments "closely" but gave no indication he was about to react to them. 

He responded sharply to complaints that the Fed is using its policies to hold down the value of the dollar. He noted that the dollar is about as strong today as it was before the financial crisis three years ago and that warnings that the Fed is devaluing the currency are "way overstated."

The Fed projects that the economy will grow between 3.4% and 3.9% this year and between 3.5% and 4.4% next year, bringing the unemployment rate down to around 8% or lower by the end of 2012. 

"We have seen increased evidence that a self-sustaining recovery in consumer and business spending may be taking hold," Mr. Bernanke said.