LONDON—There is a significant risk that U.K. inflation could soon exceed 5%, but is still likely to fall back to target over the next couple of years, according to the minutes of the Bank of England's Monetary Policy Committee's March meeting, published Wednesday. 

The committee voted to keep the U.K.'s benchmark interest rate at a record low of 0.5% when they met March 9 and 10 and the bank's stock of asset purchases at £200 billion ($327.58 billion). The minutes said that inflation was likely to rise above the 4% annual rate measured in January and "there was a significant risk that inflation would exceed 5% in the near-term." 

The bank's previous forecasts, contained in its most recent inflation report, showed that inflation was expected to rise to between 4% and 5% this year and fall back to the bank's 2% target in 2012. Inflation, as measured by the consumer prices index, increased to 4.4% in the 12 months to February, according to official figures published Tuesday. 

However, the committee stuck to its judgment that inflation would return to the bank's target of 2% over the medium term as the influence of temporary factors—like higher oil prices and a rise in a sales tax—faded. The minutes showed that members' votes were unchanged compared with February. Six members of the committee, including Governor  Mervyn King, voted to hold rates steady, while three voted for tighter policy. 

U.K. gross domestic product unexpectedly weakened in the final quarter of 2010. The six members who voted to keep interest rates on hold thought it best to get a better picture of how the economy is faring this year before changing policy, especially in light of weaker consumer spending and disruptions to the oil market from turmoil in the Arab world. 

The minutes said some of these six members thought the case for an increase in the benchmark bank rate had strengthened in recent months as inflation expectations appeared to be creeping higher. 

However, the committee also concluded that although pay deals might rise in 2011 they are likely to remain below the rate of inflation. Bumper pay deals alarm policy makers because they can trigger an inflationary spiral in which wages and prices chase each other higher. 

"Overall, the uncertainty created by both developments in the oil market and the recent indicators of household spending and confidence meant that there remained merit in waiting to see how those factors evolved before altering the stance of monetary policy," the minutes said. 

The minutes were less hawkish than investors had bargained for. Sterling fell to a low of $1.6285 Wednesday, after already falling half a cent before the minutes were released. 

Among the hawks,  Andrew Sentance reiterated his call for a rise in rates to 1%, while  Martin Weale and  Spencer Dale voted for a quarter-point rise in the benchmark bank rate. These three members believed the weak growth at the end of 2010 would prove temporary and that inflation was likely to persist. 

  Adam Posen once again voted for extra stimulus to the economy in the form of another £50 billion of asset purchases. For Mr. Posen, the weakening of consumer spending since mid-2010 supported the view that inflation would be weaker than the bank's forecasts, the minutes said. 

 Write to  Jason Douglas at jason.douglas@dowjones.com 