 Fiat and U.S. partner Chrysler Group are expected to disclose an auto parts deal Wednesday that stretches their relationship. Under terms of the agreement, Chrysler's Mopar parts division this month will begin carrying some 3,000 repair parts made by Fiat's MagnetiMarelli division. 

Earlier, Fiat boosted its stake in Chrysler to 30% from 25% after the Italian auto maker met the second of three U.S. government-mandated requirements that automatically trigger increases in its ownership stake. 



German auto maker Daimler and car parts manufacturer Robert Bosch plan to forge a 50-50 joint venture during the first half of 2011 to produce electric motors together.

SB LiMotive, a 50-50 joint venture between South Korea's Samsung SDI and Germany's Robert Bosch, will invest $500 million by 2013 to add one or two more car-battery production lines in Korea. 



Spyker Cars, the owner of Swedish car maker Saab Automobile, said it has asked the Swedish National Debt Office to allow it to sell and lease back Saab properties to secure the funding it needs to resume production. 



German tire maker Continental is in advanced talks with Modi Rubber to buy at least a 51% stake in the Indian company, said two people involved in the discussions. 



 Hoping to defuse a potential $20 billion problem, Deutsche Bank is planning to restructure its U.S. operations in an effort to shield it from potentially costly capital requirements under the new financial-regulatory law, according to people familiar with the matter. 



 Two of Germany's Landesbanks, NordLB and Helaba, are expected to fail European "stress tests" after regulators said they wouldn't include some non-voting government stakes in the banks' core capital ratios. 



Bank of America's internal auditors are reviewing why two top finance and accounting executives weren't consulted before the bank disclosed to investors that a dividend increase had been rejected by regulators, according to people familiar with the situation. 



 Allied Irish Banks said its losses widened in 2010 to €10.16 billion ($14.66 billion), compared with a net loss of €2.33 billion a year earlier, as the bank announced a significant redundancy program amid Ireland's continuing banking and economic crisis. 

It said that just under 34% of its continuing loans in its Republic of Ireland retail operations were either on watch, vulnerable, impaired or in the criticized loan categories. 



Italy's Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena gave details of its long-awaited business plan, saying it aims to lift profit and boost dividends over the next five years by cutting costs. 



 Banco Espanol de Credito, the first Spanish lender to report first-quarter earnings, said net profit fell 20% to €169.5 million ($244.6 million), signalling that difficulties in the country's banking sector are far from over. 



Citigroup is offering at least 12 million shares of Primerica, the life-insurance business it took public about a year ago. The Primerica holdings are among the assets and businesses Citigroup has been shedding after being bailed out by the U.S. government during the financial crisis. 

 A Citigroup unit was ordered by a securities arbitration panel to pay a group of investors more than $51 million for losses they incurred in several municipal arbitrage funds, including one that lost about 80% during a period between 2007 and 2008.  



 Scrambling to salvage its landmark deal with Russia's state oil company, BP is weighing once unthinkable solutions, including selling its 50% stake in its existing Russian venture, TNK-BP, according to a person familiar with the matter. 

Divesting its stake in a company that accounts for one quarter of its global oil and gas production and close to one-fifth of its reserves is seen as highly unlikely. 



 The highest oil prices in 2½ years have begun to trigger some deterioration in demand, oil producers and consumers said, a surprising fallout from the disruption in oil production that has resulted from unrest in the Middle East.  



Rosneft said Russia's Deputy Prime Minister Igor Sechin has stepped down as the state-controlled oil major's chairman following orders from the country's president. Rosneft said Alexander Nekipelov, an independent, nonexecutive director, will head the board until the company's annual shareholder meeting in June. 



Norwegian oil and gas major Statoil is evaluating a sale of some of its shares in the Gassled joint venture pipeline. A company spokesman declined to comment on whether the firm, which owns 28.5% of Gassled, had been approached by potential buyers and said a transaction would require the approval of Norway's Ministry of Petroleum and Energy. 



Royal Dutch Shell's Australian arm said it plans to stop refining at a plant near Sydney and convert the operation into a terminal for fuel imported from around the region. 



Private-equity company Terra Firma is in exclusive talks with BC Partners and Omers—the private-equity arm of the Ontario Municipal Employees Retirement System—to sell the Odeon cinema chain and is looking for £1.2 billion ($1.96 billion), people familiar with the situation said. 

Terra Firma may consider refinancing Odeon if it doesn't get the price it wants, one person said. 



 Allianz, one of Europe's biggest investors, is urging the region's leaders to establish an European Union-sponsored bond insurer to help fiscally weaker countries that have been shut out of capital markets attract fresh funding. 



Delta Lloyd's shares plummeted by 7.6% to €17.54 ($25.31) Tuesday after Aviva said it plans to reduce its stake in the business to 43%, a move that will give the Dutch insurer more strategic independence but raised market worries that the U.K. parent may offload more of it. 



Brazilian billionaire Eike Batista and other investors said they will team with Intercontinental Exchange to launch the BRIX electric energy trading exchange. 



Casino Guichard Perrachon, France's second-largest retailer by sales, reported a 19% rise in first-quarter sales to €7.85 billion ($11.3 billion), lifted by its expanding business in emerging markets, although consumer spending in France remained weaker. 



 Nokia said it has launched two new handsets featuring an updated version of its Symbian operating system, nicknamed Anna. The launch of the updated Symbian platform comes after Nokia agreed to use Microsoft's software in a new line of handsets in a bid to regain market share in the lucrative smartphone sector.  



 Cisco Systems said it plans to exit some consumer operations, including its Flip video camcorder business, and reduce its headcount by about 550 employees. Cisco's consumer businesses that aren't closed will be realigned within other segments.  



Intel said it is starting a joint research center with China's Tencent Holdings to develop technologies and services for tablet-style computers and other mobile devices in China's booming market. 



 The New York man who last year said he was entitled to 84% of Facebook filed an amended complaint in which he now claims rights to half of co-founder Mark Zuckerberg's equity in the social-networking giant.  



The final bids submitted for Shanghai Motel Management, which operates the Motel 168 brand in China and is 59%-owned by Morgan Stanley, came in below the $1 billion expected, possibly derailing the sale, two people familiar with the situation said.

But the deal to buy the Chinese budget-hotel chain isn't scrapped yet and negotiations are continuing with bidders China Lodging Group and Home Inns & Hotels Management, these people said.