A boom in computerized, high-speed trading in commodities and currencies has coincided with a series of "flash crashes" in those markets, even though the stock market hasn't seen a repeat of the harrowing plunge of a year ago.

The U.S. dollar sank 5% against the Japanese yen within minutes on March 16, one of its biggest moves ever. Also that month, cocoa-futures prices dropped 13% in just seconds on the  IntercontinentalExchange Inc.
ICE


0.30
%




 before rebounding almost as quickly. In February, the sugar market took a dive of 6% in just one second.

Like the stock market "flash crash," which occurred a year ago on Friday, these big moves are the unintended consequences of an influx of high-frequency and algorithmic traders into markets that aren't equipped to deal with them. 

High-frequency and algorithmic traders use computer programs to buy and sell assets, taking advantage of small gaps in prices to generate profits.

In both the commodities and currency markets, the growth of computerized and high-frequency trading has led to the exit of key human market makers, whose jobs are to match buyers and sellers and provide liquidity to the market. Now, as in the stock market, that role is increasingly being played by computer programs. If the traders using those programs pull back from the market, then big "buy" or "sell" orders are effectively placed into a vacuum, leading to sudden, big swings.

"As we saw with the equity markets, it increases the probability of surprise distortions," said  Jonathan Lewis, chairman of the investment committee at Samson Capital Advisors. "This is something that investors, policy makers and central banks should all be concerned about." 

The stock market's 10-minute, 600-point decline reverberated through the investment world. It took two months for stocks to regain their pre-flash-crash levels, as investors last summer bought on their conviction the Federal Reserve would take action to boost the economy. The more recent flash crashes had smaller impacts but affected companies that need to hedge exposures to commodities and currencies. 

High-frequency traders now account for 28% of the total volume in the futures markets, which include currencies and commodities, up from 22% in 2009, according to data from Aite Group, a Boston-based research firm. These traders now account for 53% of stock-market trading volume, down from 61% in 2009, according to data from Tabb Group.

The sudden tumbles have forced commodities-markets operator ICE to implement trading rules to prevent big swings. ICE is also considering expanding the use of "circuit breakers" in markets like cocoa, a spokesman said. A circuit breaker halts trading when a market or asset is sharply up or down. 

As was the case in stocks, many in the industry feel high-frequency trading is benefiting both markets, providing another kind of liquidity and a real-time reading of these otherwise opaque markets. "We think high-frequency traders play a necessary and beneficial role by providing liquidity, and that they mitigate volatility" in the markets, a spokesman for ICE said.

  Chip Lowry, chief operating officer for  State Street Corp.'s
STT


0.34
%




 electronic trading platform Currenex, says he doesn't think the emergence of computerized and high-speed trading "is an issue." 

The timing of some of these mini crashes shows the impact of computerized trading. The dollar tumbled against the yen at 5 p.m. in New York on March 16, right as several major banks had shut down their electronic-trading programs as part of a routine handoff to colleagues in Asia, when a barrage of buy orders for the currency stormed the market. With few traders around, the orders, combined with forced buying linked to options, were set loose into a void.

Cocoa's flash crash came at about 10:30 a.m. New York time on March 1, after orders to sell hundreds of cocoa contracts flooded the market. Too few buy orders were there to soak up the sale. Cocoa plunged $450 in one minute, to a low of $3,217 a metric ton. The sell orders were unusually large for the cocoa futures market, which typically handles about 20,000 contracts a day. 

"The electronic platform is too fast; it doesn't slow things down" like humans would, said  Nick Gentile, a former cocoa floor trader. "It's very frustrating" to go through these flash crashes, he said. 

Cocoa's flash crash had been years in the making, according to Mr. Gentile. The tiny market—it has contracts outstanding of just $6 billion, compared with the $16.6 trillion market capitalization of U.S. stocks—was taken over by ICE and converted to an electronic market in 2007. 

Gradually, market makers left the business, leaving fewer people to match orders. 

The same is happening in the sugar market, provoking outrage within the industry. In a February letter to ICE, the World Sugar Committee, which represents large sugar users and producers, called algorithmic and high-speed traders "parasitic." 

"Their presence only serves to enrich themselves at the expense of the traditional market users," the letter said. 

Still, the exchanges are caught in a tough balancing act: attracting new market participants while keeping their core constituents happy—the producers and users of the commodities, which rely on the markets to buy and sell and hedge their risk.

"Unfortunately, we are always going to be at risk of these types of flash crashes," said  Paul Zubulake, a senior analyst at Aite Group.

 Write to  Carolyn Cui at carolyn.cui@wsj.com and Tom Lauricella at tom.lauricella@wsj.com 