Everyone is hunting for higher yields, but they're not so easy to find, especially in the fixed-income market. That has more people searching for dividends in the stock market.

One of the most venerable dividend plays in the stock market is the so-called Dogs of the Dow strategy. It is an investment plan focused on capturing the highest dividend payouts among the 30 blue-chip stocks in the Dow Jones Industrial Average, the oldest, most widely cited stock-market indicator in the world.

Some Dog players focus on the five-highest dividend yielders, other focus on the 10-highest dividend yielders, usually establishing the Dow Dog group at the start of each year. Building a standard Dog portfolio consists of buying an equal number of shares in each Dog stock.

The fundamental underpinning of Dog investing flows from the bedrock notion of annual portfolio rebalancing. Dividend yields -- which are just the annual dividend divided by the stock price -- tend to rise as stock prices decline. Therefore, picking the highest-yielding Dow stocks should put you among the stocks that lagged in the 30-stock blue-chip measure the year before. Rather than chasing winners, you are picking up the laggards -- the dog stocks -- hoping their fortunes will turn, which is usually a solid bet among blue chips.

This year's Dow 10:  AT&T
T


0.69
%




 (yielding about 5.85%),  Verizon Communications
VZ


0.44
%




 (5.46%),  Pfizer
PFE


0.75
%




 (4.57%), Merck (4.22%), Kraft (3.68%),  Johnson & Johnson
JNJ


-0.49
%




 (3.49%),  Intel
INTC


-0.27
%




 (3.42%), DuPont (3.29%), McDonald's (3.18%) and  Chevron
CVX


1.00
%




 (3.16%).

A glance tells you a few things. One, telecommunications stocks are paying hearty yields, and some skeptics wonder how long that will last.  Vodafone Group, which isn't among the Dow industrials, pays 4.87%, and  Qwest Communications
Q


1.10
%




 pays 4.2%. Also, drug stocks have struggled in recent years -- three are among the Dogs.

The Dogs, whether you choose five or 10, have a better dividend yield than the market. The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index has a dividend yield of 1.87%, down from 2.09% one year ago, mainly due to its 13% rise in 2010. The Dow industrials yield 2.46%, a reflection of the blue chips' willingness to raise and maintain dividends even as the average rose 11% last year.

The advantage of the Dog strategy is that you get paid a solid dividend yield and you have the added advantage of potential capital appreciation in share price. The disadvantage is that some stocks have high yields because they are struggling.

The nightmare scenario is known as a "dividend trap," which occurs when investors buy stocks with a big dividend yield just before the ailing company slashes or eliminates the dividend to preserve cash. This happened with a lot of bank stocks when the financial crisis struck in late 2008.

Notably, no financial stocks are among the current batch of Dogs.  J.P. Morgan Chase
JPM


1.40
%




 and  Bank of America
BAC


0.65
%




 still have yields below 1%. Many analysts believe the banks will start raising dividends after a round of stress tests last week.

The Dogs of the Dow is popular, but how successful has it been? In the last 10 years, the 10-stock Dow Dogs have beaten the Dow industrials on a total-return basis five times. The five-stock Dow Dogs have beat the average six times.

Over the past 20 years, the Dow Dogs 10 have recorded an annual average return of 11.62%; the Dow Dogs 5, 13.78%; and the Dow industrials, 11.61%.

In the awful years of 2007 and 2008, the Dogs did worse than the industrial average. In 2008, the Dow Dogs 10 lost 42% and the Dow Dogs 5 cratered 52%, while the industrials fell 34%. Last year, however, the Dow Dogs 10 returned 16.18%, compared with 10.61% for the Dow Dogs 5 and 11% for the industrial average.

The five-stock Dog strategy, given its narrowness, tends to be far more volatile. That's mainly because, oftentimes, the biggest dogs can bark for a long period of time. Pfizer, for instance, traded at $45 in 2001. Today? It's around $18. Merck has suffered a similar fate. And sometimes truly  doggy Dow stocks get shown the door. In the wake of the financial crisis, both Citigroup and  General Motors
GM


0.28
%




 were given the boot.

Perhaps surprisingly, given its popularity, the Dogs strategy doesn't attract a great deal of mutual-fund interest. That's partly due to the simplicity of the strategy. It's easy enough for a lot of investors to build their own Dog portfolio without having to fork over management fees.

Among the funds that do track the Dogs is the Hennessy Balanced fund (HBFBX). With about $12.3 million in assets, the fund invests half its assets in Treasurys with less than a one-year maturity -- not much yield there -- and the other half in the 10 highest-yielding industrial-average stocks. Dow Jones, which publishes The Wall Street Journal and the Dow Jones Industrial Average, has no financial or ownership interest in these funds.

The Hennessy Total Return fund (HDOGX) has about $69 million in assets and utilizes a similar strategy as the balanced fund. But its asset allocation approximates 75% to the 10 highest-yielding Dow stocks.

Happy hound hunting!

—Dave Kansas is The Journal's chief markets commentator in New York. Blog: blogs.wsj.com/marketbeat Email: dave.kansas@wsj.com 