LAS VEGAS— Microsoft Corp.
MSFT


0.18
%




, feeling the heat from  Apple 
AAPL


-0.04
%




Inc.'s iPad and other devices, demonstrated the next version of its Windows operating system and showed how it is being adapted to run on new forms of mobile gadgets. 

The demonstration at the Consumer Electronics Show here also came as Microsoft CEO  Steve Ballmer announced in a keynote speech that the company shipped 8 million Kinects, the hands-free system for controlling Xbox games, in the product's first 60 days on the market. That figure qualified it as a bona fide hit among consumers. 

Microsoft's demonstration of the next version of Windows amounts to an early signal from the Redmond, Wash., company that it is doing more to make its flagship operating system better suited to new devices like tablets.

 The company showed Windows running on processors designed by ARM Holdings PLC, a company whose chip designs are common in everything from mobile phones to the iPad to television set-top boxes. 

"Windows PCs will continue to adapt and evolve," Mr. Ballmer said in his keynote. "It means Windows will be everywhere on every kind of device without compromise." 

ARM chips, manufactured by companies like  Nvidia 
NVDA


0.05
%




Corp.,  Qualcomm 
QCOM


0.80
%




Inc. and  Texas Instruments Inc.,
TXN


0.87
%




 suck less power than traditional PC microprocessors, and they're essential for battery-powered devices like tablets. Microsoft also said the next version of Windows will run on new miniature chip designs from more traditional PC chip makers like Intel Corp. and Advanced Micro Devices Inc.

Bob O'Donnell, an analyst at the research firm IDC, said Microsoft is in danger of falling too far behind competitors and "is trying to stem this concern that they're not relevant in the tablet market." 

By some analysts' estimates, Apple sold as many as 14 million iPads last year. New tablets running  Google Inc.'s Android software, such as Samsung's Galaxy Tab, are also starting to hit the market in sizable numbers, including a wave of new devices being shown at this week's CES. Some analysts predict that world-wide sales of tablets could jump to as many as 50 million in 2011. 

Microsoft is also being pressured to respond more aggressively to tablets because of early signs from retailers and PC companies that tablets are eating into traditional PC sales, especially the low-end laptop computers known as netbooks. 

But Microsoft's CES demonstration left many questions about the company's strategy unanswered. Steven Sinofsky, president of Microsoft's Windows division, made it clear that the software running on ARM processors didn't include the user interface people will see on the next version of Windows. 

Analysts said Microsoft needs to do much more to make the Windows interface better suited to touch-screen devices like tablets. The current version of the operating system, Windows 7, remains too dependent on traditional PC accessories like keyboards and mice to work well on tablets, analysts said. 

Microsoft also didn't show the new ARM-version of Windows running on finished hardware during its demonstration. It said applications that run on current versions of Windows, based on the traditional x86 PC chip design, won't run on the ARM-based versions of Windows. 

Mr. Sinofsky declined to say when the new version of Windows will be available. He reiterated that there is a two- to three-year development cycle on which the company has said it plans to release new operating-system installments. The current version of the software, Windows 7, came out in October 2009, which suggests a new version could be released late this year or next year. 

"I don't think it's that long away," Mr. Sinofsky said of the next version of Windows. 

 Write to  Nick Wingfield at nick.wingfield@wsj.com 