CHICAGO—Rod Blagojevich "sold out" the trust of Illinois citizens in a series of five illegal "shakedowns," a federal prosecutor told a jury Monday at the start of the former Illinois governor's new trial.

Mr. Blagojevich tried to extract money from people in return for naming their favored candidate to the U.S. Senate seat vacated when Barack Obama became president, said prosecutor Christopher Niewohner. The statements opened the retrial of the former governor on a range of charges.

Mr. Niewohner said Mr. Blagojevich even tried to shake down the president-elect, who sought to get ally Valerie Jarrett selected senator. The prosecutor alleged Mr. Blagojevich sought a job for himself in the president's cabinet. However, Mr. Obama didn't "play ball," the prosecutor said.

Mr. Blagojevich has maintained his innocence since federal agents arrested him at his home on Dec. 9, 2008, and charged him with a variety of federal fraud crimes.

His attorney, in an opening statement Monday, called the federal case "a tale of sound and fury, signifying nothing."

Aaron Goldstein told the jury that witnesses who gained immunity or plea deals from prosecutors and then testified against Mr. Blagojevich aren't credible. "Ask yourself, what ended up happening?" in each of Mr. Blagojevich's alleged deals, Mr. Goldstein said. "Time after time, you will find … nothing."

In the case of a Chicago public school from which Mr. Blagojevich allegedly sought a donation, the school received $2 million in state funds to build an athletic field and "Rod got nothing," Mr. Goldstein said. "This man wasn't shaking anyone down."

Mr. Niewohner, the prosecutor, described the ex-governor's view of his office as, "if you want something from the state of Illinois, I need to get what I want." The prosecutor said Blagojevich "shook down" the horse racing industry and the road-building industry and sought a $25,000 donation from the chief executive of a Chicago hospital in return for increasing state payments for children's medical care.

Mr. Blagojevich was found guilty in August on one count of making false statements to federal investigators. The jury was unable to reach a verdict on 23 other counts, and the U.S. Attorney's office in Chicago is retrying him on counts of wire fraud, attempted extortion, bribery, extortion conspiracy and bribery conspiracy.

If found guilty, Mr. Blagojevich could be sentenced to more than 40 years in jail and face fines of up to $750,000.

A juror reached shortly after the August conviction said the jury had been split 11-1 in favor of convicting the former governor on the charge of putting the Senate seat up for sale. However, that juror said, one holdout didn't agree.

Jurors in that trial concluded Mr. Blagojevich had lied to the FBI by maintaining that he didn't want to know who had made political contributions and that such donations were separate from the official actions of his administration.

After he was arrested in December 2008, he conducted a 19-month publicity campaign, appearing on numerous television shows and proclaiming his innocence.

 Write to  Thomas M. Burton at tom.burton@wsj.com 