SYDNEY—Australia's consumers took a hit this month from devastating floods in Queensland state, data showed Wednesday, as officials continued to tally damage that could reach up to an estimated 20 billion Australian dollars (US$19.9 billion).

The Consumer Sentiment Index fell 5.7% in seasonally adjusted terms in January compared with December, according to Westpac Banking Corp. and the Melbourne Institute, an arm of the University of Melbourne. Annualized, the index fell a seasonally adjusted 12.9% in January. Excluding Queensland, which accounts for 20% of the country's economy, the national index still fell by 3.2%. 

The report is the first of several upcoming figures on the country's economy that will show the true cost of the devastating the floods. A mining boom has the country's central bank forecasting economic growth of more than 3.5% for the next two years.

According to a report this week by Australia & New Zealand Banking Group Ltd., the rebuilding bill for Queensland could reach A$20 billion. 

"It is likely that perceptions of the implications of the floods for the national economy and [consumers'] own financial positions have been adversely affected," said Bill Evans, chief economist at Westpac.

With most of Queensland declared a natural disaster zone and flooding affecting other states too, interest rate traders are pushing back bets on the timing of any further lending rate increases by the Reserve Bank of Australia to the second half of the year. Economists expect the impact of crop destruction and disrupted coal exports in the state to force a contraction in the economy during the first quarter. 

The consumer-sentiment report showed that concerns over the economic impact of the floods has hit the long-term perception of the Australian public. The outlook for the economy in the year ahead dropped 15.7% on the month, even outpacing a 5.6% decline in the outlook for family finances. 

The continued strength of the Australian dollar couple with the floods poses a policy dilemma for the country's central bank when it next meets to debate interest policy early next month. A string of seven interest rate increases in 14 meetings by the Reserve Bank of Australia, or RBA, to head off potential inflationary pressures from the mining boom have helped push the Australian dollar to parity with the U.S. greenback. 

"Though the economic impact of the flooding in Queensland will steady the RBA's hand in the very near term, the realization that the tightening cycle has further to run probably will dampen consumers' spirits in 2011," said Helen Kevans, an economist at JPMorgan. 

 Write to  Enda Curran at enda.curran@dowjones.com 