Say what you will about Rick Santorum, he is economical in his use of language. The former Republican senator from Pennsylvania who is not a former Republican managed the other day to cram an impressively large amount of foolishness into a short statement.

The occasion was an interview with CNSNews.com, and the statement is quoted in a press release from the Media Research Center, of which CNSNews is a division:

This is foolish for many reasons, of which by far the foremost is Santorum's obnoxious invocation of the president's race. Brent Bozell of the MRC says in Santorum's defense that he "paralleled what many pro-life leaders have compared in the past. Just ask Dr. Alveda King, niece of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., Day Gardner, Rev. Childress or any number of other black leaders who have also called abortion the civil rights issue of our day."

National Review's Kathryn Lopez expands the argument, and even Time's Joe Klein defends it, although he disagrees with it:

Actually, however, it is Klein who misses the point. We agree that it is intellectually defensible to draw a parallel between the antiabortion movement and the civil rights movement, or between abortion and slavery--though we would also note that this is an inflammatory and highly controversial comparison. Making the argument in a way that persuades rather than alienates those who are not already convinced requires an extraordinarily high degree of subtlety and sensitivity. In this regard Santorum's comment falls very far short.

What makes it racially invidious is not the underlying argument or the rhetorical inelegance with which Santorum makes it. It is the implication that because Obama is "a black man," he is obliged to agree with Santorum.

The notion that the range of acceptable opinion is narrower for a black person than for a white person (or for a woman than a man, or a homosexual than a heterosexual) is a pernicious form of bigotry. It is usually heard from left-wing multiculturalists, as when they attack Clarence Thomas for being black and taking the position that racial preferences are unconstitutional.

One might argue that left-wingers get away with this kind of thing all the time and turnabout is fair play. Our view is that left-wingers shouldn't get away with it, and it's just as bad coming from someone on the right.

This is the biggest problem with Santorum's statement, but not the only one. The substance of his criticism of Obama is both incoherent and ignorant.

 James Taranto on Rick Santorum's foolishness. 

Incoherent because Santorum criticizes Obama both for declining to answer the question of whether an unborn child is a person and for answering it. The former seems to be a reference to the 2008 interview with the Rev. Rick Warren, in which the future president ducked the question by saying it "is above my pay grade." The problem isn't that he dodged the question--it actually is a judicial and legislative question much more than an executive one--but that he did so in such a glib way.

Ignorant because Santorum himself proceeds to deny that it is necessary "to decide who are people and who are not people." Without drawing that line, our legal system could not function. "A rat is a pig is a dog is a boy," PETA founder Ingrid Newkirk said in the 1980s. Imagine if the Supreme Court adopted that premise as the basis for constitutional law.

That's not an entirely frivolous point in this context, for Santorum himself has had some difficulty drawing the distinction between humans and animals. In a 2003 interview, he declared: "In every society, the definition of marriage has not ever to my knowledge included homosexuality. That's not to pick on homosexuality. It's not, you know, man on child, man on dog, or whatever the case may be."

To be sure, an unborn child, unlike a dog of any age, is human, and the idea that it should be treated as a legal person is not self-evidently absurd. But neither is it self-evidently correct, and abortion laws before Roe v. Wade were never predicated on the idea that legal personhood precedes birth. It would be no less revolutionary for the courts to redefine "person" in the way Santorum urges than for them to redefine "marriage" in the way he deplores.

Santorum thus gets it exactly backward when he characterizes the president as saying, "We're going to decide who are people and who are not people." That decision was made long before Obama came along. The existing definition of "person," which excludes the unborn, is a longstanding and well-settled element of the Anglo-American legal tradition. Santorum and others have every right to call for a radical change in the law, but the burden of persuasion lies with them.

One final criticism: If Santorum finds Obama's position only "almost remarkable," why did he remark on it?

  Maps Are Murder, Baby-Killing Isn't   In the immediate aftermath of the Tucson massacre, we never got around to highlighting one of the most shocking comments we saw, because of comparative insignificance of its source: a P.Z. Myers, associate professor of biology at a state university in Minnesota. Here's what he wrote at ScienceBlogs.com on the day of the shootings:

This was Paul Krugman-like speculative fantasy, although the dehumanizing rhetoric--"what a vile creature"--was beyond even anything the New York Times has published on the subject. What prompted us to return to this was another Myers post, dated yesterday, commenting on this story from the Associated Press:

Myers's central argument is that "anti-choice people" who are "claiming vindication" from the case are wrong: "Gosnell is precisely the kind of butcher the pro-choice movement opposes." He's mostly right about that, although the case does raise questions about the common claim that Roe v. Wade has been effective at protecting women from the horrors of coat alleys and back hangers.

But here is where he goes off the rails:

Again, Gosnell is accused of delivering babies alive and then killing them. That is murder, whether or not abortion is, and surely it is not what the women in question signed up for.

Myers seems to think symbolic speech from his political foes is a worse offense than the actual killing of babies. His lack of perspective is so gross that it has led him to outright depravity.

  A Tortured Argument   A new report "by a team of journalists working at Georgetown University" presents new evidence that al Qaeda detainee Khalid Sheikh Mohammad personally decapitated Wall Street Journal reporter Daniel Pearl, as he confessed in 2007. The New York Times reports. The Times quotes from the report's explanation of why some had doubted KSM's confession:

Here is what KSM actually said: "I decapitated with my blessed right hand the head of the American Jew, Daniel Pearl, in the city of Karachi, Pakistan." For sure, that could be a false boast. But does it really sound to anyone like the kind of thing you'd say if you were being "tortured" and were desperate for it to stop?

 You Know You've Hit Bottom When You're Stealing Ideas From Charles Blow 

  Sheriff Dupnik Issues APB for Sarah Palin   "Police Search for Moron"--headline, KUSA-TV website (Denver), Jan. 21

  We Blame Global Warming   "The End Is a Little Closer for Venus"--headline, FoxSports.com, Jan. 21

  The Lonely Lives of Scientists   "Scientists Try to Mate Galapagos Tortoise--Again"--headline, Associated Press, Jan. 20

  The Lonely Lives of Ecologists   "UP Marine Ecologist Pushes Sea Cucumber, Sea Urchin Breeding"--headline, Manila Bulletin, Jan. 20

  The Lonely Lives of College Students  "College Student Files Suit for $1.8M Saying Las Vegas Hooker Didn't Spend Enough Time With Him"--headline, Daily News (New York), Jan. 21

  It's Luckey She Was Godley or She Might Have Related Even More Improperley   "Godley Teacher's Aide Arrested on Improper Relations Charge"--headline, Cleburne (Texas) Times-Review, Jan. 21

  Grab a Broom, Guido   "Feds Make Record Mob Sweep"--headline, The Wall Street Journal, Jan. 21

  And the Children Shall Lead   "Film About Briton Who Saved Jewish Children Premiers"--headline, Jerusalem Post, Jan. 20

  No Wonder the Packers Are Favored by 3½   "Bears Just Got a Little Less Fearsome Thanks to the Wildlife Taser"--headline, GadgetCurve.com, Jan. 19

  Guess There Won't Be a Second Date   "Huge Ice Block Falls From the Sky Onto Whittier Woman's Escort"--headline, Whittier (Calif.) Daily News, Jan. 20

  Hey, Kids! What Time Is It?   "National Journal's Hirsh: Time for a Moral Sanction Against Gun Metaphors Similar to the 'N' Word"--headline, DailyCaller.com, Jan. 21

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking   "What the Hedgehog Knows About the GOP Presidential Race"--headline, TownHall.com, Jan. 20

  NAACP Covers Dr. King's Statue on Washington's Birthday--Now That Would Be News   "NAACP Draws Complaints for Covering George Washington Statue on Martin Luther King Day"--headline, FoxNews.com, Jan. 19

 Too Much Information 

 News of the Tautological 

  Breaking News From 1535   "Apple to Up iPad 2 Resolution to 2048 by 1536"--headline, EMSNow.com, Jan. 20

  Breaking News From 1885   "Loss of Grant Casts Doubt on Horse Park"--headline, News & Record (Greensboro, N.C.), Jan. 21

  Breaking News From 1981   "Muslim Leaders Attack the Pope"--headline, Catholic League press release, Jan. 20

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  First Draft of 'History'   A reader calls our attention to the Associated Press's "Today in History" feature for Jan. 21. Most of it is factual--"In 1924, Russian revolutionary Vladimir Lenin died at age 53," that kind of thing--but at the bottom we get this:

Wow! When did "history" get so tendentious and partisan? One year ago today, it turns out, when the AP used exactly the same biased language in a dispatch on Citizens United.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Evan Slatis, Joe Perez, John Sanders, Hillel Markowitz, Stuart Creque, Dan Pawlak, Tom Mayer, David Gerstman, John Sarna, Michele Schiesser, T. Young, Mark King, Rod Pennington, Hugh Phelps, Chris Mario, Curtis Paxton, Scott Hunt, Tim Butts, John Bobek, John Grant, Marc Young, Joseph Heschmeyer, Brian Azman, Michael Driscoll, Jeff Stark, Gary Krim, David Chiefetz, Jim Allison, Dave Nemzek, Bruce Goldman, Abe Beyda, Zack Russ, Monty Krieger, Jeanie Ribble, Richard Belzer, Ethel Fenig, Ted Loubris, Peter Huntsman, Mark Kellner, Theodore Sternberg, Mark Finkelstein, Jeff Dobbs, Steve Prestegard, Jarrett Skorup and Kelley New. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)