New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie vetoed a bill Thursday that would have made his state the first in the U.S. to reintroduce online gambling since it was effectively prohibited by a 2006 federal law.

The bill would have allowed New Jersey residents to place bets through websites run by casino companies in Atlantic City, the only place in New Jersey casino gambling is allowed under the state constitution. 

State legislatures across the U.S. have started work on bills legalizing such intrastate gambling in a bid to generate revenue, and the New Jersey veto isn't expected to stall those efforts.

Mr. Christie, a Republican, suggested the Democratic-controlled Legislature could revive the effort by asking voters to approve the measure by referendum. Lawmakers said they didn't think that would succeed.

Many online gambling companies pulled out of the U.S. after Congress in 2006 banned financial companies from processing gambling transactions across state lines. Other sites have risen, though, and now claim millions of players in the U.S., who wager using complex or underground financial transactions.

Proponents of online gambling have fought unsuccessfully for a reversal by Congress, and some recently turned to statehouses as the chances of success on the federal level appear bleak.

The New Jersey bill would have worked around the federal law by containing all the activity within the state, but Mr. Christie said he had "significant concerns," including about compliance with state laws. He rejected the stance by the bill's sponsors that placing computer servers handling the wagers in Atlantic City would satisfy state constitutional requirements.

"In my view, the creation of a legal fiction deeming all wagers to have 'originated' in Atlantic City cannot overcome the clear and unambiguous language of the State Constitution," Mr. Christie said in the veto.

The bill has drawn strong support from the Interactive Media Entertainment & Gaming Association, a group that includes some offshore companies that run gambling sites available in the U.S. The bill would allow the Atlantic City casinos to work with such software providers.

The bill had a foe in  Caesars Entertainment Inc.,
CZR


-3.48
%




 a powerful force in New Jersey with four casinos in Atlantic City. Caesars is against the state-by-state approach, hoping to pressure the federal government to create a regulated nationwide system, which would be easier to manage and much more profitable for the company.

Caesars, which owns the popular World Series of Poker brand, believes it could gain a 20% share of the $5 billion online poker market if it were legalized on the federal level. 

"We've always felt that the first focus should be trying to enact federal legislation," said Jan Jones, senior vice president of communications and government relations for Caesars.

New Jersey voters approved Atlantic City gambling in 1976, two years after rejecting statewide gambling. Mr. Christie said he worried the bill would expand gambling "in a manner that is contrary to the public's sentiment."

"The expansion of gambling in New Jersey has been slow and cautious," he said, noting public concerns about the "potential ills" of betting. A recent poll said 67% of state residents were opposed to Internet gambling.

State Sen. Raymond Lesniak, a Democrat and strong supporter, said a referendum would be the "death knell of Internet gaming in New Jersey." 

"This is very disappointing," he said. "This could have put New Jersey on the map."

The governor said the bill wouldn't prevent gambling from popping up in Internet cafes, nightclubs and bars. He also objected to some revenue from the bill going to support the state's ailing horse-racing industry. Mr. Christie is trying to get the industry off state subsidies.

 Write to  Alexandra Berzon at alexandra.berzon@wsj.com 