NEW DELHI –Coal India expects this fiscal year's output to remain more or less similar to last year's production of 430.5 million metric tons, due to operation disruptions at two of its key units, said the interim chairman of the world's largest coal producer. 

The Kolkata-based company expects to produce about 430 million tons of coal this year through March,  Nirmal Chandra Jha told Dow Jones Newswires in an interview late Wednesday. 

Coal India meets more than 80% of the country's requirements and this downgrade--the third this year--could hit consumers such as power utilities and cement companies, and may lead to higher imports to feed the rising energy demand of the world's second-fastest growing major economy. 

Former Coal India chairman,  Partha S. Bhattacharyya cut the output target twice, settling at 440 million tons from an originally planned 460.5 million tons because of some environmental issues and a shortage of railway wagons. 

"The earlier promises were made on the assumptions that our mines will operate smoothly," Mr. Jha said. 

Environmental issues contributed a shortage of 17.8 million tons of the 30-million-ton shortfall from the original production target, while lawsuits over mining contracts at one unit and flooding at mines operated by another unit hit some production too, he said. 

"We lost nearly 5 million tons of production in the current year due to a local strike and law and order problems," Mr. Jha also said. 

One of the mines at unit, Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd., wasn't operational for 17 days until March 20 because of a strike called by the locals. The mine can produce about 47,000 tons of coal each day. 

He said operations at the mines of its Central Coalfields Ltd. unit have been affected by ongoing unrest by Maoist rebels. 

Mr. Jha said the company is trying to meet supply commitments of these two units from its existing stocks as well as from six other units in India. 

Coal India has increased the budgetary allocation toward welfare programs fivefold to about 2 billion rupees ($44.7 million) to win the confidence of the local people where its mines are located. 

He said also that the company will maintain its production target for the next financial year for now. 

Mr. Bhattacharyya had previously cut the next fiscal year's production target to about 447 million tons from 486.5 million tons. 