The turmoil in the euro currency zone is intensifying ahead of a key Portuguese debt auction.

A selloff in Portuguese debt Monday prompted the European Central Bank to intervene by buying the country's bonds, traders said. The ECB's move stabilized the bond prices of Portugal and other highly indebted countries on the euro zone's fringe. The interest yield on Portuguese 10-year bonds, a key measure of investor confidence in the country's debt, rose to around 7.18% on Monday before dropping to about 6.93% amid what some traders called "aggressive" bond buying by the ECB. Late in New York, the yield had risen to 7.12%.

The ECB declined to comment on its latest bond purchases. The central bank's most recent data on its bond buying show that it bought €113 million ($146 million) of euro-zone government bonds through Wednesday of last week, a tiny amount compared with early December when the euro zone's debt crisis last flared up.

With the market pressure on Portugal mounting, however, economists say the ECB intervention will do little more than delay a bailout. What worries investors is the possibility that Europe's debt crisis, which has already enveloped Greece and Ireland, will spread from Portugal to Spain, one of Europe's largest economies. Such an outcome would test the European Union's ability to keep the common currency from unraveling.

Portugal's near-term prospects of avoiding a bailout, which Lisbon says it doesn't need, should become clearer on Wednesday, when it aims to sell between €750 million and €1.25 billion of bonds due 2014 and 2020.

The euro-zone economy is expected to expand mildly through 2011, aided by a recovery in global demand. But forecasts are overshadowed by the government debt crisis. See how member nations stack up. 

Even if the auction is a success, many analysts predict Portugal will be forced to accept a rescue later in the year. Portugal's government says it needs to borrow close to €20 billion this year, partly to meet heavy bond repayments in April. "We see a realistic possibility that Portugal will not manage to generate the funds required for 2011 without foreign aid," analysts at German lender Commerzbank said in a research note.

Other euro-zone governments, including those of Germany and France, have been urging Portugal to apply for EU-IMF rescue loans since November, according to people familiar with the matter. Officially, Paris and Berlin deny there is any pressure on Lisbon to seek aid.

Portugal can't be forced to apply for a bailout, European officials acknowledge. The ECB, which pressured Ireland into asking for aid late last year, has less leverage over Portugal: Unlike Irish banks this past fall, Portugal's banks aren't suffering from a meltdown in their loan portfolios and aren't dependent on emergency central bank funds for survival. 

Portugal's public spending has been less lavish than that of Greece, the first euro-zone country to get a rescue last year. But economists say Portugal has its own fatal flaw: chronically low economic growth, which—combined with high borrowing costs—makes it hard for the government to stem its rising debt and stay solvent.

Italy and Greece are also in the market this week with auctions of Treasury bills, and Spain will auction bonds due 2016 on Thursday. Some analysts believe that, with so much euro-denominated debt on offer, Portugal could struggle to attract investors unless it offers painfully high interest rates. 

Based on last year's emergency EU-IMF loans for Greece and Ireland, a bailout package for Portugal could total around €60 billion, UniCredit economist Marco Valli says. That amount would cover Portugal's budget deficits and debt-servicing costs for the next three years and give it a financial reserve to support its banks if necessary.

—Katie Martin contributed to this article

 Write to  Mark Brown at mark.brown@dowjones.com and Marcus Walker at marcus.walker@wsj.com 