The popular unrest sweeping across the Middle East sent thousands of protesters into the streets of Yemen and drew an exiled opposition leader home to riot-wracked Egypt, as questions mounted over who will benefit from the convulsions in the Arab world.

Nobel Peace Prize laureate and pro-democracy figure Mohamed ElBaradei returned to Egypt on Thursday evening, ahead of protests planned for Friday that promise to be the region's largest demonstration yet. The upheavals—inspired by the popular overthrow of Tunisia's authoritarian president less than two weeks ago—place Egypt at the center of the tectonic rumblings for change across the region.

In Yemen, thousands marched through San'a, the capital, in one of the largest protests seen in this autocratic nation in years. Secularist and Islamist protesters intermingled to shout for the removal of President Ali Abdullah Saleh, a key U.S. ally in the global fight against terrorism, whose government has long been criticized domestically for repression and corruption.

The government of Algeria was considering a broad government shuffle amid two weeks of sporadic rioting there, people familiar with the discussions said. And in Tunisia, where protesters continue to call for the removal of officials associated with the old regime, the caretaker government dropped two cabinet officials who were close to the freshly ousted president.

The day's events extended a mood of astonishment that has taken hold in the region over the past two weeks. Suddenly, Arab regimes long viewed as invulnerable are being challenged.

The domestic equation, and the relative strength of Islamist forces within the opposition, varies markedly from country to country. Yemen, for instance, has a strong Islamist element. But the common strand in the more economically advanced Tunisia and Egypt, observers in these countries say, is that demonstrations have started largely among Internet-savvy, middle-class citizens. As these protests have been viewed on regional television networks by a broader audience, still more people have been emboldened.

That is expected to be the case in Egypt, the Arab world's most populous nation, where Tuesday's demonstrations were the largest in three decades. Organizers and observers say the demonstrations set to take place after the noon prayers on Friday, a day when most Egyptians are off work, promise to be larger still.

Obama administration officials cautioned against drawing parallels across the region but pushed broadly for governments to respond. 

"The status quo in the Middle East and North Africa is not sustainable," said State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley. "They have young populations that are looking for more than their respective countries and governments are currently giving them."

The White House pushed the regime of Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak to open up his country's political system, reflecting a view inside the administration that delaying reforms only risks weakening the regime in the long run. 

"I've always said to him that making sure that they're moving forward on reform—political reform and economic reform—is absolutely critical to the long-term well-being of Egypt," President Barack Obama said in an interview broadcast on YouTube. "You can see these pent-up frustrations that are being displayed on the streets."

Egypt's ruling National Democratic Party said Thursday it is willing to talk to protesters and widen political participation, especially among Egypt's youth.

"All of our activities and policies are focused on the future of the youth," Safwat Al-Sherif, the secretary general of the NDP and the speaker of the Senate, told reporters. He said widespread economic hardship and a rising cost of living were "all items on the agenda" of the party. 

Small protests continued throughout Egypt on Thursday in cities including Suez. In the early morning hours Friday, Internet service appeared to be down across large swathes of Cairo. The reasons weren't immediately apparent.

A senior U.S. official said late Thursday that the administration was pushing Mr. Mubarak's government to open up the Internet and telecommunications channels to allow the demonstrators to communicate. 

Mr. ElBaradei, the 68-year-old former head of the International Atomic Energy Agency, is seen by a broad range of opposition leaders as a rare secular liberal with the stature to challenge Egypt's political establishment. He arrived in Cairo late Thursday, greeted by friends and some supporters. "It is a critical time in the life of Egypt," he said upon his arrival. "I wish we didn't have to go into the streets to impress upon the regime that they have to change."

Friday's Egyptian rallies—and Mr. ElBaradei's relation to them—are expected to provide an early read on the strength of the bonds between Egypt's newly influential opposition and Mr. ElBaradei, the man they have fitfully embraced as their leader.

The chief architects of Tuesday's rallies in Egypt are members of the National Association for Change, a grouping of opposition movements that Mr. ElBaradei assembled around him last summer. In a country where public dissent is rare and demonstrators infrequent, these organizers spurred tens of thousands of people to turn out to protest the regime of President Mubarak.

Several of these organizers now say they are disappointed with Mr. ElBaradei for spending much of his time outside Egypt, adding that he has returned late for a wave of protests that started without him. The protest's organizers say Mr. ElBaradei will have to regain the trust of demonstrators but concede he is one of the few figures capable of rallying disparate groups around him.

The political ambitions of Mr. ElBaradei remain frustratingly unclear to many of those who support him. Egyptian presidential elections are set for this fall, and the regime's tight grip on power has made it virtually impossible for outside candidates to emerge. 

Mr. ElBaradei has said he won't run for president unless Mr. Mubarak makes key changes to the constitution, including lifting barriers for independent candidates. 

Those close to Mr ElBaradei acknowledge that his nebulous intentions have disappointed many. His desire to run for president has appeared to waver. But some of Mr. ElBaradei's supporters point to the continuing political vacillation in Tunisia as an example of how even the most organic, grass-roots democracy movements ultimately need strong leadership to allay fears of chaos that could accompany any leadership change.

A crucially important opposition group that has maintained an official distance from this week's demonstrations is Egypt's outlawed but influential Muslim Brotherhood. Mr. ElBaradei successfully wooed the Muslim Brotherhood last year to participate in an opposition signature-gathering campaign. They remain aligned with his general goals, though not his political aims. 

The Muslim Brotherhood hasn't officially mobilized its people to take part in the protest, but individual members have done so. A senior U.S. administration official characterized the Brotherhood as hovering around the edges of this week's demonstrations, not directly involved in it. On Thursday night, Reuters reported that Egypt arrested three spokesmen of the Muslim Brotherhood and other members of the group ahead of Friday's planned protests, according the group's lawyer.

Egypt's mix of opposition groups isn't atypical of the region. Yet each country has a different combination. Islamist forces are barely perceptible in Tunisia, purged from the country in a wave of crackdowns in the 1990s. Algeria's secular military has at times fought brutal campaigns against Islamists since the military took control in the early 1990s before an election Islamists were expected to win. Yemen is host to an al Qaeda affiliate. But Thursday's demonstrations were planned by leaders of an opposition umbrella group that includes more moderate Islamic groups, as well as other opposition parties, including secular socialists.

—Jay Solomon, Benoit Faucon and Margaret Coker contributed to this article.

 Write to  Bill Spindle at bill.spindle@wsj.com 