Prosecutors are trying to prevent  Raj Rajaratnam's defense team from trying to discredit  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS


0.26
%




 Chief Executive  Lloyd Blankfein as a trial witness with questions about government investigations into the bank. 

The government has subpoenaed Mr. Blankfein and may call him as a witness as early as this week, according to letters written to prosecutors and a judge by lawyers for the Galleon Group founder in his insider-trading trial. The defense team has argued to the judge overseeing the case that it should be able to probe Mr. Blankfein about whether he is testifying "in the hopes of obtaining a better resolution" in ongoing government investigations.

Federal prosecutors in Manhattan said in a filing made public Tuesday evening that Mr. Blankfein would testify about the service of former Goldman director  Rajat Gupta, and what duties of confidentiality Mr. Gupta owed the bank. 

Read letters from lawyers regarding Lloyd Blankfein's testimony

Mr. Gupta was accused this month in a civil proceeding by the Securities Exchange Commission of tipping Mr. Rajaratnam about non-public information he received as a Goldman director. Mr. Gupta has denied wrongdoing and sued the SEC, accusing it of violating his constitutional rights. 

The defense team on March 7 subpoenaed Goldman for information about investigations into the firm. Goldman responded with a copy of its annual report detailing about 20 pending legal matters, including some preliminary government probes. Mr. Rajaratnam's lawyers have also asked prosecutors for similar information. 

But prosecutors, in a letter Monday to U.S. District Judge  Richard Holwell, said open investigations of Goldman Sachs "are of no relevance" to the trial and have no bearing on Mr. Blankfein's credibility. 

"Rajaratnam might suggest, for example, that because Goldman Sachs is tied up in many different legal proceedings, the firm—and by extension its CEO, Mr. Blankfein—is not to be trusted," prosecutors wrote in the letter. A Goldman spokesman declined to comment.

Mr. Rajaratnam's lawyers said in their own letter to the judge that they didn't intend to ask about specific proceedings and hadn't planned to suggest that open investigations mean Mr. Blankfein can't be trusted. 

The government also told the judge that Mr. Blankfein shouldn't be cross-examined about Goldman's possible role in the 2008 financial crisis because the trial "is simply not the appropriate forum to delve into the highly complex causes" of the crisis and recession. 

Mr. Rajaratnam's team responded that it "has never suggested that Goldman Sachs is somehow responsible for the 2008 financial crisis." 

 Write to  Michael Rothfeld at michael.rothfeld@wsj.com and Jenny Strasburg at jenny.strasburg@wsj.com 