PARIS—French voters expressed disbelief as well as imaginative plot theories Sunday after waking up to the revelation that Dominique Strauss-Kahn was being held by police in New York on charges of sexual assault.

"This is completely surreal—politics is turning into a play," said Hakim Bouras, 24, a bank information-technology technician, who said he voted for Socialist candidate Segolene Royal in the 2007 presidential elections.

In the hours since New York City police said Mr. Strauss-Kahn had been arrested after allegedly forcing a cleaning woman onto his bed and sexually assaulting her inside his room at the Sofitel Hotel near Times Square, images of the International Monetary Fund president have flooded the airwaves in France and dominated news coverage.

Mr. Strauss-Kahn's personal attorney, William Taylor, said the IMF chief would plead not guilty to the charges. Mr. Strauss-Kahn was expected to be arraigned in court later Sunday.

"When you think that he could be the future president of France based on the polls and everything, I just can't begin to understand how he could have done this," said Seye Lamine, a taxi driver in Paris.

Mr. Strauss-Kahn has been running high in the polls a year ahead of the presidential elections, suggesting that if he ran, he could have trounced President Nicolas Sarkozy by a wide margin. The IMF boss hadn't yet declared his intention to run for the Socialist candidacy, though the French political world widely expected him to do so.

For now, public opinion suggests the arrest will overshadow those aspirations. 

"Unbelievable!" said Rabie Nouira, a 23 year-old journalist student, calling him by his widely used initials. "It's game over for DSK."

The arrest of Mr. Strauss-Kahn caps three week of communication mishaps, during which the IMF president and Socialist presidential hopeful was photographed getting into a friend's Porsche Panamera, a car that sells in France for more than €100,000 ($141,000).

The picture sparked uneasiness within the party and media questions about Mr. Strauss-Kahn's lifestyle. The official is often described in the French press as a "champagne socialist" and part of a Parisian elite, with properties in France and Morocco. Anne Sinclair, Mr. Strauss-Kahn's wife, comes from a renowned art-dealing family.

Ms. Sinclair, a French journalist, said Sunday she didn't believe any of the accusations against her husband. In a statement, she said she had no doubt that "he will be proved innocent."

On Friday, Mr. Strauss-Kahn said he was suing daily France Soir after the newspaper said he bought suits valued at as much as $35,000 from Georges de Paris, an upmarket tailor based in Washington, D.C., an allegation he denies. 

The newspaper has defended its reporting. "The story is the outcome of a serious investigation; we have evidence to back what we published," said Remy Dessart, the newspaper's editor in chief.

The glaring spotlight on Mr. Strauss Kahn's lifestyle breaks from the traditional reserve among the French media when it comes to the personal lives of politicians, though the criminal charges in this case automatically make it a highly public matter. 

A practice of largely ignoring the personal lives of politicians helped Francois Mitterrand, the socialist president who ran the country between 1981 and 1995, hide the existence of his illegitimate daughter, Mazarine Pingeot, for 20 years, even though the information was well known in Paris' small, influential circles. In 1988, running for re-election, Mr. Mitterrand didn't disclose to voters that he had been diagnosed with prostate cancer seven years beforehand.

To be sure, President Sarkozy has somewhat changed that trend. Mr. Sarkozy, who has been public about his divorce and subsequent marriage to model-turned-singer Carla Bruni, has sought to be more open, letting himself be photographed while jogging in a T-shirt or without his top while holidaying.

In the 2007 presidential campaign, Mr. Sarkozy agreed to publish his medical bulletins twice a year. But starting in 2008 the publication was suspended, and when the president fainted while jogging in July 2009, an official statement put it down to a type of dizzy spell, a diagnosis many found too vague. 

Still, for all the increased scrutiny on politicians' lifestyles, many in the French public believe they can get away with almost anything in France.

"Had this happened in a Sofitel in Paris, I very much doubt we would have ever come to know about it," said Anne Sophie Michel, a producer at Universal Music in Paris.

"In France we're generally less hard than Americans on sexual-harassment cases," said Marie Pierre Moura, a 32-year-old chemistry teacher in Le Pecq, in the Yvelines region close to Paris.

Stunned by the news, many elaborated fuzzy theories on some sort of plot to force Mr. Strauss-Kahn to abandon the election race.

"The timing of all these revelations on Strauss-Kahn is a bit suspect," said Mr. Bouras, the IT technician.

"It's not the first time we hear this kind of rumor about him," said Vincent Carrier, 39, a physical-education teacher. "But now, all of a sudden, a year ahead of the elections, when he's leading the polls . . . it does smell of conspiracy."

Still, French voters are expected to be unforgiving if the allegations prove true.

"We don't want someone's private life to come under scrutiny, but once something like this happens, there's no forgiveness," said Ms. Michel, a Parisian who lives in the 18th arrondissement, close to Montmartre.

 Write to  Gabriele Parussini at gabriele.parussini@dowjones.com 