If the Republicans in the state Senate had their way, New Jersey would cut funding for full-day preschool in poor districts to pump up funding to suburban and rural schools.

The lawmakers made the suggestions as part of a private proposal to the Christie administration, saying it would save $300 million, a fraction of the state's annual spending on schools, according to a presentation reviewed by The Wall Street Journal.

The Christie administration is working on altering the formula used to distribute subsidies to school districts. About $10.3 billion—or more than a third of the state's $29.4 billion annual budget—will be spent on local school districts this year. Richer districts receive much less aid than poor, urban districts because of a requirement in the state constitution to ensure that every child gets a free, "thorough and efficient" public education.

The Senate Republicans would send $200 million to other districts that have hit funding caps, give $50 million to districts that spend the least per pupil to encourage "efficiency" and launch a $30 million program for data-based teacher evaluation and instruction in the state's poorer districts. Districts that bus students long distances would get extra help, and $3.3 million would go to a handful of towns with high senior citizen populations.

The December proposal, which had been in the works since the summer, is the most cohesive attempt to influence policy among the legislative parties, but it's unclear whether it will sway the Christie administration.

Gov. Chris Christie argues that money alone cannot be the barometer of a good education. That's especially important in these lean times. 

His administration is defending a $820 million cut in year-over-year education spending in front of the state Supreme Court, which has wielded major power over school spending through a series of cases known as Abbott v. Burke. 

Some lawmakers believe it's unlikely there will be fundamental changes to the school formula until the court's members are changed—another goal of Mr. Christie's. He strongly opposes the state Supreme Court injecting itself into spending decisions. 

In 1998, the court said the state had to pay for half-day preschool in the urban "Abbott" districts. But  David Sciarra, the executive director of the Education Law Center, which argued the Abbott cases, said the court inherently required full-day preschool when it blessed the current formula in 2009.

The state this year is spending a little less than $600 million to fund full-day preschool, mostly in 35 districts. 

"It would be a tragedy for the kids in the urban districts and beyond if the legislature were to tamper in any way with this program," he said. "This is one of the best preschool programs in the United States."

As it stands, the formula, which was crafted under then-Gov.  Jon Corzine in 2008 and approved by the Supreme Court in 2009, sets a standard for how much it costs to educate a child. Then, using property values and income, it determines which towns can meet that standard on their own and which need extra aid. It also adds funding for certain students, such as those in poverty or who have limited English skills.

State funding is said to "follow the child," because each student's needs are supposed to be represented. But Republicans say that is not consistent, because most of the funding for special education is not based on individual students in the district, but on the district's wealth.

The Democrats who control the Legislature have supported the current formula. Assembly Speaker  Sheila Oliver in a statement called the formula sensible. "I will not look favorably on any change to this formula's basic premise," she said.