Most of us wake up every morning to a burst of mint when we brush our teeth and many of us don't think of mint again for the day unless it's to chew a piece of gum or remove a sprig from a slice of chocolate cake at dessert. But as the crop of feminine and masculine mint fragrances taking the limelight this summer reveals, there's another side to mint that is decidedly subtler and altogether contemporary. 

Jacques Cavallier, the nose behind Giorgio Armani's new scent for men, Code Sport ($73, giorgioarmanibeauty-usa.com), turned to mint because "its modern freshness fits perfectly with the sophisticated image of the brand." Top notes of "spearmint bring a fizzing, spicy and frosted freshness" to this flirtatious cologne, he said. Peppermint brings a further chill and Brazilian mint deepens the scent, giving it a lasting physicality. For Mr. Cavallier, Code Sport harkens back to his youth in Grasse, France, the capital of perfume, when his after-school drink was a glass of cold water with a swirl of mint syrup. 

Just across the channel, James Heeley, the U.K.-born, now Paris-based graphic and interior designer, would race as a boy to fetch the mint from his mother's garden every Sunday for their roast. But it wasn't until he found himself walking through a field of wild mint on the southern shores of Corsica many years later that he found the inspiration for Menthe Fraîche ($148, barneys.com), the first of his coterie of clean, unisex fragrances. Marrying the "rounder, naughty" character of peppermint with the "sharp, crisp" notes of spearmint, as Mr. Heeley put it, Menthe Fraîche is a joyful, breezy perfume that floats on a base of white cedar, freesia and green tea. 

 Jo Malone serves us a Fresh Mint Leaf Cologne ($55, jomalone.com) in her new tea collection for women. It's a vivid spearmint, at once familiar and transparent. Layer it, however, with her Sweet Lemon Cologne or Earl Grey and Cucumber Cologne, and you'll be rewarded with a sophisticated and very British royal union.

 Guerlain Homme ($65, saksfifthavenue.com) is decidedly less aristocratic in manners. Inspired by Mojito cocktails, it's infused with the zest of sweet lime, crushed mint leaves and Jamaican rum. A whiff of vetiver balances the sweetness with a more masculine note. It's heady, tipsy and one sniff is never enough. 

 Cartier Roadster  ($80, cartier.us) comes in an aerodynamic bottle, topped with a cap that's reminiscent of their Roadster watch face. While the bottle may be a toy, the fragrance is anything but. Mint, bergamot, patchouli and vanilla give it an ever-changing hot-cold dynamic that carries both clarity and mystery.

In Hermès Eau d'Orange Verte ($125, hermes.com), mint is almost imperceptible, artfully blended with lemon, mandarin and cedar. But it is that very note that gives this classic scent its timeless green accord. 

Master perfumers Serge Lutens and Frédéric Malle  have recently turned to mint to create modern, pure fragrances that come as a radical departure from their characteristically more complex scents. Mr. Malle described the mint in Geranium Pour Monsieur ($225, editionsdeparfums.com) as bringing "a very natural smelling long lasting freshness." Paired with geranium and aniseed, it's chic, bright and surprising. 

In L'Eau ($150, barneys.com), Serge Lutens  brings a mere three notes together—white mint, clary sage and magnolia. "I wanted," he explained, "to create an antifragrance whose notes would make a lasting sensation of wearing a clean scent, not a perfume. This creation is my response to a world that is over-scented." L'Eau is as simple as a perfectly pressed white linen sheet.

Speaking of ironing, a few spritzes of Santa Maria Novella's Herb and Mint Water ($28, lafco.com) will give an energizing hint of mint to crisp white shirts and linen dresses. Or keep a bottle in the fridge and spray it on the back of your neck when the thermostat spikes for a bracing chill and a welcome mood-lift. And if you happen to need a jolt to your beach-softened brain this summer, according to the great Roman philosopher Pliny the Elder, mint exhilarates and awakens the mind. That it also repels mosquitoes is a bonus. But after a dab of one of these fresh and feisty scents, you're sure to be attracting a fairer species.

