BANGALORE – India's  Wipro Ltd. may change its foreign exchange hedging strategies for quake-hit Japan and the politically tense Middle East and North Africa markets, even though cash flows from these regions form just a small part of its total revenue, a senior company executive said. 

After assessing the business impact from the natural disaster in Japan and the political turmoil in the Middle East, Wipro may revise the hedges it has accounted for, or realign itself to the new situations, said  Rajendra Shreemal, vice president, corporate treasury. 

"After the earthquake, things [Japan's monetary policy] will change," Mr. Shreemal said in a recent interview. 

Jittery investors are shifting to safe-haven assets following Friday's magnitude-9.0 earthquake, fearing further aftershocks and explosions at nuclear power plants in Japan after an explosion rocked a fourth nuclear reactor Tuesday. 

Also, they're worried that the unrest in Libya could spread to key oil-producing countries in the Middle East and disrupt supplies, triggering gains in the dollar. 

"You look at the Middle East crisis, you don't know where the dollar is headed or whether the contagion will spread to Saudi Arabia. If it goes to Saudi Arabia, it can be a disaster," Mr. Shreemal said. 

The Nasdaq and Mumbai-listed company gets more than 90% of its revenue from overseas and takes a slightly long-term view on hedging, unlike its immediate competitor  Infosys Technologies Ltd. 

Wipro, India's third-largest software exporter by sales, usually hedges $1.5 billion-$1.7 billion of net cash flows at any point of time, regardless of a fall or rise in the Indian rupee against the dollar. 

"Our hedging strategy has predominantly been that we would hedge anywhere between 50% and 75% of the net [cash] inflows of the next four quarters," Mr. Shreemal said. 

Mr. Shreemal expects the rupee to remain in a band of 44-46 rupees to a dollar in the quarter ending June 30--similar to the previous four to six quarters. 

The rupee is likely to remain in a range through 2011, but without an appreciating bias, he said. The rupee has slipped by 1.3% so far in 2011 whereas last year the local unit rose by about 4% against the greenback. 

A 1% move in the Indian rupee either way impacts Wipro's operating margin by 0.35 percentage point, Mr. Shreemal said. 

He cites India's yawning current account deficit, prevailing poor global risk sentiment, political unrest in the Middle East and North Africa regions and the nuclear emergency in quake-hit Japan as reasons for the rupee's likely losses this year. 

Wipro's hedging strategy isn't dictated by views on where the rupee could be compared with the dollar in three or six months or a year, Mr. Shreemal said, adding that the company focuses on drivers of currency movements to take hedging calls. 

"You cannot live quarter-by-quarter. You have to take a long-term view," he said. Wipro has pegged hedges at various levels, ranging between 40 rupees to a dollar and 50 rupees to a dollar, he said. 

The company holds about three-quarters of its hedges in forwards and the remaining in options. 

"It [the mix] purely depends on the market factors," Mr. Shreemal said, adding that the company favors forwards. "The premiums are so good." 

 Write to  Dhanya Ann Thoppil at dhanya.thoppil@dowjones.com 