HONG KONG—Blue-chip developer  Hang Lung Properties Ltd. said Wednesday its profit for the first half of its fiscal year fell 81% from a year earlier, due to "negligible" property sales in Hong Kong. 

Hong Kong's real-estate market has faced uncertainty since the government introduced a series of measures last year to slow the rise in property prices. In the latest round of cooling measures introduced Nov. 19, the government imposed an additional stamp duty, or transaction levy, of up to 15% on apartment sales within two years of their purchase in a bid to discourage speculation. 

Hang Lung Chairman  Ronnie Chan said the company may hold off on releasing its remaining 1,400 high-end residential units in Hong Kong for the time being, even though that would cause a short-term decline in profit. 

"Our properties in Hong Kong are of good quality. We don't need to sell them at times like this," he said. 

Mr. Chan said the company is optimistic about expanding its presence in mainland China's leasing market, adding that Hang Lung will continue to focus on land acquisitions in China for development of commercial, retail and integrated projects. 

"We haven't bought land in Hong Kong for more than 10 years. There is too much competition here, whereas on the mainland there are still a lot of opportunities to grow," he said. 

Hang Lung Properties, whose results mark the start of the Hong Kong property sector's reporting season, said its net profit for the six months ended Dec. 31 dropped to 3.42 billion Hong Kong dollars (US$439.1 million), from HK$18.15 billion a year earlier. 

However, the value of Hong Kong's property transactions surged 34% in 2010 to the highest level since 1997, suggesting other property heavyweights could issue robust results in the next few weeks.

Hang Lung Properties' underlying profit dropped 77%, to HK$1.28 billion from HK$5.51. Analysts prefer underlying profit as a performance gauge for Hong Kong's property companies because regular revaluations of investment properties distort the bottom line.

Revenue fell 74%, to HK$2.52 billion from HK$9.73 billion. Revenue from property sales in Hong Kong fell to HK$3 million from HK$7.51 billion a year earlier, while rental revenue from the company's Hong Kong properties grew 9% to HK$1.39 billion.

The firm proposed a first-half dividend of 17 Hong Kong cents, unchanged from a year earlier. 

The increase in the value of its investment properties for the first half was HK$2.30 billion, down from HK$16.16 billion a year earlier.

  Hang Lung Group Ltd., which owns around 52% of Hang Lung Properties, also reported its first-half earnings Wednesday.

Net profit was HK$1.90 billion, down from HK$10.04 billion a year earlier, on revenue of HK$2.79 billion, down from HK$9.99 billion. It declared a first-half dividend of 19 Hong Kong cents, the same as a year earlier.