Short-term disorder in the foreign exchange market may be an irritant, but it's usually nothing more. Government reaction to this brief disorder, on the other hand, can have a long-term impact. Last week's currency intervention, coordinated by the G-7, to stabilize the yen is a case in point. 

The G-7 says that "excess volatility and disorderly movements" in yen-paired currency markets—meaning the sudden appreciation the yen has seen against the dollar for instance—"have adverse implications for economic and financial stability." But by stopping the natural appreciation of the yen, developed-economy finance ministers are robbing Japan of the chance to find some stability after the Tohoku earthquake. This may even be a first for the G-7: agreeing to a policy which is damaging to a fellow member, with that member's full endorsement. 

Some claim that the yen is being driven up by speculators who, on the basis of experience after the 1995 Kobe earthquake, expect the yen to appreciate. After Kobe, insurance companies had to buy lots of yen to meet claims. This obviously drove up the yen's value. According to this theory, speculators are buying yen now to take advantage of future demand. Whether or not this theory is true, it is irrelevant to how governments and central banks should look at economic policy as a whole. And right now, that policy should favor a rising yen for the sake of the Japanese economy.

Consider what the earthquake has done to the balance of supply and demand for Japanese goods. The Japanese want more—in fact, much more—of these goods, and foreigners want no fewer than before. Of course, a good chunk of the country's productive capacity has been destroyed. So supply has fallen sharply, while demand has increased. As Japanese goods become scarce relative to non-Japanese goods, their relative price must rise. That means the yen rate against the dollar or the euro has to go up.

Those riling against speculators driving up the yen think this is a disaster for Japan. But would it prevent recovery? The anti-appreciation crowd fears a slump in output, which is usually caused by a slump in demand. In Japan of late, what has mattered especially is external demand. If the issue boils down to a slump in foreign demand for Japanese goods, then a strengthening currency would indeed impede recovery. 

But this occasion is different. Japan will see a slump in GDP, but that will be due to a fall in domestic supply. In that case, it's important to help boost the supply of foodstuffs or construction materials into Japan. Right now, the Japanese want to consume as much as they can at home, and export as little as possible. So what they need are imports. A strong yen would cheapen imports in yen terms, allowing the transfer of more and more goods and services into Japan. 

The urgency of getting resources to Japan underlines the dangers of the exchange market intervention. Such interventions are defended by the claim that they slow the pace of adjustment and dampen volatility. Except, at the moment, the faster the adjustment the faster resources will be diverted to Japan. And sudden volatility in prices is part of the process the market uses to find a new level. Dampening the volatility will end up slowing down the pace at which the market finds its way.

Central banks also justify interventions as a way to gain foreign exchange reserves. But Japan has no current need to tap the euro- or dollar-denominated savings of other countries. The country has an enormous stock of yen-denominated assets; these show up in the country's high savings. This surplus can now be spent down, regardless of whether growth is about to slow—because of the savings, expenditure needn't depend for now on expected income. So it does not really matter whether Japan can borrow overseas readily. Because of this savings buffer, claims that exchange-rate fluctuations will reduce capital flows—a claim of dubious validity anyway—are irrelevant.

If these fluctuations give cause to worries and even panics about the domestic banking system, the Bank of Japan can help in the traditional way by providing liquidity. But it's important to note that liquidity is temporary; it cannot fundamentally deal with the capital lost. Allowing foreign banks and other outside lenders to put forth their capital is a better idea.

All in all, this tragedy can be ameliorated by a stronger yen. The G-7 should let the foreign exchange market work its way to that end.

 Mr. Wood is professor emeritus of economics at Cass Business School in London and professor emeritus of monetary economics at the University of Buckingham. 