Red Roof Inn Inc.'s debt saga appears to be coming to an end, with the voluntary forfeiture of 127 of its hotels to holders of their mortgages.

Red Roof's owners, led by Westmont Hospitality Group and  Citigroup Inc.,
C


0.67
%




 reached a tentative deal late last year with holders of $754 million of past due mortgages to hand over the 127 hotels, according to debt-analysis company Realpoint LLC. 

The forfeitures could end the nearly two-year ordeal of Red Roof's attempts to restructure the loans. Westmont, Citi and a Canadian pension fund bought Red Roof in 2007 from Accor SA for $1.3 billion, financing the purchase with $1.2 billion of debt. All told, Red Roof owns 203 budget hotels bearing its name, and its franchisees own another 139 lodgings.

Red Roof defaulted on the $754 million in mortgages in 2009. Realpoint calculates that the 127 Red Roofs pledged as collateral for those mortgages are worth less than the mortgages' balance. There also is a $164 million mezzanine loan tied to the hotels.

The latest proposal calls for Red Roof to continue running the properties. "We are optimistic that the long-term franchise agreements will help position Red Roof for profitable growth," Red Roof President  Andrew Alexander said in a statement.

—Kris Hudson

It is no secret that booksellers have fallen on hard times, but their troubles hit home in recent days for investors in a real-estate investment trust that counts  Borders Group Inc. as its second-largest tenant.

  Agree Realty Corp.
ADC


0.29
%




, which has leases with 15 Borders stores along with the company's headquarters in Ann Arbor, Mich., has seen its shares tumble 9.7% since the bookstore chain announced Thursday that it was halting payments to some of its vendors as it tried to refinance its debt. If that effort failed, Borders warned, Borders could run short on cash.

Agree, of Farmington Hills, Mich., which gets 20% of its revenue from its leases with Borders, didn't respond to a request for comment. Its struggles point to the headwinds facing landlords even as the broader economy recovers. 

"While a lot of companies have enjoyed the strong rebound in REIT pricing, there are still a lot of issues out there," said  Gary Linhart, a portfolio manager at ViaWest Group, a Phoenix firm focusing on REIT investments. "Even if Borders survives, its real-estate footprint will have to change, which means that it will have to start talking to landlords about rent and space reductions."

—A.D. Pruitt

Hospitals are looking to the real-estate industry to help cut costs. 

The latest example: Beaumont Hospitals, a three-hospital nonprofit health system in the Detroit area, has tapped real-estate-services company  Jones Lang LaSalle Inc.
JLL


0.81
%




 to create a joint venture to manage its real-estate needs, from construction projects to maintenance, more efficiently. For example, Jones Lang LaSalle will be able to use its size to negotiate better deals for Beaumont's natural-gas supply, said  Jim Safran, the chief executive of the new venture. 

The deal comes as hospitals around the country look for new ways to save money as they grapple with the health-care overhaul and an aging population. "In terms of maintaining even a slim margin, the need to focus on getting more efficient is going to be something that is seen throughout the industry," Mr. Safran said.

Meanwhile, real-estate companies that have traditionally focused on managing real-estate portfolios for banks and other big corporations are swooping into health care. Real-estate-services company  CB Richard Ellis Group Inc.
CBG


0.58
%




 also has been ramping up its hospital-outsourcing business.

—Anton Troianovski