One day last month, my twin 13-year-old boys—students at two different Los Angeles middle schools—barreled through the front door, charged the snack drawer and mentioned in the most casual way possible that each planned to take part in a National Day of Silence in support of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgendered classmates.

Say what?

"You know, Mom," one of them said, as he pawed through the packages of chips, "it's for kids who want to come out and stuff."

It was one of those moments when you realize that the world in which your children live is substantially different from the one you once inhabited. Trying to imagine the boys of my own seventh-grade class understanding the range of sexual identities encompassed by the term "LGBT," let alone standing in solidarity with its constituents, is impossible. Yet here were my own boys, suiting up for the revolution: Beavis and Butt-Head go to Stonewall. "I'm proud of you," I said, with feeling.

"Can we have root beer?" they asked, with none.

Such a fine generation of young Americans—it's too bad that they are being systematically robbed of the great national story that is their birthright. Here in California, history classes are now required by law to include the contributions to the state and nation that have been made by Native Americans, African Americans, Mexican Americans, Asian Americans, Pacific Islanders, European Americans and persons with disabilities. Soon to be added to this list—provided that Senate Bill 48, which just passed in Sacramento, becomes state law—are the contributions of "gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgendered Americans."

Pity the poor textbook writer, charged not only with describing American history to semiliterate students (our public schools rank 49th in the nation) but also with locating transgendered Americans who made their marks upon it. Pity also the students themselves, their weak grasp of our shared history about to become even more tenuous. 

Shaking down our national story for underrepresented Mexican Americans—however specious such a task may be—can't be thirsty work, but the curriculum meeting where they try to find a "lesbian American" present at the Second Continental Congress is one I'd pay to attend. Imagine our benighted students sitting at their desks and trying to make a coherent story emerge from among the special protections offered certain of its players, rather than from the central theme of American history: the relentless journey toward freedom.

But most troubling about Senate Bill 48 is its "proposed purpose," which is at once laudable and misguided: to discourage the bullying of gay kids. We may disagree about the extent to which schools should indoctrinate kids with particular political or social beliefs, but it's indisputable that the world is cruel, children can be sadistic and the playground can be ugly. 

Teaching children to behave decently toward one another, supervising them, punishing them when they disobey—this is how you make life better and kinder at school. The minute you define some groups as protected from that cruelty, you automatically make others candidates for it. You should not need a lobby and a special-interest group to protect your child from taunting and cruelty, because what will happen to the child without an SB 48 of her own? History classes and antibullying campaigns emerge from two separate obligations with which our schools are charged: teaching children the story of America and inculcating in them the knowledge and practice of human decency.

My boys learned in their morning assemblies about the day of silence, a student-led effort in which kids take a vow against the bullying of gay students. I recall what assemblies were like in my own youth: the darkened auditorium, the welcome respite from class, the important personages who stood at the microphone to address us. How wonderful it would have been, particularly for the gay students, if one of these programs had been devoted to standing in fealty with them. They didn't have that. 

But at least they had history class, where our teachers were unafraid to tell us the truth: that long ago a group of white, male and (apparently) heterosexual men avowed and then defended with their lives a set of ideals that made all of us—eventually and at times imperfectly—free. 

There is a straight line running from Valley Forge to Stonewall. Too bad that kids are less and less likely to learn about it.