There are alarm clocks that cook your bacon and bacon screen-printed wallets. So why not a metal pig to shoulder your grilling needs? This handmade portable piggy hibachi works indoors and out, and with any kind of charcoal or wood flavor you desire in your slab of pork (we recommend homemade applewood-smoked bacon). The porcine hibachi is piglet-size, but if you're in the mood to grill a bit of pork belly in the park, this little piggy will be your best friend. $468, anthropologie.com 

—Pervaiz Shallwani

 Susan Spicer, chef of Bayona and Mondo in New Orleans 

"I will try to grow Padrón peppers in my garden. They are smallish, bright green, thin-skinned, bell-shaped peppers that are very flavorful but usually not hot, although there may be one or two hot ones in every few dozen. In Spain they are roasted or sautéed with olive oil and salt, and are served alone, or with anchovies or other ingredients to make tapas." $15 a pound, tienda.com 

Learn at the knee of a culinary legend this summer, when Anne Willan, longtime proprietor of La Varenne cooking school in Burgundy, France, opens her Santa Monica home to small classes with local chefs. Chefs from two well-respected Los Angeles restaurants, Il Grano and Fraîche, will teach this summer; chef and restaurateur Michael McCarty of the legendary Michael's in Santa Monica and New York is scheduled for September. Demonstration and tasting classes cost $250 a head and are limited to 12 people. lavarenne.com 

—Katy McLaughlin

 Lidia Bastianich, host of 'Lidia's Italy' and chef of Felidia in New York 

"Every summer, I reach for Colatura di Alici, an ingredient that's been used in Italy for centuries. It's the juice that drains out of anchovies salted in a barrel. It has the effect of umami and it brings out flavor in everything you do. I love it on tomatoes instead of salt with olive oil. I also use it in sauces, just to accent. When I do a roast lamb or chicken, at the end I just drizzle a little Colatura on it and brush it on." $28 for 3.4 ounces, deandeluca.com 

If you love a milkshake, and the prospect of iced coffee is enough to turn a dour day upbeat, it's time to embrace the affogato—the Italian version of a grownup soda-fountain drink. The caffeinated wonder combines hot espresso with cold gelato to create a melty, spoonable (or gulpable) treat. A newfangled rendition has turned up at Blue Bottle Coffee in Brooklyn, N.Y., where pastry chef Sarah Cox pours a single pulled shot over a half-cup of homemade double chocolate stout and milk chocolate ice cream. You can try it at home with whatever scoop you prefer—keep in mind, if it's a richer flavor, follow Ms. Cox's modest measurement; if a milder choice, make it three quarters of a cup of ice cream.

—Charlotte Druckman

 Grant Achatz,chef of Alinea and Next in Chicago 

"The Big Green Egg is a great smoker for summer. There has been an explosion of barbecue places opening up in the Chicago area. My sons said to me, 'Can't we do this at home?' We came up with ribs and other usual stuff like corn and eggplant, but also lettuces and kale and fruits like watermelon, strawberries, apples and pineapple. My boys are all jazzed about making smoked applesauce this summer." From $380, biggreenegg.com  

Known for its all-natural, low-calorie, light-on-the-sugar (and the pure cane kind, at that), only-four-ingredients-per-bottle policy, Seattle's Dry Soda Co. recently unveiled its newest flavor, a refreshing Blood Orange. $19 for a dozen, drysoda.com 

Anton Nocito, founder of Brooklyn-based P&H Soda Co., just made a limited run of grapefruit syrup. Use either in a spritzer, mixed into a cocktail or, for a homemade slushie, poured over crushed ice. $13 per bottle, Kalustyan's, 212-685-3451  

—C.D.

Jeni Britton Bauer has hard-core ice cream science credentials. The proprietor of Jeni's Splendid Ice Creams, with nine Ohio locations and pints sold nationwide, has researched the field for over a decade, even attending the Penn State Ice Cream Short Course, first created for dairy manufacturers in 1892. In her ingenious homemade-ice-cream bible, "Jeni's Splendid Ice Creams: Artisanal Ice Creams for the Home Kitchen" (to be published in June), she adds natural amendments like cream cheese, corn starch and (non-high-fructose) corn syrup, all of which prevent crystals or clumps without masking the rich flavors. Her à la mode creations, including goat cheese and roasted cherry ice cream and sour beer sorbet, will, she promises, "make you the star of your dinner party, the talk of the neighborhood, and the hero at family holidays." $24, artisanbooks.com 

—Emily Kaiser Thelin

Reserve a spot to eat in Europe's skyline, literally, in one of the two "The Cube" restaurants, ultramodern pop-ups that perch atop landmarks in European cities. From March 30 to July 3, one Cube will sit atop Brussels's Arc de Triomphe; in July, another Cube heads to a to-be-announced location in Stockholm. Next stops: Somewhere in Italy, Russia and Switzerland. Top local chefs handle the cooking duties. €150 ($215) a head, electrolux.be/cube 

—Katy McLaughlin