Yoga has many taxing positions, but in Connecticut that's being taken literally.

 From yoga studios and pet-grooming services to boats and even coupons, Connecticut Gov.  Dannel Malloy is proposing $1.5 billion in new taxes to help plug the state's $3.3 billion shortfall. 

Mr. Malloy calls the new taxes part of his plan for "shared sacrifice." But consumers and business owners say the levies on everyday items come at a time when they're already stretched for cash. 

Currently yoga studios are exempt from the 6% state sales taxes that health and athletic facilities pay. The proposed budget raises the tax to 6.25% and includes commercial yoga studios. Studios run by religious or non-profit organizations would continue to be tax-exempt. 

"I understand Connecticut's financial situation is dire and we're going to have to make tough choices," says  Robin Brace, owner of Bikram Yoga New Haven. "But it seems so backwards to be taxing something that can actually reduce expensive health-care costs." 

In Stamford, a group of more than a dozen studios brought their concerns to a town-hall meeting held earlier this week by the governor to discuss the budget. 

Mr. Malloy expects the yoga tax to yield $200,000 annually, part of $160 million he looks to generate by eliminating sales-tax exemptions. He also wants to start slapping sales taxes on cosmetic surgery, pet-grooming, nail salons and limousine services. 

  Ben Barnes, Connecticut's Office of Policy and Management secretary, says the administration has received backlash from many interest groups and will evaluate each of their claims. 

"I've heard we will kill the boating industry, devastate the yoga industry," Mr. Barnes says. "If one tax or another has a serious negative impact on an industry we'll take steps to soften it but you have to take everything with a grain of salt."

The proposed new taxes also are targeting the state's $1 billion boating industry, reversing tax exemptions that were passed more than a decade ago to help Connecticut compete with nearby states. 

In 1993 Rhode Island, already a tax harbor for boats, removed sales taxes on new purchases. In response, Connecticut killed sales taxes on storage and repair and maintenance labor. It maintained taxes on the purchase of boats. 

"Within 18 months we saw a 30% increase in business," says Grant Westerson, executive director of the Connecticut Marine Trades Association, a lobbying and trade group. 

Now Connecticut wants to put those same taxes back in place plus some new ones. Under Mr. Malloy's plan, the state would generate $14.3 million over the next two years by taxing boat services at 6.25%, including storage and labor. A 3% luxury tax would be imposed on the purchase of boats that cost more than $100,000. 

Additionally, owners would begin paying property taxes on boats. The owner of a $100,000 boat would pay $1,400 annually.

About 110,000 boats are registered in Connecticut and roughly 600 businesses are tied to the industry, Mr. Westerson says. 

He predicted the new tax would cause consumers to buy and dock boats in Rhode Island. "People aren't stupid. If they can walk two doors down and buy something for 10% less, they will," he says.

The governor also wants to apply a 3% incremental luxury tax to vehicles over $50,000, jewelry exceeding $5,000 and clothing costing at least $1,000. And he proposes hitting airplanes with a property tax.

 Write to  Shelly Banjo at shelly.banjo@wsj.com 