RIKUZENTAKATA, Iwate Prefecture—Many towns hit by last week's quake and tsunami were already in a steady decline. Now, local leaders are facing the reality that instead of rebuilding their communities, they may just fade away.

"To be honest, I can't predict at what point people will feel like trying again," said Futoshi Toba, mayor of this northeastern seaside town. Mr. Toba said the town had already been going through hard times before the March 11 natural disaster. 

The public works projects that once supported the local construction industry have dried up and many factories have closed or moved to cheaper labor markets in Asia.

"With so many people who have had [their homes and livelihoods] destroyed or damaged, it's hard to know if they will want to live here or go to some other place where they will feel safer," he said.

Rikuzentakata had more than 30,000 residents in the late 1960s. That figure slipped to 23,000 before last week, with more than a third aged 65 years or older. About 10% of the entire population is now dead or missing, and most stores and businesses in the main part of the inlet fishing village were washed away. 

A glance around what used to be Rikuzentakata's main shopping district illustrates the herculean task that would lie ahead if the town were to try to rebuild. A three-story supermarket and an adjoining 100-yen discount shop have been completely hollowed out except for the debris carried in by the powerful waves. While the building frame is still standing, there is no evidence that the space had been used for retail other than the signs on the roof.

Kiichi Fukuda, a 76-year-old who has lived in Rikuzentakata his whole life, said young people have been leaving the town for years and that tourism to the coastal village has also slowed since the 1960s and 1970s. For the last 30 years, he operated one of six bed-and-breakfast inns in the town, down from 13 inns during the peak travel years. His inn has been destroyed. 

"Young people can't make a living here," said Mr. Fukuda. "We need to try to overcome this, but we don't have that kind of leeway right now," he said as his voice crackled. 

Riding his bicycle among the wreckage, searching for his new car that was washed away, Mr. Fukuda said he would probably give up his business and live out his days in the town in an apartment or a small house with his wife.

As Mr. Fukuda spoke, rescue workers shouted that they had found a body in rubble a few hundred feet away. They loaded the corpse wrapped in a blue sheet onto the back of white pick-up truck and drove away.

Excavators and other construction equipment now are dismantling piles of rubble to allow rescuers to search for the bodies left behind by last week's tsunami.

The one economic bright spot in the town has been a small group of oyster farmers, who produce a local breed called Hirotawan. These delicacies sell for 400 yen (about $5) apiece in high-end restaurants in Tokyo, and some farmers can make as much as 30 million yen ($372,000) a year. This too has been disrupted by the tsunami, and the farming is likely to take years to recover. 

Natural disasters are capable of sending communities into long-term—sometimes terminal—decline.

The U.S. Gulf Coast city of Galveston, Texas, never fully recovered from a hurricane in 1900 that killed more than 5,000 people, destroyed much of the city's infrastructure and helped end its reign as one of America's most important ports.

In New Orleans, tens of thousands of people haven't returned after Hurricane Katrina struck in 2005 and left more than 1,600 people dead. Five years later, the city's population was about 344,000, according to U.S. Census data, compared to 484,674 in 2000. Many people left the state of Louisiana altogether, while others stayed in the region but moved further inland.



In Miyagi prefecture, one of the worst-hit tsunami zones and a neighbor to Iwate prefecture, officials have said many survivors should expect to relocate to other parts of Japan for six months to a year due to the difficulties in providing housing in the short term. With so much time away from home, many of those residents may decide to stay in their new locations, especially if they find new jobs.

"Our underlying principle is for people to continue living in Miyagi prefecture, but we are no longer in a position to fulfill this," Miyagi Gov. Yoshihiro Murai said at a news conference Friday. "We will put our highest priority on the wishes of the victims, but I ask that people evacuate to safe areas," the governor said.

Already, more than 21,000 people have moved out of tsunami-affected areas and into other parts of Japan, according to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, or OCHA. The government has identified some 19,600 vacant public houses in other parts of the country that can be used to help accommodate relocated people.

In Rikuzentakata on Sunday, 32-year-old Hiroyuki Matsuno surveyed the devastation of his hometown for the first time since the March 11 earthquake and tsunami.

He left the town after high school and never returned. Now a civil servant in a town further inland, he can't imagine ever returning to Rikuzentakata, especially with the town in its current condition.

"I'm just not sure this place can recover," said Mr. Matsuno, who estimates that half of the people from his local high school eventually left town.

"The older people may not want to leave because they have sentimental ties to this place," he said. "But if you have a family and they need to eat, I get the feeling that people will go to the places where there are jobs." 

—Patrick Barta, Kana Inagaki  and Andrew Monahan  contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Daisuke Wakabayashi at Daisuke.Wakabayashi@wsj.com 