Mint Juleps are like oil changes: you could do it on your own, but it will be messy. It's far better to leave it to the professionals. To make one isn't impossible, it just requires copious amounts of crushed ice (made with a mallet and a Lewis bag), fresh mint, bonded bourbon (the lower proof stuff won't hold up), a swizzle stick, a sterling silver cup and, most importantly, the thing that you can't buy: skill. Plus, as one of the most debated cocktails of all time, there are far too many recipes and techniques to choose from. Feel free to play with a few this summer, but on a day when there's no race and thirsty party guests with empty cups—whipping one up takes much longer than a lap around Churchill Downs. 

Fortunately, racing and drinking have always been inseparable and there are many tasty classics created in the name of equine pursuits that are far easier to pull off than the popular julep. Try one and you may find yourself a new racing tradition. These cocktails go down far too easy, however. Pace yourself and leave the racing to the horses. 

—Kevin Sintumuang

The are many drinks named Derby, but this one, found in the excellent "Vintage Spirits and Forgotten Cocktails" by Ted Haigh, is my favorite. Think of it as a summertime Manhattan—cooling and refreshing but it has a bite to it. 

1 ounce bourbon whiskey  ½ ounce sweet vermouth  ½ ounce orange curaçao  ¾ ounce fresh lime juice  Mint

 Shake liquids with ice and strain into a cocktail glass. Garnish with a mint leaf and a lemon wedge (optional). 

Named for the type of race in which participants are two-year-old horses, the Futurity has an elegant simplicity. Like any drink with so few ingredients, it really is the sum of its parts. Plymouth makes the only Sloe Gin worth drinking. And consider using a finer sweet vermouth such as Carpano Antica or Dolin. The end result is a little sweet, a little bitter, and oh-so sippable. 

1½ ounce sloe gin  1½ ounce sweet vermouth  1 dash Angostura bitters

 Shake with ice and strain into a cocktail glass.  

This drink is originally from "The Savoy Cocktail Book," but most use the tweaked version below, found in Gary Regan's "Joy of Mixology." The sweet almond flavor of the amaretto melds nicely with the tartness of the lemon juice, while the gin gives the drink a pleasant dryness. 

2 ounces gin  ¾ ounce amaretto  ¾ ounce fresh lemon juice  1 dash Angostura bitters

 Shake all ingredients and strain into a cocktail glass. 