By the time I arrived at  Massimo Vignelli's Upper East Side apartment, maybe five minutes late, he and my photographer  Daniella Zalcman had already bonded. Over her iPhone case. "It's so much nicer" than his, he said, coveting hers while announcing that as soon as our interview was over, not that he was rushing me, he was going out to buy one. "Immediately," he said. "I can't wait. No matter what it costs."

Ms. Zalcman's was a silver band of plastic that fits around the rim of the device and is supposed to alleviate whatever problems iPhones have that cause reception difficulties. Other than the color—his was black—I didn't see any difference between the two. If anything, I might have preferred Mr. Vignelli's. "But I suffer about this thing," he said. "The object is so good," meaning the iPhone itself. "It rapes it."

That Mr. Vignelli has strong feelings about such seeming minutiae probably shouldn't have come as a surprise. He is, after all, one of the great industrial designers of the age. His credits include a 1972 version—and, without doubt, the most elegant—of the New York subway map; the corporate logos for companies such as American Airlines and Ford; and furniture, jewelry, books, watches and even wine labels.

Now it was my turn to bond with the man. He admired my watch. "It's a great one," he attested. It was a Swiss Railways watch that I'd bought online for about a hundred bucks. What I liked about it, I told him, beside its simplicity and boldness, was that it was the exact same design as the clocks in Swiss railroads stations. As if he didn't know.

"That's why it's so good," he explained. "It relates to something that has history. It goes through the mountains and tunnels"—he meant the train, not my watch—"and everything is nice and clean and all of a sudden the landscape goes to junk. At that moment it goes into Italy. It's so depressing."

I didn't think I should have to defend his homeland to a native Italian, but Mr. Vignelli apparently feels Italy has squandered, since he left, much of what made it special. The designer grew up in Milan, studied architecture in Venice for five years and came to the U.S. in 1965, to set up an American office and planning to stay only a couple of years. "But there was a need for design over here," he said. "There was no need in Italy."

While Mr. Vignelli believes that some of the best design is coming out of the U.S. these days—witness the iPhone, not to mention his matching MacBook Air—he didn't mean to suggest he was ready to put his feet up (on one of the apartment's sleek minimalistic tables or couches, which he created with the help of his partner in life as well as design, his wife Lella). The furniture lends the space a sense of serenity that tiptoes up to, yet somehow manages to avoid crossing over the line into, the monastic. Perhaps because the man himself, at 80, is filled with life, with a self-disciplined hedonism and with a passionate belief in the importance of his craft.

"The greatest design has to provide a little pleasure," he explained, producing the straightforward black bag he carries; Mr. Vignelli wears nothing but black. Proudly reporting that he'd bought the bag from a local street vendor, he pulled out a black Leica camera ("Oh," Ms. Zalcman exclaimed at its beauty), a pair of black  Ray Bans and a tape measure—alas, bright yellow, not black. 

"This is my dictionary," Mr. Vignelli said of the tape measure. He explained that even as a child he had such fascination with the dimensions of things that he would challenge his friends to guess their size. He believes that subtleties of shape conjure emotion. "Is that three centimeters or four centimeters?" he said, speaking of a hypothetical piece of pipe. "Each one of these diameters gives you a completely different feeling."

It's that sense of refinement that defines the Vignelli brand—whether the objects in question are 1971 cylindrical silver salt-and-pepper shakers now in the collection of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Knoll's iconic stacking handkerchief chair from the 1980s that Mr. Vignelli designed with  David Law, or the signage for the New York City subway system that he created in the mid-'60s in collaboration with designer  Bob Noorda. Yes, those spare, white-on-black signs you pass every day that say "Downtown and Brooklyn," and the white numbers and letters inside color-coded circles that distinguish the red Broadway local No. 1 train from the green Lexington Avenue No. 6 line.

But it's apparent in speaking with him that design isn't merely craft, or even art. It's life itself, underlying everything. The only question is whether it's good or bad. "I always complain to him not everybody can be perfectly beautiful," said Lella, who joined us and who, luckily for their marriage, is at least as elegantly put together as her spouse.

"Even being thin or fat has a meaning," said Massimo, politely disagreeing. "Everything has a message. How can somebody getting fat keep eating? Everything is the product of the mind. Everything that is ugly is the product of ugly minds. Beauty is a by-product of intellectual elegance."

The Vignellis are the subject of a documentary that's in the works by  Emmy-winning film makers  Kathy Brew and  Roberto Guerra. Clips of it were shown this week at the Architectural League of New York, where Massimo and Lella were awarded the league's President's Medal. (In 2010, the Rochester Institute of Technology opened the Vignelli Center for Design Studies, which houses their archive.)

The couple moved into their apartment's library and dropped onto black-leather couches with black-lacquered sides that they designed, too. There, Massimo discussed his work for New York City Transit and surprised his wife, though perhaps not completely, with an announcement: "Actually, I wouldn't mind to die on the subway." It seemed a rather unlikely statement, considering that the NYC subway system is an exercise in sensory deprivation, or if nothing else one of the least aesthetically pleasing areas on the planet. 

But on further thought, perhaps it makes sense. Great design, after all, is a perfect gift, and gifts require recipients. Mr. Vignelli's success undoubtedly comes, on some subliminal level, as an affirmation of humanity. "You die in a place," he explained, "where everybody is around you. Really, the human condition is one of the most exciting and entertaining fields of activity."

— ralph.gardner@wsj.com 