 Paul Gigot: This week, a special New Year's edition of "The Journal Editorial Report." We'll take a look back at the biggest stories of 2010, as well as the winners and, of course, the losers of the year that's passed. Plus, a look ahead to 2011. What stories will you be talking about? Which public figures will grab the headlines? Our panel's here with their predictions, next. 

 Gigot: Welcome to this New Year's Day edition of "The Journal Editorial Report." I'm Paul Gigot. 

First up this week, a look back at the biggest stories of 2010 with our all-knowing and all-seeing panel: Wall Street Journal columnist and deputy editor Dan Henninger and editorial board members Jason Riley, Dorothy Rabinowitz and Matt Kaminski. 

So, Dan, wer're going to start with you. What's your call for the big story of the year? 

 Henninger: Well, Paul, I think clearly the biggest story of the year was November's off-year elections, and I don't think it was the biggest story merely because the Democrats were swept out and the Republicans swept in. I think this was the beginning of a historic reform. Occasionally, the American people rise up and try to cleanse their system. And I think the tea party was simply the leading edge of a huge wave that's sweeping not merely through Washington, but Sacramento, Albany, Trenton, Illinois. Congress's approval rating had fallen down below 20%. It's essentially a vote of no confidence in government. 

 Gigot: All right, but here's the thing, Dan. You're right. A historic repudiation, 63-seat House gain. The Republicans will have a bigger majority, I think, since any time since 1946. 

 Henninger: And down even to state legislatures. 

 Gigot: Yeah, more than 700 state legislative seats. So it really was a historic change. On the other hand, the Democrats say this is the greatest Congress in 50 years. Historic. They passed all of this great legislation. Explain that paradox. 

 Henninger: Well, they passed ObamaCare, which was the greatest entitlement since Medicare, and they didn't win the election. I mean, there has to be a certain degree of causality in--connect-the-dots in American politics.

 Gigot: They don't see that connection, so this historical change has not sunk in. 

 Henninger: They were standing on the beach and they said, "Look at the big wave coming. Oh, that's going to sweep us into office." It swept them out to sea. I mean, what more can one say?

 Gigot: All right, Matt Kaminski. Your biggest story? 

 Kaminski: I would Dan's point and broaden it out globally. The biggest story in the developed world this year was that we start out the year with the age of insolvency. Government everywhere was broke. In Greece you had rioting. The deficit was out of control with the country about to default. England had had a huge deficit too. But this has brought about the age of austerity. We've had incredibly deep cuts pushed through by new governments in Greece, in the U.K., in New Jersey, and--

 Gigot: And New Jersey. 

 Kaminski: --and New Jersey and maybe California. We'll see. 

 Gigot: And Ireland. 

 Kaminski: And Ireland, of course. And I think we'll see that there's been this sort of--people are realizing that their government cannot provide what it used to provide with just overspending grossly. 

 Gigot: Fascinating. All right, Jason? 

 Riley: I think a very big story this year was the Obama administration's decision to regulate the Internet, which is something that just happened this month. 

 Gigot: That was a December action. 

 Riley: Exactly. And this is a significant pivot away from the hands-off approach that has been taken by Democratic and Republican administrations alike. I think it's a very big deal. The good news is that, with the new Republican House taking over next year, perhaps some of these regulations will not be implemented. 

 Gigot: But Jason, explain the motivation here. Because what we've seen also this year is an incredible proliferation of successful innovations on the other hand. You've got the development of the Apple tablet, the iPad, and its imitators, which--you've had huge investments in broadband across the United States. Why does the Obama administration--

 Riley: Which is exactly the point. 

 Gigot: But why do they think they need to do this? 

 Riley: I think it's a pure power grab on the part of the FCC--Julius Genachowski, the chairman of the Federal Communications Commission. It is something that Obama campaigned on. He said this was going to happen. The left wing of the party--the MoveOn.org wing, the Soros-funded activist groups--are all in favor of--

 Gigot: So they want to put themselves at the decision point, the inflection point, where they can decide who wins and who loses. 

 Riley: Yes. 

 Gigot: You think it comes down to that. 

 Riley: And this is being done in the absence of any true market failure. Like you said, innovation is moving along. Investment is strong in the telecom sector. There's no market failure that this--that these regulations would be addressing. This is a pure power grab on the part of the administration. It could do a lot of harm. 

 Gigot: Not getting enough attention either. Dorothy, your biggest story of the year?

 Rabinowtiz: My biggest story was the immigration bill in Arizona that Jan Brewer passed and which caused a tremendous conflagration and revealed the depths of the passion and also the demagoguery that attaches the entire issue of immigration. You have the attorney general of the United States making legal war on this state. You have the president of Mexico coming before Congress to denounce the bill and receiving a standing ovation before Congress. You've had a tremendous misinterpretation and distortion of the bill itself, which said--well, among the demagogues, it said everybody who goes out for a milkshake who is Latino is going to be picked up. 

 Gigot: Could possibly--could possibly be arrested. OK. Do you think this played some role in the election? 

 Rabinowtiz: It played an enormous revelatory role in the election, and it's going to be picked up in the next year. The passions were extreme and divided in a way that you could not imagine. This is a state--

 Gigot: And that immigration debate is going to be with us. 

 Rabinowtiz: It's going to. 

 Gigot: But Dorothy, I want to get in my choice here before the segment is over of the biggest story of the year. I think it's the passage of ObamaCare, because notwithstanding, Dan, that repudiation by the voters, the truth is, the 111th Congress passed ObamaCare. and that is the one bill that they passed that actually, if it is not repealed or changed fundamentally, could really change the nature of this country--move us towards the European welfare state, where taxes, to be able to afford it, 30% to 40% of GDP, from 20% now, and change the fundamental character of American medicine. We've been moving in this direction, bureaucratically with more government control, but politics is, from now on out, from here on out, if it's not repealed, politics is going to determine who gets what kind of care and how much. 

 Henninger: But I think, Paul, what you're talking is precisely the issue that was put on the table by these elections. To Matt's point as well, electorates everywhere are trying to decide whether they want, over the next generation, to have their society and their economy directed by government or by the private sector. There's a huge division of wealth that's taking place. And ObamaCare means the public sector will take most of the wealth. 

 Gigot: Right. 

 Henninger: And what we're talking about, I think, is that the private sector will pull it back in its direction. That's the choice. 

 Gigot: The warning from Europe is, if you go down this path, it is incredibly difficult to change. 

 Henninger: Yeah. 

 Gigot: But you'll have to change. Otherwise you can't afford it. 

 Kaminski: And in Europe, you're seeing that actually they are pushing to retrench while we are going in this direction. 

 Gigot: All right, thank you, Matt. We have to take a short break. When we come back, our panel's picks for the winners and the losers of 2010.

 Gigot: Time now for the biggest winners and losers of 2010. We'll start with the fun list, the losers. Dorothy, who's on yours?

 Rabinowtiz: Where to begin? Michael Bloomberg is the one. A man who was given--

 Gigot: Mayor of New York. 

 Rabinowtiz: The mayor of New York. Forgive me, I thought he was a national figure. This man who wanted to become, I believe, a national figure, and this is the year that did him in. He has given sanctimoniousness a new meaning, an entirely new one. He has called the New Yorkers and everybody else who opposed the mosque at Ground Zero, or near Ground Zero people who should be ashamed of themselves, morally inferior and you can continue the list. And appointed as education secretary of New York Cathleen Black, a person who has absolutely no experience, because he could. 

 Gigot: All right. Jason? 

 Riley: I'm going to go with Randi Weingarten, the head of the American Federation of Teachers, one of the nation's largest teachers unions. I think she had a very tough year. There was a popular film documentary, well-received, called "Waiting for Superman," released this year. Really illustrated the extent to which the teachers unions have been a barrier to education reform. And then she had the Obama administration pushing charter schools very hard this year. Unions don't like charter schools because most of their teachers are not unionized. So I think the unions had a tough year--which, of course, means the kids had a very good year. 

 Gigot: All right. Matt? 

 Kaminski: Paul, I think the people of Haiti had one of the worst years in their history, from a catastrophic earthquake and cholera epidemic--

 Gigot: That's saying something. 

 Kaminski: That's saying something, exactly. And lastly, a very flawed election. This is a nation that can't cut a break. 

 Gigot: Yeah, well, it shows you that governance matters, because it's ill governance that has ruined that country. All right. Dan? 

 Henninger: My loser of the year is Sen. Russ Feingold of Wisconsin, who was defeated by a rookie, Ron Johnson. And I think the interesting thing here is that Sen. Feingold was one half of the McCain-Feingold campaign finance reform. It is ironic indeed that this representative of good government was swept out and defeated by a wave of reform. I think he missed the fact that good government no longer means more government, but less government. 

 Gigot: All right, and my loser of the year, John Maynard Keynes, the great economist, dead economist, who was the patron saint of many on the left for spending stimulus. Their ideas that dominated 2008 and 2009, were tried, and seen, I think, by the American people, through the election, to have been a failure. So--but while Keynes was a better economist than many of his supporters, nonetheless, his ideas, I think, have been repudiated again. 

All right. Now, we're going to the winners of the year. And Jason, we'll start with you. 

 Riley: I'm going with Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, who I think had a great year. He's taken on the powerful public-sector unions in his state and has become a YouTube sensation and a Republican rock star in the process, so I'm going to go with Chris Christie. 

 Gigot: So, you think it's going to work this year? He's going to keep moving on that direction?

 Riley: I hope so, I hope so. Although there has been a lot of talk about urging him to run for president. So we'll see. 

 Gigot: He says he's not going to do it. All right. Dorothy? 

 Rabinowtiz: Well, another rock star, Paul Ryan, a congressman from Wisconsin, who took on the health-care bill and who proved that he could--you could still have a rarity. He is ferocious debater and manages civility. This is something rare in politics. He took on the president, mano a mano. He succeeded.

 Gigot: On health care. 

 Rabinowtiz: On health care. 

 Gigot: In a public forum. 

 Rabinowtiz: He succeeded in every single debate in crushing the opposition and coming out smelling like a civilized man. That is somebody to watch. 

 Gigot: OK. Dan. 

 Henninger: No one would call John Boehner a rock star. 

 Gigot: Hey, what have we got, the trifecta of Republicans here? All right, you've got Boehner.

 Henninger: Well, yeah. I mean, Boehner is now going to be the speaker of the House. It kind of fell into his lap. But on the other hand, John Boehner's a guy from Cincinnati. His parents ran a shot-and-a-beer bar. He's got about eight brothers and sisters. And he now has the historic opportunity to lead the reform of the government. 

 Gigot: But is he really a reformer, Dan? That's the question. Or is he just a status quo guy--

 Henninger: That's what we're going to find out. 

 Gigot: --who just managed to be on top of the wave when it crashed?

 Henninger: The reform is about helping average Americans, and I think if John Boehner remembers where he came from, he has the opportunity to step up and lead that reform. 

 Gigot: OK. Matt Kaminski? 

 Kaminski: Look, I think the bad news for the GOP is the biggest winner this year is Barack Obama. He pushed through almost his entire agenda, starting with, most of all, with ObamaCare. He paid a price for it in November. That was probably his lowest political point, but he has now pivoted in the month and a half since. 

 Gigot: But did he pay--this is interesting. Did he pay a price, or his party did? He didn't necessarily. He wasn't on the ballot. 

 Kaminski: And he still stayed fairly popular. I think, I mean, it was a referendum on him, but he's gotten some of these old war horses out of the Congress. He can now pivot more to the center, which he did in the lame-duck session. He got through his arms treaty. And I think he's looking fairly good coming into this next election cycle for a second term. 

 Gigot: Do I hear a dissent? 

 Henninger: He pivoted--he's pivoted to the center. He's now in a land that he doesn't understand, is totally unfamiliar with, and it makes him uncomfortable. I think it's going to be very hard for him to operate going forward as a centrist. 

 Gigot: He doesn't have that feel for the center. 

 Henninger: Bill Clinton could do it like that. I don't think it--

 Gigot: Obama's a man of the left. He's going to have a hard time adjusting. 

 Kaminski: He is a man of the left. But you know, this tax deal that he got with the Republicans--this is actually good for the economy, which in the end would be good for him. 

 Gigot: At least in 2011 and '12, right? 

 Kaminski: Well--

 Gigot: Whether or not it's just a sugar high, and it'll wear off, is another question. 

I want to get in my pick for the winner of year, and that's David Petraeus. The president picked him to head his Afghan campaign after he fired Stanley McChrystal. And if anybody can do it, David Petraeus is the guy who can--that is prevail in Afghanistan. He prevailed by winning--defeating al Qaeda in Iraq. He knows counterinsurgency. And he just might rescue the president's policy, if he is given the chance to do what needs to be done, which means, I think, going into the sanctuaries in Pakistan where the Taliban can hole up. So I hope, for the sake of the country, that he is the big winner in 2011, too.

Still ahead, what to look for in the next year. Our panel gazes into their crystal balls to bring you the stories and the people you'll be talking about in the year ahead. 

 Gigot: Well, with health-care reform, the midterm elections and the global economic crisis dominating the headlines in 2010, what will the New Year bring? Our panelists are gazing into their crystal balls for the big stories to watch in 2011. Dorothy? 

 Rabinowtiz: Yes, well, this story I think will be the effort to repeal health care, and it's gotten a tremendous boost. And we now know, for certain as a result of the elections, that the more Americans learned about health care, the less they liked it, which was exactly contrary to everything the administration asked. And I think that you're going to see, with a surge of real relief they could do it, which wasn't there before, with a court ruling against. 

 Gigot: That said that it was unconstitutional. 

 Rabinowtiz: That said, yes, it's unconstitutional. This is a tremendous spurt. And I think this will be the story. 

 Gigot: But the House probably will pass a repeal bill. It'll be interesting to see how many Democrats they get. In fact, I'm certain the House will pass it. The question is, then, the Senate, where--it's still run by Democrats. How many Democrats will repudiate their earlier vote? Or, say, will Joe Manchin, newly elected, and is up from West Virginia, will he vote to repeal? And then the president may veto it. But you have the issue framed for the election.

 Riley: Yeah, and you also have a Republican House there when it comes to funding the implementation of this thing. They'll have some say in that. 

 Gigot: That's another thing they could do--

 Riley: And hearings, they can both slow the process so--

 Gigot: And educate people about what it's actually doing to the insurance market--

 Riley: But they can throw a lot of sand in--

 Gigot: Raising insurance prices, for example, limiting choice. 

 Henninger: I think life in doctor's offices and hospitals is going to educate people. There are internists all over Manhattan opting out of Medicare as we speak. 

 Rabinowitz: As we speak.

 Henninger: And I think this is the thing that Dorothy's talking about. People will be shouting over the effects on--

 Kaminski: I think it will be very hard, though, to sustain the outrage you saw last month in elections. 

 Gigot: It will be unless the prices keep rising. And then people will--and they own it. They own the health care system now, lock, stock and barrel. And that's something that the repeal promoters can work on. Jason? 

 Riley: I think one of the big stories for the nonpolitical junkies in America will be whether we we're going to have a NFL season next year. The collective bargaining agreement expires in March, and if the players unions and owners cannot agree to a new deal, we may not have a football season next year. 

 Gigot: Why would they jeopardize an $8 billion industry, which is the most successful sporting league in America? 

 Riley: Why have other sports had lockouts? Baseball, hockey--I mean, it happens. The owners are driving a tough bargain here. So we'll see. 

 Gigot: All right. Matt?

 Kaminski: I think the biggest story next year will be foreign policy, which didn't really come up in the elections in November. 

 Gigot: Really? 

 Kaminski: Absolutely. First of all, it's a make-or-break year in Afghanistan. We're going to see this spring whether the new counterinsurgency push is working. Yu have North Korea acting up. You have the Iran problem, which is still unresolved. And the other issue, which is present too, is that this summer, you'll probably see secretary of defense, Bob Gates leave. You're going to have to get a new chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. So, you know, we don't know what the crisis will be. But I would see that foreign policy will be back on a top-line issue next year. 

 Gigot: And the biggest issue will be Iran, North Korea or Afghanistan? 

 Kaminski: I think that Afghanistan is really the crucial issue here, because you have already a push to try and de-surge Obama's troops. Gen. Petraeus has said that, you know, there's been a sort of fragile progress. But you won't really see whether it's working until spring. You cannot say tthat he violence, which has been brought down the last few months, is really going to stay down. And you also have to see whether you're going to have improvements on governance in Afghanistan. 

 Gigot: OK. All right, Dan? 

 Henninger: Well, Paul, I think clearly the big story is going to be finally the emergence of the Republican presidential campaign. People talk all the time--

 Gigot: Is that good news or bad news, Dan? 

 Henninger: Well, I don't know either. 

People talk all the time about how the campaigns are too long. I've been getting asked for a year by people who I think the Republican nominee will be. 

 Gigot: Well, that's because there's no clear front runner and nobody knows. Everybody's guess--

 Henninger: There is no answer. But by midyear 2011, they're going to be coming out of the woodwork, and we'll be spending the next 18 months talking about front runners and also-rans. 

 Gigot: All right, Henninger, go out on a limb. Who is the front runner a year from now on the Republican side? 

 Henninger: The front runner a year from now? 

 Gigot: Jeb Bush? 

 Henninger: I'm not going to give that away, Paul. I'm not going to give that away. I've got--I think the most interesting story is: Who are the dark horses? I think the current front runners are probably going to fall back and people like Mitch Daniels and Haley Barbour, and I would even throw Arizona's Sen. Jon Kyl into the mix. That's the sort of person that's going to be out there. 

 Gigot: A couple of governors, all right. 

So my biggest story, I think, for 2011 will be: Can the Republicans really cut spending? I don't think we know that. They tried in 1995 and '96, when they last took control of Congress. They succeeded modestly for a year or two, and then they gave up the game. The question now is: Can they really do big cuts? Can they do major entitlement reform? I think with President Obama opposing them every step of the way, they're not going to get too much done in the next two years. But they can frame the issue for the election in 2012. 

 Henninger: Do you think the incoming freshmen are going to have an effect on the old bulls in the Republican Party? 

 Gigot: There's no question. They're already having that effect. They've already stiffened some spines. They're stiffening even John Boehner's spine and some of the appropriators. And Paul Ryan, that Dorothy mentioned, is going to drive this in the House. I think they're going to be able to do it in the House, but Obama is going to try to frame every cut they make as somehow--what they always do, which is throwing grandma into the snow bank, cutting school lunches for children. The question is, once that political debate is joined, can the Republicans stick it out and win?

 Riley: And that's when we'll see whether the influence of the tea party can be sustained here. Because a lot of these freshmen being brought in were put in there or helped gain office because of efforts by the tea party. And those are the real anti-spenders out there. And whether they can light a fire under these established Republicans and say, "You've got to change," is what we need to wait and see. 

 Kaminski: And can the party in power sustain the enthusiasm of the tea-party grass roots. 

 Gigot: Because if they, for example--the Republicans look to be cynical--if they look to be, for example, funding ethanol, if they look to be picking their own corporate welfare agents to support, the tea party is going to get--they're going to get skeptical, they're going to get upset, and then they're going to lose that enthusiasm, and you might find that they don't want to come out and vote in 2012. So this is a difficult managing act for the Republicans. But I think that they should keep in mind what they were elected on, and follow through on that mandate, and go toe to toe with President Obama. 

All right, we have to take one more break. When we come back, our panel's picks for the people to watch in 2011. 

 Gigot: And finally this week, our panel's picks for the people to watch in 2011. Dorothy? 

 Rabinowtiz: Mitch Daniels, governor of Indiana, who has all the seductiveness of a dark horse, and I know seductiveness is not a word you attach to Mitch Daniels. But if you think he is charismatically challenged I offer you competence, which sounds pretty good next to the charisma we see in the White House. He has, in fact, said some strong things that give us a sense of who he is. 

 Gigot: All right. Jason? 

 Riley: I'm going to be watching a group of people, Paul, and those are the Ivy League presidents, and whether or not they're going to allow military recruiters back on campus in the wake of the repeal of "Don't Ask, Don't Tell," the ban on openly gay men and women serving in the military. The policy was and long cited as a reason to keep ROTC off campus. Let's see if these colleges were arguing in good faith here.

 Gigot: All right. Matt? 

 Kaminski: I'm going to go with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, who has been patiently watching the U.S. try to walk--walk and talk back Iran from getting nuclear weapons. But Israel is terrified of Iran going nuclear and at some point will decide to handle this problem on its own if we don't. 

 Gigot: And that could be this year, possibly.

 Kaminski: Exactly. 

 Gigot: All right. Dan?

 Henninger: Paul, the people of South Carolina, a state that is routinely ridiculed in the public media, have just elected to their governorship Nikki Haley. Who is Nikki Haley? She's a Republican woman of Indian descent, and she looks like she's going to be very capable. She's very smart. I think it's a very good development for the Republican Party. And if she does well, I think we're going to be hearing a lot more about Nikki Haley of South Carolina. 

 Gigot: As a symbol of the Republican governors who have come in. There's a lot of them. 

I've got two people to watch, and they're Democratic governors. Jerry Brown, who is governor of California, on his second tour of that job, and Andrew Cuomo, going to be governor of New York, son of the former governor, Mario Cuomo. Now both of those governors, Democrats, are going to be leaning to Democratic blue states that are busted, no money. And they're going to have to reform. And they've got Democrats mostly in control--of the total legislature in California; half of the legislature in New York, and the Senate's liberal anyway. So they're going to have to govern against their own political constituencies to be able to reform. And the question is: Will the Democratic governors be able to reform?

We're going to have two models going forward. We're going to have Republicans on the one hand, seeing what they can do with their new majority, and a couple of old blue-line states that are broke, seeing if they can govern the same way. I think this will be a fascinating market test of who can actually accomplish what. 

 Henninger: Well, I think that California and New York to succeed would give New Year's optimism new meaning. 

 Gigot: Yeah, I'm not optimistic myself, Dan. But for America, I'd love to see two of our biggest and most important states succeed. And I'm afraid that that hasn't been happening in a long time. 

 Henninger: Well, the alternative, you move out of those states and go to nicer climes, like Texas and Tennessee. 

 Gigot: And that's exactly what's been happening. You'd still like to see California--what is it, the seventh-largest economy in the world--actually get a reason to get some reform energy to be able to revive that economy. 

 Kaminski: For Jerry Brown, though, this will be his last job, and he does have nothing to lose except his legacy, so that's the one reason to be trying to be optimistic. 

 Gigot: Very good point. 

That's it for this week's edition of "The Journal Editorial Report." Thanks to my panel and to all of you for watching. I'm Paul Gigot. Happy New Year. We hope to see you right here next week. 