More than anything, it's just a bizarre insult to choose.

What Antonio Cromartie called New England Patriots quarterback Tom Brady to a Daily News reporter—in case you missed it, he used an unprintable term familiar to any New Yorker who's ever, well, lived in New York—was crude and unnecessary. Not surprisingly, it's been immediately pounced on by those who believe that Rex Ryan's Jets are a franchise gone amok, with no sense of decorum.

Mr. Ryan didn't help himself with a mush-mouthed defense of Mr. Cromartie on Wednesday. "First off, in this country, you're allowed to have opinions, and all that kind of stuff," Magic Khakis said. One wonders how respectful Mr. Ryan would be of Mr. Cromartie's free speech rights had the cornerback used the same term about a teammate. 

Or Mr. Ryan.

"Obviously, as an organization, we respect Tom Brady, there is no question about it," Mr. Ryan continued on, adding later: "Am I going to punish Cromartie for saying something, or whatever? No."

Was Mr. Ryan worried about looking like a hypocrite if he slammed Mr. Cromartie? He shouldn't have been. Mr. Ryan does possess a big mouth—and as we learned on HBO, it's not always PG-13—but he's been sharp enough to know the line between obnoxious and nasty. Mr. Cromartie does not. Though we find Mr. Ryan entertaining and not the Threat to Civilization that others do, the coach should have scolded his player and squished this silly story. 



Instead, it's more oxygen for this overbaked, one-way feud with a division champ that one month ago thrashed the Jets 45-3.

Told of Mr. Cromartie's remark, Mr. Brady coolly channeled Don Draper and declined to take the bait. "I've been called worse," he said. "I'm sure there is a long list of people that feel that way."

Are there? That's the strangest thing about Mr. Cromartie's comment—it seemed to come out of some alternate universe of misplaced put-downs. Mr. Brady has said he "hate(s)" the Jets and delights in taunting them, as he did during that Dec. 6 destruction in Foxborough. But does that merit such a seven-letter expletive?

Let's give Mr. Cromartie the benefit of the doubt, which is probably more than he deserves here. Is Mr. Brady actually loathsome? We're talking about bona fide loathsome—not just the knee-jerk dislike that any Patriots opponent is entitled to.

There's a lot to Mr. Brady that could make a football traditionalist crazy. There's the supermodel wife and magazine covers and the "Entourage" cameo and the bespoke Tom Ford suits. There's That Hair, though Mr. Brady's cut has become less mockable as it's lengthened from Justin Bieber to Kings of Leon.

It's not as if Patriots fans haven't had their own concerns. Prior to this sparkling 14-2 season, there were worries in New England that perhaps Mr. Brady had become too distracted and starry for another Super Bowl run.

But Mr. Brady has proven he contains multitudes. He is a three-time Super Bowl champ who can attend the Costume Institute Gala at the Met. He's rallied from a season-ending knee injury and an embarrassing playoff loss last season to the Ravens and the exile of Randy Moss to have an MVP-type year.

He's Johnny Unitas' soul in Brad Pitt's life. He's exactly the opposite of what Mr. Cromartie said he was.

Whereas Antonio Cromartie is a Jets cornerback who will be starting Sunday afternoon against Tom Brady.

Now who would you rather be?

 Write to  Jason Gay at jason.gay@wsj.com 