  (See Corrections & Amplifications item below.)  

In the new movie "The Company Men," a smug corporate sales executive played by Ben Affleck loses his big-salaried job at a shipbuilding conglomerate. At first, he retaliates with angry phone calls to Human Resources and refuses to give up his country club membership. But mid-way through the story, Affleck's character slowly begins adapting to his changing economic reality. 

"As a country, I would argue that we're in the same place," says the film's director John Wells, the veteran TV producer of "E.R." and "The West Wing." "In terms of our acceptance of what's going on, we're only in the middle of the film."

Mr. Wells, 54 years old, actually began developing "The Company Men" 10 years ago after the dotcom bust. Inspired by a brother-in-law who was fired from a high-tech manufacturing firm, Mr. Wells sold a draft of the script to Warner Brothers. But when the economy bounced back, the studio no longer felt it was relevant.

Now Mr. Wells' first film as a director, which he made independently last year and risked some of his own money to produce, may face another challenge of awkward timing. Last year's "Up in the Air," a clever romantic comedy also about corporate layoffs, took in $83 million at the box office and nearly that much overseas, while winning six Oscar nominations, including for Best Picture and its three lead actors. By comparison, "The Company Men" could seem a bit conventional, or worse, passe.

Coming from TV, Mr. Wells acknowledges, "There is some advantage about being able to write something on a Tuesday that then shoots on the following Tuesday and then is on the air two Tuesdays after that." But despite the lag time between the film's pre-production in 2008 and its release, Mr. Wells maintains "The Company Men" confronts a number of topics—the feeling of shame in the unemployed; the anguish of upper management—that have still not yet been fully addressed, particularly in a dramatic movie.

"There may be a substantial amount of media coverage, but we, as a nation, have not come out of this crisis," he says. "I think we're undergoing a seismic shift in the country, not just in specific economic issues, like what our homes are worth and what is our retirement going to look like, but a whole readjustment in the way we assess success and the American Dream." 

The film initially was released in December in two theaters—one in Los Angeles and one in New York--for Academy Awards consideration. Friday it hits about 200 theaters in 24 markets. The reviews were enthusiastic at the time, but award nominations haven't come so far and the movie's profile has been low. 

Mr. Wells, whose mother was a Denver schoolteacher and father was an Episcopalian minister, grew up "real middle class," he says—"not what we now consider to be middle class in Los Angeles." 

Before Mr. Wells began making a living as a writer, he worked as a carpenter from the late 1970s to the mid-1980s. In "The Company Men," Mr. Affleck's character—tail between his legs—eventually agrees to take a job building a house with his blue-collar brother-in-law (Kevin Costner). "Those parts of the film in which people are pounding nails were hard-won information, not research," says Mr. Wells. 

"My tool belt is still on a peg in the garage," he continues. "When you've been a freelancer and don't know where your next paycheck is going to come from, it's hard to sell your tools. You think sooner or later, that'll come in handy again."

Mr. Wells, of course, is being somewhat facetious: With the success of shows like "E.R.," "The West Wing" and currently, Showtime's "Shameless" and TNT's "Southland," Mr. Wells doesn't exactly need to worry about feeding his family. But given his upbringing, he confesses such concerns remain in the back of his mind; they also helped him relate to the people he spoke with during his research for the film.

Mr. Wells spent six months talking to the unemployed, as well as outplacement center workers and CEOs who had slashed jobs. Some of the film's dialogue comes from these conversations, from an outplacement leader's motivational mantra, played for laughs ("I Will Win") to a CEO's concern for his shareholders. 

Mr. Wells says his interviews with corporate executives—from the entertainment, auto and struggling steel-making industries—substantially changed his script and influenced his characterization of Gene McClary, the shipbuilding corporation's co-founder and conscience played by Tommy Lee Jones. "I found people who had a defensive brio about [downsizing], but you quickly got down to just how painful it was," he says. "I found very little callousness and a sense of hopelessness about the quarterly earnings pressure. And I was surprised by that."

Counteracting Hollywood's typical depiction of the corporate elite, Mr. Wells continues, "I tried hard not to demonize management as a faceless bureaucracy. I completely understand when a CEO says 'I have to be responsive to the stockholders,' because the stockholders are all of us; they are the employee pension funds and our parents' 401(k)s."

As the current president of the Writers Guild of America West, Mr. Wells may not seem like the most obvious person to sympathize with corporate managers. But he says he tried to be even-handed. "Some companies have overreacted and cut back too much," he says, "while other companies are trying to stay competitive and providing work for the marketplace." 

Mr. Wells, for his part, already has his next directing job lined up, an adaptation of  Tracy Letts' Pulitzer winning play "August: Osage County" for the Weinstein Company. And yet he still harbors anxieties about his livelihood. "What you really worry about is not being able to do this anymore," he says. Because not unlike the shipbuilders he depicts in "The Company Men," he continues, "It's very capital-intensive, and if you're not successful, people don't give you more capital to do it."

 Corrections & Amplifications 

The film "The Company Men" opened in 106 theaters on Jan. 21. A previous version of this article reported that it would open in 200 theaters. 