SEOUL—North Korea raised the pressure Monday on four North Koreans who defected to South Korea, saying it wants the four to face their relatives at a meeting of the two Koreas later this week.

South Korean officials said they agreed to meet North Korea on Wednesday to discuss the issue, but added they won't bring the four North Koreans to the meeting or force them to leave the South against their will.

North Korea has sharply criticized South Korea for allowing the defection of the four people, who were part of a group of 31 that drifted on a fishing boat to a South Korean island on Feb. 4. The 27 others want to return to North Korea, and South Korea attempted last week to deliver them at a border crossing, but North Korean officials didn't turn up to take them.

With its criticism over these four people, North Korea, which typically says little about defections, has cast a spotlight on the limits to its citizens' freedom of movement.

By saying it would bring their relatives to Wednesday's meeting, North Korea is trying to put pressure on the four, who include the captain of the wayward vessel. Pyongyang severely punishes the families of defectors, often sending them for years to labor camps considered some of the worst prisons on earth. Many defectors hide their identity once they leave the country, seeking to protect relatives left behind.

North Korea said it wants the four defectors to confirm in front of their relatives their intention to stay. Human-rights activists called the demand cruel, saying the defectors are likely already wrestling with the consequences their choice will have on their families.

"It's such an inhumane act," said  Kim Sung-min of Free North Korea Radio, a defector-operated radio station in the South. "Whatever pressure they feel, the four people would not dare to go back, because there is no question that they will be executed. The family members are now branded as traitors and could face the same fate."

In a statement on Monday, North Korea made clear it already has investigated the four people and identified their relatives and colleagues.

"As for those four persons whom the south Korean authorities claim expressed their intention to 'defect' to the south, they have no ground whatsoever to do so in light of their socio-political circumstances and family background," North Korea's statement said. "Their families, relatives and colleagues absolutely vouch for them."

North Korea accused South Korea of forcing the four to stay and blamed the U.S., which leads the United Nations Command that confirms the repatriation desires of North Koreans who wind up in the South, for conspiring with the South to keep them.

When the group first arrived, South Korea said the 31 didn't appear to be trying to defect and that the boat apparently lost power in foggy weather. Even so, suspicions about the group have been high from the start. The boat was small to hold so many people and the number of young women aboard suggested it wasn't a fishing crew.

South Korea says the four people asked to stay during individual interviews conducted last week as arrangements were being made for the transfer back to the North.

Since word of the four defections was announced Thursday, North Korea has refused to discuss the other 27 on the boat who want to return. South Korea authorities took the group to the border on Friday and waited for more than eight hours for the officials from the North to meet them.

A spokeswoman for South Korea's Unification Ministry, which handles affairs with the North, said it would use the meeting on Wednesday to resolve the transfer of the 27.

About 2,000 defectors or refugees arrive in South Korean annually, but most take months or years to get there, often taking elaborate routes through China. A defection by sea is rare. Rare, too, is the North's mention of any such defections. 

Mr. Kim of Free North Korea Radio, however, said the North has used families to apply pressure in the past. He recalled an episode in the late 1990s when a family caught by North Korean agents in Thailand got in a car accident. The parents were taken by Thai police but the agents got away with their young boy. 

In a subsequent meeting with the agents and the parents arranged by police, the boy pleaded with his parents to return to North Korea. The Thai government eventually stepped in and arranged for the family to be reunited and move to South Korea, Mr. Kim said.

 Write to  Evan Ramstad at evan.ramstad@wsj.com 