The new landlords of the Lipstick Building are confident that its reputation won't be smeared by its most infamous tenant,  Bernard Madoff. 

Argentina's largest landlord and the brothers who founded retailer Guess teamed up late last year to take control of the troubled 636,000-square-foot office tower on Third Avenue. They already are putting a positive spin on the Madoff connection. Before collapsing, Mr. Madoff's firm occupied 51,600 square feet, or about 8% of building.

"When he was big, Madoff had his choice of all the buildings in the city, and he chose this building," says  Daniel Elsztain, a third-generation member of an Argentine family that controls millions of square feet of office buildings, cattle ranches, malls, hotels and apartment buildings. 

Mr. Elsztain and Paul and  Maurice Marciano, who founded Guess in 1981, had minority positions in the Philip Johnson-designed elliptical skyscraper at 885 Third Avenue. But, by putting in fresh capital, they took control in one of the many debt restructurings that are taking place throughout New York as the commercial-property market recovers. 

The deal valued the property at about $395 million, or about $620 a square foot, according to people with knowledge of the deal. 

That valuation shows that the New York market still has a ways to go before it reaches the lofty valuations of the prerecession years. The previous landlord of the building,  Haim Revah, paid $648.5 million, according to published reports, or about $1,000 a square foot, for it in 2007. Mr. Revah didn't respond to a request for comment.

The building is still 92.5% occupied. One tenant, law firm Latham & Watkins, leases 403,930 square feet, or 65% of the Lipstick.

The Lipstick restructuring demonstrates that the city's commercial real estate sales market is rebounding faster and stronger than those in most of the rest of the country. 

"This type of multiparty solution would have been bogged down in 2009 with mispricing, and impatience, and an overall inability for both sides to gamble on bold moves," says  Douglas Harmon of Eastdil Secured, who, with  Adam Spies, represented the main mortgage holder, the  Royal Bank of Canada,
RY


-1.26
%




 in the restructuring. 

One of the reasons New York's market is rebounding is the deep bench of well-capitalized investors like the Marcianos and Mr. Elsztain who are eager to own a piece of what many regard as the Mecca of American real estate. The three investors all own less prestigious properties here, but in taking control of the Lipstick Building they're making their biggest splash so far. 

Also, this is a city that tends to put the past behind quickly. Right after the Madoff scandal erupted, brokers warned that tenants, especially other hedge funds, wouldn't want to locate in the space in which Mr. Madoff ran the biggest Ponzi scheme in history. The Federal Bureau of Investigation stills pays month-to-month for 9,889 square feet that formerly housed Bernard Madoff Investment Securities.

But some of the other Madoff space is now occupied by Muriel Siebert & Co. and Surge Trading, which bought the Madoff trading operations. The new landlords plan to continue marketing the rest of the Madoff space. 

The fate of the red granite Lipstick Building, which got its name from its three-tiered, telescoping design, has mirrored the ups and downs of New York's real estate market. Completed in 1986 by Texan developer Hines, it was sold in 2004 to a group led by  Tishman Speyer that paid $235 million, or about $400 a square foot. Three years later, Tishman made an enormous profit by selling it to Mr. Revah for $648.5 million. 

That transaction had a complicated financing structure that was typical of the boom years. Mr. Revah funded the acquisition with a $210 million first mortgage from the Royal Bank of Canada. He also sold the ground beneath the property to SL Green, agreeing to a ground lease with rapidly rising rent payments. In addition, he sold minority equity interests in the property to people like Mr. Elsztain and the Marciano brothers. 

Like many buyers during the boom years, Mr. Revah bought with the expectation that rents would continue rising. But when the downturn hit, rents fell, making it harder for the building to make its mortgage payments. By 2010, Mr. Revah's real-estate group, Metropolitan Real Estate Investors, had defaulted on its mortgage from Royal Bank of Canada, whose new team went on to hire Eastdil Secured to market the loan, according to court records.

This put Mr. Elsztain and the Marcianos in a bind. If the bank or someone else foreclosed, their investment would likely be wiped out. So they told the bank they would be interested in putting in fresh capital. That led to months of negotiations and, finally, last month's restructuring. 

As part of the deal, Mr. Elsztain and the Marcianos are putting in $15 million of fresh capital, and are increasing their stakes to 49% and 42% respectively. 

In exchange, the bank agreed to write down its debt of $210 million to $130 million, and to use the $15 million to further pay down the note, according to people familiar with the deal. 

Royal Bank of Canada didn't respond to requests for comment. 

Now that the dust has settled, Mr. Elsztain says the venture plans to reposition the property. It has hired  Gerard Nocera, of Herald Square Properties, who is now interviewing architecture firms about redesigning the building's lobby to, "maybe move it from the mid 1980s to the 2011 era," Mr. Nocera says. 

They also plan to make a push to lease up some of the building's empty space, something that should be easier to do now that it has reduced its debt and doesn't need such high rents. "Over the past few years, it has slipped off its top perch, due to cash flow issues," Mr. Nocera says. "Now with positive cash flow again, the building will be able to right itself."

Meanwhile, both the Marcianos and Mr. Elzstain are considering other opportunities in New York City, a market they consider a sound investment.

 "We believe strongly in the recovery of the New York economy," says  William Payne, the chief investment officer for Marciano Investment Group LLC, the Guess brothers' private-investment group. "We're looking at new investment opportunities in New York with reputable operating partners." 