A key witness against  Raj Rajaratnam testified he gave the Galleon Group founder secret information about  Intel Corp.
INTC


0.02
%




 because "we were very good friends." 

"Mr. Rajaratnam is—was—a very good friend of mine," former Intel executive  Rajiv Goel told jurors at Mr. Rajaratnam's insider-trading trial Tuesday. "He was a good man to me. I was a good pal, a good person to him." 

The men, who had been friends for 25 years, barely looked at each other as Mr. Goel, who formerly worked in Intel's financial department advising on technology investments, testified for the government against Mr. Rajaratnam in a lower Manhattan courtroom. 

The 53-year-old former hedge-fund manager faces 14 counts of securities fraud and conspiracy. His defense lawyer,  John Dowd, has argued he did nothing wrong and traded based only on legitimate research. 

Prosecutors see Mr. Goel as an important witness, because—like  Anil Kumar, a former McKinsey & Co. partner who has already testified for the government—he can tell jurors that he directly gave Mr. Rajaratnam confidential information to which he had access. 

Mr. Goel, 52 years old, was arrested on Oct. 16, 2009, the same day as Mr. Rajaratnam. His conversations with Mr. Rajaratnam about Intel were overheard by federal agents on wiretaps, and some have already been played at the trial. Mr. Goel pleaded guilty to securities fraud and conspiracy in February 2010 and is cooperating with the government in the hope of receiving a lighter sentence. 

Hunched over a microphone, in a dark-gray suit, Mr. Goel testified that he violated his duties to Intel by giving Mr. Rajaratnam earnings information about Intel for the first quarter of 2007, and had filled him in about an investment the company was making in a wireless venture in 2008. As Mr. Goel spoke, Mr. Rajaratnam covered his mouth with his hand at times, looking down and writing on his legal pad.

Mr. Goel also said Mr. Rajaratnam was "a generous person," willing to help him, too. 

Since Mr. Goel wasn't knowledgeable about investments, Mr. Rajaratnam agreed to make trades in his Charles Schwab account, earning $700,000 to $800,000 for him between October 2005 and October 2009, Mr. Goel testified. He had given Mr. Rajaratnam the password.

"You're a successful trader, you're a star trader, you have this stellar reputation in the market," Mr. Goel recalled telling him. "If you don't mind, can you make me some money?" 

In July 2005, Mr. Goel said, he and his wife were buying their first home and were nervous about making the down payment. Mr. Rajaratnam loaned him $100,000. Mr. Goel said he never repaid the money. 

The following year, in 2006, Mr. Rajaratnam sent him $500,000 to help when his elderly father became ill in India. Mr. Goel said that to receive the money, he set up a Swiss bank account, which he felt had "a certain mystique," recalling from his childhood that rich people in India kept money there. "I had never seen so much money in my life," he said. 

Mr. Goel said he ultimately spent $150,000 of the money to repair his house in Silicon Valley when it became infested with rats; the rest he sent to an account in India. 

Prosecutors alleged the money and the stock trades in the Charles Schwab account were forms of compensation from Mr. Rajaratnam for inside information. Mr. Dowd, in his opening statement, had said his client did that to help a friend. 

"Why did it stop?" a prosecutor asked Mr. Goel on Tuesday, referring to the Schwab trades.

"Because he and I were arrested," Mr. Goel said.

Mr. Goel said he had met Mr. Rajaratnam while studying at the Wharton School in the 1980s. They had stayed in touch over the years, frequently discussing "our worlds" with each other, he said, including their growing families and developing careers. 

Mr. Goel, who lives in California, said he would visit Mr. Rajaratnam when he was on business in New York, and Mr. Rajaratnam would do the same while on the West Coast. 

Though both are South Asian—Mr. Rajaratnam is from Sri Lanka and Mr. Goel from India—they mostly spoke English, with a little Indian slang thrown in, Mr. Goel testified. Twice they vacationed together with their families. 

Starting in about 2002, soon after he joined Intel, Mr. Rajaratnam asked him for information about the company, he said. 

Mr. Goel said Mr. Rajaratnam long ago boasted of having "a stellar reputation" for predicting Intel's financial performance because two women at the company were supplying him with information about the company's orders. 

To reward them, "he gave them two cars, one to each individual," Mr. Goel said. "He gave them the keys to the car. If I recall correctly, they were BMWs." 

 Write to  Michael Rothfeld at michael.rothfeld@wsj.com and Jenny Strasburg at jenny.strasburg@wsj.com 