So there are Giants who want to be Jets.

And how is this shocking?

The Jets are playing real-live football, and are just one victory away from a rowdy, hide-the-children Super Bowl date in Texas.

The Giants, meanwhile, are cobwebbing on the couch, fishing for the remote, making school lunches for the kids, doing the yard work—or at least talking to the personal chef about finding the remote, making the school lunches and doing the yard work.

As Big Blue hibernates, its unkempt Meadowlands roommate is driving its clown car through the Lincoln Tunnel and doing donuts in Times Square. New York City is under a blustery Jets spell. Rex Ryan is transformed from Big Mouth Impediment to Big Mouth Genius. The Hudson is dyed green—and the Statue of Liberty is popping Pittsburgh a middle finger.

If you're a Giant, still recovering from another season-ending sputter, this latest Jets playoff run must make you jealous.

Of course, it's not just that the Jets are alive. They also seem to have more fun. While Tom Coughlin takes his inspiration from General Patton, Mr. Ryan emulates Bill Murray in "Meatballs." Mr. Ryan jokes like a player, swaggers like a player, and when his players stumble, he protects them like a mama bear. Much to the discipline-loving establishment's chagrin, it's working.

A couple of days ago, a pair of Giants made the unacceptable mistake of speaking honestly during an interview on a Miami radio station.

"I would love to play for guy like Rex," safety Kenny Phillips said. 

"He allows you to be you. He's not asking you to hide. If you're a guy that likes to talk, go out and talk as long as you back it up...these guys are playing for him. I'd love to be part of that."

"I think [the Jets] chemistry might be better than ours," said Mr. Phillips' Giants teammate, Antrel Rolle. "At the end of the day, we're professional athletes. We get paid a lot of money to do what we do, but we're human. No one is a robot at this level. We do have feelings. We like to have fun."

Mr. Phillips later backpedaled from his statements, stressing he did not mean to disrespect Mr. Coughlin or the Giants. Obviously, expressing such public lust for a rival team was a tacky move, and both players should have known better.

It also should be emphasized that there's one head coach in New York with a Super Bowl ring, and it's not Mr. Ryan. But let's be honest—Mr. Phillips and Mr. Rolle were just stating the obvious. Right now, the Jets do look a lot more attractive than the Jets.

The Giants are like a summer internship at your dad's friend's law office. The Jets are a lifeguard chair on the Jersey Shore. The Giants are the New York Yacht Club. The Jets are the Mars Bar.

The Giants are "Tiger Mother." The Jets are a 16-year-old babysitter who doesn't mind if you smoke and play "Call of Duty" all night.

Naturally, Mr. Phillips and Mr. Rolle have taken a pounding from ordinary civilians for complaining about their jobs and wonder what it'd be like to work someplace else—because if there's one thing that ordinary civilians never do, it's complain about their jobs and wonder what it'd be like to work someplace else.

But these overly candid Giants can take solace in one fact:

If they were Jets, they wouldn't be in trouble at all.

 Write to  Jason Gay at jason.gay@wsj.com 