The emergency financial manager of the Detroit Public Schools presented a plan Saturday to turn nearly one in every three schools into charter schools as part of a bid to save the district millions of dollars and prevent massive school closings.

The 41 schools selected for independent control currently enroll about 16,000 of the district's 73,000 students and would operate as public school academies starting as soon as this fall. The district expects to release a list of the schools this week and solicit proposals for their transfer.

Recently the district led by a state-appointed manager overseeing a total of 142 schools has explored modeling Detroit on post-Katrina New Orleans, where a shrunken district was remade with mostly charter schools.

  Robert Bobb, the emergency financial manager, said in a news release Saturday that the charter-school plan would reduce operating costs by $75 million to $99 million, but did not say over what period of time any cost savings would be realized.

The original deficit-elimination plan approved last month called for closing 40 schools next school year, which would have saved the district $28 million, according to  Steve Wasko, a district spokesman. The plan also calls for shuttering another 30 schools in 2012.

He said a similar estimate for savings associated with transferring 41 schools to charter control has not been completed. 

Among the schools under consideration to become charters would be those in the district with the worst academic performance. Those schools which have not been recently restructured or received large capital investments would also be eligible.

Even as charter schools, they will continue to be neighborhood-based and required to serve students first from the surrounding areas as well as special-needs youngsters, according to Mr. Wasko.

Mr. Bobb presented his plan to the district's school board at a finance workshop Saturday morning. He attributed the savings in part to the money not spent to close and secure schools as well as funds collected from leases to charter organizations.

On the flipside, the district, which has been losing students for years, would also miss out of state revenue for students attending charter schools. The district receives about $7,660 in state aid for each of its students plus additional federal funds, Mr. Wasko said.

School board president  Anthony Adams could not be reached for immediate comment.

"I don't want to speak for the board members, but I would describe the reaction as overwhelmingly positive among the board's leadership," Mr. Wasko said Saturday afternoon.

Currently the school board still controls the district's academics and would need to approve the charter-school plan. But that could change as the Michigan state legislature is considering expanding the power of emergency financial managers in the state.

If a selected school does not receive a qualified proposal, Mr. Bobb said, the school will close and its students transferred.

The plan comes in the wake of the announcement in February that Detroit would have to close about half of its public schools and increase the average size of high-school classrooms to 60 students over the next four years to eliminate a $327 million deficit.

But on Saturday, Mr. Bobb did not present a single plan to reduce the deficit, even with the newly chartered schools.

Instead he outlined several options. One would split the district into two entities to help retire its debt, along the lines of the government-engineered bankruptcy of  General Motors.
GM


-1.20
%






Another option would hold the district harmless against revenue loss from declining enrollment for a period of time while additional financing is sought. During that time, the cuts required by the state-required, deficit-elimination plan would be put on hold.

Under a third option, a system more dependent on charter schools would replace the existing public school system. Additional options would blend aspects of all three plans, according to Mr. Bobb.

The plans have yet to be presented in detail and Mr. Wasko said they hope to be completed by June.

The deficit-elimination plan was submitted in January by Mr. Bobb and approved by the state in February as a last-ditch scenario if the district couldn't find new revenue sources, which it hasn't so far.

Mr. Bobb has said the deep cuts were necessary if the district hoped to be solvent again without additional state aid. But he said the strategy was ultimately ill-advised because it will likely drive even more students away, depriving the district of needed state funds, which Michigan apportions on the basis of enrollment.

Mr. Bobb is now moving to shrink the district as enrollment is expected to decline to 58,570 students by 2014 from about 73,000 students today.

Frustrated by the extended outside rule of the district's operations, the school board recently regained control of the district's academics through a lawsuit. It has also sought an infusion of funds from the state and an end to outside control of the district.

Mr. Bobb arrived two years ago and has agreed to stay through the end of June while Republican Gov. Rick Snyder considers a possible replacement.

 Write to  Matthew Dolan at matthew.dolan@wsj.com 