At the annual Detroit auto show, the saying goes, the cars are the stars. But at this year's love-in, following a year in which sector stocks jumped 58%, so are the companies making them.

Attendance and new model launches at the conference are up. Such exuberance marks a welcome change from recent years, but also points to a subtle shift in the investment climate, with big implications for stock buyers.

  Brian Johnson, autos analyst at Barclays Capital, says investors asking questions at this year's company presentations are more focused on big-picture trends as opposed to the deep-value investors who picked over the nitty-gritty of companies' financial statements at the 2010 show. "It's a palpably different mind-set" he says.

  Ford Motor's
F


1.16
%




 experience illustrates the point. Having been mentioned eight times at the manufacturer's presentation last year, the phrase "balance sheet" was notable by its complete absence at Tuesday's dog-and-pony show.

Alongside accelerating seasonally adjusted vehicle sales,  General Motors
GM


0.28
%




' return to the stock market in November provided bullish symbolism. It was also a chance for a broader swath of investors to brush up on the sector.

Analyzing earlier cyclical upswings, Mr. Johnson reckons auto stocks have further to run. In the early 1990s, vehicle sales bottomed out in January 1991. Beginning with supplier stocks, the auto sector climbed until early 1994, with forward price/earnings multiples expanding from single digits to a peak of about 16 times.

Right now, it has been almost a year since sales reached their cyclical trough and, on BarCap's estimates, supplier stocks trade on an average multiple of normalized earnings, which smooth out cyclical swings, of 9.3 times. Ford and GM trade below seven times.

Last year, the sector was bouncing off the bottom and actions like Ford's debt redemptions provided internal momentum. Now, macroeconomic trends are in the driving seat, both in terms of profitability and, judging from the auto show crowd, the investor base. However, two critical indicators, housing and employment, remain choppy rather than offering solid support. Rising prices for steel and gasoline present additional headwinds.

To mitigate the volatility this implies, investors should target auto stocks pricing in conservative trends.  Chris Ceraso at Credit Suisse reckons that prices of supplier stocks like  Lear,
LEA


-1.35
%




 Johnson Controls
JCI


-0.22
%




 and  Tenneco
TEN


-0.09
%




 imply low or negative profit growth despite their leverage to the cyclical upswing.

One thing even optimists will have to bear in mind as the year goes on, however, is the factor that eventually killed the early 1990s rally: interest rates. Cheap money facilitates purchases of cars and stocks alike. And the next time car lovers congregate in a wintry Detroit, this anomalous era of zero rates should be drawing to a close, if not receding in the rearview mirror already.

 Write to  Liam Denning at liam.denning@wsj.com 