Young men and women in the northern Indian state of Punjab have been raised on stories of the booming new India. But for many of them, dreams of a good job and a steady paycheck are clashing with the reality of how little Punjab has to offer them. 

Their frustration at the lack of modern employment offers a sharp counterpoint to the popular image of a giant, striving nation where the economic possibilities are endless.

"I don't see a single job opportunity," says Pooja Pandey, 20, whose father is in the Indian Army. She's finishing a two-year bachelor's of science program with a focus on information technology. "So many people are unemployed."

The state's metropolitan areas haven't attracted the same scale of investment from large-scale industries and multi-national companies that has powered rapid growth in many other parts of India. Instead, Punjab remains heavily reliant on agriculture, which has been in decline for the past 15 years. Unemployment in Punjab's cities stands at 15.2%, double the national average.

"We don't know what to do next," says Palvi Devgan, 24 years old, who has finished a master's degree in business economics from a top local university. "Punjab has a total lack of job opportunities. But I can't leave my family. I can't leave this place."

Determined to develop a career for herself, Ms. Devgan, whose mother is a school principal, left the village where she grew up six years ago and moved to the nearest city, Amritsar. But after living as a paying guest away from her family and struggling to make a career, Ms. Devgan says she feels cheated. "Now I see there's nothing here," she said.

She and other students interviewed said many young people they knew were so discouraged and stressed that they abused drugs and alcohol. "One of my close friends is addicted to drugs," said 22-year-old Silky, who doesn't use a last name. "It's the unemployment, their minds are totally blank."

Until recent years, a young person in Punjab who couldn't find a job in the private sector could at least aspire to a job in state government. These jobs were generally good for life, paid reasonably well and offered the opportunity to make additional income in bribes. But Punjab's cash-strapped government isn't hiring much these days, leading to a dispiriting rush where any government job is advertized.

"In Punjab, when they even have rallies to recruit constables or to recruit people in the army for the basic post of a soldier, people with post-graduate degrees apply. There's so much of frustration you literally have a stampede kind of situation," says Gurjeet Sekhon, the director of a job-training center run by NIIT Ltd. in the Punjabi city of Amritsar.

Some of Punjab's youth who left to join new industries elsewhere have returned to try to make their careers at home. But it's tough going. 

After working as a network engineer at Indian tech giant Wipro Ltd. outside New Delhi, Arjun Khanna returned to Amritsar to try to launch an Internet company. His dream was to create a Web site to help Indians find nearby restaurants and look up menus – an Indian version of MenuPages.com. But he gave up because he couldn't find enough local tech talent and couldn't recruit anyone from other cities to move to Amritsar.

"I couldn't find experienced personnel and experienced people around," the 27-year-old says. "And I lacked the experience myself."

He then looked around for a decent-paying tech job in the city. "There was no good software job in Amritsar – I tried my best," he said. "There's nothing here for youth, no service sector opportunities. All you see is liquor stores on every corner."

Mr. Khanna had to direct his entrepreneurial energy elsewhere. He decided to carry on his family's textile business by setting up a knitting factory to manufacture nylon and polyester cloth used in everything from linings for sarees to burqas to tablecloths and curtains. 

He bought second-hand German knitting machines through a contact in Spain – they were so old that they were marked "Made in West Germany" – and then taught himself how to operate them by reading online manuals.

He and his father have ploughed about $100,000 into the venture, which employs 10 workers and operates out of a small plant in the heart of the city. "I started with three machines and now I'm up to seven," he says.

As state elections approach next year, all leading Punjabi politicians – incumbents and their opponents -- are promising to focus on creating better job opportunities. 

"By 2020, I think development will finally be taking place here," says Nakul Mehra, 21, who just finished his bachelor's of science program focusing on Internet technology. "But by then, it will be too late for us."