India is thinking of lowering its guard against foreign banks. The catch? The outsiders will have to look more like locals to get in.

For most foreigners, India has proven impenetrable. Standard Chartered, which has been operating in the country for 150 years, accounts for nearly a third of the just 308 branches of foreign banks in India. Thirteen of the 33 other foreign banks in India have only one branch each.

The Reserve Bank of India, keeping true to India's legacy of conservatism with all foreign companies, has ensured this by keeping tight control over branch growth. In the year through March 2010, for example, it handed out licenses for only 15 new branches -- just three more than the minimum mandated by the World Trade Organization.

But in a draft document published on its website late Friday, the RBI is proposing some big changes to this, including easing its approach to granting new branch licenses, and treating foreign banks the same as local private-sector banks in terms of capital requirements. It also says foreign banks could be allowed to tap the domestic bond market to raise rupee-denominated funds.

The tradeoff is that the foreign banks will have to operate in India as wholly owned subsidiaries, rather than as outposts of a foreign company. It means setting up a board of directors in India, at least half of whom must be Indian nationals residing in the country.

In asking for this, the central bank is after two things: Creating a separation between the assets of the Indian unit and the parent in London or Singapore, and increasing control over how the banks lend. The RBI currently requires domestic banks to direct a portion of lending to the agricultural sector, for example. It says it might require the same of foreigners, though to a smaller degree.

For the central bank, this resolves a key concern over foreigners in India. In 2009, credit growth declined sharply -- by 16% that October from the year earlier for example -- as foreign banks rapidly pulled out of the market when their parent banks were squeezed for cash. To ensure foreigners don't dominate Indian banking, it says it'll stop giving new licenses once foreign bank assets reach 15% of the industry's assets. Right now, they constitute only 7.6%.

The door isn't wide open, but foreigners would be happy they are getting a chance to squeeze a limb in. 

 Write to  Harsh Joshi at harsh.joshi@dowjones.com 