I would not have accumulated nearly what I did if I'd known Mama would die so soon. But I did. And she did, six years ago last month.

Mama, née Ruth Clark, lived in the small farming town of Tarboro, N.C. She was all the things a Steel Magnolia should be: a beauty, a wit, a Character (capital C). I mean, this is a lady who, on what would be the next-to-last night of her life, put on lipstick before the ambulance came and lied about her age to the paramedics.

Her Federal-style house, which our family had occupied continuously for more than a century, brimmed with things. It also mirrored her spirit: elegant (Scalamandré silks), distinctive (14-foot ceilings), eccentric (embarrassing display of our childhood crafts at Christmas). She had left my sister and me a letter. "If something should happen…If you are reading this, something indeed has happened…," she wrote, winking at us even in death. "Please don't you all fight over my things. Just take what you want and throw the rest away…"

Months passed before my sister and I could bring ourselves to deal with her possessions. We didn't bicker, thank goodness. The throwing away was difficult, but it was nice to have her permission. We reminded ourselves that our mother's things were not our mother. Giving them away to charity and friends was a joy. Storing items ostensibly for future generations was neurotic and against all anti-clutter dictates, but we did it anyway. In the words of another great Steel Magnolia, "I'll think about that tomorrow."

Eventually, we whittled down our picks—dozens of items each—and set about incorporating those new-old things into our own homes. A few of the pieces were worth something—a fine Hepplewhite sideboard, an Art Deco diamond cuff. But mostly there was just a lot of stuff whose greatest value was sentimental.

Mama had impeccable taste. But my style is less English and formal, more Continental and casual. I probably would not have aspired to a collection of Staffordshire porcelain dogs, for example; or an assortment of brown furniture. And yet now I wanted hers. Keeping it, though, would require a little work.

Making room was an issue. My sister's sprawling house in Atlanta was more accommodating than my Manhattan two-bedroom. But I had recently acquired a cottage in Long Island, and there would be space there.

It helped that the house, in East Hampton, was very Cotswolds-cottage-y, so the Staffordshire and English furniture would fit in easily. Other pieces would need encouragement in the form of painting, repurposing or outright reimagining.

And here's the lovely part about making peace with a loved one's belongings: While so many of us are drawn to the new and perfect, inherited pieces have soul. Even if flawed, objects and furnishings with history have a story. They carry the energy of our affection. It radiates through the house. People can sense it when they walk through the door. We may not be conscious of it, but it's there.

Certainly our family isn't the first to confront the emotional reapportioning of a beloved's belongings. A few lessons from my journey:

 Don't act in haste. Storing items is costly, but it can buy you time for a final edit and save you money in the long run on furnishings. Do a quickie calculation.

 Create a special place. The Staffordshire pieces needed a display area of their own. Shelves were the simple answer, but how not to clutter up precious wall space? I built them into a discreet niche at the foot of a staircase. The rest were stashed in nooks there and yon.

 Don't pigeonhole period pieces. A frumpy old Victorian table went surprisingly well with my painted and upholstered furniture and a sisal rug. It also brought some needed contrast to the room.

 Retask items. I figured mom's apple green laminate breakfast table would make a good desk. I fit it with a tailored burlap tablecloth, and voila: a neutral element that provided hidden storage to boot.

 Break decorating rules. An 18th-century table was one of the last pieces I placed. I painted it a high-gloss enamel white, and plopped it in the kitchen—sacrilege in the eyes of some, but a great solution for me.

 Find ways to use what you love. Massive gilded bronze cheniers? I always adored them and was determined to make them work. A decorator friend had them made into lamps. They are still a tad preposterous, but they're functional—and what character!

A P.S. My sister got the diamond bracelet and I got the sideboard. I finally had it restored last year and routed to my revamped New York apartment. Fittingly, Ruth's portrait hangs above it. I can still hear her telling the artist, "I don't care if it looks like me; I just want it to be young and thin." She was in her 50s at the time and every bit a size 12. In the portrait she's a 35-year-old size 4; otherwise it captures her perfectly. She was a knockout.

—Ms. Schultz is currently writing a series of columns for House Beautiful magazine about the makeover of her Long Island house, "Bee Cottage."