PARIS—France, one of the world's nuclear powers, moved quickly to try to reassure the world and its own people that its nuclear plants were safe, as Japan's unfolding crisis threw a wrench in a much-vaunted global nuclear renaissance. 

Nuclear energy accounts for around 80% of France's electricity output, and the country has for decades invested money and manpower to build state-of-the-art nuclear plants, including so-called third-generation reactors that are considered among the world's safest and most advanced.

Buoyed by recent renewed interest in nuclear energy, companies such as France's  Areva SA and  Électricité de France SA
EDF


0.20
%




—two of the industry's biggest players—have over the past few years been actively pitching their reactors in developing countries including South Africa, India and Saudi Arabia. EDF is now expanding nuclear capacity in China and is hoping to build new reactors in Poland and the U.K. 

The earthquake-spawned crises at Japan's Fukushima and other plants, however, strengthens the hands of nuclear doubters around the world—and even by factions within France, where there has until now been little debate over the benefits of nuclear power.



On Monday, French European Parliament member Daniel Cohn-Bendit called for a referendum on nuclear power, in the hope that the subject could become a major topic of France's presidential election in May 2011.

Responding to the criticisms, French Environment Minister Nathalie Kosciusko-Morizet said other renewable energy sources wouldn't suffice to compensate for the loss of any nuclear power in France. 

Henri Guaino, a top adviser to French President Nicolas Sarkozy, said in a televised interview that France's nuclear industry wouldn't suffer the fallout of Japan's accident. "I'd say the contrary as France stands out for its focus on safety."

Despite the reassurances, concerns are growing across Europe. Though the reports from Japan point to a more contained situation, some parallels are even being drawn with the 1986 Chernobyl disaster, which soured public opinion on nuclear energy for a generation and led to an effective moratorium on new nuclear investment.

On Monday, the Swiss government said it had suspended plans to replace its aging nuclear power plants. Austria's environment minister, Nikolaus Berlakovich, called for stress tests on Europe's nuclear power plants to check how earthquake-proof they were, how their cooling systems worked and whether their reactors were adequately protected. 

The accidents in Japan have "changed the world," said Guenther Oettinger, the European Union's energy commissioner.

Areva is currently building four 1,600-megawatt EPR reactors:

EDF currently:

The fallout in Germany was swift. Chancellor Angela Merkel announced a three-month moratorium on a much-debated government decision to extend the lifespan of Germany's nuclear fleet by roughly eight years for reactors commissioned before 1980 and by 14 years for younger plants. 

In the U.K., the accident comes at a delicate time. The U.K. has one of the world's most ambitious nuclear-plant construction programs, designed to help it meet tough carbon-emission targets and replace its fleet of aging reactors. 

U.K. Energy Secretary Chris Huhne said over the weekend that he had asked the country's chief nuclear inspector to report on the implications of the Japanese crisis. 

Anticipating a possible slowdown in new contracts, investors drove down shares in European energy companies  E.On AG,  RWE AG
RWEOY


-0.50
%




 and EDF. In an interview with Germany's influential tabloid Bild-Zeitung, RWE Chief Executive  Juergen Grossman said the crisis at Japan's reactors couldn't happen in Germany, given that the problems were unleashed by the tsunami. 

Areva and EDF haven't commented on the Japanese nuclear-power crisis. Still, Areva has long been touting its reactors as among the world's safest. The company's third-generation EPR reactor, for example, is capable of withstanding the crash of a plane on its rooftop. The company, which designs and supplies nuclear reactors, mines uranium and provides nuclear-related services,is building four EPRs around the world.

The first such reactor, in Finland, should be completed next year 2012, after difficulties and long delays. Areva is also building one EPR in France and two in Taishan, China.

—Vanessa Fuhrmans contributed to this article.

 Write to  Geraldine Amiel at geraldine.amiel@dowjones.com and Guy Chazan at guy.chazan@wsj.com 