As parents who sign their children up for music lessons know, music education is a whole lot more than just learning how to play an instrument. It's really about learning a skill, how to solve problems and be disciplined.

Learning the violin as a 4-year-old turned out to be an important part of Roy Niederhoffer's life. The 45-year-old founder and president of R.G. Niederhoffer Capital Management, a New York-based hedge fund, still plays the violin with New York's Park Avenue Chamber Symphony. He helps his children practice their instruments, too.

But he also hopes to bring the benefits of music education to New York City public school students. For three years, Mr. Niederhoffer has supported the Harmony Program at the City University of New York.

The nonprofit, founded in 2004, trains college music students to teach economically disadvantaged students to play an instrument. The free program provides about 100 elementary-school students with daily after-school music lessons, instruments, books and the opportunity to attend cultural events.

The program is modeled after "El Sistema," Venezuela's national orchestra program, which catches children at an early age and makes classical music and performance the centerpiece of the child's education.

Mr. Niederhoffer has helped raise more than $100,000 for the Harmony Program and recently gave $25,000 to underwrite the group's annual gala to be held May 2 in New York. He serves on the organization's board of directors and has helped to channel concert proceeds from Park Avenue Chamber Symphony performances to the Harmony Program.

For Mr. Niederhoffer, the program helps to create "a sense of discipline, a work ethic and an understanding that any problem, including something as difficult as mastering a piece on the violin, can be broken down into individualized pieces and perfected," he says, adding "that with hard work and good teaching you can do things that seem impossible."

Some Harmony Program students are already in their third year of the program and are gaining confidence in their performance and studies, playing alongside professional musicians, including members of the New York Philharmonic.

The hope is that even if the students don't become professional musicians that the work ethic developed in the program will benefit the students long-term. Mr. Niederhoffer calls it "planting seeds."

"Just the exposure to this, at a young age, changes people permanently and everything that they do for the rest of their lives will be influenced by the lessons that they learn," he says. "There's nothing but goodness that can come out of this type of music education."