WASHINGTON— Democrats frustrated over the use of filibusters to slow or block legislation say they will push for procedural changes on Wednesday, when the new Senate convenes. 

A hallowed Senate institution, the filibuster is considered a safeguard of minority rights by some senators and by others as a tool of obstruction.

"The Senate today is dysfunctional," Sen.  Tom Harkin (D., Iowa), a longtime advocate of changing the rules, said in an interview. "You just can't run a 21st century superpower using 19th century rules."

Other senators calling for changes include  Mark Udall (D., Colo.) and  Jeff Merkley (D., Oregon), but a broader group has expressed unhappiness with the current rules. Senate leaders say it's unlikely that far-reaching changes will be enacted this week. But Wednesday's effort to start debate could lead to modifications in the filibuster.

Since its founding, the Senate, unlike the House, has allowed members to filibuster, or speak endlessly on the floor—a right that many have used to block bills they oppose. The lengthy speeches are intended to prevent the bill in question from coming to a vote by forcing its weary supporters to withdraw it from consideration. 

 In 1975, senators adopted a rule that filibusters could be shut down by a vote of 60 senators.

Democrats say the GOP is using the filibuster to torpedo the Democratic agenda. As an example, some cite the Republican filibustering of the food-safety bill in 2010, which slowed the passage of a measure that nevertheless enjoyed wide, bipartisan support. Republicans said they objected to elements of the bill.

Republicans say they are forced to filibuster because Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid refuses to let them have any amendments and cuts off debate as quickly as he can.

Few signs point to Republicans joining Democrats in pushing for changes. But one Republican, Sen.  Lamar Alexander of Tennessee, said the two parties could agree on some changes, such as ending the practice of a senator anonymously putting a "hold'' on legislation.

Mr. Alexander predicted Democrats will conclude that major changes are not in their long-term self-interest, in part because they could lose their majority status after the 2012 elections. 

"The whole purpose of the Senate is to be a forum where any senator can have debate and offer almost any amendment until 60 senators decide it's enough," Mr. Alexander said. "The main thing we need is a change in behavior, rather than a change in rules." 

Advocates for change, including Sens. Udall and Merkley, are not proposing to abolish the filibuster. They want more limited curbs, such as preventing senators from filibustering the motion to begin debating a bill as well as the bill itself, which means that lawmakers in effect filibuster the same bill twice.

And they say if senators want to filibuster, they should be required to remain physically present on the Senate floor and keep talking, rather than simply notifying party leaders of their objection, which has become recent practice.

Other proposals abound. Mr. Harkin wants to set up a series of votes when a filibuster is launched, with the final one requiring just 51 votes to end debate. Mr. Harkin said it's hard to persuade his colleagues to accept such changes.

"The power of a senator comes not from what he can do but what he can stop—that's the dirty little secret," he said.enate rule changes typically require 67 votes, a virtually insurmountable hurdle for changing the filibuster. But Mr. Harkin and others say little basis exists for this requirement, and that the Constitution suggests the Senate should be able to change its rules by simple majority.

 Write to  Naftali Bendavid at naftali.bendavid@wsj.com 