Democrats are deriding last night's House vote to repeal ObamaCare as "symbolic," and it was, but that is not the same as meaningless. The stunning political reality is that a new entitlement that was supposed to be a landmark of liberal governance has been repudiated by a majority of one chamber of Congress only 10 months after it passed. This sort of thing never happens.

More House Members—245 in total—voted to rescind the new entitlement than the 219 Democrats who voted to create it last March. That partisan majority narrowly prevailed over all 178 Republicans and some 38 Democrats. The three Democrats who favored repeal yesterday confirmed the bipartisan opposition to the kind of vast new social program that historically has been built on a national bipartisan consensus.

Republicans across the country campaigned on repeal last year, and yesterday's vote showed refreshing respect for the often invoked, rarely consulted American people. Meanwhile, six additional states have asked to join the momentous constitutional challenge to ObamaCare in Florida, bringing the total to 26, plus Virginia's separate suit. A majority of states resisting this mandate is another "symbolic" threshold.

It's also telling that even many Democrats are now bowing to the public mood, conceding that the law needs fixing even if they oppose outright repeal. No less than President Obama declared that "I'm willing and eager to work with both Democrats and Republicans to improve the Affordable Care Act. But we can't go backward." House Minority Whip Steny Hoyer said on Tuesday that Democrats are "open to better ideas."

These feints toward conciliation would be more convincing if Harry Reid were willing to bring the repeal bill to the Senate floor. No doubt the Majority Leader fears defections when Republicans eventually do force an up-or-down vote, especially among the many vulnerable red-state Democrats standing for re-election in 2012. The retirement of North Dakota's Kent Conrad, the self-styled deficit hawk who voted for this fiscal disaster, may be a portent.

Various liberal sages chimed in with a prediction/hope that repeal will backfire on Republicans, usually based on outlier polls like those produced by the Kaiser Family Foundation. These are the same wise men who after Scott Brown's Massachusetts Senate upset a year ago importuned Democrats to pass the bill anyway. They claimed it would be a political winner, eventually, once voters were hooked up to subsidized coverage.

But such spin can't overcome the reality of premium increases and other damage in the insurance market that consumers can see in their own paychecks and that will only grow. Recall that reform was sold as a way to control costs and increase consumer choice. But underlying medical costs continue to climb, carrying premiums aloft in tandem. Even a nonprofit insurer like Blue Shield of California, a reliable lobbyist for progressive causes, says it must raise rates by as much as 59%, in part to comply with ObamaCare's mandates.

The law's central planning has also set off a wave of health-industry consolidation that is already reshaping medicine as providers try to shelter themselves from political risk. A Thompson Reuters survey released this week found that 65% of physicians believe the quality of care will deteriorate over the next five years, with only 18% thinking it will improve. Republicans could have done better in yesterday's debate by focusing more on this deterioration in choice and quality, rather than so much on the (admittedly real) harm to jobs and the federal deficit. 

The GOP does need to craft a reform alternative based on competition and market incentives that is more than a return to the status quo ante. And while "repeal and replace" can't happen as long as Mr. Obama wields veto power, yesterday's vote sent an important signal to voters that ObamaCare can't be fixed at the margins when it is so destructive at its core. Next up: defunding the law's implementation and repealing some of its more pernicious parts. 