The public shaming of Ohio State football coach Jim Tressel is the latest in a series of revelations that have touched nearly all the top programs in college football and many of the sport's most prominent stars. 

The long trail of investigations, accusations, clarifications and statements of heartfelt contrition has cut from North Carolina to Oregon in recent months, scooping up national champions, famous coaches and Heisman Trophy winners. 

The latest blow came Tuesday evening when Tressel appeared at a news conference to apologize for failing to report information he'd been given about potential wrongdoing by two of his players. Tressel was suspended for two games and fined by the school, but his larger fate now rests with the NCAA. 

The obvious conclusion to draw is that college football's moral center has been replaced with a delicious filling of creamy marzipan. (Good luck finding someone who would argue the other side). But the events of recent days also point to another, more complex truth: College football is becoming an impossible place to keep secrets. 

"The more transparency, the more openness the better," said former Michigan athletic director Bill Martin. "I think this is all very healthy." 

For a number of reasons both new and old, college football may be the nation's most out-in-the-open sport. First, there's the sheer size of it. There are 26,300 athletes who play Division I football. That's more than double the 10,800 athletes on the second-largest men's sport, outdoor track and field. Men's college basketball has just 5,182 participants. 

It's not just the number of athletes involved, or their prominence on campus. These athletes also must qualify academically and can't accept any money or favors—factors that create infinitely more opportunities for the schools to get in trouble. And many of these infractions are things that wouldn't have registered in the past. "Jim Tressel's situation, that's jaywalking to me," said former Oklahoma coach Barry Switzer. "These things don't surprise me. This stuff has gone on forever."

Another difference today is that there are hundreds of new ways for schools and players to get caught breaking the rules. Never mind the growing number of national media outlets that pursue stories about wrongdoing in college football (this week's Tressel story was first reported by Yahoo Sports). Today's information providers include everything from TMZ.com and Twitter to the enormous network of fan forums and scouting sites that have popped up to serve the insatiable appetite for minutiae. 

In the last year, NCAA investigators have been drawn to ask questions about everything from a report on TMZ.com that a player was at a party sponsored by an agent to a Facebook post in which one heavily recruited high school player posted about his new iPhone. 

There have been controversies generated by reports of players who've been spotted in fancy cars. And because most schools are public institutions supported by taxpayers, they're required to respond to requests for information made under the Freedom of Information Act. 

Mississippi State coach Dan Mullen says much of the pressure comes from the increasing number of "big-money media sources" competing for stories. "Everyone's trying to get the scoop and it gets a little sensational," he said. 

Mullen said the added scrutiny is especially tough for coaches, who almost feel that the recruiting experts, reporters and agents have better access to players than coaches. "We are restricted by so many rules," he said. "I only get to make one visit but they can talk to players whenever they want."

The deluge of scandals over the past year is, in large part, the result of increasing enforcement by the NCAA. Despite massive criticism for how it has (or hasn't) meted out punishment in several high-profile cases recently—including the controversy surrounding Auburn quarterback Cam Newton—the NCAA has publicly committed to steeping up its efforts. "We're not shying away from it," said Rachel Newman Baker, the NCAA's director of agent, gambling and amateurism activities. 

Beyond enforcement, however, there's a growing consensus throughout college football that the NCAA is simply doing a better job of collecting information. "In the past, the NCAA was often criticized for not knowing what's going on in the real world," Baker said. "I think we've got a pretty good idea. Coaches and players are starting to realize that as well."

What's often forgotten is that the immense popularity of college football, the intensity of its rivalries and the increasing interconnections of its fans, have created another potent police force. The result: more messes are being exposed. But the sport is also seeing more than its share of sunlight. And as Justice Louis Brandeis said, "Sunlight is the best disinfectant." 

"I don't know that things are a lot different—it's just that people are turning in schools now that weren't before," said Gary Barnett, the former Northwestern and Colorado coach. "It really comes down to all of the hype that's around this sport. The hype is involved, therefore the interest is involved, and people are willing to come forward."

—Matthew Futterman and Hannah Karp contributed to this article.

 Write to  Darren Everson at darren.everson@wsj.com 