HONG KONG— China Resources Power
0836


0.00
%




 Holdings Co. said Thursday its net profit fell 7.9% last year as higher fuel costs more than offset increased power output. 

The power company, a unit of state-owned China Resources National Corp., also said it plans to build more coal-fired power plants and to buy and develop coal mines in China's Shanxi province to support its power-generation business. 

"We aim to concentrate on the construction of large-scale efficient coal-fired generation units in eastern as well as southern China," Chairman  Wang Shuai Ting said in a statement. 

"We are also actively looking for and developing new coal mine projects in the country in order to increase the total coal resources which we control and secure our long-term fuel supply at low costs," he said. 

China Resources Power reported a net profit of 4.90 billion Hong Kong dollars (US$628 million) for the 12 months ended Dec. 31, down from HK$5.32 billion the year before. The result was also below the average HK$5.15 billion net profit forecast of 17 analysts polled earlier by Thomson Reuters. 

Revenue rose 46% to HK$48.58 billion from HK$33.21 billion as the company's 2010 electricity output grew 27% to 95.2 million megawatt hours from 75.2 million megawatt hours a year earlier. 

However, higher fuel costs ate into the company's net profit. China Resources Power said its average unit fuel costs rose 21.4% in 2010, and fuel costs accounted for 72% of its total operating costs during the period. 

Although China's government has ordered coal firms to refrain from raising contract thermal coal prices this year in a bid to curb inflation, the country's power producers' unit fuel costs will likely still rise because of purchases of more expensive coal from the spot market. 

Spot prices of Shanxi Quality Mix coal with a calorific value of 5500 kilocalories per kilogram, a domestic benchmark, are currently 13% higher than a year ago. 

China's power producers won't be able to pass these additional costs on to grid operators or consumers due to Beijing's reluctance to loosen state caps on power prices. The government fears raising power prices will push up inflation, which is already near two-year highs. 

As part of its efforts to secure adequate coal supplies, China Resources Power said Sunday it agreed to buy a stake in a coal mine in northern China from Thai coal miner  Banpu PCL
BNPJY


0.00
%




 for $669 million. 

Under the agreement, China Resources will buy 100% of Banpu's unit SAADEC (Hong Kong), which owns a 56% stake in Daning coal mine in Shanxi province, northern China. 

China Resources said the deal will give the company access to the mine's coal reserves. 

The blue-chip power producer recommended a final dividend of 27 Hong Kong cents for 2010, down from 32 Hong Kong cents a year earlier. 

 Write to  Yvonne Lee at yvonne.lee@wsj.com 