WASHINGTON—The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau on Wednesday tapped Sendhil Mullainathan, a leading behavioral economist, to help aid its work in crafting consumer-protection rules.

Mr. Mullainathan, a Harvard University economist and research associate at the National Bureau of Economic Research, will run the agency's Office of Research. The research arm "will promote evidence-based policy-making" and help the bureau understand the potential benefits and costs of its policies, said Elizabeth Warren, the White House adviser helping launch the consumer bureau.

The consumer bureau, a creation of the Dodd-Frank financial overhaul law enacted last year, will have broad powers to write and enforce consumer-protection laws. The agency is poised to supervise large banks as well as thousands of smaller financial firms that offer student loans, payday loans and check-cashing services. 

Mr. Mullainathan's research has focused on how people's biases and weaknesses lead them to make bad economic decisions. His research has provided much of the intellectual foundation for the establishment of the bureau.

"He's more or less exactly what the CFPB should be: evidence based, appropriately suspicious of concentrated interests, and he understands that real people can make mistakes," said Wharton School economist Justin Wolfers.

Mr. Mullainathan, who has received a MacArthur Foundation "genius award," told lawmakers in 2009 that he supported a two-part approach to financial regulation—one in which safe products would be lightly regulated while other products with the potential to hurt consumers would be more heavily regulated.

He is a founder, with Esther Duflo and Abhijit Banerjee, of MIT's Jameel Poverty Action Lab.

The CFPB also tapped Patrice Ficklin, a former Fannie Mae staffer who most recently practiced at the civil-rights law firm Relman, Dane & Colfax, as assistant director for fair lending. 

The financial industry, which largely opposed the creation of the bureau, has been watching closely as Ms. Warren staffs the agency and makes key decisions about the bureau's priorities. So far, Ms. Warren has attracted a diverse group of staffers, including former Wall Street banker Rajeev V. Date to head the agency's research, markets and regulations team. Elizabeth Vale, a Morgan Stanley managing director and longtime community banker, is the bureau's assistant director for community banks and credit unions. And Holly Petraeus, wife of Gen. David Petraeus, is in charge of an office aimed at protecting military families from predatory financial practices. 

Ms. Warren has also brought in people who have been critical of the financial industry such as former Ohio Democratic Attorney General Richard Cordray, who is leading the agency's enforcement division. She has also named David Silberman, a former AFL-CIO general counsel, as head of the agency's credit-markets division. 

 Write to  Maya Jackson Randall at Maya.Jackson-Randall@dowjones.com and Justin Lahart at justin.lahart@wsj.com 