 The British businessman talks to the Wall Street Journal Europe about how he starts his weekend.  

Sir Martin Sorrell, the chief executive of marketing agency WPP Group PLC finished last year on a high after acquiring Blue State Digital, the advertising agency that was hired by Barack Obama's presidential campaign. The acquisition is just one in a recent spate of additions to his global empire. 

With a trans-Atlantic business, Sir Martin spends the little free time he has in either London or New York, where he tries to fit in a work out routine at the gym and dine out with his wife. 

 How does your weekend start? 

The answer is what weekends? I live half time London and half time New York. Things are fairly hectic, so there is an element of collapsing in a heap after that kind of activity during the week. Often times you might be traveling back from London or New York overnight on a Friday night, which is something I don't like to do. I'd far rather spend Friday night in London or New York. But I don't spend time in London with family as much as I used to. My weekend starts depending on where I am and what I am doing. If I am staying in New York, [my weekend would start] on a Friday evening with a dinner with my wife and others. If I am traveling back from New York to London, sadly Friday night is probably on a plane.

 What do you then if you are looking for leisure? 

I go to the cinema, occasional theater and maybe even ballet or opera—very occasionally. But not enough of those things...New York is always very nice because it's got these different parts to it which are violently different and that's good fun. London tends to be more about spending time at home or in restaurants because I have family here. 

 What's your favorite restaurant? 

If I say what my favorite restaurant is I will get people upset so I'd say lots of nice ones. What we do on Fridays is actually try new ones. 

 What kind of food do you like? 

My wife is from Rome so good Italian restaurants are inevitably on the agenda. She's very choosy but I like all actually—French, Chinese, Japanese. I try to eat healthily which is extremely difficult. I tend to like pasta. [My meals] tend to be meat and vegetables or fish and vegetables. Breakfast tends to be either protein or porridge. So I tend to be rather boring because I am concerned about getting fat.

 When do you make time to workout?  

On the weekends, I try to go to the gym. I do half cardio and half weights—about 30 minutes of each. I take that seriously. In a funny way it relaxes me. I don't like running, not even on a machine, because it's hard work. I monitor the heart rate and all that stuff. But I have lost a fair bit of weight which is the right thing. You feel better and you have more energy. 

 Are you into any sports? 

I play cricket mainly in the summer. I'm certainly at my most disconnected, if not relaxed, when I am facing a 6 foot 6 inch West Indian fast bowler without a helmet, on the one or two weekends of the year that I play cricket. 

 Do you ever switch off? 

The weekend is about relaxing, but if the question is do you take the BlackBerry with you on holidays then the answer is yes. The good thing about the weekend is that the amount of email traffic is less and you get time to think about the things you didn't do in the week and I get time to read things like magazines and newspapers, which I am increasingly doing from an iPad. I occasionally read books on an iPad but I tend to focus that more on holidays. I love reading on the iPad but lots of people tell me they don't like it. I don't get tired when reading the screen but my wife has a fetish about being able to flip over the pages. I can't understand why anybody would like to take a physical book around with them anymore. 

 What would be something you would change about your weekend? 

Make them longer or make them shorter! On balance I enjoy them as they are. I'm privileged to spend a little time each weekend in two of the most intriguing diverse [cities] in the world. [I] wouldn't swap this for the world. It gives me a chance to catch up with my wife and family, which busy weeks prevent. The only problem is that the pace is so intense that even the weekends may be encroached upon.

—Sir Martin was speaking with Javier Espinoza.

 Write to  Javier Espinoza at javier.espinoza@wsj.com 