AMMAN, Jordan—The Iraqi Oil Ministry has presented a new plan that would raise the country's crude oil production capacity to about 6.5 million barrels a day by the end of 2014, from 2.6 million barrels a day now. 

The plan, which will be submitted to the cabinet in Baghdad for approval in few days, also sets a target to raise associated and nonassociated natural-gas-production capacity to 4.5 billion cubic feet a day by the end of 2014, from the current 1.7 billion cubic feet a day. 

The plan, prepared by top officials in the ministry including Oil Minister Abdul Kareem Luaiby, also set an ambitious target to raise the country's refining capacity from its current 523,000 barrels a day to 700,000 barrels a day. 

Iraq's oil-export capacity will rise to 5.65 million barrels a day by the end of 2014, up from 1.890 million barrels a day in actual exports last year, the plan stated. 

The plan is based on 15 oil and gas deals that Baghdad has signed over the past 16 months with some of the largest international companies to upgrade one of the world's largest oil fields. 

Iraq sits atop an estimated 143 billion barrels of oil, the world's third-largest proven reserves. But the country has struggled to lift its output amid years of sanctions and war before the U.S.-led invasion in 2003. Looting, underinvestment and political gridlock after the invasion slowed development. 

Momentum appeared to have started to pick up since last year, when international oil companies started investing billions of dollars to boost output in Iraq's prized oil fields. The oil ministry announced earlier this year that the country's crude-oil-output capacity had increased by 300,000 barrels a day from oil fields in southern Iraq. 

"We are hoping to reach a production target of 11.5 million barrels a day from these deals," Mr. Luaiby said. 

Some observers, however, believe that Iraq's official oil production forecast is unrealistic. They say the companies will be hindered by sobering security, poor infrastructure and political instability. 

"The figure 6.5 million barrels a day to be reached in 2014 is too ambitious," said  Jean-Luc Amos, a senior analyst at the London-based KBC Energy Economics. "The more realistic dates for achieving that figure would be between 2015 and 2020," he added. 

Also crucial to the expansion of Iraq's crude oil output is a massive, shared water-injection scheme that would sustain pressure in the country's giant southern oil fields. The ministry hasn't started yet serious construction of the project.  Exxon Mobil Corp.
XOM


-0.54
%




, which won a deal to develop Iraq's supergiant West Qurna Phase 1 oil field, is leading a steering committee that's exploring how to build the system, which could use up to 10 million barrels a day of sea water. 

The other setback to a production increase is export capacity. Iraq hasn't yet had the export outlets to handle that amount of crude oil exports. 

"Why should they be producing that much of crude oil if they don't have the export facilities to sell them," Mr. Amos asked. 

Oil Minister Luaiby said his ministry is working to expand export facilities to handle rising crude output. Two floating loading terminals, each with an export capacity of 800,000 barrels a day, off Basra are expected to be completed by the end of this year. Current export capacity from Basra terminals is at 1.75 million barrels a day, he said. While export capacity of the volatile northern export pipeline to the Turkish Ceyhan port is standing at 650,000 barrels a day, the line is being damaged by rebels almost on a monthly basis. 

 Write to  Hassan Hafidh at hassan.hafidh@wsj.com 