WASHINGTON—The First Amendment protects free speech even if it is as hurtful as signs at a Marine funeral proclaiming "Thank God for Dead Soldiers," the Supreme Court ruled Wednesday in a decision that was one of the court's most significant on freedom of expression in recent years.

The Westboro Baptist Church celebrated the death of Lance Cpl. Matthew Snyder in Iraq with signs such as "God Hates You," along with antigay messages at his funeral in Maryland in 2006. The late Marine's father sought damages for emotional distress, but the court ruled that he had no case. 

"As a nation we have chosen…to protect even hurtful speech on public issues to ensure that we do not stifle public debate," Chief Justice John Roberts wrote for the court in an 8-1 decision. "That choice requires that we shield Westboro from tort liability for its picketing in this case."

Last April, in another 8-1 ruling, the court struck down a law banning animal-cruelty videos, saying it was too broad and might chill legitimate speech. Together, the rulings show a broad consensus on the court, spanning the frequent liberal-conservative ideological divide, protecting hateful or offensive speech. 

The lone dissenter in both rulings, Justice Samuel Alito, wrote in Wednesday's case, "Our profound national commitment to free and open debate is not a license for the vicious verbal assault that occurred in this case." 

He said the soldier's father, Albert Snyder, "wanted what is surely the right of any parent who experiences such an incalculable loss: to bury his son in peace. But…members of the Westboro Baptist Church deprived him of that elementary right."

The case raised emotions on both sides, crystallizing as well as any single case could the tension between the right to free speech and the desire to protect people from pain. Chief Justice Roberts nodded to the wrenching set of facts in the case, writing that "the applicable legal term— 'emotional distress'—fails to capture fully the anguish Westboro's choice added to Mr. Snyder's already incalculable grief."

 Read more about the Supreme Court, including upcoming cases and details on the justices. 

The Westboro church, which has no connection to national Baptist organizations, believes that any misfortune America suffers is divine punishment for the nation's failure to follow the sect's doctrine, which condemns gays, Catholics, Jews and others. The tiny church in Topeka, Kan., whose membership largely consists of the family of founder Fred W. Phelps, pickets military funerals to get attention for its message. 

Mr. Snyder said the group's presence turned the funeral in Westminster, Md., into a circus. His lawyers argued in Snyder v. Phelps that Westboro's speech was entitled to less First Amendment protection, in part because the group exploited a private funeral to deliver its message. 

Mr. Snyder said he could see the tops of picket signs as he drove to the funeral, but didn't learn of the signs' content until he saw television coverage of the protest. 

Chief Justice Roberts said the protesters followed the law and weren't violent. "Any distress occasioned by Westboro's picketing turned on the content and viewpoint of the message conveyed, rather that any interference with the funeral itself," Chief Justice Roberts said. 

The Supreme Court has taken a broad view of free-speech rights in recent years, except for a case involving speech by a juvenile. 

 Morse v. Frederick (June 2007): A divided Supreme Court rules that an Alaska high-school student who was suspended after unfurling a banner reading "BONG HiTS 4 JESUS" can't sue the principal for damages. Chief Justice John Roberts says the banner was "reasonably viewed as promoting illegal drug use." 

 Citizens United v. FEC (January 2010): Court strikes down limits on political spending by corporations and unions, reversing federal laws dating to 1947. Five-justice conservative majority says the limits violated the First Amendment free-speech rights of corporations.

 U.S. v. Stevens (April 2010): Court strikes down a federal law banning depictions of animal cruelty, calling the law overbroad. Roberts writes for 8-1 majority, with Justice Samuel Alito the lone dissenter.

 Schwarzenegger v. Entertainment Merchants Association (argued November 2010, decision pending): High court is considering a challenge to a California law banning the sale of violent videogames to minors that appeal to a "deviant or morbid interest."

He said the group's messages "may fall short of refined social or political commentary," but discussed "matters of public import," such as the nation's morality and gays in the military. 

"The core of the First Amendment has always been that speech can't be punished or held liable because it is offensive," said Erwin Chemerinsky, dean of the University of California, Irvine, law school. "Had the court come out the other way, it would have dramatically changed First Amendment law."

Mr. Chemerinsky said the court has traditionally allowed some limits on when and where speech is made, a point reaffirmed by Chief Justice Roberts. His 15-page opinion noted that Maryland, as well as 43 other states and the federal government, now have laws imposing restrictions on funeral picketing, and said the court wasn't taking a position on those laws.

Westboro's protests, the chief justice said, were subject to reasonable government limits on the time, place and manner of the speech. He cited court precedent that allowed restrictions on protests at abortion clinics, including a requirement for a buffer zone between protesters and the clinic entrance. Maryland's law wasn't in effect at the time of the Snyder funeral protest.

After the funeral, the elder Mr. Snyder discovered a screed on the church's website attacking him for raising his son a Catholic and supporting his service in the armed forces. The Supreme Court said the online attack didn't factor into its analysis because Mr. Snyder didn't mention it in his petition to the high court.

Mr. Snyder won $5 million in damages at a federal trial court in Maryland, but the federal appeals court in Richmond, Va., later overturned the jury verdict on First Amendment grounds. 

Veterans groups and 42 U.S. senators were among those who had urged the Supreme Court to rule for the family. Civil-liberties and media groups, including Dow Jones & Co., publisher of The Wall Street Journal, urged the court to rule for Westboro, citing free-speech concerns.

"Our reaction is, thank God and praise his name. He has a message and we're going to deliver it," said Margie Phelps, the daughter of Westboro's founder and the lawyer who argued the group's case before the high court.

"It's a sad day for military families that are going to be subjected to this behavior," said Sean E. Summers, the lawyer who represented Mr. Snyder. "The court gave Westboro a blank check to harass families at private funerals."



 Write to  Brent Kendall at brent.kendall@dowjones.com 