COLUMBIA, S.C.—Patrick Haddon, like a lot of top Republicans in this key primary state, is feeling a little forlorn.

He just stepped down as party chairman of Greenville County, the state's biggest Republican enclave, making him a good tour guide for any candidate seeking to win influence here. Yet none of the likely 2012 presidential candidates are actively wooing him.

"Sure, I'm getting some calls," Mr. Haddon said. "But no one's saying, 'Hey, are you with us?' It's like everyone's still on vacation."

On the brink of Thursday's first national Republican debate—set in Greenville and co-sponsored by the state GOP and Fox News—and just 10 months from its first-in-the-South primary, South Carolina is abuzz with tales of neglect. Pollsters, activists, political operatives and lawmakers are all scratching their heads over the 2012 campaign that just won't get rolling.

Read about the potential Republican presidential contenders.

Four years ago, the same debate drew 10 contenders and a last-minute lawsuit from an 11th who was barred from the stage.

This year, five candidates are set to show up, including several who were iffy just days ago. Most of the big names—Mitt Romney, Newt Gingrich, Mike Huckabee, Michele Bachmann—have sent their regrets.

Those planning to attend are former Minnesota governor Tim Pawlenty, former Pennsylvania senator Rick Santorum, Rep. Ron Paul of Texas, former corporate CEO Herman Cain and former New Mexico governor Gary Johnson. 

Local polls suggest the race is wide open. A Winthrop University poll of 600 Republican and Republican-leaning voters last month found that 18% supported Mr. Huckabee, the former Arkansas governor, who has given mixed signals about running for the nomination. Mr. Romney, the former Massachusetts governor, received 16%. The same share were undecided. Combined, the five Republicans debating on Thursday night drew less than 8% support in the poll. 

Coming on the heels of the earliest nominating contests, in Iowa and New Hampshire, South Carolina has earned a reputation as a pivotal Republican primary. Since the contest's inception in 1980, every winner in South Carolina, from Ronald Reagan to John McCain, has gone on to become the GOP nominee.

A few likely candidates have swooped into the state often in recent months, with Mr. Santorum topping the list. He has made 14 trips since late 2009. 

But no one has begun to build the network of operatives and paid activists that several campaigns are now assembling in Iowa and New Hampshire. 

Only a few candidates have signed up any prominent backers. Mr. Gingrich, the former House speaker, has veteran operative Katon Dawson on his side, while Jon Huntsman, the former Utah governor and U.S. ambassador to China, has lured longtime strategist Richard Quinn. 

"So far, there's pretty much nothing going on," said Warren Tompkins, a veteran South Carolina political operative who supported Haley Barbour until the Mississippi governor decided not to run last month. 

Republicans cite many reasons for the sluggishness. President Barack Obama's campaign war chest, already swelling and expected to approach $1 billion, is putting an early premium on fund raising over campaigning. All the likely contenders face must-wins in the earlier states and are not yet looking much over the horizon. 

At the same time, some activists worry that the field lacks a personality big enough to defeat an incumbent president, and are waiting for the candidates to prove themselves or for another prominent name to join the contest. "People just don't want to make a mistake by supporting the wrong person," said Lin Bennett, the party chief in Charleston County. 

Longtime South Carolina donors and activists also say the party's own leadership remains rattled by last year's election of Gov. Nikki Haley, a tea party favorite who defeated three prominent Republican office-holders in the primary. That has left them unsure which political forces will propel the presidential election, and what sway the tea party will have in sorting out the candidates.

In an interview, Gov. Haley said the state's tea party fervor remained strong, and that voters were going to demand that candidates "put forward real specifics on policy" on topics from cutting the national debt to containing al Qaeda.

South Carolina is the first state on the Republican calendar to test a candidate's broad appeal, especially to voters in the South. While social conservatives dominate in Iowa, and New Hampshire leans more toward small-government libertarians, South Carolina is a hybrid. In addition, it has a big military contingent and tens of thousands of transplanted retirees.

"Here, you have to appeal to all kinds," said Mr. Tompkins, the longtime political operative. 

Most predict the campaign will begin to heat up by July. 

"The state doesn't look tailor-made for anyone," said Charleston communications consultant Jim Dyke. "That means it's all the more open for everyone."

 Write to  Neil King Jr. at neil.king@wsj.com and Valerie Bauerlein at valerie.bauerlein@wsj.com 