Illinois this week earned the honor of becoming the first state in 2011 to sock it to taxpayers, passing a tax hike the size of Lake Michigan. Citizens cried out, legislators deflected, but the most interesting response came from neighboring Wisconsin, where newly elected GOP Gov. Scott Walker had three words for Illinois businesses: "Escape to Wisconsin." 

Across the country, dozens of new governors are taking office, fine-tuning state-of-the-state addresses, polishing budgets. With each event we are seeing a growing national divide. 

On one side are wide swathes of the country that this past midterm elected reformers intent on slashing spending and reviving growth. On the other are the holdout pockets—Illinois, California, Massachusetts, Connecticut—drifting further into the abyss of tax and spend. The chasm has huge implications, not just for local and regional politics but for Washington.

Mr. Walker is painting that gulf as big as the Grand Canyon, this week blitzing the Chicago media markets to let suffering Illinois businesses know that while their governor, Pat Quinn, levies a 50% increase in corporate income taxes, Wisconsin is working to enact the total elimination of corporate income taxes for two years for firms that migrate. The "Escape to Wisconsin" line comes from an old tourism campaign, but Mr. Walker thinks it sums up the business choice perfectly. "We're going to send out that line to every employer in the state of Illinois," he tells me.

He won't be alone in rushing to siphon the nation's wealth creators. By the end of this month, 29 GOP governors will sit in office, 17 of them newly elected on promises to end out-of-control spending and grow jobs. In Ohio, John Kasich's Republican legislature has already introduced legislation to kill the state death tax. Illinois just reimposed its own. 

Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder's first order of business will be to end the 22% surcharge on his state's job-killing business tax, also making a contrast with Illinois's corporate hike. Mr. Walker is also flacking his reforms—including a reduction in capital gains tax—in nearby Minnesota, where new Democratic Gov. Mark Dayton recently lectured his own state Chamber of Commerce that its members are undertaxed. 

Nevada's Brian Sandoval has vowed to kill the tax hikes passed by Democrats in 2009. This sounds good to California businesses, whose own new Democratic governor, Jerry Brown, has announced plans for a five-year extension of his state's 2009 "temporary" tax increases. In Iowa, South Carolina, Florida, you name it, new Republican governors have made top priorities of cutting or eliminating state corporate income taxes. The midterms handed many of these reformers enough allies in their state legislatures to pull some, or all, of this off. 

Indiana GOP Gov. Mitch Daniels, who has spent six years taking competitive advantage of dysfunctional neighbors, jokes that living next to Illinois is like "living next to the Simpsons." He attests to the benefits, noting that Illinois-based Caterpillar recently chose to direct a major investment to build locomotives to Muncie, Ind. And while he recognizes he's now got some competition, he sees the combined force of reformers in Wisconsin, Michigan and Ohio creating a "divide that could operate long-term in the Midwest's favor." 

Many states have slashed budgets and used pro-growth tax policy to revive their fortunes. No state has taxed and spent itself to prosperity. As the road that Indiana and Wisconsin and Ohio are on diverges ever more successfully from that of high-tax states, Mr. Daniels says the pressure for change in the latter will grow: "The federal system has a wonderful built-in self-correction mechanism." 

It's already happening, he says, as witnessed by states that just elected reformers, and as notably, by liberal Democrats, like New York's new governor, Andrew Cuomo, who are acknowledging state government is too large. Mr. Cuomo is following New Jersey GOP reformer Chris Christie in proposing a cap on property taxes. "What you see are the first signs people in the other party are coming to terms with reality—that this can really has been kicked to a dead end," says Mr. Daniels. 

Mr. Walker sees reform affecting more than state or regional unemployment rates. He rewinds to the late 1980s and 1990s, when Wisconsin Gov. Tommy Thompson and Michigan Gov. John Engler led the way nationally on welfare and tort reform. He sees an opportunity for today's governors to be "even more aggressive"—this time on public-employee pensions, budget reform and Medicaid—and to turn these into national debates in Washington. 

And he sees all this playing large in 2012. When President Obama runs for re-election, he will do so in the face of "governors who are new, and who are being bold and aggressive in swing states about our reforms." The voters will get to see that distinction, and if Mr. Obama "puts his head in the sand, and keeps on the same path, he's in trouble," says Mr. Walker.

As for the state divide, Mr. Walker is happy to talk about it beyond business and the economy. "I was kidding the Chicago media guys, saying 'Have me back on when the Packers are ready to beat the Bears, and I'll talk some smackdown.'" 

Write to kim@wsj.com 