Cost cutting helped  Yahoo Inc.
YHOO


-0.18
%




's quarterly profit more than double but revenue declined 12% as the company continues to struggle to keep pace with rivals  Google Inc. and Facebook Inc.

The results came the same day the Sunnyvale, Calif., company made its second round of layoffs in two months, in sharp contrast to its biggest online competitors, which are hiring aggressively. On Tuesday, Google said it would boost its work force by 25% this year.

Yahoo said it would cut 1% of its staff, or about 135 employees. The disclosure came about a month after the company said it was slashing 4% of its payroll. Yahoo had about 13,600 employees as of Dec. 31.

The new layoffs, combined with a weak profit projection for the current quarter, showed that Yahoo is still in the thick of trying to turn itself around. The company has been beset by competition from Google and Facebook, which have grabbed users' attention and online advertising dollars. 

Yahoo Chief Executive  Carol Bartz has cut costs but concerns abound over the company's growth prospects.

Yahoo's report "implies there is no dramatic turnaround to this turnaround story," said Citigroup analyst Mark Mahaney. Yahoo shares fell 2% to $15.70 in after-hours trading after ending at $16.02 at 4 p.m. on the Nasdaq Stock Market. 

Yahoo's new layoffs come as Google said it plans to hire more than 6,000 employees this year, as the Web-search giant continues to expand into areas such as mobile-device software and local advertising. 

Last week, Google posted a 29% profit increase and a 26% revenue jump. In 2010, Google added 4,500 employees, boosting total staff to 24,400.

  Tim Morse, Yahoo's chief financial officer, played down the new layoffs in an interview. He said the company was continuing to hire in key areas while looking to expand margins by "taking a proactive stance to adjust our cost structure and align our spending with high-return activities." 

Ms. Bartz said later during a conference call that the company would increase head count overall this year. 

"We're not trying to cut our way to revenue growth. We're investing for future revenue growth," she said.

The executives blamed much of the fourth-quarter revenue drop on the transition of combining Yahoo's search-advertising business with that of  Microsoft Corp.
MSFT


0.42
%




 as part of a 10-year agreement. Microsoft's Bing search engine now powers searches on Yahoo sites, a move expected to save money over time because Yahoo no longer needs to invest in search technology. 

Ms. Bartz said Yahoo, which still designs the look of its search engine while Bing executes the searches themselves, would be able to increase its share of the overall Web-search market this year after losing ground to Google and Bing in 2010.

Overall, Yahoo posted fourth-quarter income of $312 million, or 24 cents a share, up from $153 million, or 11 cents a share, a year earlier. 

Revenue fell to $1.53 billion from $1.73 billion. Excluding commissions paid to partners, Yahoo's revenue fell 4% in the quarter to $1.21 billion. Excluding the Microsoft impact and certain divestitures, revenue grew by 2% in the quarter. 

On that basis, Yahoo projected revenue of $1.02 billion to $1.08 billion for the first quarter of this year. The company projected income from operations in the first quarter of between $130 million to $160 million, below Wall Street expectations of around $200 million.

In a positive sign, Yahoo said sales of display ads, which include graphical, interactive and video ads, on its websites increased 16% in the fourth quarter. 

"Our strong performance in display is a positive indicator of the top line growth we expect to see in the future," Ms. Bartz said on the call.

Still, in the market for U.S. display ads, which reached nearly $9 billion in 2010, Yahoo's share slipped to 16.2% in 2010 from 16.5% in 2009, according to research firm eMarketer. Google's share jumped to 13.4%, from 4.7%; Facebook's rose to 13.6% from 7.3%.

The number of unique monthly visitors to Yahoo sites rose 13% last year, according to data from comScore Inc. But in a troubling sign, the amount of time people collectively spent last year on Yahoo's Web properties, which include its popular Yahoo.com home page, email service and sports, entertainment and news sites, slipped by 10% while the minutes spent on Facebook increased by 79%, comScore said.

In an interview, Mr. Morse said it was "too early to tell" whether the value in Yahoo's Asian assets would be unlocked this year. Those assets include a roughly 40% stake in Chinese e-commerce giant Alibaba Group Holding. 

Analysts say a public offering for Alibaba's Taobao.com retail site or its Alipay.com electronic-payment service could result in a value to Yahoo that is worth more than what Yahoo trades for today. Yahoo's market value was about $21 billion on Tuesday.

 Write to  Scott Morrison at scott.morrison@dowjones.com 