NEW DELHI -- Jewelry shops opened early Friday in parts of India as people lined up outside to buy gold during Akshaya Tritiya, a Hindu festival considered auspicious to buy bullion, but demand for silver remained low as edgy investors eyed further price falls in the white metal.

Many Hindus believe buying precious metals on Akshaya Tritiya will multiply their wealth and the festival typically sees huge sales of gold and silver in India, which imports 700-800 metric tons of gold and around 3,000 tons of silver a year. The day has also become the focus of a major marketing initiative by the World Gold Council in recent years.

"We opened our shops at 6 o' clock instead of 9 o' clock today [Friday], and people were waiting outside even before," said  T.K. Chandran, managing director of DKTM Jewellery Ltd., which has a chain of shops in southern India, including in the cities of Chennai and Coimbatore.

"Our sales so far this year [on Akshaya Tritiya] are already near last year's level," he said at noon, adding, the auspicious time for purchases will end about 1530 hours local time (1000 GMT).

A fall in gold prices this week aided the demand.

Overseas spot gold was up $5.5 at $1481.18 an ounce on Friday, after losing 2.7%, or $41.60, Thursday. In India, spot gold prices in the key southern trading hub of Chennai slipped to 20,400 rupees ($456) per 10 grams from about 20,800 rupees Thursday, while silver slipped to 54,000 rupees-56,000 rupees per kilogram from 58,000 per kg in the western city of Ahmedabad, tracking international prices.

  Girish Choksi, a bullion dealer based in Ahmedabad, said the demand was good for gold. "It is almost equal for jewelry and bars."

To attract buyers, some jewelers are giving discounts on making charges of gold jewellery, while some others are offering options in light jewelry.

  Ashish Pethe, a partner of Mumbai-based  Waman Hari Pethe Jewellers, said he expects sales at its shops to rise about 5% this Akshaya Tritiya from last year's festival day.

But silver, which was in huge demand in recent months as its price more than doubled in a year, didn't find much interest from buyers as its price fell sharply this week and raised concerns of further corrections.

"People are a bit scared to pick up silver," Mr. Choksi said. "People are turning more toward gold than silver as they see more of an upside [in the yellow metal]."

There has been a 60% fall in silver demand since last week, he said. "If there were no Akshaya Tritiya, whatever demand is left for silver coins would also have vanished."

On Thursday, silver prices fell 8% on the Comex division of the New York Mercantile Exchange, its largest one-day percentage drop since Dec. 1, 2008. The losses have coincided with increased margin requirements.

Spot silver in overseas market was trading flat at $34.67 an ounce on Friday after falling nearly 12% Thursday.

On Friday, the Bombay Stock Exchange and National Stock Exchange extended their trading hours for gold exchange traded funds due to the festival.

Meanwhile, Muthoot Finance Ltd., which gives loans against gold as security, made a positive debut on the stock market Friday.

 Write to  Biman Mukherji at biman.mukherji@dowjones.com 