Former Intel Corp. executive  Rajiv Goel joked with Galleon Group founder  Raj Rajaratnam on a 2008 phone call secretly recorded by federal agents. Then, prosecutors say, Mr. Goel gave his longtime friend confidential information about a multibillion-dollar business deal. 

The March 19, 2008, call between Messrs. Rajaratnam and Goel, then a managing director of Intel's treasury group, was played for jurors Monday as the former hedge-fund manager's insider-trading trial kicked off its third week. 

"You're a good man," Mr. Goel told Mr. Rajaratnam, whom he had known for 25 years and who had given him hundreds of thousands of dollars for personal needs. Mr. Rajaratnam shot back that the praise was "highly suspicious," prompting laughter. 

The recording was the first of three phone calls played involving Mr. Goel, who was responsible for advising on investments by Intel Capital in the wireless sector. Messrs. Goel and Rajaratnam quickly turned to discussing business. 

"Intel has a board meeting, in fact, today," Mr. Goel told Mr. Rajaratnam, whose focus was on a long-rumored joint venture between  Clearwire Corp. and  Sprint Nextel Corp.
S


-2.25
%




 that was soon to be announced, and in which Intel was in talks to invest more than $1 billion. 

Mr. Goel, a longtime friend of Mr. Rajaratnam, pleaded guilty in February 2010 in connection to this case and admitted that Mr. Rajaratnam occasionally asked for information about Intel and that he occasionally gave him information. Mr. Goel is expected to testify against Mr. Rajaratnam later in the trial. 

Mr. Rajaratnam, who faces 14 counts of conspiracy and securities fraud, has denied any wrongdoing. His lawyer,  John Dowd, has said that his client had done nothing wrong and traded stocks based on legitimate research. Mr. Rajaratnam is one of 26 people charged in the government's investigation; 19 have pleaded guilty. 

The three recordings were played during testimony Monday by senior Intel executive  Sriram Viswanathan, who in 2008 was involved in the wireless investments. Mr. Viswanathan isn't implicated in any wrongdoing. 

Prosecutors have said in court filings that Mr. Rajaratnam purchased through a Galleon technology fund 125,800 shares of Clearwire on March 24, 2008, based on inside information provided by Mr. Goel about the venture. Clearwire's stock rose two days later based on news reports about the venture, according to federal prosecutors in Manhattan.

During cross-examination by  Terence Lynam, a lawyer for Mr. Rajaratnam, Mr. Viswanathan testified that there was extensive public speculation by investment analysts and reporters about the Sprint-Clearwire joint venture and possible investment by Intel, in a technology called 4G WiMax.

In a recorded call the day after Intel's March 2008 board meeting, Mr. Rajaratnam asked Mr. Goel about the timing of the deal. 

"April 1st, right?" Mr. Rajaratnam asked.

"Huh?"

"April 1st, right?"

"Yeah, but you know, these deals," Mr. Goel said, adding that "there are so many people involved." But, he added, "yesterday our board approved this deal."

"I see," Mr. Rajaratnam said.

In another call between Mr. Rajaratnam and Mr. Goel, children's voices and laughing can be heard in the background on the recording.

"My kids are making fun of me the way I talk to you … I talk softly," Mr. Goel said, before he and Mr. Rajaratnam start talking about terms of Intel's planned investment in the wireless venture. 

"This is how I would analyze it," Mr. Rajaratnam said. "You guys put 600 million, right?"

"Yeah," Mr. Goel responded.

"And then … you … put a billion," Mr. Rajaratnam said.

"Yeah. Uh. 620 million," Mr. Goel answered.

Later in the conversation, Mr. Rajaratnam got specific about the expected impact of the deal on Clearwire's stock price.

"So that means this stock is going to trade somewhere between 16 and 20," he said to Mr. Goel, who went on to detail the makeup of the new wireless venture's board.

"There is going to be 13 members," he said.

Playback of the recordings followed testimony earlier Monday by a Moody's Investors Service credit analyst who said she gave confidential information about a planned takeover of Hilton Hotels Corp. to a junior analyst accused of leaking the news to investors. 

  Margaret Holloway, a senior credit analyst for Moody's Investors Service, testified that she gave confidential information about Hilton's planned sale to  Blackstone Group
BX


0.35
%




 LP to a junior analyst,  Deep Shah, to help him prepare for a credit-rating discussion about Hilton.

Mr. Shah, who has been charged in the case, is believed to be living in India and is considered a fugitive by the U.S. government. In an interview with The Wall Street Journal in India in 2009, he denied giving out information about Hilton.

Mr. Rajaratnam's lawyers, meanwhile, presented evidence showing that a possible sale of Hilton had long been speculated about by investment analysts and in media reports. 