TOKYO—Japan has had five prime ministers in as many years, creating a merry-go-round of leadership. Now, for the first time, the country is being plunged into a catastrophe and the costs of weak leadership are becoming increasingly clear. 

The Japanese prime minister's public appearances have become increasingly rare in the days since his visible tour through the ravaged region. A somber Mr. Kan has given a few brief press conferences in which he asks Japan to "remain calm", without any display of emotion and without an attempt to rally the country and lift their spirits. 

"What he is saying is clear, but he is not telling me the information I really want to know," said Ken Hasegawa, 62, who runs his own advertising company in Tokyo, speaking about the concerns surrounding the fluctuating radiation levels. "His words also haven't been entirely reassuring. Don't tell us just to be calm. Tell us how the country will pull out of this."

In the 24 hours following the twin disasters Friday, Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan suited up in the now-familiar one-piece, light blue emergency suit and quickly headed to Japan's northeast. But Mr. Kan's initial rallying response as commander in chief has steadily diminished, raising new questions about his leadership. 

As fears over a possible nuclear catastrophe reached new heights Tuesday, Mr. Kan's brief public appearance did little to tamp down on concerns.

The Nikkei June contract in the futures market plunged immediately after Mr. Kan's speech, in which he said there is a high risk of elevated radiation levels from the nuclear reactors, and he urged people within 30 kilometers of the facility to stay indoors. Trading came to a temporary halt on the Osaka Securities Exchange, where circuit breakers were triggered during the session. 

The morning before the quake hit on Friday, Mr. Kan was facing the imminent demise of his administration, paralyzed with intraparty squabbles and a hostile parliament.

Mr. Kan, whose public-approval ratings had plummeted to below the dangerous 20% mark, had been fending off calls for his resignation amid allegations that he had received illegal political fund donations. 



In the hours before the quake struck Friday, Mr. Kan admitted that his fund-raising organization received donations from a foreign national, which could be a violation of Japan's political funding laws. 

"The acceleration of the [nuclear] incident is not something that Kan can control. But both Tepco and the government have not done well in terms of explaining the situation to the public," said Takuo Yamamoto, chief strategist at Mitsubishi UFJ Asset Management. 

Analysts say Mr. Kan's response to the unfolding nuclear reactors crisis will be key, as its outcome affects the entire country. "There could still be a significant backlash," said Jeff Kingston, professor of Asia Studies at Temple University in Tokyo. "It's a very fragile, volatile situation and that reflects the nature of this complex catastrophe."

Still, these outward shortcomings are showcasing Mr. Kan as the kind of quiet, stalwart leader he wasn't considered before Friday's disasters. Mr. Kan's initially quick response is also a comparative improvement from the way disaster efforts were managed following the Kobe earthquake in January 1995. 

"People are more focused on getting things done on the day-to-day level. You don't necessarily have to be a flashy, charismatic leader to get the support of the people," said Koichi Nakano, professor of political science at Sophia University in Tokyo. "As long as Kan appears earnest and hard-working, that's fine. He doesn't necessarily need to inspire the people."

Then-Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama and his cabinet faced withering criticism over their sluggish response to the quake. 

Mr. Murayama didn't visit the city for three days, failed to deploy Japan's Self Defense Forces immediately and initially refused foreign aid. 

"Prime Minister Murayama was lost at sea, and the Self Defense Forces remained in their barracks waiting for a call while Kobe burned," said Mr. Kingston.

"I think [Kan] has taken the measures he's been able to take, using the various powers at his disposal to do as much as possible to have a search-and-relief operation rather quickly and acting with a sense of urgency. He has shown his mettle." Mr. Kan's government has deployed 100,000 SDF personnel to the quake-hit areas and is currently working to craft a supplementary budget to fund relief work. 

Despite the communication missteps surrounding the nuclear situation, Mr. Kingston said the government's frequent updates represent a departure from its management of past nuclear incidents, when explanations were few and vague. 

But others are more skeptical. "I thought this could've been a great chance for Mr. Kan to prove himself as a leader, but I'm not getting that sense," says Mr. Hasegawa. "But it's not lost entirely. I'd give him until the end of April to get it together."

—Kana Inagaki  contributed to this article.