It may have just been a line, but it made sense to me. When I asked  Eileen Hanavan, who runs the ASPCA mobile adoption van—it was parked outside Petland Discounts at 50th Street and Ninth Avenue on Sunday afternoon—why most of the cats she brought along for adoption were young adults rather than kittens, she said at that age one can learn "a little bit more about their disposition."

Made sense to me. Had we waited to adopt our dog Mimi from an upstate shelter as an adult rather than a puppy, we might have selected a different pet. Not that Mimi tried to hide her problematic social skills. Awoken an hour after we got her home, she tried to take off my hand. And she hasn't gotten noticeably cuddlier with the years. No lap dog, the most fun I've had with her is roughhousing together outdoors, my hands protected by ski mittens.

Of course, part of the challenge with shelter animals is that you often don't know anything about their backgrounds. Ms. Hanavan said the nine cats reclining like odalisques in the 26-foot van's picture windows came from a variety of sources, though rarely from privilege: city-operated shelters and owners who no longer wanted them, plus strays and animals brought in through humane law enforcement.

The mobile adoption unit focuses mainly on cats, though you might assume otherwise based on the molded plastic beagle's head and paws overhanging the windshield. The ASPCA also holds mobile dog adoption events, but less frequently. Dogs small enough to fit into the van's compartments tend to get adopted quickly anyway at the ASPCA's adoption center on East 92nd Street, while larger dogs would stress the felines. 

Mobile cat adoptions are held weekly throughout the year, Thursday through Sunday, at various—often repeat—locations throughout the five boroughs. (More information on the van's whereabouts can be found at aspca.org.)

Ms. Hanavan, who worked at an upstate animal shelter before joining the organization in 2006, said that cats invited along for the ride—on this afternoon there were eight adults, the oldest 3 years old, and one five-month-old kitten—had been picked by  Katie Watts, the ASPCA's feline behaviorist, for their winning dispositions.

"Selecting them is based on temperament and comfort with novelty," Ms. Hanavan explained. "They're cats that are a little more sociable and not highly stressed."

Andy Sumners, a West Village resident shopping for a cat, may have had a different opinion as he stroked Tess, the five-month-old black and white domestic, shorthaired kitten. "She's nervous," he reported. Tess was also missing an eye, the result of a severe infection. "I'd be nervous too."

"It's good for her," said Ms. Hanavan, whose manner is serious but anything but hard sell, of the attention. "She just doesn't know it."

All animals come spayed or neutered, with up-to-date vaccinations and an implanted identification microchip. The adoption fees range from $75 to $125, the older animals being less expensive to adopt.

As Tess climbed onto his shoulder and disappeared behind his back, Mr. Sumners said the fact that she was missing an eye wouldn't be a deterrent. "It just gives her more character," he said. "I might have to change her name to Winky."

In 2010, 264 pets were adopted from the van: 185 of them were adolescent or adult cats; 75 were kittens; two were adolescent or adult dogs; and two were puppies.

No adoptions were to occur on this afternoon. Indeed, there was little traffic, perhaps because of the frigid temperatures and high winds—though the temperature inside the van was a toasty 68 degrees. "I don't think I'm adopting today," Mr. Sumners announced after a good 45 minutes interviewing different animals.

"Hopefully we'll be seeing you again," Ms. Hanavan said.

He was followed by Booker Counts, a 7-year-old who'd decided, apparently only in the previous 24 hours, that he preferred cats to hermit crabs. He'd been considering purchasing several (crabs apparently hate to be alone) from the pet shop a few feet away.

"Maybe a cat would be better," Booker mused. "You can watch it play. Mostly, hermit crabs just walk around."

Booker's mom, Eve Suter, said that another advantage cats had over crabs is that she and Booker's father would happily participate in caring for the animal, whereas Booker would be on his own if he purchased a crustacean—his dad didn't find them especially huggable. "My husband said, 'When I see hermit crabs I just want to cook them,'" Ms. Suter explained.

I was somewhat surprised that crabs were a pet option, so I excused myself to visit Petland Discounts, where Bernardo Jurado, one of the employees, told me that crabs sell, though not in the abundance of goldfish or parakeets, especially Pacific crabs. They're apparently friendlier and more active during the day than their Atlantic brethren. 

"They're a low-maintenance pet," Mr. Jurado said. "They're hiding most of the time."

Back at the van, Ms. Hanavan was wrapping up for the day. Although she had zero adoptions to show for her labors, she wasn't discouraged, explaining that bonding between humans and pets is an organic process that can't be rushed. She said the van often returns to the same location a couple of days in a row so that prospective pet owners who want the night to think it over know they can come back the following day.

She gently rejected my suggestion that she drive slowly, the felines remaining in their picture windows during the trip back to the shelter lest pedestrians or passing motorists be moved to adopt. She explained that before the vehicle departs the pets are returned to the safety of their carrying cases and the van's shades drawn. "Motion sickness is something we need to consider," she explained sensibly.

— ralph.gardner@wsj.com 