Osama bin Laden's youngest widow has told Pakistani investigators the al Qaeda leader and his family had been living in the compound where he was killed for the past five years, said a senior Pakistani intelligence official.

While President Obama has decided not to release photographs of Osama bin Laden taken after the al Qaeda leader was shot to death Sunday by U.S. forces, other photos taken at the compound have been released by Reuters. 



Photos from around the world.

 "Justice has been done" and more.

A look at Monday's front pages of U.S. newspapers on the news of Osama bin Laden's death. 

On the ground

Diagram from the U.S. government

Photos inside and out

Amal Ahmed Abdulfattah, a 29-year-old Yemeni who was injured in a raid on the compound by U.S. Navy SEALs early Monday and is now being treated in a Pakistani military hospital, was one of three of bin Laden's wives and several of his children who had been living with him in the garrison town of Abbottabad, the official said.

His account of her testimony offers some of the strongest evidence so far of how long the world's most-wanted man had been living in Abbottabad, and in what circumstances, as well as some fresh insight into what happened during and immediately after the raid.

Ms. Abdulfattah, whom bin Laden married in 2000, was among a total of 17 people taken from the compound by Pakistani forces after the raid, the official said. He said only that she was injured in the crossfire, but U.S. officials have said a woman was shot in the leg trying to protect bin Laden.The Pakistan intelligence official said U.S. forces had removed the bodies of bin Laden and his 18-year-old son, but Pakistani authorities had recovered the corpses of three other men from the compound.

Among the compound residents taken into Pakistani custody was bin Laden's 12-year-old daughter, Safia, who officials say saw her father being shot and dragged away by U.S. soldiers.

She is the oldest of bin Laden's children who survived the operation.

Apart from the three wives of bin Laden, a fourth adult woman in custody is believed to be the wife of a companion of bin Laden who was killed in the operation, the official said.

Pakistani officials said the survivors would be sent to their countries of origin after the investigation was completed. One of bin Laden's wives is believed to be a Saudi national, while the nationality of the third isn't yet known.

However, that may not be possible for bin Laden's children, as Saudi Arabia revoked his citizenship in 1994. His family, which has renounced him, would have to adopt the children for them to live there.

The official said the compound had separate living quarters for four families, with two occupied by bin Laden and his son, and the other two by his courier and the courier's brother. They even had separate kitchens and gas meters.

U.S. officials have identified the courier as a Pakistani man who was born in Kuwait and used aliases including Arshad Khan and Abu Ahmed al-Kuwaiti. They have said he and his brother were among those killed in the raid.

Local officials in Abbottabad said they had no information about the courier's real identity, but some details have emerged of how Arshad Khan acquired the house.

Land records reviewed by The Wall Street Journal showed that a man using the name Mohammed Arshad Waled Niqab Khan purchased the land from four different sellers for a total of about $50,000 over the course of 2004 and 2005.

The records give no other details of Khan's identity, other than that he came from an area called Tangi in Charsadda district in northwestern Pakistan.

The last plot he bought was from Qazi Mahfouz ul-Haq, who is a lecturer at the Frontier Medical College in Abbottabad and also runs a small private clinic.

Dr. Mahfouz confirmed that he sold his plot to Khan in 2005 for about $25,000. Khan had already purchased the three other plots in 2004 and had told Dr. Mahfouz he wanted the extra plot to build a house for his "uncle."

"He was a very ordinary man—nice in his talking, but nothing special or extraordinary," said Dr. Mahfouz, 41, who like Khan is from the Pashtun ethnic group that dominates the area around Pakistan's border with Afghanistan. "I can't believe even now that he was such a type of man."

He said Khan was clean-shaven, wore traditional Pashtun clothes, spoke in Pashto, and looked about 25 years old.

Shown photographs of three dead male bodies found at the compound and released by Reuters, he said one was definitely not Khan, but he couldn't be sure about the other two because the faces were contorted and partially obscured.

He said he saw Khan six or seven times after their land deal, sometimes shopping around town, and once when he came to Dr. Mahfouz's clinic to get some medicine for a chest infection.

The deal between the two men was witnessed by Aziz ul-Rehman, an imam at a local mosque who also deals in property.

Mr. Aziz said he only met Khan once, when the deal was signed, and that he seemed to be relatively wealthy, judging by his appearance and his arrival in a new two-door sport-utility vehicle. Mr Aziz also said Khan was clean-shaven, but addressed him in Urdu, rather than Pashtu.

 Write to  Jeremy Page at jeremy.page@wsj.com 