Plenty of people like the idea of owning a second home in Europe for regular, cultured vacations. Many stop fantasizing once they realize they'll also have a second mortgage on their hands. But what if that second property could make them money? 

Read the full Real Estate report.

Canny investors can put a second property to work on several conditions: They're willing to rent it out to short-term tenants for the times they aren't there, they can afford property in the $1 to $2 million range (€730,000 to €1.5 million) and, crucially, if they buy in the right locations. 

Prime real estate broker  Debbie Dove says there are two European hotspots offering short-term rental yields upwards of 5%: London and Cannes. Each city requires a different approach.



London is a transient rental market, with thousands of people passing through every year on business trips that can last for months on end. It's these folks, the ones who'd rather avoid the sky-high rates offered by London's hotels, who make good potential renters throughout the year. There's no peak season for short-term letting in London, so a buyer has the flexibility to decide when they want to stay for their own vacation. 

Ms. Dove, who has built up an £80 million fortune and a property empire that includes the former homes of Robert Louis Stevenson and Charles Dickens, says the idea of short-term buy-to-let in what real estate agents call "prime London" is already popular with Middle Eastern property buyers, partly because the dinar has been strong against the pound. 

These buyers tend to stay in London during the summer and in the winter months of December and January. Much of the rest of the year - the autumn months of ramadam and then from January to June - they rent out the property. 

"It covers all their costs and they get a great profit," says Ms. Dove, adding that she has seen houses bought for £500,000 achieve £1,000 a week rent on short-let. A £2 million house in Knightsbridge could likewise achieve at least £4,000 a week on short-let, she says. "There's a very good demand of three to six months," she adds. "You can juggle owner occupancy around that."

Another scenario: You buy a one- or two-bedroom, small apartment in luxurious Belgravia. If you let it for two years without a break, the rent would average out at about £1,200 a week. But a three-month rental could achieve £2,000 a week. 

If anything, London prime real estate offers investors the strong prospect of capital growth, meaning they could still achieve a yield of around 2%-3% from renting it over a long period of time.  Jonathan Hewlett, a director at property broker  Savills,
SVS


0.10
%




 has done just that. A couple of years ago he bought a studio flat in Central London.

"There will be capital growth and I think it's a safe place to put my money," he says, adding that capital growth prospects are similar to Manhattan, New York. That said: "London attracts a bigger global field of players so our market is going to be that much stronger." 

But there are caveats to London. Stamp duty on British real estate is set to rise this April to 5% from 4%. Also, to capture juicy yields from short-term buy-to-let, buyers must fork out for the most top-notch property in some of the city's most exclusive areas. Ms. Dove typically brokers houses in Mayfair, Hampstead and Knightsbridge, which play host to some of the most expensive properties in Europe, much less the world. "There's no demand in London for anything that's not top notch," she says. "Everyone is looking for quality." 



Prime locations are good, particularly properties that are attractive to look at, close to London Underground stations and shops and not surrounded by too much noise. Avoid buildings that have high service charges, though. 

One such example is the Lancasters, a prestigious, unfinished development of high-end apartments on Bayswater Road where prices range from £3.5 million to £8 million. 

Estimates from several estate agents are that the properties there could offer short-term rental yields of a relatively modest 3% because of high service costs--not attractive for someone who wants a stronger return on their investment.

Ms. Dove's second recommended hotspot is Cannes in Southern France. The area is a little more complicated for letting, but it offers sunny local weather for regular vacations while a stream of glittery events through the year make for a transient market that's perfect for short-term letting.

Properties in and around Cannes can fetch eye-wateringly high rental income during the annual Cannes Film Festival, the Monaco Grand Prix and during the regular conferences like property trade fair MIPIM or MIDEM, the world's largest music industry trade fair.

A three-bedroom apartment on the highly desirable Boulevard Croixette will set you back an initial £1.5 million, but bring in £7,000 a week in rent during the three weeks of the Cannes Film Festival, says Ms. Dove. The same goes for the Monaco Grand Prix, which takes place in Monaco but sees many of its participants stay in Cannes. The trick to achieving rental yields of 5% in Cannes is timing the letting of a property around the many events that take place nearby. 

The prime period is the summer months of May, June, July and August, meaning you could leave the property vacant for your own holiday there in September, and rent it out again for the remaining months of the year at a lower rate. Winter months will achieve 50% of the very high rental rates of the summer. But even a year that's spotty with high yields is better than letting on a 12-month contract, says Ms. Dove. 

Property investors will find it almost impossible to find similarly-high yields from other parts of France where buyers might be tempted by the prospect of a cozy chateau or picturesque vineyard. The market for short-term letting of these properties is almost non-existent. "People take root in these properties," Ms. Dove explains. "It's a totally different market." 

Then there's the market for ski properties, including chalets and ski apartments in places like Switzerland. The problem here is that achieving any sort of decent yield requires properties with purchase prices in the €20 million range, well beyond the budgets of most property investors. "For the short-term letting and good yields, it's prime London and Cannes," says Ms. Dove. "It's as limited as that." 

 Parmy Olson is the London Bureau Chief of Forbes Magazine. She can be reached at polson@forbes.com. Visit her blog on blogs.forbes.com/parmyolson. 