WASHINGTON—Federal housing regulators said Tuesday they will develop a new compensation structure for mortgage-servicing companies, which have been battered by paperwork errors and widespread consumer complaints. 

The Federal Housing Finance Agency said it directed Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to work on the initiative with the Department of Housing and Urban Development. FHFA controls the two giant mortgage buyers, which have been operating in federal conservatorship since September 2008. 

Since Fannie and Freddie dominate the mortgage market, any new rules for mortgage servicers that they adopt would likely become an industrywide standard. 

Compensation for mortgage servicers is currently based on a minimum servicing fee that is deducted from a borrower's interest payments. Consumer advocates and some regulators say mortgage servicers don't have enough incentive to modify loans for troubled homeowners, which has led to poor results from loan-modification programs. 

"As the recent problems in managing mortgage delinquencies suggest, the current servicing compensation model was not designed for current market conditions," Edward DeMarco, the acting director of FHFA, said in a statement. 

The agency said it would seek input from the mortgage industry for several months. The new compensation structure isn't expected to go into effect until summer 2012. 

Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner and U.S. Housing and Urban Development Secretary Shaun Donovan said they back the effort. "It is clear that the mortgage-servicing compensation model is broken and should be fixed," they wrote in a joint letter to Mr. DeMarco. "Addressing this issue will help better protect homeowners, investors and taxpayers, while also increasing efficiency and competition in the market." 

Revelations in recent months that lenders cut corners when processing foreclosure cases, using so-called robo-signers, who signed thousands of court documents without reading them, have prompted federal regulators to consider ways to revamp the mortgage-servicing system. Attorneys general in 50 states have been investigating. 

Besides the new fee structure, regulators have been discussing several other changes, including requiring that mortgage servicers set a single point of contact for delinquent homeowners. Mortgage servicers also could be required to disclose to investors whether they own any interest in the loans they service, such as a home-equity loan. 

 Write to  Alan Zibel at alan.zibel@dowjones.com 