 (Best of the tube tonight: We'll be on Fox News Channel's "Hannity" tonight as part of the "Great American Panel." The program starts at 9 p.m. ET, and we'll be on in the latter half hour. A repeat airs at midnight ET.) 

America's liberal left is preoccupied with salacious fantasies of political violence. These take two forms: dreams of leftist insurrection, and nightmares of reactionary bloodshed. The "mainstream" media ignore or suppress the former type of fantasy and treat the latter as if it reflected reality. This produces a distorted narrative that further feeds the left's fantasies and disserves those who expect the media to provide truthful information.

In a Los Angeles Times op-ed piece, socialist author Barbara Ehrenreich defends socialist sociologist Frances Fox Piven, who has recently been criticized, most prominently by Fox News Channel's Glenn Beck, for advocating violence in the service of left-wing aims.

Ehrenreich claims that Piven was merely urging "economically hard-pressed Americans" to "organize a protest at the local unemployment office." In fact, as we noted Monday, what Piven urged in the pages of The Nation was--these are her words--"something like the strikes and riots that have spread across Greece."

 Glenn Reynolds has repeatedly reminded us what those Greek riots looked like, quoting a Wall Street Journal account from last May:

Ehrenreich was writing for the L.A. Times's opinion page, and she is entitled to her opinion, but she is not entitled to her own facts. The heading "opinion" is not a license to tell outright lies.

The dishonesty of Ehrenreich's piece is shocking, but it isn't even the most bizarre thing about it. She begins by bemoaning the absence of grass-roots activism in America:

Ehrenreich's explanation is America has become "a tyranny of the heavily armed." Americans don't get politically involved because they're afraid of getting shot. The implication is that if only the government would take away Americans' guns, Americans would be able to grab their Molotov cocktails and rise up against the government, or for the government, or something.

But wait. How has it escaped Ehrenreich's notice that the past two years have seen the greatest flowering of grass-roots democracy in America since the civil rights movement? We refer, of course, to the Tea Party movement. To be sure, you won't see any Molotov cocktails at a Tea Party gathering. You may see some guns--a normal part of life in most of America--but they will be borne lawfully and not used violently.

Since the Tea Party advocates individualism and not socialism, we may assume that Ehrenreich strongly disapproves of it (as does her pal Piven). But to bemoan the dearth of grass-roots activism in America without even acknowledging the Tea Party's existence suggests a detachment from reality bordering on the clinical.

Even odder, many on the left have advanced a false narrative in which the Tea Party is violent. The New Yorker's Hendrik Hertzberg did so in a column last week, in which he was still trying to justify the media's falsely blaming the right for the attempted murder of Rep. Gabrielle Giffords.

Hertzberg claims that the shooting "took place amid a two-year eruption of shocking vituperation and hatred, virtually all of it coming from people who call themselves conservatives," and that "these realities, and not the malevolence of liberal opportunists, were why, in the immediate aftermath of the crime, the 'national conversation' focussed on the nation's poisonous political and rhetorical climate."

This is bunk. The "two-year eruption of shocking vituperation and hatred" is a media myth, promulgated in two primary ways:

The first is by seeking out the most extreme expressions by Tea Party activists and sympathetic politicians and portraying them as if they were typical. This is in sharp contrast to the way left-wing political rallies are covered. Extreme and violent rhetoric is at least as easy to find there if you look--Michael Bowers has put together a photo gallery of "Left-Wing Hatred"--but the mainstreamers seldom look. During the Bush years, "antiwar" rallies were routinely depicted as nothing more than forums for wholesome, patriotic dissent.

The second is by presenting innocuous rhetoric from the right as if it were something sinister or dangerous. The most famous example--cited by Hertzberg, naturally--is the SarahPAC map of targeted districts, including Giffords's, which many on the left hoped had incited the man who shot her. Palinoiacs denounced the map as "violent" when it first came out last March, notwithstanding that the visual metaphor of a target is about as common in political campaigns of both parties as cartoons on the pages of Hertzberg's magazine.

Similarly, as we noted Jan. 12, Paul Krugman, the New York Times's most dishonest columnist, characterized as "eliminationist rhetoric" Rep. Michele Bachmann's comment that she wanted her constituents to be "armed and dangerous." In context, it turned out that she wanted them to be "armed" with information--a poor choice of words, but no more eliminationist than Barack Obama's comment in June 2008: "If they bring a knife to the fight, we bring a gun." At the time, the New York Times characterized this as part of "Mr. Obama's efforts to show he can do more than give a good speech."

Hertzberg is saying no more than that liberal journalists like himself are justified in perpetuating the myth of conservative violence because they promulgated it in the first place. 

Perhaps he is right that it is not the product of opportunism but rather of sincerely held prejudice. But would it be a defense of, say, Theodore Bilbo or Joseph McCarthy to say that they sincerely believed the prejudices and falsehoods they espoused? What's more, Bilbo and McCarthy were politicians. Why is it so hard for journalists to remember that their job is to tell the truth?

  Larry J. Sabato's Crystal Bull   The Center for Politics, Larry Sabato's shop down at the University of Virginia, puts out some good analyses. Today they put out one that is completely worthless, titled "The Early Line: 2012 House Races."

Here is how author Isaac Wood sums up the state of play in House races:

Actually, only two new Republican congressmen hail from districts where Democrats can wage any kind of contest at all: Rick Berg of North Dakota and Kristi Noem of South Dakota, and neither of them show up in Wood's list of 20 "vulnerable House Republicans." There's another list of 19 "vulnerable House Democrats."

These lists are meaningless, because, as Wood finally gets around to mentioning at the end of the eighth paragraph, "the districts have yet to be drawn." Of the 435 House districts, only seven--the at-large districts from states with populations too small to merit multiple representatives--will be the same next year as they were last year.

Just how ludicrous is this exercise? The list of vulnerable Democrats includes not one from Massachusetts, even though the Bay State has already lost a House seat through reapportionment, has an all-Democratic delegation, and therefore is assured of losing one Democratic member. The list of vulnerable Republicans includes not one from Louisiana, even though the Bayou State has lost a seat and has an all-GOP delegation except for a black-majority district that will have to be preserved to conform to the Voting Rights Act, and therefore is all but assured of losing one Republican member.

C'mon, Sabato, get your staff in line. It's never too early to speculate about the next election, but this effort is just amateurish.

  If Life Is a Bowl of Cherries, What Is Dennis Kucinich Doing in the Pits?   One congressman who may be in danger of losing his seat to redistricting--and who does make it onto the silly Sabato list--is Dennis Kucinich. Ohio lost two seats in reapportionment, and Republicans will control the redistricting process, so the kooky Clevelander is "actively shopping around for a new district," the Washington Examiner reports.

That's not all he's doing, as the Cleveland Plain Dealer notes:

He should have ordered the freedom fries.

  Fog in Potomac, Rest of Country Cut Off   "Heavy snow and icy roads Wednesday night created hazardous condition for President Barack Obama as he returned to the White House from a trip to Wisconsin," the Associated Press reports:

Seems to us an awful lot of people were inconvenienced by the weather, and most of us don't have motorcades that are privileged to "weave through rush hour traffic." Isn't it a bit creepy for the press to give this sort of solicitous treatment to an elected politician in a democracy?

  Out on a Limb   "Public Unions Don't Have Our Interests at Heart"--headline, News Tribune (Tacoma, Wash.), Jan. 26

  Would You Buy a Used Czar From This Man?   "Obama Tries to Sell Agenda, Presidency"--headline, Roll Call, Jan. 27

  Ralph Hall Sat Next to Louise Slaughter   "Dating Sheds New Light on Dawn of the Dinosaurs"--headline, RedOrbit.com, Jan. 25

  With DNC in Mind, City Bans Carrying Urine, Feces   "Floor Pooper Sentenced to Jail"--headline, United Press International, Jan. 26

  If He Has Wheels, He's a Wagon   "Giuliani Is Leading GOP Contender if Front-Runners Drop Out"--headline, RasmussenReports.com, Jan. 25

 The Vice President Does His Part 

  Don't They Use Obscene Euros Now?   "Vandals Leave $30,000 Worth of Obscene Marks at High School . . . Video"--headline, South Florida Sun Sentinel website, Jan. 27

  CSUN Has a Very Prestigious Pee HD Program   "Cal State Northridge Professor Charged With Allegedly Urinating on Colleague's Office Door"--headline, Los Angeles Times, Jan. 26

  Questions Nobody Is Asking   "Are Skyscrapers Evil?"--headline, EconomicPolicyJournal.com, Jan. 26

 Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  Climate Change Cancels Winter Weather Event--Now That Would Be News   "Winter Weather Cancels Climate Change Event"--headline, Daily Progress (Charlottesville, Va.), Jan. 26

  Restaurant to Open Dogs--Now That Would Be Chinese   "MadDogs to Open Six D-FW Restaurants"--headline, Dallas Business Journal, Jan. 26

  Too Much Information   "New Seats but No Spats on Congressional Date Night Despite Hoopla"--headline, TheHill.com, Jan. 26

  Everything Seemingly Is Spinning Out of Control   "Whoopi Goldberg Defends Michele Bachmann on 'The View' "--headline, DailyCaller.com, Jan. 26

  News of the Tautological   "Super Bowl Ticket Supply Drives Cost"--headline, Dallas Business Journal, Jan. 26

  Breaking News From Genesis 6:11-21   "Noah Getting Closer to Action"--headline, Chicago Tribune, Jan. 27

  Breaking News From 1953   "School Divides Students Based on Race, Gender"--headline, WGAL-TV website (Lancaster, Pa.), Jan. 25

  Breaking News From 1979   "Why Today Is 1979, Not 1995"--headline, The American Spectator website, Jan. 26

  News You Can Use   "The Thyroid Is That Butterfly Gland Just Below the Adam's Apple"--headline, Free Lance-Star (Fredericksburg, Va.), Jan. 26

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  The State of the Union Is Bored   Conor Friedersdorf, filling in for the awful Andrew Sullivan, opens a blog post with this sad story:

This turns out to be an analogy leading up to the point that journalists should not write "obligatory pieces" about the State of the Union Address.

We don't really disagree with that. Indeed, we don't care enough to have an opinion. And we don't know Friedersdorf, but we hope he's gay like Sullivan, because it sounds as though he has a really bad attitude toward women.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Kenneth Killiany, Ethel Fenig, Jeff Percifield, Karl Ahnell, Michele Schiesser, Steve Prestegard, John Bobek, Zack Russ, Kyle Kyllan, John Sanders, T. Young, David Clark, David Schlosser, Andy Pulley, Glade Roper, Jack Archer, Don Stewart, Kenny Alwes, Rod Pennington, John Barnes, Tim Willis, Jarret Peritzman, Rebecca Billings, J.L. Wolter, Mark King, Evan Slatis, Jeff Bliss, Sarah Childress, Steven James, Leonard Peirce, Marion Dreyfus and Hillel Markowitz. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)