"There's no right and wrong. My right, your wrong, vice versa..."

These are the words of comedian Lenny Bruce, recorded live onstage at Carnegie Hall 50 years ago this week. Eight months away from his first obscenity arrest and five years before his death from a morphine overdose, the performer born Leonard Schneider in Mineola, N.Y., was at the height of his powers. On a recent afternoon, Bruce's alternately angular and purring delivery was echoed by an actor and magician, Steve Cuiffo, as he stood in his downtown apartment and matched an audio recording of Bruce inflection for inflection. On Friday and Saturday, Mr. Cuiffo will mark the 50th anniversary of the Feb. 4, 1961 Carnegie Hall engagement by re-creating Bruce's performance word for word at St. Ann's Warehouse in Brooklyn. 

While film exists of Bruce's stage act in other venues and years, the Carnegie Hall show is documented only on record. Speaking along with "The Carnegie Hall Concert" is one of several ways that Mr. Cuiffo, 33, hones his own meta-act. 

"I have to settle into his breath to keep up with him," Mr. Cuiffo said. Rather than obsessing over biographical details or speculating on motivations, Mr. Ciuffo's process for channeling the iconic comedian is primarily physical. "Breath, that really is the key to it," he said. "Going to his words and his rhythm and his timing and his breath."

Mr. Cuiffo rehearses using the concert recording and a printed transcript of the show that runs 42 single-spaced pages. He romances Bruce's words and delivery with a particularly selfless ardor. Loose limbed, keenly focused, eyes alight and acknowledging a phantom audience, Mr. Cuiffo's transformation during a recent living-room preview not only brought Lenny Bruce back to life—it momentarily threatened to re-erect Carnegie Hall on Bleecker Street. 

Instead of perpetuating what he describes as "the cliché of Lenny Bruce—strung out, onstage, and reading his own court cases," Mr. Cuiffo approaches Bruce's performing persona as that of "a sharp guy—so smart, so profound. Of course, when you're dealing with drug addiction, accidental death and court cases, that is very dramatic," he said. "I tell people that there's a lot more to this guy. I've discovered that for myself, so as a performer that's what I'm focusing on."

Mr. Cuiffo's discovery process began five years ago when he performed a brief, scripted impersonation of Bruce as part of the two-person show "Major Bang Or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Dirty Bomb." And while the upcoming Carnegie Hall re-creation is a solo turn, the actor sees it as the culmination of influential experiences with the work of other artists. 

"I come from this downtown theater scene that's all about collaborative, devised work," Mr. Cuiffo said. He cited creative associations with the Wooster Group's Kate Valk and drag artist Lypsinka (aka John Epperson) as particularly beneficial. In 2005, Mr. Cuiffo played interviewer John Springer opposite Lypsinka as Joan Crawford in "The Passion of the Crawford," which he described as a technical and spiritual lesson. "We were lip-synching to a solid track that didn't change," he said, "and yet it was somehow different every night." 

Mr. Cuiffo is also an accomplished magician, and it factors into his conjuring of Bruce. "[Magic] is something where you can't cut corners," he said. "It's very technical and very craft-oriented." He cited sleight-of-hand artist Ricky Jay as an artist whose application of craft is exemplary. "Ricky Jay is a master and he's spent his life dedicated to a deck of cards," Mr. Cuiffo said. "It's beautiful to watch him work." 

During the course of a 90-minute conversation about his Lenny Bruce enactment, Mr. Cuiffo repeatedly returned to the idea of Bruce's art being analogous to music, and to Bruce's delivery having the same appeal as a Thelonius Monk performance. "Nobody plays that way," he said of Monk. "It's related to Lenny, too. His rhythms are kind of off and he's hitting his own notes and I love that." 

Ultimately, he said, the act of resurrecting Lenny Bruce onstage evokes Carnegie Hall's original purpose more than it does a comedy club. "It's kind of like a song," Mr. Cuiffo said of the half-century-old improvised comedy set he will bring to Brooklyn this weekend. "That's the best way to describe it. You just know it and you sing it back."