The Federal Aviation Administration chief suspended the air-traffic controller who nodded off while two jetliners landed at Washington's Reagan National Airport, even as lawmakers and labor union officials demanded an end to single-person staffing at any airport tower.

San Diego International Airport

Ontario International Airport

Bob Hope Airport (Burbank, Calif.)

Sacramento International Airport

Reno-Tahoe International Airport

Tucson International Airport

San Juan Luis Munoz Marin International Airport (Puerto Rico)

Denver/Centennial Airport

Huntsville International Airport

Fort Lauderdale Executive Airport

Orlando Sanford International Airport

 --SOURCE: Industry Officials 

FAA chief Randy Babbitt suspended the controller supervisor, a 20-year veteran who was the only person on duty around midnight Wednesday when the airport's tower went silent for roughly half an hour. The agency employee, whose identity hasn't been disclosed, admitted he dozed off while working his fourth consecutive overnight shift, according to investigators from the National Transportation Safety Board.

Both planes, with a total of more than 160 people aboard, touched down safely without communicating with the tower. But the event has prompted renewed public and congressional scrutiny over controller fatigue, along with skeleton staffing levels at many U.S. airports during overnight shifts, when air traffic can be minimal. 

Saying he was "personally outraged" at the controller's behavior, Mr. Babbitt released a statement Thursday pledging to "get to the bottom of this situation." The FAA already is assessing the potential overtime costs of eliminating most or all single-controller towers nationwide, according to industry officials. 

Mr. Babbitt's boss, Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood, ordered a wide-ranging evaluation of airport tower staffing, and he ordered that at least two controllers be on duty at all times in the Reagan National Airport tower. 

As a cost-saving measure based on sharply reduced traffic during the early-morning hours at certain airports, the FAA years ago decided that in certain cases a single controller on duty was adequate. Around 30 airports are believed to fall into this category. Most are smaller fields with scant overnight traffic such as the international airport in Richmond, Va. and Centennial Airport near Denver, though the list also includes Sacramento International Airport in northern California and Tucson International Airport in Arizona, according to industry officials. 

By contrast, Dulles International Airport, which also serves the metropolitan Washington area, has at least two controllers working between midnight and dawn, according to industry officials. So do New York's three major commercial airports, Chicago's O'Hare International Airport and Boston's Logan International Airport.

Some lawmakers pledged to step in and quickly legislate a fix. Sen. Jay Rockefeller, the West Virginia Democrat who heads the Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, said the recent incident raised "serious concerns" because "it's completely unacceptable for the traveling public to be put in danger." 

In a statement, Sen. Rockefeller said pending legislation backs Secretary LaHood's call for a "broad evaluation of controller staffing."

The union representing the nation's nearly 20,000 air-traffic controllers criticized that policy of single-person staffing as "unsafe" and also called for an "urgent, comprehensive" nationwide study to improve the situation.

Paul Rinaldi, president of the National Air Traffic Controllers Association, said in a statement that "one-person shifts are unsafe, period," and the union has opposed them for two decades. 

The head of the union, which has a history of friction with the agency, called for the FAA to conduct a wide-ranging study of tower staffing levels and said NATCA also will "work closely with Congress on FAA reauthorization language that calls for such a study." 

The issue of single-controller towers received national attention nearly five years ago, when a commuter jet flying for Delta Air Lines Inc. took off from the wrong runway around dawn in Lexington, Ky., and crashed, killing 49 people. Investigators determined that the sole controller on duty, responsible for issuing instructions to aircraft as well as attending to administrative tasks, failed to alert pilots they lined up on an incorrect, shorter runway for takeoff. 

Earlier this week, before the much-publicized Reagan National incident, safety board investigators issued recommendations urging the FAA to bar controllers from simultaneously handling traffic and performing supervisory duties.

Some lawmakers rejected calls for a swift policy change, including Rep. John Mica, the Florida Republican who chairs the House Transportation Committee. Calling Secretary LaHood's directive "a typical bureaucratic response," Mr. Mica said that "in difficult financial times for the nation, it is critical that we utilize our limited resources in the most responsible fashion" while protecting safety.

But details of the latest incident are bound to provide ammunition for FAA critics. It has prompted a buzz in the aviation community about reports of a previous incident, perhaps about a year ago, when a controller mistakenly may have gotten locked out of the control room in the same airport's tower. Audio of radio transmissions between the FAA's approach-control center and the pilots of a third plane that landed at Reagan National Airport—immediately behind the two jets that couldn't raise the sleeping tower controller—mentions that earlier issue. The FAA has declined to comment. 

In the audio, which doesn't give the identities of those speaking, an approach controller first informs the pilots of American Airlines Flight 1900 that "the tower apparently is not manned" and that two "earlier planes went in in the past 10-15 minutes, so you can expect to go into an uncontrolled airport." After one of the Flight 1900 pilots asks for the "reason it's not manned," the controller, who also said the tower controller failed to respond to a few FAA phone calls, replies: "I'm going to take a guess, and say that the controller got locked out."

When the pilot seems incredulous and says "that's the first time I've heard" of such an incident, the controller responds: "It happened about a year ago. I'm not sure that's what happened now, but anyway, there's nobody in the tower." 

The audio ends with the approach controller telling Flight 1900 that the "tower is back in business" and normal operations can resume. "That was a close call," the pilot retorts." And the approach controller concurs with "wasn't it, though." According to the safety board, the tower was silent for 33 minutes.

 Write to  Andy Pasztor at andy.pasztor@wsj.com 