NEW DELHI – State-run gas transmission company GAIL (India) Ltd. Tuesday reported a 13% rise in net profit for the October-December period, helped mainly by an increase in natural-gas trading. 

Profit in the three-month period grew to 9.68 billion rupees ($212.8 million) from 8.6 billion rupees a year earlier. That missed the 10 billion-rupee average of estimates in a Dow Jones Newswires poll of eight analysts. 

The company's shares fell after the results and closed down 0.9% at 478 rupees in a Mumbai market that finished 1.1% higher. 

GAIL, which transports about 78% of India's natural gas, said quarterly sales jumped 35% to 83.65 billion rupees from 62.12 billion rupees, led by a 50% surge in revenue from natural-gas trading to 67.73 billion rupees. 

Profit was higher also because the company carried more natural gas and liquefied petroleum gas, or LPG. Revenue from natural-gas transmission rose 17% to 10.01 billion rupees and from LPG transmission grew 11% to 1.29 billion rupees. 

GAIL, which has a gas pipeline network of 8,100 kilometers, will add 1,500 kilometers by the end of December to expand transmission capacity, Chairman B.C. Tripathi told a news conference. 

The company plans to invest 350 billion rupees ($7.6 billion) over the next four years, mainly to expand its transmission network. 

GAIL needs to increase its transmission capacity as demand for gas from sectors including power, fertilizer and auto as well as households is set to rise in the country. 

Mr. Tripathi said GAIL will increase its capital expenditure by 27% to 70 billion rupees in the next financial year. "We will raise 35 billion rupees from the market and the remaining through internal resources."

Finance Director  R.K. Goel said the company plans to raise $150 million to $200 million through dollar-denominated bonds next fiscal year. The company will also raise $150 million through overseas borrowing in February to fund its capital expenditure plans, he said. 

Mr. Tripathi also said that GAIL will buy two spot liquefied natural gas cargoes by mid-February to meet demand for gas from power, fertilizer, refining and city-gas distribution sectors. 

GAIL will buy one cargo from Qatar's Ras Laffan Liquefied Natural Gas Co., and the other one from Japan's  Marubeni Corp.
MARUY


1.46
%




, taking its total spot cargo buys for the current financial year to four. 

The company is importing the fuel as there is a shortfall of 5 million metric standard cubic meters per day to 7 million metric standard cubic meters per day from local sources, he said. 

 Write to  Rakesh Sharma at rakesh.sharma@dowjones.com and Eric Yep at eric.yep@dowjones.com 