ORLANDO—Samsung Electronics Co. set prices for two new versions of its Galaxy Tab line of tablet computers, as it tries to break  Apple Inc.'s lock on the market. 

Samsung said the newly announced Wi-Fi version of the 8.9-inch tablet will sell for $469, or $569 for the extra storage memory, and come out in early summer. Its 10.1-inch tablet will sell for between $499 and $599 and be released June 8. 

The original Galaxy Tab, which had a 7-inch screen, went on sale in the U.S. in November for $599 without a wireless contract or as low as $399 with a two-year service contract.

Unlike Apple, which has one core design for its iPad, Samsung is opting for a more-scattershot approach, having shown off three different sizes of tablets. Samsung said it wants to give customers choice, and the company itself admits that it's experimenting with different options to see what holds. 

As an indication of Samsung's push into the tablet market, the company scrapped the design of the 10.1-inch tablet it showed off at Mobile World Congress last month, redesigning it to be thinner and lighter. 

  Omar Khan, head of strategy for Samsung's U.S. mobile arm, reiterated the thinness and battery life of the device, a subtle nod to the improvements Apple made to its iPad 2. "From a hardware perspective, we will not be outdone," Mr. Khan said in an interview. 

Despite the updated designs, critics say the underlying software continues to lag Apple. The devices both run on the latest version of Android, specifically designed for tablets. 

"The weaker content and application potential compared with iOS devices continues to expose the main weakness of Android devices in general," said Ovum analyst  Tony Cripps. 

Mr. Khan said the company plans to start customizing the user interface for its devices.

Mr. Khan said he expects to maintain Samsung's leadership in the market for Android tablet, as well as grow its share in the overall tablet market. He said it was crucial to get into the tablet market early so consumers and retailers could recognize the Galaxy Tab brand, adding that the first Galaxy Tab, launched late last year, performed well. 

Samsung, like other companies, are struggling to maintain interest in its product announcements following  AT&T Inc.'s proposed deal to buy T-Mobile USA from  Deutsche Telekom AG. Mr. Khan declined to comment on the deal, only saying that the company would continue to serve both customers. 

 Write to  Roger Cheng at roger.cheng@dowjones.com 