DUBLIN—Ireland's Prime Minister Brian Cowen Thursday told his Fianna Fail party that he would not resign, despite widespread pressure for him to step down following revelations about his relationship with a former official from the now-nationalized Anglo Irish Bank Corp. 

However, during a parliamentary party meeting Thursday afternoon, Mr. Cowen acknowledged that there are issues remaining with his leadership and told lawmakers that he would meet with senior party members over the coming days. 

Fianna Fail lawmaker Michael Kennedy said Mr. Cowen has agreed to consult his party colleagues over the next 24 to 48 hours regarding the issue of his leadership. "Obviously there are people who have very firm views on the matter," Mr. Kennedy told state broadcaster RTE Radio. 

Finance Minister Brian Lenihan—who is regarded as one of the front runners to replace Mr. Cowen—told reporters in Belfast that there wasn't an official motion of no confidence tabled at Thursday's meeting, but he didn't rule out a future date if the situation arose. 

Mr. Lenihan did say he has confidence in Mr. Cowen, but said Fianna Fail lawmakers are anxious about the upcoming election and the future of the party itself. He added: "I've always made it clear that a member of any political party is always interested in the leadership of the party." 

Earlier Thursday, a senior Fianna Fail lawmaker said that expectations of an announcement were mounting. 

"The place is alive with rumors that the Taoiseach is going to resign. It looks like he's going to resign, but we've had false dawns before," he said. 

An election is due in March after the Finance Bill is passed, which brings into law the remaining measures from December's budget. 

But Mr. Cowen's leadership was thrown into question when it was revealed last weekend he had previously undisclosed meetings with the former chairman of Anglo Irish Bank. 

In a robust defense, Mr. Cowen told parliament during a heated debate on Wednesday that the government's bank guarantee in September 2008 wasn't influenced by these meetings with Sean FitzPatrick, the widely derided former chairman of Anglo Irish, the bank regarded as the main culprit in the country's financial crisis. 

"I am no economic traitor," Mr. Cowen said after revelations that he met Mr. FitzPatrick in July 2008, two months before the government's blanket guarantee to pay back international holders of bonds issued by Irish banks should they fail. 

The meetings surfaced with the recent publication of "The FitzPatrick Tapes," a book on the former Anglo Irish chairman. Mr. FitzPatrick also said he phoned Mr. Cowen in March 2008 when Anglo Irish's share price was collapsing and told Mr. Cowen, then finance minister, that there was an issue with the bank shares held by businessman Sean Quinn. 

Mr. Cowen said he referred Mr. FitzPatrick to the Central Bank of Ireland. 

Fianna Fail, which is in a coalition with the Green Party, is at a historic low in public opinion polls, trailing behind the two main opposition parties due to widespread criticism over the government's handling of the economic crisis. After multiple denials that it had sought a bailout, the government agreed to €67.5 billion in aid from the EU and International Monetary Fund in late November. Ireland will contribute an additional €17.5 billion. 

Foreign Affairs Minister Micheal Martin and Tourism Minister Mary Hanafin are among others tipped to replace Mr. Cowen.

But judging by all recent opinion polls, the next Fianna Fail leader will not be Prime Minister after the general election. 

Enda Kenny, leader of the center-right Fine Gael party, is in pole position to become the country's next elected leader, most likely in a coalition with the left-of-center Labour Party, which is led by Eamon Gilmore. Both parties have said they want to renegotiate the EU/IMF deal. 

—Ainsley Thomson in London contributed to this article.

