In June of last year, Lameece Issaq, Maha Chehlaoui and Nancy Vitale launched Noor Theatre, a company dedicated to producing works by artists of Middle Eastern descent. A company-in-residence at the East Village's New York Theatre Workshop through 2012, Noor has already held a series of readings by emerging playwrights Sevan Greene, Betty Shamieh and Mona Mansour, and the company's first production, "Food and Fadwa," written by Ms. Issaq, is slated to open at the New York Theater Workshop in spring 2012. 

"We're trying to change the dialogue, change the conversation from what is in the media," Ms. Chehlaoui said. "Theater can start to shift those perceptions." The Journal recently sat down with the three women to find out how the Noor Theatre can respond artistically to the current unrest in the Middle East.

Personally and programmatically, how are you responding to current events in the Middle East? 

 Ms. Issaq: I've always felt a responsibility to these emerging voices within the diaspora. Now, I feel even more of that responsibility, to tell these stories that are coming down the pipeline. For example, we have two good friends who put together a night of stories in [Cairo's] Tahrir Square. They said to people, "Write down your stories," and then everyone performed their own stories in the square. We're discussing now how to get our hands on that stuff, and what to do with it. Right now, with the army reigning in Egypt, it's all very fragile. Representing people in this present state of transition and empowerment is an honor.

 Ms. Chehlaoui: It was so unexpected. Of course, we all hoped for this, but I never thought we'd be dealing with it so soon. There's a new energy and a new spirit. It's clear people here are hungry for firsthand, unfiltered accounts. Through our community on Facebook, we were sharing firsthand accounts from the people in Egypt, and the response was phenomenal. The urgency has shot up, but at the same time, it takes time to respond to something artistically.

 Ms. Vitale: Programming-wise, we're in contact with people in Egypt. We'd like to act as receivers of the work they're creating, and we want people to know we're available for that. But we're a young company, and we don't have the funds right now to commission specific pieces. That's absolutely one of our long-term goals.

 Ms. Issaq: It's still too early to define it artistically, especially because there is no better drama than what's happening over there. Right now it's so close. But for our upcoming reading of "Our Sweet Life by the Pacific Ocean," by the Iranian playwright Houshang Touzie [and starring the Emmy award-winning Iranian actress Shohreh Aghdashloo], he's addressing the recent resurgence of the Green Revolution by writing a lot more politics into his script, which previously focused more on family life. Hey, let him get as current as he can.

Do you plan to commission anything from, say, a Libyan national or someone of Libyan descent? What importance do you attach to 'nationality' or 'roots'?

 Ms. Chehlaoui: Personally, I feel that anyone can write about anything. But we're here because we feel there's not enough encouragement for Middle Eastern artists. But we don't expect our writers to only write about their socio-political context; they're capable of operating artistically on many levels.

 Ms. Issaq: I really appreciate work done by our community, about our community. But in theater you have more room to play, more flexibility. I just played an Israeli woman, and I'm Arab-American. It's fun to go into that culture; it's something I understand. I'm often told I don't look "Arab enough." Sometimes, you see a very talented South Asian actor playing an Arab, but the accent is all wrong. That perpetuates the stereotype that every brown person is the same. 

 Ms. Chehlaoui: Right now, we're casting a reading that features an Iranian family. We start by asking, "Who are the Iranian actors we know?" 

 Ms. Issaq: There are so many factors that make someone right for a part. The important thing is that whomever you cast, you empower them to represent that character properly.

 Ms. Chehlaoui: Yes. It's art, not documentary. But an Indian with a bad Arab accent is totally avoidable. That's quality control.

There have been quite a few comedy routines with a Middle East theme that tour in America and do their acts in English. Why did this become such a strong element of the Arab-American performing arts scene? 

 Ms. Chehlaoui: Comedy is the most natural way in. Everyone wants to laugh. After September 11, these stand-up acts got Middle Eastern people out there in way that was not about crying or suffering. It's irreverent, and that's how people are. I was talking to a Latino actor and he described a path that artists take, that starts with stand-up and goes to sketch comedy, and then to a one-person show, and then to ensemble acting. Each step gives artists a chance to bring more complexity alongside the entertainment.