The Montclair, N.J., school district is considering closing schools to bridge a budget gap, and parents are up in arms.

It's a big change for the acclaimed district, which embodies the principle of choice that Gov. Chris Christie and education reformers throughout the country say is essential. As long as spots are available, parents can pick from among themed elementary and middle schools rather than seeing their children funneled into the closest school.

Now the school board worries it can't pay for all that choice. It raised the prospect of closing schools—a move more frequently associated with poor academic performance—to save money in the 6,645-student district. 

That stings parents, who say it's an unnecessary and short-sighted attack on the system.

"We should move heaven and earth to preserve this magnet system," said Christine McGoey, a parent whose child's school might be closed, using the term for the open-borders-style system. "Nothing is broken."

Montclair, like districts across the state, is facing painful decisions as public budgets deal with the deep recession. This year, Montclair's highest-earning teachers took a one-year pay freeze; the district was one of a few that did what Mr. Christie was calling for across the state. But the anticipated $900,000 in savings could not make up for $5.4 million cut from its state subsidy, part of nearly $820 million in cuts statewide.

The board president, Shelly Lombard, a former auto-industry analyst, said the district has to anticipate losing what's left of the state subsidy, $3.6 million. And with salary increases and other rising costs, the district's expenses next year are projected to be about $3.1 million more than this school year's $110.6 million budget, leaving a hole of about $6.7 million. The district is trying not to raise taxes, a year after a 4.4% tax hike.

Ms. Lombard, who was appointed by the mayor, said that while school closings aren't inevitable, it would mean more resources for others. A recently built school has enough capacity to bring in other students, and the remaining buildings could be rented out, she said.

"Every year we take away things, every year we strip away librarians, we strip away foreign language," she said, adding that it would be better to have fewer "vibrant choices" than more "stripped-down" ones.

The district has garnered attention nationwide for its magnet system, launched in 1977 to desegregate the schools. Now, students and parents have a palate of elementary schools that include Montessori-style teaching, and a focus on science and technology, arts and performance and world languages and culture. Parents and school officials say the district is socially and economically diverse, and has attracted forward-thinking families, including that of the acting state education commissioner, Christopher Cerf.

The idea for closing schools, first brought up by the board last year, resurfaced in October through one of several parent-run groups analyzing the budget.

Gabriela Bambrick-Santoyo, who has three children in the school system, hit the books, saying she found research that said closing schools didn't necessarily save money or improve education. "If you had the math, I would totally be open to it," said Ms. Bambrick-Santoyo, research coordinator and director of a HIV-prevention project. "To close it without a real reason for it would be a crime."

Ms. McGoey launched a group she calls "Save Our Schools Montclair," and began selling tomato-red wristbands to raise money. Others came forward with ideas to raise revenue, such as selling naming rights to the ballfields, or closing administrative offices and moving them into the excess school spaces. The school district is also considering bringing special-education students back in-district instead of paying much more to other specialized schools.

Parents argue that reducing choice would bring down property values in a state where high property taxes are the sacrifice made for top-flight schools. Realtors say they haven't seen such an effect yet, early in the process, but add that the magnet system is one of the major selling points in the town.

Ms. Lombard, who said she felt under siege, added that she was trying to conduct the process openly. "I don't mean to sound defensive, but this has not been pretty," she said. "If I could move to Mexico tomorrow, I would, because this has been a very unpleasant process."

 Write to  Lisa Fleisher at Lisa.Fleisher@wsj.com 