Soon after the fevered opening of this latest "Jane Eyre," the far-off figure of the heroine, unmoored on the moors, stands at a crossroads that is hardly more than a crosspaths—four corners faintly traced in one of the film's many understated yet transfixing vistas. Almost everything about Cary Fukunaga's version of the Charlotte Brontë romance is understated yet transfixing, mainly—although far from exclusively—because of Mia Wasikowska's presence in the title role. She embodies Jane's most endearing qualities—courage, passion, devotion, unadorned beauty—but not for a moment the moist poignance that many of the umpteen previous versions have inflicted on her. (Eighteen feature films, to be exact, and nine TV versions.) This Jane meets the world and everyone in it with a rock-solid sense of herself that can only be shaken by love.

Ms. Wasikowska works with economical purity within the novel's 19th-century English setting. Jane's personal power seems entirely her own, rather than some anachronistic notion of self-empowerment. That's particularly stirring in a crucial moment of self-assertion—"Am I a machine without feelings?" she begins—with Michael Fassbender's forbiddingly handsome Rochester. And it's all the more impressive in light of the young Australian star's charmingly modern portrayal of an American teenage daughter in "The Kids Are All Right."

But then the work of Mr. Fukunaga—who directed from a strong adaptation by Moira Buffini—is impressive too. He made his directorial debut two years ago with "Sin Nombre," a dramatically commanding and visually expansive account, in Spanish, of impoverished immigrants riding atop freight trains as they lumber through Mexico toward the U.S. border. That was a singular choice for the California-born son of a Swedish-American mother and a Japanese-American father, though maybe not such a strange one, given his rich family heritage. Choosing a remake of the oft-made Brontë classic did seem odd on the face of it, and more than a little worrisome for those of us who cherished "Sin Nombre" and wished him only the best. As it turns out, there was no need to worry. With these two productions, each distinct from the other though connected by impeccable craftsmanship, Mr. Fukunaga has arrived as a self-effacing master of his medium.

He and Ms. Buffini have heightened the drama of their source material in two ways, both successful. They've rearranged the narrative by starting with Jane's heartsick flight from Thornfield Hall, by spending useful time on her usually scanted encounter with St. John Rivers (Jamie Bell) and his family, and by playing, as powerful flashbacks, her harsh childhood as an orphan as well as her time as a governess at Thornfield. The film also has somber fun with Thornfield as a haunted house of alarming sounds and squeaking timbers.

The heart of the story remains Jane's anguished love for Rochester, and that heart beats strongly, even though this "Jane Eyre" moves at a pace some may find slow: I found it perfectly measured. Mr. Fassbender's lord of the cursed manor is worthy of his governess's love, even though he's no match for the one played by Timothy Dalton when it comes to bottomless despair or towering rage, and though he can't, or wisely won't, touch the doomy self-regard that Orson Welles brought to the role. Instead of a black hole taking energy in, he's a pulsar pumping it out in the form of pain relieved, at least for a while, by wry humor and an openness to Jane's beauty. Judi Dench, as Rochester's housekeeper, Mrs. Fairfax, dispenses gentle humor unburdened by pain, though enriched by maturity and kindness. Will Hughes-Jones designed the production. Michael O'Connor did the marvelous costumes.

When I wrote about "Sin Nombre," which was shot with graphic grandeur by the Brazilian cinematographer Adriano Goldman, I called the use of 35mm film cameras instead of digital equipment a crucial aesthetic choice. That's equally true of "Jane Eyre," which was shot by Mr. Goldman with equal virtuosity, though in a very different visual style. His technique is painterly in its evocation of 19th century English artists. Beyond that, it's distinguished by an abundance of tonal variety: interiors that seem to take on the smell of weathered furniture; softly modeled closeups that cast Jane as a country madonna; candlelit scenes that recall the magical warmth of "Barry Lyndon."

To prove that I didn't embrace "Jane Eyre" uncritically, I'll note that pulses were taken in the 19th century by checking the wrist, not the carotid artery as shown here, and I'll register an objection to the use of surround sound to create squeaking timbers at the back of the theater. This lovely film surrounds us without it.

A 3-D animated feature from Disney, "Mars Needs Moms" looks impressive, up to a point. Most of the action takes place beneath the surface of Mars, where hatchling kiddies are raised by nannybots in an elaborately technological setting that owes much of its retro esthetic to Terry Gilliam. But the film suffers from chronic light loss that's at least as depressing as the dumb story. Part of that loss is imposed by the story's terms—an earth mother, or rather, an Earth mother, is kidnapped by a Martian civilization that keeps her underground to tap her parenting skills (she's voiced by Joan Cusack); and a deadline requires her son, Milo (Seth Green), to rescue her before the Martian sunrise—in other words, no hope of blue skies on the red planet. Even more light is lost to the 3-D glasses, leading one to wonder, during the movie's frequent down times, what the producers were thinking.

"Mars Needs Moms" instills mom appreciation in Milo, and is meant to do the same for all the Milos and Mileys in the audience. By the end, the 9-year-old hero comes to see maternal authority as loving wisdom, and eating broccoli or taking out the garbage as privileges instead of chores. But there's nothing to be said in favor of sitting through garbage, and this movie is awash in the stuff, both figuratively and literally: One of its main locales is a vast garbage dump. The pace is frantic—"Inspector Gadget" lives—and the secondary characters are nattering nuisances: an Earth nerd, Gribble (Dan Fogler), who may have been modeled on John Belushi's screwball pilot in "1941," and a Martian girl, Ki (Elisabeth Harnois), who spouts flower-child phrases like "Mellow out, man, I'm not the fuzz," because she's obsessed with old TV reruns that travel from Earth to Mars as streaming video.

Underdeveloped stories can be enhanced, if not transformed, by inventive animation, as proved by the success of "Rango." That didn't happen here, because the movie, produced by Robert Zemeckis and directed by Simon Wells (the great-grandson of H.G. Wells), employs the same motion-capture technology that Mr. Zemeckis used in "The Polar Express" and "A Christmas Carol." There is motion-capture and motion-capture. When it's done with the finesse of "Avatar," the process can be both amazing and invisible. When it's done with the clumsiness of this production, faces look like glove puppets and characters go through motions that are paradoxically lively but lifeless. Mars may need moms, but Earth needs good movies, and this isn't one of them.

This tedious retelling of the venerable fairy tale—"Twilight" with Oedipal kinks—takes place in a medieval village that is plagued by a werewolf, and that looks like a shtetl settled by California actors.

For a while the joke seems intentional. The local beauty, played by Amanda Seyfried and torn between two men, eventually gets to wear a red outfit, but her name is Valerie, and the boy she secretly loves, Peter (Shiloh Fernandez), has spiked hair. Unfortunately, and that's putting it mildly, the director, Catherine Hardwick (she directed the first "Twilight" feature); the writer, David Johnson, and the denizens of the village are stuck in a style warp between today and the Middle Ages.

Every now and then today holds sway: "Omigod, you can speak!" Valerie says to the wolf, who proves to be a fairly fluent conversationalist. "I'm gonna getcha outa here!" says Henry (Max Irons), the handsome but dull boy Valerie is supposed to marry. Mostly, though, the movie lumbers along in medieval mode, what with Valerie's stern father (Billy Burke, also from "Twilight") telling her that "it's time to put on your harlot's robe," and Gary Oldman's witch-hunting Father Solomon telling everyone that "during a Blood Moon your very souls are in danger."

Tone is everything in a venture like this, and "Red Riding Hood" never finds a workable one; the only really good laugh comes when Valerie comments on her grandmother's big eyes, big nose and big teeth. (Granny is played by Julie Christie, who has fine features, but that makes it funnier.) The ostensible mystery concerns the identity of the big bad werewolf (who looks like a creature found on the cutting-room floor of a defunct Claymation studio), but the real mystery is how an amusing idea could have gone so wrong. The movie must have been conceived during a Blood Moon.

 Write to  Joe Morgenstern at joe.morgenstern@wsj.com 

Cary Fukunaga has said that he grew up watching this black-and-white version with his mother; these days it can be streamed via Netflix. The director was Robert Stevenson, who wrote the screenplay with no less a literary light than Aldous Huxley, along with John Houseman (of Orson Welles's Mercury Theater) and an uncredited Henry Koster. The production is dominated by Mr. Welles; his brooding Rochester has no use for understatement. Joan Fontaine is affecting but not very forceful as Jane. The cast includes Agnes Moorehead and Margaret O'Brien, who, as Rochester's ward, Adele, struggles sweetly with a French accent.

Terry Gilliam's darkly funny and truly visionary retro-futurist fantasy is a mess dramatically, and its turbulent history echoes the battles fought by Orson Welles against studio executives bent on recutting or scuttling his films. A three-disc Criterion release includes Mr. Gilliam's 142-minute version, plus Universal's dreadful 94-minute recut version (with a happy ending) that the studio released unsuccessfully. There's also a video history chronicling the filmmaker's struggles with the studio, all of which could have been avoided by the terms of his contract if he'd been able to shorten his own cut to 125 minutes.

Amanda Seyfried is irrestistible as Sophie, an ardent bride and the daughter of a former rocker, Donna Sheridan (Meryl Streep). Sophie doesn't know the identity of her father, so, unbeknownst to her mother, she invites three plausible candidates from Donna's past to her wedding. They're played by Pierce Brosnan, Stellan Skarsgård and Colin Firth, who sing and dance gamely. Ever since the movie came out, I've been teased for my praise of such old-fashioned entertainment, but it's really entertaining, and Ms. Streep plays lusty joyfulness just as fearlessly as she has ever played tragedy or riveting drama.

—Joe Morgenstern