QUITO--Faced with a deteriorating infrastructure and overwhelming demand, Ecuador President  Rafael Correa declared a state of emergency in the public health system this week aimed at improving care in some of the nation's largest public hospitals. 

Ecuador's free public health service, which began in 2007, is struggling to cope with rising patient numbers. The demand has risen so quickly that patients begin waiting in line at hospitals well before dawn to ensure treatment. 

President Correa's decision, which will last 60 days, means an additional $406 million will be spent on the public-health sector, on top of about $1.2 billion already approved in the 2011 fiscal budget. 

Spending on the health sector has already increased about 120% during Mr. Correa's term. Some political analysts see the decree as a means of boosting support for the government prior to Saturday's four-year anniversary of the current administration, which has taken a populist stance. 

The emergency funding will focus on eight major hospitals in Ecuador, including two in the capital of Quito, two in the coastal city of Guayaquil and four others across the country. It will also provide help for 24 other hospitals. 

According to the emergency decree, the occupation rate at the eight main hospitals is between 98% and 104%, and there are 4,500 people on waiting lists for surgery. 

At  Eugenio Espejo Hospital in Quito, one of the eight participating in the program, patients come from all over the country to seek care. The hospital serves an average of between 1,000 and 1,200 outpatients per day. It also treats up to 250 emergencies and handles between 40 and 60 scheduled surgeries daily. 

Doctors say that according to international standards, hospitals should have at least 20% of beds in reserve in case of an emergency, but Eugenio Espejo's 350 beds are fully occupied. 

At another of Ecuador's most important hospitals, the  Baca Ortiz Children's Hospital, also in Quito, there are 330 beds and its current occupation index is 104%, which means there is barely enough time to disinfect a bed between patients. The Baca Ortiz hospital treats about 650 outpatients daily, and its emergency department normally sees between 150 and 200 children per day, although in January it has been treating up to 300 children a day due to an increase in respiratory illnesses during the cold weather. 

Also, Baca Ortiz currently has a shortfall of 20 doctors and 100 nurses, and the hospital needs to expand and modernize its facilities. 

Baca Ortiz's director,  Alexandra Rosero, said patient demand is growing by at least 10% each year, while its infrastructure doesn't. 

The current emergency decree, as well as a recent study of the hospital system in Ecuador that sparked the move, are expected to lead to a modernization of public hospitals. Better infrastructure, more staff and resources should come as a direct result of the decree, said Ms. Rosero, but others are less hopeful. 

"The health-system sector is sick and it will not be cured with an emergency decree," said a trainee doctor in Guayaquil. 

"The main problems are due to hospital management failures and in health policy, which does not emphasize prevention," he said. More resources are not going to help and the extra money will probably be wasted, said the doctor, who preferred not to be identified. 

Patients, however, seem happy with the free health care, despite the often lengthy waiting times. 

Guadalupe de Hurtado is a patient of the Pablo Arturo Suarez Hospital in Quito. She has diabetes and needs regular lab tests. To get an appointment she arrives as early as 3 a.m. and when she gets there, about 60 people are already in the queue. At 6 a.m. hospital personnel start distributing appointments. 

"Last time, they gave me an appointment for 1:30pm and I had been in the hospital from three in the morning. For the lab examinations they gave me an appointment for four days later," she said. 

She added that for any specialist medical assistance it is almost impossible to get appointments, but "the doctors are good, and the effort is worth it." 

Although the medical assistance and the lab examinations were free, Ms. Hurtado said she had to buy the medicines she needed "because they always say that there are not medicines and I have to buy them on my own." 

Despite the inconveniences, she said she is pleased with the service, having recently received an endoscopy and several laboratory examinations. 

"If the medical assistance was not free, I would have to pay at least $60 dollars for the examinations," she said. 

 -Write to  Mercedes Alvaro at mercedes.alvaro@dowjones.com 