LONDON—If WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange is extradited to Sweden to face a sexual-assault investigation, there is a "real risk" the U.S. would seek to extradite him from there, Mr. Assange's lawyers argued in documents published Tuesday.

The attorneys cited a risk the U.S. could detain Mr. Assange at Guantanamo Bay or subject him to the death penalty.

A U.S. Justice Department spokeswoman declined to comment on the lawyers' document or on the likelihood of Mr. Assange being charged with a crime in the U.S. The Obama administration has said it is trying to close Guantanamo Bay. Mr. Assange's lawyers didn't say in their document which charges they believe the U.S. might levy that could lead to the death penalty for Mr. Assange, who is a citizen of Australia. 

Sweden is trying to extradite Mr. Assange from the U.K. to face questioning over allegations that he raped one woman and molested another during a visit to Stockholm last summer. Mr. Assange was arrested last month in the U.K. on a European warrant issued by Sweden. He hasn't been formally charged with a crime and denies any wrongdoing. 

Mr. Assange made a court appearance Tuesday, at which a judge set a Feb. 7 date for his next hearing in the extradition matter.

 Text of 35-page document posted online by the law firm representing Assange 

In a 35-page document posted online Tuesday by the law firm representing Mr. Assange, his lawyers reiterated arguments they plan to make against his extradition. But they also said Mr. Assange "reserves the right to argue" a few additional points at the Feb. 7 hearing. 

The document indicated Mr. Assange may argue that he shouldn't be extradited to Sweden because the arrest warrant "has been issued against him for the purposes of prosecuting or punishing him for his political opinions." 

The WikiLeaks founder could be "prejudiced at trial" for his opinions, they added. 

The document also said Mr. Assange's lawyers might choose to assert that his extradition would violate his rights under the European Convention on Human Rights, including Article 3 of the convention, which prohibits torture. This is because, if Sweden hands him over to the U.S., "there will be a real risk of him being detained at Guantanamo Bay or elsewhere, in conditions which would breach Article 3 of the ECHR," the document says.

"Indeed," the document continued, "if Mr. Assange were rendered to the U.S.A., without assurances that the death penalty would not be carried out, there is a real risk that he could be made subject to the death penalty."

A spokeswoman for Swedish prosecutors declined to comment on the document, saying she hadn't yet had the chance to read it. Sweden has strongly denied any political motivation or involvement from Washington in its attempts to extradite or investigate Mr. Assange. 

Washington has also denied involvement in the Swedish case. The U.S. Justice Department is carrying out its own investigation of WikiLeaks and its publication of thousands of leaked U.S. government and military documents. Attorney General Eric Holder, who has condemned WikiLeaks for putting U.S. national security at risk, has confirmed the existence of an "active, ongoing criminal investigation" but hasn't given details of its direction. 

An initial version of the document disclosed the names of the two women who have accused Mr. Assange. Documents read aloud in court have previously kept their identities anonymous. 

Mark Stephens, a lawyer for Mr. Assange, said his firm removed the women's names from the document after someone flagged the fact that they had been published. "We felt that in the interest of sensitivity it was perhaps better to redact the names, even though there was no legal requirement to do so," he said. 

On Tuesday, Mr. Assange left the courtroom at Belmarsh Magistrates' Court on the same bail conditions set last month, which require him to wear an electronic tag, live at the same address in eastern England and check in with the police every day.

Sweden says it has been unable to question Mr. Assange in person in the country. Mr. Assange left the country on Sept. 27, according to statements in U.K. court.

 Write to  Jeanne Whalen at jeanne.whalen@wsj.com 