Defriending is one of the oldest, and in many ways the most painful, of all human activities. Yet it is also one of the most important.

The murderous strife between ancient Rome and Carthage exploded when Aeneas defriended Dido. It was Brutus's surprise defriending of Julius Caesar on the Ides of March that brought the Roman Republic to an end. Reformed party animal Thomas à Becket's defriending of his lecherous drinking buddy Henry II paved the way for the Reformation. Delilah defriended Samson, Benedict Arnold defriended George Washington, Dean Martin defriended Jerry Lewis, and in 1995 Bill Clinton defriended the entire Democratic Congress. Barack Obama just did the same thing to Nancy Pelosi and Harry Reid.

The one thing these famous uncouplings had in common was that they were carried out in a demonstrative, unequivocal fashion. Aeneas told Dido straight out that they'd had a few laughs but now they were through. Brutus, Cassius and Casca made it crystal clear to Julius Caesar that the fun times were over. After John Lennon recorded the vitriolic "How Do You Sleep?" it was obvious to Paul McCartney that their friendship was at an end. The same thing when Carly Simon defriended Warren Beatty via the contemptuous "You're So Vain (You Probably Think This Song Is About You)." Generally, when guys break up with Taylor Swift, they do it by telephone. There's nothing sneaky or underhanded about it. They come clean.

This is what I hate about the defriending feature on Facebook. Defriending is a surreptitious, and I believe cowardly, way of terminating relationships. In this often confusing era of electronic amity, Facebook users casually add friends and acquaintances to their list of friends, but then at some point, cravenly defriend them in the dead of night while no one is watching. The defriended, the unfriended, the ex-friended, only find out later, when they are denied access to the defriender's Facebook page, that they have been cast out into the darkness. They never know whether the defriending was because of a specific thing they had done, or was simply the result of routine interpersonal pruning.

According to Dunbar's Number, a pseuodoscientific stricture invented by a self-promoting British anthropologist, human beings can only handle 150 relationships at a time. After that, the neocortex starts to malfunction. So if a person already has 150 friends and suddenly meets a set of charismatic triplets that he likes, he must purge three friends from his Facebook account, ASAP. Repeat: A human being can only handle 150 friendships at a time. One-hundred and fifty-one and his neocortex might explode.

A traditionalist myself, I prefer the old approach to defriending people. Even when I am the defriendee.

"Take my name out of your Rolodex, you schmuck," a Wall Street pal once told me after I wrote something nasty about his employer. (His employer was Mike Milken.)

"There's a time to hold 'em and a time to fold 'em," said another friend as she walked out the door. "Guess what time it is?"

In truth, I suppose that my biggest objection to neo-defriending is that it takes all the joy out of bringing a stone-dead relationship to an end. Once, while traveling in northern France, I bought a postcard with an aerial shot of four World War I cemeteries: French, English, Canadian, Australian. I then dashed off a quick note to an old friend I had come to dislike. It read, "Wish you were here."

The best defriendings, of course, are carried out in person. 

"By the time Richard Nixon left office, the whole world was sick of him," I said to a new friend whose discourteous behavior had made him a pariah among my old friends. "But it took Richard Nixon 60 years to get to the point where everybody wanted to see him go. You did it in a week."

I never saw the friend again. He had been defriended. But not by Facebook. Face to face. The way Aeneas would have done it. 