LONDON—Chinese Vice Premier  Li Keqiang arrived in Edinburgh Sunday, kicking off a four-day visit to the U.K. aimed at strengthening the two nations' political and commercial ties. 

"We hope in this visit to strengthen cooperation with Britain, pushing forward a political partnership...and an economic relationship that's beneficial for both parties," the official Xinhua News Agency cited Mr. Li as saying in prepared remarks at the Edinburgh airport. 

Mr. Li, widely expected to succeed  Wen Jiabao as China's premier next year, will meet U.K. Prime Minister David Cameron, Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg and Chancellor of the Exchequer  George Osborne, as well as attend a dinner banquet with business leaders, before concluding his nine-day tour of the European Union, China's largest export market. 

Earlier, Mr. Li made stops in Germany and Spain, as China looks to strengthen its ties with cash-strapped euro-zone countries, pledging to buy member states' debt and expand business ties. 

In Edinburgh, Mr. Li is to hold talks with  Alex Salmond, head of Scotland's executive, on the country's rapidly growing offshore wind, wave and tidal energy industry. 

In comments to the British Broadcasting Corp. on Sunday, Mr. Salmond said he hopes the visit will lead to "very substantial" business deals. 

The U.K. coalition government, which took office in May, has set enhancing ties between the two governments as a key objective. In November, Mr. Cameron brought the largest-ever U.K. business delegation to China and oversaw a $1.2 billion order from  China Eastern Airlines
CEA


-3.16
%




 for  Rolls-Royce Group
RYCEY


0.98
%




 PLC engines to power 16 Airbus A330 aircraft. 

However, several deals that British officials hoped to conclude in Beijing weren't sealed and could resurface. 

In a statement Friday, Mr. Clegg said the U.K. and China are natural "partners for growth" and said U.K. companies "have the goods and services, experience and skills to match China's ambition to restructure." 

In a nod to the U.K.'s human-rights concerns about China, Mr. Clegg pledged no subject will be "off limits." 

U.K. diplomats said the visit will be a chance to make a "strong and positive impression" on an important Chinese leader who barely knows the country. They said U.K. officials will use the meetings to offer "strong encouragement" to the Chinese government not to backslide on the process of opening up China's domestic market. 

In 2010, the U.K. was China's third-largest trade partner in the EU, and bilateral trade hit a record high $40.2 billion between January and October, up 30% from 2009, according to  Liu Xiaoming, the Chinese ambassador to the U.K. 

In Spain, Mr. Li and Chinese Vice Commerce Minister Gao Hucheng vowed China will continue to buy Spanish government debt. But discussion over market access issues cast a shadow over Mr. Li's stop in Germany, which is by far China's biggest European trading partner. 

German Economy Minister Rainer Brüderle raised concerns over China's tightening of control over its rare-earth metals exports and criticized conditions for Western firms operating in China. 

In response, Mr. Li promised China will take steps to make its market more open and fair and better regulated, according to Xinhua. Beijing is also pushing for the EU to lift its arms embargo. 

