FOXBOROUGH, Mass.—Just as coach Rex Ryan reached the end zone to join the fun, an official tossed a yellow flag high in the air. Mr. Ryan's team was being penalized for excessive celebration, and it was all too perfect. Could there have been a more fitting way for the Jets to seal their 28-21 victory over the New England Patriots on Sunday night?

In a divisional-round playoff game that defied expectation and explanation, the Jets (13-5) rolled into their second-straight AFC championship game with a defensive game plan that bewildered Tom Brady, the Patriots' golden-armed quarterback, and by backing up their own brash talk.

Jets quarterback Mark Sanchez answered his own critics by completing 16 of 25 passes for 194 yards and three touchdowns, and running backs Shonn Greene and LaDainian Tomlinson combined to rush for 119 yards on 27 carries. The Jets' defense, meanwhile, sacked Mr. Brady five times and, in the first quarter, forced him into his first interception in 340 pass attempts.

After the Patriots scored a meaningless touchdown late in the fourth quarter, many of the Jets made like airplanes as they left the field, extending their arms and sprinting into the tunnel toward the locker room. The move was choreographed months ago by wide receiver Santonio Holmes, one of several veterans the Jets recruited over the offseason for such an opportunity.

"This is a win, but this isn't our goal," linebacker Bart Scott said. "Our goal is still ahead of us."

The sixth-seeded Jets, who earned a wild-card berth in the playoffs, will continue their raucous journey next Sunday, when they visit the Pittsburgh Steelers with nothing short of the franchise's second appearance in the Super Bowl at stake. The Patriots (14-3), the AFC's top seed, are done for the season.

Remember the game ball that Mr. Ryan buried after the Patriots defeated—check that, clobbered—the Jets 45-3 here on Dec. 6? It was a symbolic gesture, though perhaps it was effective. Still, the players could not escape the memory of that performance last week, Mr. Tomlinson said. Not with the media dredging it up all the time, and not with the players' collective hope of vindication looming over their locker room back in New Jersey.

And so as his teammates gathered around him in one of the end zones about an hour before kickoff, Mr. Tomlinson kept his message succinct, even as he pumped his arms wildly, even violently: "Any man can be beat! Any man can be beat! You've got to be willing to die for it today!"

If nothing else, the Jets have made a habit of trafficking in hyperbole this season. But who can question them now? After a week full of verbal pyrotechnics—Mr. Ryan assessed the game as "personal" between himself and Patriots coach Bill Belichick, and cornerback Antonio Cromartie said he "hated" Mr. Brady—the Jets unfurled an unconventional game plan that featured four new defensive schemes.

It became apparent that Mr. Brady was confused by the new tactics, which included the Jets' defensive backs occasionally dropping into zone coverage. "He was terrified," Jets defensive lineman Trevor Pryce said. "In the first half, he was absolutely frazzled."

Mr. Brady overthrew running back BenJarvus Green-Ellis on the Patriots' first series, and Jets linebacker David Harris returned the interception 58 yards to the Patriots' 12-yard line. The Jets could not capitalize, however, and kicker Nick Folk missed wide left on a 30-yard field goal.

Jets Nation must have gasped: Here we go again. But these Jets are not the same old Jets, this team never buying into the franchise's legacy of letdowns and missed opportunities. They scored two touchdowns in the second quarter, relegating Gillette Stadium—so electric at the start of the game, booing Messrs. Ryan and Cromartie with gusto—into a sort of gleaming, futuristic sports mausoleum.

The place got quiet in a hurry when Mr. Sanchez targeted Mr. Tomlinson for a 7-yard touchdown reception and the Jets' first score.

Later, with less than two minutes remaining in the first half, the Patriots made the mystifying decision to fake a punt on their own side of the field—a move that Mr. Pryce said was born of desperation. It backfired. Patrick Chung, a safety playing special teams, mishandled the snap and the Jets took over at the Patriots' 37-yard line. Three plays later, Mr. Sanchez connected with Mr. Edwards on a 15-yard scoring strike. Mr. Edwards dragged a pair of defensive backs into the end zone with him, and the Jets led 14-3 at halftime.

The Patriots cut the lead to 14-11 in the third quarter with an 80-yard drive that Mr. Brady punctuated with a 2-yard touchdown pass to tight end Alge Crumpler. But then, more of the same from the Patriots' offense: more confusion, more incompletions, more drive-stalling sacks.

Mr. Tomlinson said he noticed something significant about the way Mr. Brady was operating in the pocket. Usually, Mr. Tomlinson said, Mr. Brady will drop back and fire the ball without hesitation, his actions quick and decisive. On Sunday, he kept patting the ball and surveying the field, looking for options that seldom materialized.

Later in the third quarter, Mr. Sanchez completed a 48-yard pass to wide receiver Jerricho Cotchery, setting up a 7-yard touchdown pass to Mr. Holmes. And with less than two minutes remaining in the game, Mr. Greene busted free for a 16-yard touchdown run that sparked general hysteria. Mr. Ryan ran—fine, lumbered—down the sideline to hug Mr. Greene, at which point Mr. Sanchez jumped on Mr. Ryan's back.

The Jets were motivated. At Saturday night's team meeting, Mr. Ryan ceded his usual role as pregame speaker to former defensive linemen Dennis Byrd, who suffered a career-ending injury and was temporary paralyzed after breaking his neck during a game in 1992. On his Twitter account, Mr. Edwards described Mr. Byrd's speech as "the most inspirational message of my life."

Mr. Byrd's general theme: Appreciate this opportunity. There are no guarantees.

There also was the small matter of Patriots wide receiver Wes Welker, who took an obvious shot at Mr. Ryan last week by working in 11 references to feet during a Thursday press conference. "A lot of guys in here took that personally," Jets backup quarterback Mark Brunell said. "That crossed the line."

The Jets have been known to run their own mouths this season, making bold declarations that might as well come packaged in neon lights. But to their credit, they have made good on all the chatter. On Sunday night, they left their latest message on the scoreboard.

 Write to  Scott Cacciola at scott.cacciola@wsj.com 

