Cash-strapped Detroit Public Schools paid dearly to attract investors to buy $231 million in one-year notes in the municipal-bond market Thursday. 

The district, which has been under supervision of a state-appointed emergency financial manager for about two years, sold its debt through the Michigan Finance Authority in two parts: $120 million of bills due in February 2012 yielded 6.45%, while $111 million of bills due in March 2012 yielded 6.65%. 

Those yields far exceeded those of top-rated, tax-free munis maturing in one year. The yield on a triple-A rated 2012 note is just 0.38%, according to a widely watched index from Thomson Reuters Municipal Market Data. 

They also were above the interest rate Detroit Public Schools paid for its cash flow financings last year, the district said in a statement. 

The higher rates were a result of a number of factors, it said, including the volatility of the muni market and concerns about the expiration of the district's promise not to file for municipal bankruptcy. That pledge will expire at the end of Emergency Financial Manager Robert Bobb's term, which goes through June. 

"We are pleased this sale allows us to make payroll and meet our obligations," Mr. Bobb said in a statement. 

Given the deal's juicy rates, the offering was said to be oversubscribed. 

"It's a good amount of yield for such a short time period," said Dan Solender, director of municipal bond management at investment firm Lord Abbett in Jersey City, N.J. He surmised high-yield funds were likely major buyers of the debt. 

But, Mr. Solender added, the deal's pricing shows "how important it is to have market access and how costly it can become if an issuer doesn't manage its finances well." 

In this case, state support of the notes helped Detroit Public Schools garner an SP-1 rating from Standard & Poor's, the firm's second-highest of four short-term ratings. But the school district still had to pay a penalty because "Detroit is involved," Mr. Solender said. 

Detroit Public Schools will use the proceeds of Thursday's sale for operating expenses through August. J.P. Morgan Securities and Siebert Brandford Shank & Co. were lead managers on the deal. 

Despite state oversight, the district still faces significant financial challenges, S&P said. 

The district is grappling with a $327 million deficit—almost 65% of its general fund. 

Numbers like that were enough to discourage Josh Gonze, a co-portfolio manager at Thornburg Investment Management, from buying the deal. 

"The school district is in poor condition," he said, noting he believes there's a chance it could file for protection from its creditors under Chapter 9 of the federal bankruptcy code. 

Mr. Gonze said if that were to occur, state aid payments may flow to the school district, rather than directly to bondholders. 

Terry Stanton, a spokesman for the Michigan Treasury, said a municipal bankruptcy was not considered an option for Detroit Public Schools. 

 Write to  Kelly Nolan at kelly.nolan@dowjones.com 