A Continental 737 en route to Chicago from Houston was diverted Sunday to St. Louis after a man who tried to open an airplane door was subdued by passengers in a chaotic and frightening mid-air episode, according to witnesses, as well as officials with the Federal Aviation Administration and Lambert-St. Louis International Airport. 



About an hour and 15 minutes after the Boeing 737-800 took off from Houston, a cabin attendant let out "a blood-curdling scream" and several men rushed to the front of the plane, said Sara Olkon, a passenger.

"People all around me are crying," Ms. Olkon, a news editor for the University of Chicago and former reporter for The Wall Street Journal said during a phone call while the plane sat on the ground in St. Louis. Passengers feared the man was a terrorist, she said.

Government officials said the man, apparently suffering a panic attack, tried to open a cabin door. Airplane doors cannot be opened in mid-flight, authorities said.

The flight landed in St. Louis at about 1:30 Central time. Airport police boarded the plane and found a flight attendant and two passengers holding a man on the floor near the front of the plane, officials said. The passenger, identified as a 34-year-old man from Burbank, Ill., was taken off the plane and the flight continued to Chicago.

Airport security—and passenger jitters—have tightened since President Barack Obama announced a week ago that U.S. special forces had killed terror mastermind Osama bin Laden in a Pakistan compound.

In a separate incident Sunday, a Delta Air Lines flight to San Diego from Detroit was diverted to Albuquerque, N.M., where officials investigated a potential security threat before clearing the flight to take off again, according to the Associated Press.

Albuquerque International Sunport spokesman Daniel Jiron said 107 passengers aboard the flight were interviewed, in addition to the crew, before passengers were allowed to continue their trip after a delay of approximately two and a half hours.

Mr. Jiron declined to specify what the threat was. 

FBI spokesman Frank Fisher also declined to say.

—Susan Carey, Devlin Barrett and Stephanie Banchero contributed to this article.

 Write to  Douglas Belkin at doug.belkin@wsj.com 