  BP PLC has hailed its $16 billion share swap with state-owned Russian oil giant OAO Rosneft as a ground-breaking maneuver in the oil industry, but the deal already has drawn criticism in Washington over its potential implications for U.S. national security.

The deal makes Rosneft the single largest BP shareholder. Under the tie-up, announced Friday, the two companies will jointly explore for oil and gas in the Russian Arctic, one of the world's last remaining unexplored hydrocarbon basins. Rosneft will be issued new BP shares equivalent to a 5% stake, valued at $7.8 billion, while BP will receive a 9.5% stake in Rosneft, in addition to the 1.3% it already holds. 

BP described it as the first cross-shareholding between a state-owned national oil company and a western oil major.  Bob Dudley, BP's chief executive, called it "a new template for how business can be done in our industry."

The deal is a bold move for a company that just a few months ago was fighting for its very survival. BP's shares are still nearly 25% below where they were when the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig blew up last April in the Gulf of Mexico, setting off one of the worst offshore oil spills in U.S. history. The company estimates spill-related costs at around $40 billion.

The deal entrenches BP's position in Russia, at a time when the Gulf spill has raised doubts about the company's ability to grow in the U.S.

In an interview, Mr. Dudley denied that in the wake of Deepwater Horizon the company was now turning away from America. The U.S. was still a "core heartland for BP," he said, accounting for one quarter of its global oil and gas production and one quarter of its assets.

Yet the Rosneft tie-up could end up exacerbating BP's already fraught relations with U.S. authorities. Already, some U.S. politicians have expressed concern about the national security implications of a share swap between a Kremlin-controlled oil firm and a company that in 2009 was the top supplier of petroleum to the U.S. military.

Rep. Edward Markey, the top Democrat on the House Natural Resources Committee, called for the deal to be analyzed by the Committee on Foreign Investment, a branch of the Treasury Department. 

"BP once stood for British Petroleum," he said. "With this deal, it now stands for Bolshoi Petroleum."

Republican Congressman Michael Burgess, who sits on the House Energy and Commerce Committee, also said the deal "deserves some analysis and scrutiny."

Under the tie-up, BP and Rosneft will jointly explore three license blocks owned by Rosneft in the South Kara Sea, an area covering 125,000 square kilometers. BP said the license area was comparable to the U.K. North Sea —which contains some 60 billion barrels of oil and gas—in terms of its size and potential. The two firms will form a joint operating company two-thirds owned by Rosneft and a third by BP and will spend up to $2 billion in the initial phase on seismic testing and drilling wells.

The deal gives BP access to an area long seen as the final frontier for energy exploration. A 2008 report by the U.S. Geological Survey found that the area north of the Arctic Circle contains just over a fifth of the world's undiscovered, recoverable oil and gas resources. It said the Arctic has an estimated 1,670 trillion cubic feet of gas—nearly two-thirds the proved gas reserves of the entire Middle East—and 90 billion barrels of oil.

The report found that a lot of the gas in the Arctic is in Russian waters, largely in the South Kara Sea and the South Barents Basin—both geological extensions of onshore areas that are rich in gas. Arctic exploration is likely to reinforce Russia's dominance of the global natural gas industry. Mr. Dudley said BP and Rosneft had been discussing teaming up to explore in the Arctic since 2005 but the idea of a share swap was first raised by the Russians in high-level meetings just three months ago. "They were looking for a way to differentiate," he said. "They had a desire to do something not traditional."

BP mulled the idea and ultimately decided it would be "mutually beneficial," he added. All western oil majors were keen to improve their ties with the big national oil companies, or NOCs, which own the lion's share of the world's oil and gas reserves, he said. 

"Relationships with the NOCs is a trend for the future, and I can't think of a better one than BP-Rosneft," Mr. Dudley said.

In London BP shares fell 4.20 pence, or less than 1%, to 499.5 pence Friday. Its American Depositary Receipts rose $1.71, or 3.6%, to $49.25 at 4 p.m. on the New York Stock Exchange. 

 Write to  Guy Chazan at guy.chazan@wsj.com 