  (See Corrections & Amplifications item below.)  

It was a bottle of Bordeaux that united Morgan and Sidney Stark with Itzhak and Toby Perlman in a partnership to support and teach talented young musicians.

The Perlman Music Program, founded in 1993 by musician Toby Perlman, wife of renowned violinist Itzhak Perlman, provides training to string musicians ages 12 to 30. The core of the program is a summer music school at the organization's camp on Shelter Island, N.Y.

About six years ago, Mr. and Mrs. Stark attended a dinner with the Perlmans to learn about the charity. "I knew he loved wine and I said the only condition of the dinner is that I get to bring the wine," said Mr. Stark, who had hoped to impress Mr. Perlman, an oenophile. By coincidence, Mr. Stark selected the same bottle that Mr. Perlman had planned to serve: a 1982 Château Lynch-Bages. 

"It was just a very humorous beginning to what turned out to be a wonderful evening and so I said, 'Absolutely, let me come on the board,'" said Mr. Stark, who now serves as board president. 

Morgan Stark, 71, is chairman of Ramius Alternative Investments and head of Macro Trading Strategy at Ramius Capital. He and his wife Sidney have contributed, through their Stires-Stark Family Foundation, more than $1.25 million to the organization. 

The Manhattan couple's most recent gift of $125,000 will go toward constructing a facility that will include a girls' dormitory, soundproof practice rooms and a rehearsal hall for major recitals. Critically, with heat and air conditioning, it will allow for the camp to operate year-round. 

The project follows the renovation of three other buildings at the camp and will be the biggest project to date. Mr. Stark hopes that it will redefine and shape the future of the camp.

"Structures and building and duration matter to me just like planning where should the Perlman Music Program be 20 years from now," said Mr. Stark.

Though the Starks enjoy classical music, Mr. Stark most appreciates the young performers for the "incredible gift that these kids give back by virtue of their talents and their skills and their dedication," he said. "It fills my soul."

Beyond the musical training, Mr. Stark says that the Perlmans develop within their students a "deep passion for not only their music and the importance of it and the role it can play, but just the pure living of a decent and real life," he said.

"These are people that if they don't become the next best and the greatest cello or violin player, they are likely to be doctors or lawyers. But they will be wonderful people," said Mr. Stark. 

 Write to  Melanie Grayce West at melanie.west@wsj.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications:  In an earlier version of this article, a drawing of Robert and Nancy Schulman was incorrectly identified as Morgan and Sidney Stark.