VATICAN CITY—A top Vatican official on Thursday waded into a scandal that has embroiled Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, expressing concern over an investigation into whether the billionaire media mogul gave gifts and cash to an underage woman in exchange for sexual favors.

"The Holy See is watching these Italian matters with attention and, in particular, worry," Vatican Secretary of State Cardinal Tarcisio Bertone, the Vatican's No. 2 official, told reporters when asked about the allegations against Mr. Berlusconi.

  More interactive graphics and photos  

The comments marked a rare, if subtle, rebuke of Mr. Berlusconi whose center-right government has long supported the Catholic Church's conservative teachings. The Vatican has traditionally eschewed any overt criticism of Mr. Berlusconi's penchant for late-night parties with young women, a practice that has been public for nearly two years.

The remarks are therefore a measure of how Mr. Berlusconi faces mounting pressure from across the political and social spectrum as he defends himself against allegations by prosecutors that he had sexual relations with Karima El Mahroug when she was 17 years old. Prosecutors also allege the premier abused his powers in an attempt to cover up the relationship.

Mr. Berlusconi has vigorously denied having sex with Ms. El Mahroug or seeking to cover up his alleged relations with her. He has also lashed out at Italy's judiciary, accusing prosecutors of violating Italy's constitution in a campaign to persecute him.

The Vatican's views carry particular weigh in Italy, a Catholic stronghold where church officials still command a large swath of votes. The Vatican also holds some sway over the Union of Christian Democrats party, which Mr. Berlusconi recently courted in an effort to shore up his narrow majority in Parliament.

"The Church calls for everyone, especially those who have public duties in politics, governance and the judiciary, to bear the burden of robust morality, of a sense of law and justice," Cardinal Bertone said.