NEW DELHI – Hero Honda Motors Ltd. said Tuesday one of its biggest founders will buy Honda Motor Co.'s 26% stake in the two-wheeler maker for about 38.42 billion rupees ($853 million), less than half the current market price. 

Shares in Hero Honda fell as investors worried the company will shell out more towards royalty payments to Honda for the Japanese auto maker's technology until a current agreement expires in 2014, to make up for the cheaper share price. 

Hero Investments Pvt.'s decision to buy Honda's stake comes three months after New Delhi-based Hero Group and Honda decided to part ways as they seek to focus on their individual aspirations for the world's biggest two-wheeler market after China. 

Hero Investments plans to buy Honda's 51.92 million shares at 739.97 rupees apiece on, or around, March 22. 

Shares of Hero Honda, trading lower earlier in the session, extended their fall after the announcement. They fell as much as 3.78% after the announcement but later recovered to close 0.8% lower at 1,518.15 rupees. The Mumbai market ended up 1.2%. 

Hero Investments didn't give any reason for the steep discount at which it is buying the stake, but analysts worried that Hero Group will compensate Honda by paying a higher royalty. 

"The price offered by Hero Group is far below what the market was expecting," said an analyst with a Mumbai-based brokerage. "Since Honda is exiting at a lower price, the fear is that they will charge a much higher royalty." 

Hero Honda has, however, maintained that royalty to Honda won't increase for existing models. Chief Financial Officer Ravi Sud said in December the company expects royalty payments to Honda for existing models to end in 2014. 

"If not royalty, payment of fees for new models will definitely increase substantially," said Deepak Jain, analyst with brokerage Sharekhan Ltd. 

In a statement, Hero Group said it has lined up most of the financing for the stake buy. It has tied up with BC India Private Investors II, an affiliate of Bain Capital LLC, and Lathe Investment Pvt., a fully-owned unit of Government of Singapore Investment Corp. (Ventures) Pvt., which will infuse money into Hero Investments to provide funds for the deal. 

The statement didn't disclose the investment of each private-equity firm and the stake they would get in return. 

The New Delhi-based Hero Group, through 23 affiliates, holds a 26.21% stake in Hero Honda. Hero Investments alone holds 17.33% of the company, and its stake will rise to 43.33% after the deal is completed. 

Separately, a person familiar with the matter told Dow Jones Newswires that Hero Group plans to raise 34 billion rupees through bonds and commercial paper to finance the purchase of Honda's stake. 

The group plans to raise 29 billion rupees through three-month commercial paper paying a yield of 11.25%, and another 5 billion rupees via two-year bonds, said the person, declining to be named. 

"The two tranches of debt, combined with the group's existing assets, will cover the amount they need to pay Honda" the person said.

Meanwhile, a proposal by Hero Investments to induct foreign partners was approved by India's foreign investment promotion board on Feb. 24. The proposal is currently being considered by a cabinet panel on economic affairs as it involves foreign equity inflow of 45 billion rupees. 

Hero Group is likely to use the money raised by selling stakes in Hero Investments to the private equity firms to pay for the bonds once they mature. 

"The funds received as investment by the private-equity firms will be used to retire a significant portion of the debt that has been raised by Hero Investments recently for financing the acquisition," the Hero Group statement said. 

Hero Group and Honda had tied up 26 years ago to set up a two-wheeler manufacturing company for the Indian market. While Hero Group was responsible for marketing the two-wheelers, Honda primarily provided technology. 

The end of the joint venture will allow Hero Group to export two-wheelers to countries in Africa and Latin America. At the same time, it will allow Honda to focus on its wholly-owned unit, Honda Motorcycle & Scooter India Pvt., the country's fourth-largest two-wheeler maker by sales. 

—Bijou George in Mumbai contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Nikhil Gulati at nikhil.gulati@dowjones.com 