 (Best of the Tube tonight: We'll be on "Hannity" discussing Libya. The program begins at 9 p.m. ET on Fox News Channel, and we're told our segment will start around 9:20.) 

President Obama's Libya policy is raising hackles on Capitol Hill, Politico reports:

As we noted yesterday, this column generally supports the Libya effort. Yet it also seems to us there is merit in the objection that the administration has given short shrift to Congress's authority and responsibility under the Constitution.

At one time, Barack Obama would have agreed. This passage from a 2007 Boston Globe interview with the junior senator from Illinois has been making the rounds:

Is there any way the president's actions vis-à-vis Libya can be squared with his words in 2007? Perhaps he could argue that he isn't acting "unilaterally" because the attack has international support, but that seems too clever by half. The interview question clearly concerned the domestic separation of powers. And while the question dealt with Iran, in answering it then-Sen. Obama made a general statement of principle, which would apply here too.

The administration has not ignored Congress altogether. The Hill reported yesterday that Obama sent a letter to Speaker John Boehner "outlining the mission and declaring his authority":

 MSNBC.com adds that the administration has begun "to pushback [sic] hard . . . on the charge that the White House did not consult with Congress." Officials cite "a Senate resolution that passed March 1, which denounced Khaddafy's atrocities. . . . The resolution was incorporated unanimously and calls for a 'no-fly zone.' "

But it's a nonbinding resolution, and the language about the no-fly zone is equivocal. It "urges the United Nations Security Council to take such further action as may be necessary to protect civilians in Libya from attack, including the possible imposition of a no-fly zone over Libyan territory."

This columnist is not a purist about such matters. It doesn't bother us, for example, that there was no formal declaration of war in Afghanistan or Iraq; an authorization to use military force is, to our mind, a de facto declaration of war. But a nonbinding resolution passed by only one house of Congress is nothing of the sort.

Politico quotes Sen. Webb as saying that Congress has "been sort of on autopilot for almost 10 years now, in terms of presidential authority, in conducting these types of military operations absent the meaningful participation of the Congress." Yet in both Afghanistan and Iraq, President Bush successfully sought congressional authorization before dropping the first bomb.

In the case of Iraq, one could even argue that this was unnecessary--that Congress had already granted the president the authority to act, in the form of the 1991 Authorization to Use Military Force and the 1998 Iraq Liberation Act, which made "regime change" official U.S. policy.

That would have been a foolish position for George W. Bush to take. In committing the country to war, it was politically necessary to build political support, in both the public and Congress. But we raise the 1991 and 1998 laws to point out that Bush would have been on stronger legal ground in claiming the authority to act without further congressional approval than Obama is in resting such authority on a nonbinding Senate resolution.

We are not without sympathy for President Obama's position, and it's even a little unsporting to bring up that 2007 interview. Every president finds out sooner or later that the job is a lot harder than criticizing his predecessor from outside was. Presidents have to make tough choices, as Obama did, if belatedly, in Libya. Now, though, he has to make the effort of persuading Congress to ratify his decision to go to war. Otherwise, if things go badly, he'll be on his own.

  An Academic Thoughtcrime   The New York Times's Kate Zernike--whom we've previously defended--rankles us with this aside in a story on female professors at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology:

It is flatly false to say that Summers suggested "that women simply lacked the aptitude for science." Here are his actual words from the 2005 speech:

He did not say that women "simply" lacked aptitude, but that disparities in aptitude were, in his view, the second most important cause of the disparate outcomes. The reaction at Harvard shows that in a sizable and influential portion of academia, the idea of disparate aptitude is regarded as politically incorrect and thus a forbidden topic for scholarly inquiry.

It doesn't speak well of the New York Times that it mirrors academic political correctness, even going so far as to editorialize in news stories by using words like "infamously."

Meanwhile, in a "news analysis" carrying a Tripoli dateline, the Times's David Kirkpatrick observes: "Like the chiefs of the Libyan state news media, the rebels feel no loyalty to the truth in shaping their propaganda." The pot calling the kettle black? Or maybe Kirkpatrick has a really biting sense of humor.

  Accountability Journalism   Here is a great example of why the Associated Press's so-called accountability journalism has had execrable results. It's a dispatch by Philip Elliott titled "A Perfect GOP Candidate Is Hard to Find":

He eventually gets around to quoting some of the candidates, as well as other political observers, but the opening passage of the dispatch (which goes on for two more paragraphs) is all opinion. We tend to agree that most of the GOP contenders have major flaws, yet it rubs us the wrong way when a supposedly objective reporter writes it.

After all, who cares what Philip Elliott thinks? The important question is whether Republicans think their field is flawed. Elliott seems to be implying that they do, but he does so in his own authoritative voice, ignoring those whose opinions actually matter. "He said, she said journalism" gets disparaged a lot, but the AP shows its value by trying to provide something else in its place.

  Hovering on the Edge of the Threshold   "New Jersey's burgeoning numbers of poor and nearly poor show the need for government to 'provide more help, more care and more protection' to its suffering residents, according to a report on poverty issued Tuesday," reports the Asbury Park Press:

Can you think of a synonym for "hovering on the edge of the federal threshold"? We can, but it's a barnyard vulgarity that we can't print in a family newspaper. It turns out you don't have to be very close to poverty at all to be considered "in poor economic condition":

"The 200 percent of poverty level" means you make double the amount that the federal government considers poor. What they're doing is taking the number of people who are poor, then inflating it by adding another number of people who aren't poor, and claiming that the resulting total shows an alarming level of poverty. What's more troubling is that journalists routinely fall for such obvious trickery.

  'Randomly Shot at Civilians . . . Shot at Dogs and Cattle for Fun'   "Big Guns Back to Add to Kerry's Armoury"--headline, Irish Times, March 22

  The Government Is Favored by 10½ Points   "Anti-Government Protests Spread in Syrian South"--headline, Jerusalem Post, March 21

  We Don't Want to Know What the Runner-Up Did   "Brainerd's Citizen of the Year Pleads Guilty to Child Porn"--headline, Associated Press, March 21

  The Lonely Lives of Scientists   "Scientist Says 'Gay Cure' App Misinterprets His Research"--headline, PCMag.com, March 22

  The Lonely Lives of Academics   "Academics to 'Embrace Wikipedia' "--headline, BBC website, March 21

  So Much for the War on Drugs   "Martinez, Coke Lead Tigers Past Astros"--headline, MLB.com, March 21

  It Makes Your Voice Lower   "First Observation of Antihelium"--headline, TechnologyReview.com, March 21

  Notaries From the North   "Seals From Canada Found as Far South as N. Carolina"--headline, USA Today, March 21

  Hey, Kids! What Time Is It?   "Time for Close Air Support in Libya"--headline, Commentary website, March 22

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

 Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  Look Out Below!   "Black Populations Fall in Major Cities"--headline, USA Today. March 22

  Someone Set Up Us the Bomb   "A Tram at Last Winds Round Jerusalem Complexities"--headline, Associated Press, March 22

  Everything Seemingly Is Spinning Out of Control   "Space Shuttle Stowaway Is a Commie Mole"--headline, The Wall Street Journal, March 22

  News You Can Use   "How to Run a Car on Cooking Oil (at 18p a Litre)"--headline, Daily Telegraph (London), March 22

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  Take Me to Your Leader   "House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, the former speaker, briefly went to a Rome hospital Monday morning but has resumed her official duties, her office announced," the Los Angeles Times reports. Since she's fine, we can have a little fun with the story, specifically this quote:

Reader Tracey Tomashpol writes: "Maybe it's just me, but the constant repetition of the phrase 'the leader' put me in mind of the 'dear leader' in North Korea."

Tracey, it's just you. It reminds everyone else of Pottsylvania.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to T. Young, Ethel Fenig, Ed Lasky, Michele Schiesser, Alan Jones, Hillel Markowitz, Edward Tannen, Thomas Brown, Andrew Levinson, Pat Rowe, John Sanders, Scott Siegel, Bill King, Kevin Bloom, Ken Hennesay, John Bobek, Kyle Kyllan, Bruce Goldman, Lew Olowski, Rick Weisehan, David Hallstrom, Patrick Heavey, Zack Russ and Steven Schildwachter. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)