ABU DHABI—Syria's military said Thursday it had started to withdraw from the besieged town of Deraa, but residents of the southern city said tanks, troops and snipers still restricted their movement.

Syrian security forces also broadened their effort to stifle the seven-week protest movement against the regime of President Bashar al-Assad, by raiding a Damascus suburb.

Scores of Syrians around the capital have gone into hiding after the army and security forces carried out a dawn raid/on the Damascus suburb of Saqba, arresting at least 300 people, residents and activists said. The raid was the latest in a wave of arrests and detentions sweeping Syria's protest hotspots, in an attempt to crush dissent that flared against Mr. Assad's 11-year rule amid uprisings that are sweeping through the Middle East.

Around 200 tanks surrounded the city of Al Rastan, just north of Homs, and "seem ready to enter any minute," according to a resident reached by telephone. Last month, protesters in Al Rastan destroyed an 8-meter-high statue of Mr. Assad's father, Hafez, who ruled Syria for three decades until 2000. 

Despite the rising death toll from weeks of unrest, people across Syria continue to protest the government of President Bashar al-Assad. See events by day.

Track events day by day in the region.

Popular demonstrations in Tunisia toppled a president and spread to countries across the region. See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

About 30 tanks also surrounded the western coastal city of Banias, deploying at a town 10 kilometers away, activists said.

Earlier Thursday, Syria's military said it started to gradually withdraw from Deraa, following an "accomplished mission, during which scores of terrorists were arrested to stand trial." 

Residents of Deraa were among the first to mount demonstrations against the Assad regime, and their town is seen as the heart of the Syrian uprising. The government has said it sent the army into the city on April 25 at the request of citizens to protect them from armed criminal groups.

"Life in the City of Deraa has been gradually returning to normality," a military statement carried by the state news agency said. The citizens of Deraa were satisfied with the army's response, it added.

A resident of Deraa reached by satellite phone said about 40 tanks withdrew from the city Wednesday night, but that hundreds more remained and that snipers and security forces still outnumber people on Deraa's streets.

"We're still locked inside. There's a security check point at every corner. They're detaining anyone with an ID that says they're from Deraa or the surrounding villages," the resident said. "If the military operation is over, tell them to turn the electricity and the Internet back on. Tell them to stop blocking our phone lines." 

He said electricity had been restored in areas of the city where major detention campaigns have been carried out. On Sunday, 499 people were arrested in house-to-house raids, according to Amnesty International. Residents say detainees are being held in the city's old soccer field. 

Human-rights groups have reported more than 100 people killed since the military siege began, with residents saying they have been left without access to food or water.

Major demonstrations in Syria started when Deraa residents went out to protest the detention of school-aged children who had scrawled antiregime slogans on the walls of their Ba'ath Party school. The Ba'ath party has controlled political life in Syria since 1963.

Faced with the unprecedented challenge to his rule, Mr. Assad's regime has moved to squash protest hotspots—including Deraa in the south and the western coastal town of Banias—over the past two weeks. Between 650 and 850 people have been killed since the unrest began, according to estimates by different human-rights groups.

After a violent crackdown on large protests across the country last Friday, security forces appeared to focus on intimidation through detentions and harassment. As many as 8,000 people are missing or detained in Syria since the uprising began, according to Insan, a Syria-focused human rights and pro-democracy group based in Europe. Insan said detainees who were released--some of them having been "severely tortured"--were instructed to share what happened to them in detention.

On Thursday, Syrian Facebook users reported the social-networking site was blocked by some Internet service providers in the country. Syria in February lifted a firewall on Internet sites including Facebook and YouTube in place since the end of 2007.

The military deployment around Homs, Syria's third-largest city, and Banias—two spots where protests have sustained almost daily—raised concerns that Mr. Assad was preparing to crack down on other restive cities ahead of Friday, where large protests have been planned after the Islamic prayer.

An activist in Homs said planned protests there will put smaller groups at different locations, for fear of an assault by soldiers or security forces. "Some of the elders around here are advising us just not to go out anymore," he said.

In Deraa, the resident said he didn't expect anyone to pray at the city's central al-Omari mosque on Friday but that protesters would march in the surrounding villages.

"Who wants to go out to pray, and die?" he said. 

 Write to  Nour Malas at nour.malas@dowjones.com 