SENDAI, Japan—The Iwanuma City Fitness Center, the local gymnasium of a town that suffered the twin blows of Friday's earthquake and tsunami, has in recent days become a makeshift morgue.

Inside the nondescript white building on Monday were 53 bodies, nine of them still unidentified, that rescuers had pulled from mud and debris nearby. Outside, in the parking lot, small groups huddled in mourning. An elderly man walked out of the building, his legs appearing to buckle. 

Some here were distraught because they had found a loved one inside. Others were distraught because they hadn't. Morgue workers expected worse to come.

"We think tomorrow will be the busy day," a Red Cross official at the Iwanuma gym said Monday. "The military will be bringing in more bodies."

Facilities like this one, 20 miles south of the big city of Sendai, have cropped up all along Japan's devastated northeastern coastline to receive bodies found as floodwaters subside from Friday's tsunami. They form part of the new fabric of life in this zone—one of morgues, evacuation centers and vast, unreachable expanses of mud mixed with trees and fire extinguishers, tatami mats and minivans, doors and roofs.

By early Tuesday, Japan's government said 2,400 people had died from Friday's 9.0-magnitude quake and the waves that followed. The toll is expected to rise as Japan increases the number of Self-Defense Force troops it is deploying to search and rescue operations—to 100,000, up from an initial deployment of 50,000—and continues to push into now-impassable areas.

According to some news reports, some towns have been all but washed away. "There are isolated areas we still cannot reach," a Self-Defense Force spokesman said Monday. He said survivors remain stranded in schools and other buildings in towns such as Onagawa, north of Sendai. "We are trying to rescue them with our helicopters. First, we need to find a place where the choppers can land."

Relief workers say they are growing less optimistic of finding survivors. "Yesterday they found someone alive," said one policeman from Tokyo who arrived Saturday to help out. "Mostly, they just find bodies."



In a middle-school gymnasium in the nearby town of Arahama, now an evacuation center, four easel-size sheets of paper were filled with messages written by people seeking news of loved ones.

"Erika Fujita was last seen near the Family-Mart in the second district of Arahama. If she is unharmed, please call her mother. She is worried," one note read. Nearby, a power strip was filled with charging mobile phones, their owners waiting for good news.

Throughout Monday, defense forces arrived at Iwanuma's makeshift morgue with bodies found in waters that had rushed far inland. Police examined and photographed corpses. Families streamed into the fitness center to file missing persons' reports and look at the police photos. Outside a side door, a van from a local funeral company made multiple trips, carrying those that had been identified. 

Life in the middle of Sendai appeared strangely routine Monday, apart from the cracked buildings and closed shops. Some women walked in high heels. One woman rode her bicycle with now-precious groceries in the front basket.

Toward the Pacific coast, however, were police checkpoints, cranes and the blaring sirens of fire trucks and ambulances. Onlookers are generally kept at least two miles from the sea. 

Even at that distance, fields of mud and debris can be seen stretching for miles. Covered in inches of dark shiny sludge is a rich stew: a bicycle, an Ultraman stuffed toy, a fire extinguisher, a bank book. A soccer ball. A wheelchair.

"You can't use any of it," said Shigeru Matsumoto, a farmer with a rice paddy in this area. "It's been ruined by the water."

Speaking at the middle-school evacuation center in Arahama, the 61-year-old said he had been outside at around 2:30 p.m. Friday, getting his land ready for planting, when the quake hit. Though he said it was the biggest of the many tremors he has felt over his lifetime, he stayed in his field, some two miles inland.

Then came the fire trucks, the helicopters, the orders to evacuate. "They were saying we had to flee, because a tsunami was coming," he said. "I didn't think the water could possibly come in that far."

As he was trying to finish up his work, he says he heard a great noise—"Crack! Crack! Crack," is how he describes it. He looked to see water and wood flying into the air in the distance. He jumped into his car. 

Tracing a diagram of his evacuation path on the dust of the floor, he described driving down a narrow road between the rice paddies. "One wrong turn and my wheel would get stuck, and it would be over," he said.

At a corner where the road turned left, away from the ocean, he said he could see the water rising. "It was there right in front of me," he said. 

Mr. Matsumoto said he has returned to his home and found that the earthquake damaged it beyond repair. His land, he presumes, lies under muck.

With many roads impassable to cars, he has salvaged a bicycle and has been helping a friend clean out his home in an area where residents have been permitted to return. "You would not believe what was washed in," said Mr. Matsumoto, proudly gesturing to the muddy jumpsuit and rubber boots he had worn to clean the home. 

Mr. Matsumoto—who says he turned to farming after a life as a salaryman in a job he declined to name—says he wants to farm again. His resolve is tempered by thoughts of a friend's disappeared daughter and of the wall of water he just outran. Lowering his voice, he considers the thousands the government says are likely to have died. "I think it is tens of thousands," he said.

 Write to  Daisuke Wakabayashi at Daisuke.Wakabayashi@wsj.com and Eric Bellman at eric.bellman@wsj.com 