President Barack Obama called on Congress Monday to overhaul the No Child Left Behind education law, the third time this month he has focused on education in a bid to gain advantage in the federal budget battle.

The effort to change the law, George W. Bush's signature domestic achievement, is expected to be largely bipartisan. Mr. Obama asked lawmakers to send him a new version before school opens this fall.

At the same time, White House officials see an opportunity in education to win support in the budget debate, which Republicans have focused on cutting federal spending. On Monday, Mr. Obama paired some largely bipartisan ideas about policy with a partisan attack on GOP budget priorities. "Let me make it plain: We cannot cut education," said Mr. Obama at a middle school in Arlington, Va., part of what the White House labels "education month."

The White House's goal, beyond reauthorizing No Child, is to turn the spending debate from a general push for cuts toward a discussion of the implications for favored programs.

Republicans have focused on the big budget picture, not individual programs, citing this year's projected $1.65 trillion deficit as the reason deep spending cuts are needed. Last month, the Republican House passed a spending plan for the rest of this year that would cut $61 billion from last year's levels, including nearly $5 billion for education. 

"Virtually all government agencies and programs must share in the sacrifice as we cut spending to get our nation onto a sustainable fiscal path," said Rep. Hal Rogers (R., Ky.), chairman of the House Appropriations Committee.

Democratic strategists say the key is to reframe the conversation. "This is a debate that we lose in general and we win when we're concrete," said Mark Mellman, a Democratic pollster. "Voters don't want to cut education."

In a Wall Street Journal/NBC News survey last month, 77% of people said it would be mostly or totally unacceptable to significantly cut education programs for children in kindergarten through grade 12 to reduce the federal budget deficit. It was tied, with Social Security, as the least popular spending cut from a list of 14 programs measured.

On Friday, Mr. Obama singled out Pell grants for higher education and Head Start, the preschool program for the poor, as two programs that shouldn't be cut. Republicans say funding for those programs has been inflated recently and should return to earlier levels.

The White House's strategy could alienate voters who want, first and foremost, to tackle the budget deficit. Stan Greenberg, a Democratic pollster who worked for President Clinton, recalled how the White House sowed confusion in 1993 when it argued simultaneously for deficit reduction and economic stimulus.

"In retrospect, we were very muddled in terms of message," he said. "We wanted to both increase and decrease spending. We didn't have a framework for explaining that." He said Mr. Obama appears to be juggling the messages more skillfully.

Mr. Obama praised the No Child law for spotlighting achievement gaps, but said the law labels too many schools as failures and doesn't do enough to evaluate teacher quality.

States can set their own achievement standards, and more than a dozen have lowered theirs to make it easier to meet. Mr. Obama said all states should demand students be college- or career-ready upon graduation.

Mr. Obama's plan would focus federal attention on the worst-performing schools, requiring major changes, such as replacing principals. It would continue competitive grants that require schools to make certain policy changes to qualify for funding.

Rep. John Kline (R., Minn.), chairman of the House education committee, said he would work to develop "targeted, fiscally responsible reforms" but suggested the work may not be finished by September. "We need to take time to get this right," he said.

 Write to  Laura Meckler at laura.meckler@wsj.com 