After a restless night punctuated by persistent aftershocks, tens of thousands of office workers stranded overnight in central Tokyo woke up Saturday to find the transport system was mostly working again and they could likely head home. But the fears and doubts brought by Friday's earthquake remained too close and vivid for comfort.

Hours after the quake struck, office workers had wandered the streets of the capital, waited in long lines for packed buses, or, for a lucky few, sat in cabs stuck in slow-moving traffic. Others stood in lines in front of the few public phone booths that remain today in central Tokyo. In many cases, the lime green public phones were their only way to reach relatives because most mobile phone networks offered sporadic or no service for several hours.

Many pedestrians downtown gathered in front of buildings with window displays featuring flat-panel screens to watch television broadcasts of the widespread damage. Employees of the Asahi newspaper stood on street corners in the Ginza handing out free copies of a four-page special edition with a five-inch headline that read: "Giant Earthquake In Eastern Japan."

But stoic Tokyoites' relative calm was undercut by a much-bigger concern: What if this was the "big one"? A major quake is often seen as overdue since the 1923 Great Kanto Earthquake that left more than 100,000 dead in a flattened city. 

The threat of such a quake was brought to the fore Friday. As thousands poured out of buildings, uncertain where to go next, many residents who tend to brush aside the small tremors that regularly course through the city were faced with a reminder: The city's buildings may be strong, but Tokyo isn't earthquake-proof.

"This is the worst quake I've ever felt that was based so far away from Tokyo," said Kiyomi Suzuki, 69 years old, who was stranded outside a Tokyo train station. Ms. Suzuki has lived in the area all of her life.

The inside of The Wall Street Journal newsroom wasn't immune to the raw shock. Workers in the office were startled to realize that the building across the way was moving from left to right. In a few seconds, staff had to hold on to desks and chairs. Knuckles tightened, and faces grew pale.

 Write to  Kenneth Maxwell at kenneth.maxwell@dowjones.com 