Allied air strikes against Libya, one of the world's major oil producers, provide a powerful headline that could help dominate commodities prices in coming days.

But, for forecasters trying to weigh the potential impact, it is worth noting where historic events in the past week drove some key markets: Nowhere.

Within a week, the triple blow of an earthquake, a tsunami and a nuclear crisis in Japan threatened the world's third largest economy, while Saudi Arabia's decision to send troops into Bahrain raised the stakes for ongoing Middle East unrest.

Yet there was nothing dramatic about gold and oil last week, two assets that would typically be vulnerable to such developments.

Oil prices fell 9 cents to $101.07 per barrel last week in New York, little more than a rounding error. Gold also barely budged last week, declining $5.60 per troy ounce to $1415.90.

Prices for some assets swung much more widely than oil and gold. Copper rose 3.2% last week, perhaps reflecting a belief that Japan will need the industrial metal while replacing wrecked homes. The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 1.5%. 

There were some sharp daily moves. Oil prices shot up 3.5% Thursday, while gold prices fell 2.2% Tuesday, as traders reacted to rapidly unfolding situations. 

But the lasting impact of recent events on oil supply and demand or global stability—factors that have a strong influence on oil and gold— remains unclear. Bullish and bearish scenarios are virtually cancelling one another out.

The markets are being pulled in "two different directions," said  Michael G. McGlone, senior director of commodity indexing at Standard & Poor's.

Last Tuesday provided a stark example. When Saudi Arabia's troops joined other Gulf forces entering Bahrain, Iran reacted sharply. But, instead of spiking upwards, oil prices fell 4%.

Investors were more concerned about radiation spreading from Japan's stricken nuclear reactor than the potential for conflict between the world's No. 1 and No. 3 oil exporters.

Events in Libya, the 12th largest exporter, hold similar uncertainty. Many traders have assumed that most of Libya's oil won't be available amid the fighting. Now the market perception is that the war will be quick, and the Gadhafi regime will be overthrown, "which means a potential correction of oil prices," said  Stephen Schork, editor of the Schork Report, a newsletter on oil markets.

At the same time, the Middle East crisis has basically cut in half the world's spare capacity for pumping oil, meaning there is less of a buffer if something else happens.

"It has opened up the odds for something else going wrong somewhere in the region," said  Larry Goldstein, director of the Energy Policy Research Foundation.

 Write to  Liam Pleven at liam.pleven@wsj.com and Carolyn Cui at carolyn.cui@wsj.com 