BEIJING—Thousands of delegates are gathering for China's annual legislative meeting, which is expected to highlight the country's search for a balance between pursuing growth while also curbing inflation, long associated with instability in the country. 

Plans by Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao and other Communist Party leaders to boost living standards of lower-income Chinese were in the works well before recent upheavals in the Middle East, but problems there are likely to influence leaders' thinking ahead of the meeting. 

"We expect that 'people's livelihood' will become the buzz word" during the National People's Congress, said  Qing Wang, a Morgan Stanley economist.

Rising prices helped trigger the Mideast unrest. Similarly, in China, the double-digit inflation of the late 1980s is widely seen as a main cause of public discontent that led to the Tiananmen Square uprising.

The country's leaders use the session to announce various government economic targets and proposals, and also to try to build momentum for the policies among the nearly 3,000 delegates from across the country. Leaders will release plans for the coming year and for the five-year period until 2016. 

Any proposal, however, is bound to be incremental because of the leadership's fear of inadvertently sparking "social instability" through sharp changes in direction.

Referring to the high numbers of young, jobless participants in protests in the Middle East and North Africe, Bank of America-Merrill Lynch economist  Lu Ting wrote in a recent note, "The lesson for China is that growth is still the predominant priority for China because growth both creates jobs and narrows income inequality."

Measures to address income inequality include building more low-income housing, lifting minimum wages by double-digit increases and boosting the dividends that state-owned companies are required to pay the government. Revenue raised by the latter measure could be used to pay for expanded social-welfare programs.

New social spending assumes a continuation of the growth rates of the past 30 years of nearly 9% on average. Last year, China's GDP grew at around 11%.

But Premier Wen has already said he is looking at a somewhat slower pace of growth, for two reasons. First, China is trying to slowly transition from a model based on exports and heavy investment in state-owned companies to one based on domestic consumption. That transition is bound to reduce growth rates, but China hopes it can produce more jobs by shifting away from capital intensive industries that substitute machinery for labor.

China also is looking to slow growth as a way to to tamp down inflation. China's consumer price index was up 4.9% in January compared with a year earlier. Food inflation reflects the increase in agricultural commodity prices globally and the effects of a drought in China. Nonfood inflation reached a 13-year high as well, of 2.6% compared with the year-earlier period.

Prices for property and other assets in China have been described by critics as a bubble, and have proved resistant to efforts to control them.

Tax reform is also likely to draw attention. China's state council, its governing body, said on Wednesday, it would raise the threshold at which personal income tax kicks in, and adjust the income-tax brackets. It gave no further details, but one widely discussed possibility would be to raise the tax exemption to the first 3,000 yuan ($457) of income per month, up from 2,000 yuan currently.

It's possible, though, that the country's rulers may seek deeper change. In a commentary piece Monday in the China Daily newspaper, two researchers affiliated with the Ministry of Commerce argued that China should reduce the number of tax brackets and lower the top tax rate as a way to spur efficiency and growth.

The current structure, with nine income-tax brackets and a top rate of 45%, encourages tax evasion and "is against the international trend of reducing high tax rates,"  Jia Kang and  Liang Ji, researchers at the Institute for Fiscal Science Research under the Ministry of Finance, wrote in the piece.

 Write to  Aaron Back at aaron.back@dowjones.com and Bob Davis at bob.davis@wsj.com 