PARIS—It was one of the most sensational allegations of industrial espionage ever leveled in the auto industry: In January, Renault SA of France accused three executives of selling electric-car secrets. 

Hints were dropped that the buyers were "the Chinese." French Industry Minister Eric Besson said the theft was tantamount to "economic warfare." Renault suspected that the loot was stashed in bank accounts in Switzerland and Liechtenstein. 

Two months after Renault said it had been the victim of corporate espionage at its electric car unit, there are growing signs that the car company may have pulled the trigger too fast. Follow events surrounding the investigation.

Two months later, the investigation is looking more like the work of the Keystone Kops. There are growing signs that Renault pulled the trigger too fast, according to interviews with law-enforcement officials, executives, lawyers and outside consultants. So far, the French car company has come up with little proof, these people say. For example, police investigators found no secret bank accounts connected to the three managers, some of these people say.

It's all adding up to a major headache for Renault's chief executive,  Carlos Ghosn, the corporate superstar who turned around Renault's once-ailing corporate affiliate, Japan's Nissan Motor Co., and now jets between Tokyo and Paris to run the giant auto group.

The case against the three executives was triggered by an anonymous letter sent in August to several top Renault managers about  Michel Balthazard, head of the car firm's development projects and one of the company's most respected executives. But the anonymous tipster admitted to serious doubts about his or her own allegations.

"I saw Michel Balthazard negotiating a bribe….Over several weeks his behavior reinforced my first impression," wrote the informer, says Mr. Balthazard's lawyer. The missive ended on a more doubtful note. "Of course I have no proof…but if this is all wrong then I'm paranoid."

Mr. Balthazard and two other officials were fired, as Renault moved to do what it saw as damage control to what is possibly the most important business for its future—electric cars. Renault also filed a criminal complaint with a Paris court.

All three managers have repeatedly and adamantly professed their innocence. "After 30 years, none of the top executives have showed me any trust," Mr. Balthazard said in an interview, adding that he was still baffled by the accusations against him.

Among the host of unanswered questions about the affair: Who sent the anonymous letter? And who is supposed to have bought the corporate secrets?

At Renault, executives have begun considering the possibility that they might have been led astray and acted too fast. 

In an interview with a French newspaper last week, Renault Chief Operating Officer  Patrick Pélata said the car company might have been tricked, and indicated that he would resign if the ongoing investigation into the case turned up nothing. 

"We would accept the consequences up to the highest level in the company, meaning up to me," he told French newspaper Le Figaro.

Mr. Pélata is widely considered the face of Renault in France, but the heat is turning up as well on Mr. Ghosn.

The inconclusive evidence in the case has left Renault's management split into "pro-Ghosn and anti-Ghosn camps," according to one person close to Renault's board. 

"The air at the company is unbreathable…. Everyone suspects his office neighbor could be the secret informer," this person said.

A Renault spokeswoman said people in the company were a bit disturbed, but that there were no signs of staff becoming "pro- or anti-whomever." 

A mishandling of the probe could be embarrassing for the French government, which owns 15% of Renault. Last week, French Finance Minister Christine Lagarde suggested that the probe had so far proven inconclusive, and she called on Renault's top managers to "take the consequences" of any mishandling of the investigation.

According to Mr. Balthazard's lawyer, the anonymous letter that sparked the investigation read in part: "I can't stand to see people who are paid properly steal more money, which will also end up being to the detriment of Renault and its personnel."

Case Looks Murky Against Three Fired Executives

Matthieu Tenenbaum, Bertrand Rochette and Michel Balthazard were accused of selling Renault secrets.

Renault's internal-security department launched an investigation and hired former French paratrooper Michel Luc, who worked for a private investigations firm and was based in Algeria, according to people familiar with the matter. The investigations firm, Groupe Geos, says it asked Mr. Luc to resign when it learned he had agreed to act as a middleman between Renault and another investigator without its approval. Mr. Luc didn't respond to messages left at his former office near Algiers.

In December, the head of Renault's legal department,  Christian Husson, told a colleague that he had "a number of converging pieces of evidence" against Mr. Balthazard and two people who worked with him: his deputy  Bertrand Rochette and  Matthieu Tenenbaum, a lower-level executive in the division, according to a person familiar with the matter. 

The investigation led to three bank accounts, which Renault investigators assumed were the repository for cash received in exchange for corporate secrets.

One had been opened in March 2009 in Switzerland and was funded by money coming from a firm in Cyprus, these people said. A second had been opened in February 2010 in Liechtenstein, and received money from another Cyprus-based company. This second account was used to transfer money to a third account, in Switzerland, via a Swiss company, these people added. It is unclear who alerted Renault to the existence of these accounts.

On Jan. 3, Renault's Technocentre, the division within Renault that handles the electric-car business, was preparing for a visit by Mr. Besson, France's industry minister. Renault intended to show off a new series of electric vehicles that it planned to unveil later in the year.

Mr. Balthazard, a 31-year-veteran of Renault who was one of the masterminds behind the company's electric-car business, was in his office at 8 a.m. when he received a call from Renault's executive vice president for engineering and quality, asking him into a private meeting. 

"Michel, we're accusing you of corruption in an organized group, threatening the interests of Renault and ultimately [working] for a foreign power," said  Jean-Yves Coudriou, vice president for senior executive management, according to Mr. Balthazard's lawyer. "You're going to have to explain why you did this." 

Mr. Balthazard responded that he didn't understand what the accusations were about. "After 10 minutes, I realized that I had fallen into something unimaginable," Mr. Balthazard later told his lawyer, according to the lawyer. The meeting was over at 8:30 am.

Renault declined to make Mr. Coudriou available for comment. 

Mr. Balthazard had a position on the company's management committee and an annual salary, with bonuses, of €300,000, with which he had bought an apartment in Paris and a house in the country. 

"I don't think that I have any enemies," he said in an interview on Monday. "Some people like you; others don't. But I don't think I had any enemies at the company."

Moments after Mr. Balthazard was confronted, similar meetings occurred with Messrs. Rochette and Tenenbaum. "We know what you've done. Your accomplices have already confessed, so there's no use denying it. You'd do well to resign," the head of Renault's legal department told Mr. Tenenbaum, according to a person familiar with the matter.

All three men have denied any misconduct and have filed lawsuits alleging defamation or slander.

Within days, Renault announced to the media that it had discovered an attempt at corporate espionage. To French government officials, Renault said that there was likely a Chinese angle to the espionage, according to a person close to the French government. A Chinese foreign ministry spokesman angrily denied the accusations. 

Mr. Pélata, the chief operating officer, told the media that the information allegedly divulged overseas had nothing to do with any technical aspect of the electric-car business, such as the formula for chemicals used in a battery. Instead, he said, it was the company's economic model for electric vehicles. On television, Mr. Ghosn said the company had "multiple pieces of evidence of wrongdoing."

Renault officials have told French police that it was not Mr. Luc, the former paratrooper, who gathered information allegedly incriminating Mr. Balthazard and his two colleagues, according to people familiar with the matter. Yet, they have refused to disclose their source, these people said.

Liechtenstein authorities had queries about the matter from French authorities, but did not find anything relevant to the case, according to a person familiar with the matter.

Two months later, Mr. Balthazard says he is confident that the company won't be able to build a case against him. But even though Mr. Pélata, the COO, has said that the company would reinstate the managers should the investigation come up with nothing, Mr. Balthazard no longer wants to be at the company. 

"There's no question of working with those people again," he says.