WASHINGTON—House Republicans plan to unveil another short-term measure Friday to keep the government operating while they negotiate over this year's federal budget with Democrats and the White House.

The measure is expected to extend funding for three weeks beyond March 18, the expiration for a stopgap bill that is now keeping the government funded, senior GOP aides said. Failure to pass a new funding mechanism by March 18 would trigger a partial government shutdown.

The new, short-term measure through April 8 would likely make additional cuts in spending from last year's levels at a rate of $2 billion a week.

Republicans are divided, however, on whether the legislation should include policy riders, such as measures that restrict funding for the new health-care law or other Obama administration initiatives. Many conservatives feel strongly about including such limits, but GOP leaders are warning that such additions could generate too much controversy and threaten a government shutdown.

In a sign of the pressure facing GOP leaders, Edwin J. Feulner, president of the conservative Heritage Foundation, will release an open letter Friday urging Republicans to stand their ground. "Those who constantly counsel 'compromise' really seek to ignore the message that voters sent in the last election," Mr. Feulner wrote.

News of the House Republican plan came on a day the federal government reported its biggest one-month deficit in history. The deficit for February was $222.5 billion, as government spending of $333.2 billion more than tripled its $110.7 billion in revenue, Treasury Department figures showed. The second-highest deficit in U.S. history was $220.9 billion in February 2010.

The Obama administration has projected that the federal government this fiscal year will run the largest deficit in its history, at $1.65 trillion. It usually posts a bigger deficit in February because it pays out tax refunds to early filers while having just 28 days to collect revenues. 

In addition, the deficit last month reflected the high joblessness that has undercut tax revenue and caused the government to spend money compensating those out of work. 

The pathway into law of a short-term spending bill remains unclear. Assuming it cleared the Republican-led House, Senate Democrats might agree to certain spending cuts, aides to Democratic lawmakers said. But the two parties would wind up in a battle if the cuts came from programs Democrats favor.

A new funding measure is needed because Republicans and Democrats remain more than $50 billion apart on legislation to finance the government for the remaining six and a half months of the 2011 fiscal year.

The House has passed a bill that would cut $61 billion from 2010 levels; $4 billion of that has already been enacted. Senate Democrats' alternative called for $4.6 billion in additional cuts.

The Senate on Wednesday rejected both of those plans. Those votes underscored the deep divisions between Republicans and Democrats: Not a single senator crossed party lines to vote for the other party's proposal.

Sen. Charles Schumer (D., N.Y.) argued that unified Democratic opposition to the GOP bill dashed Republicans' hopes that their position would attract support from centrist Democrats. He argued that the onus is now on House Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio) to show more flexibility.

"We're looking for some give on the Republican side," said Mr. Schumer. "Those two votes failing might actually be progress."

Mr. Boehner, in a news conference, made no concessions and shrugged off recent proposals by Senate Democratic leaders that budget negotiations be broadened to include cuts in entitlement programs and possible tax increases as a way to bridge the gap between the two parties.

He said there would be plenty of time for a wider discussion on federal spending when "last year's mess" was cleaned up. "It's time for Democrats here in Washington to get serious about these budget negotiations," Mr. Boehner said.

—Corey Boles and Jeff Bater contributed to this article.