Johnny Miller, the Golf Hall of Famer who is now NBC's lead tournament commentator, has such an ear for the sound of a well-struck shot that he can often pronounce it successful based solely on the quality of the "thwack" he hears through his headset. That's not surprising, given that sound and what golfers describe as "feel" are almost synonymous, particularly in the case of the driver. So Miller, with his experience and the help of boom microphones positioned on the tees, can "feel" a shot up in his 18th-hole tower almost as well as the player who hit it.

Sound is much more central to golf than most players realize—and a lot more central to how companies design and build clubs that you probably imagine. The cracks, pops, pings and plunks that clubs make, from drivers down to the putter, are highly engineered. "We can put sounds in and we can take sounds out," says Chris McGinley, Titleist's vice president for golf club marketing. "It's not totally science, because we've used testing over the years to develop our knowledge of what frequencies and sounds players prefer. But there's a lot of science behind how we make it happen in each club." 

The auto industry pays a lot of attention to acoustics, too. All the major companies have large NVH departments (for "noise, vibration and harshness") which fiddle with the sounds of closing doors or engines roaring to life. The golf industry in the past decade or so has been hurrying to catch up.

Sound didn't matter so much back when drivers were made of persimmon. Lacquered wood damped nearly all the audible frequencies out of the hit; most of what golfers heard came from the ball and the plastic insert in the clubface, not the wood body.

Metal-headed drivers, when they began showing up starting in 1979, were a different story. Initially, golfers hated the sound. Quickly the early metalwood companies like TaylorMade and Callaway started filling their driver heads with foam to muffle the noise.

"That perception changed when the metalwood sound became identified with improved performance and forgiveness," says Steve Ehlers, Callaway's vice president for golf club innovation and development. By the early 2000s, Callaway's mostly composite C4 driver flopped in the marketplace, despite good performance, primarily because of its muted thump. It sounded too much like the old persimmons. In subsequent years several other drivers, notably a few made by Cobra, fared poorly because they were too loud and the ringing sound lasted too long.

Without tuning, today's big, hollow, thin-walled metal driver heads could easily clang like trash cans. In fact, "trash-can mode" is the term Callaway engineers use for the range of harsh frequencies they labor to eliminate. The three measurable sound qualities created at impact are frequency, duration and loudness, or volume. Together they create "a mixture of tones that is almost like a musical chord," Ehlers says, with the top of the clubhead, or crown, functioning something like a speaker to transmit the sound directly upward toward the golfer's ears.

In irons, sound is relatively less important, if only because irons don't make nearly the racket drivers do. But sound is still a major design consideration, particularly for clubs aimed at better players. High-handicap players, concerned about forgiveness, tend to prefer a harder, more "aggressive" sound in their irons, so that they feel like they've really hit the ball, says Titleist's McGinley.

"The better golfers, who are our main target audience for clubs, like a quieter, more traditional sound and feel," he says. Titleist engineers achieve that by varying structure and materials. The nickel in the tungsten-nickel alloy box on the back of the AP2 irons, for example, was chosen for its vibration-damping characteristics; sound is caused by vibration.

Physical feel—the vibration golfers detect through their fingers and arms—begins to be more of a factor in wedges and putters, or so most people in golf technology seem to believe. (With driver-ball impact, the consensus has it, physical feel is a small part of the experience.) But even in the short game, sound remains the dominant component of feel. 

Putters, for instance, come in different styles—such as mallets, blades and long-belly putters—to accommodate strokes. But when it comes to feel, sound is the major differentiator and personal preference is all that matters. For those who like a muted sound, thick-faced putters usually fit the bill. Cushioned inserts create a softer note. And for a crisp, ring-like sound, a putter with a groove milled into the sole can be the answer. The softness of ball covers also figures in with putting and wedge play, but less so nowadays than formerly, because there are fewer truly hard balls on the market.

Ryan Crysler, a pro who does a lot of club fitting at the Austin Golf Club in Texas, emphasizes sound with his clients. "Listen to the music, I tell them," he says.

 Write to John Paul at golfjournal@wsj.com 