 Clic Gallery  255 Centre St., (212) 966-2766  Through March 27

Once, when our Upper West Side kids were little, we stopped in Paramus, N.J., on our way back from a family vacation to show them what a mall was. Now Manhattan is becoming a mall, as chain stores with their identical facades take over retail space from yesterday's mom-and-pop operations. 

Many of the older stores had attractive fronts, and even when they weren't special, they were identifying fixtures in the neighborhoods they served. James and Karla Murray began photographing those storefronts in the 1990s, and their current show at Clic includes 35 medium-format color prints: Their project is the artistic equivalent of the Endangered Species Act. The storefronts are shot head on and closely cropped with few, if any, people in evidence. There's the front of Capital Fishing Tackle, a venerable New York institution, now ousted from the spot it occupied in the Chelsea Hotel for 42 years. There's the awning of CBGB, a fixture on the Bowery for 43 years, sorely missed by many, if not by me. I weep to see the Vesuvio Bakery, which was in SoHo before it became SoHo but is now part of a chain. Some of the storefronts are still bidding for immortality: Katz's Delicatessen is with us yet, as are the Clover Delicatessen, McSorley's Old Ale House (established 1854), and Barney Greengrass, the Sturgeon King. Nevertheless, in 2010 the Murrays did a survey and found that 60% of the storefronts they had photographed were gone.

 Paul Kasmin Gallery  511 W. 27th St., (212) 563-4474  Through April 2

In 1841, two years after the announcement of Louis Daguerre's photographic process in France, the English polymath Henry Fox Talbot patented a process for making photographic negatives.

Whereas each Daguerreotype was unique and couldn't be duplicated, Talbot's calo-  type process allowed for multiple prints. This was a major technological breakthrough. The negatives were paper that had been sensitized with silver salts, and some of the earliest are on display at Kasmin.

The waxed calotype negative of Talbot's "Magdalen Bridge, Oxford" (1842) is so delicate it is kept under a black velvet curtain that has to be raised for viewing. But many of the negatives are displayed in backlit frames that use special imported LEDs. The negatives present a world in reverse, where black is white, white is black, and left and right change places: This world seems uncanny, like the realm Alice found when she stepped through the looking glass.

There is an element of phantasmagoria in Dr. John Murray's simple "View of Lake" (c. 1858-1862). John Wiggin's "House in Lavenham" (c. 1855) is surreal. The "Windswept Tree, Himalayas, India" (1850s), by an unknown British photographer, is spectral. The waxed paper negative of Charles Negre's "Barbary Organ Player" (1853) is shown with a salt print in which the player, and a young assistant holding his cap out for coins, once again become familiar.

 Camera Club of New York  338 W. 37th St., Suite 206  (212) 260-9927  Through April 30

Founded in 1884 and now housed on the second floor of a nondescript midtown building, the Camera Club of New York had Alfred Stieglitz as one of its first and most influential members. Besides exhibition space, there are darkrooms and other photographic facilities available to members 24 hours a day, 365 days a year, and a long tradition of lectures and instruction. At present the club is displaying pictures of Mexico City (referred to locally as D.F., for Districto Federal) by Jerry Vezzuso and curated by Lindsey Castillo. 

Mr. Vezzuso's pictures of Mexico City have much in common with Daido Moriyama's of Japan. 

There are five images of dogs, apparently stray mutts scrounging on the streets for scraps to feed on. There are at least as many shots of couples smooching in public—not as explicitly erotic as Moriyama's, but they were taken in the daytime rather than at night. Many of the pictures are printed in high contrast, which causes a loss of detail, and printed on rough textured papers not usually used for this purpose. Seven 20-by-24-inch pictures are on brown paper similar to what bags are made of. A large 26-by-112-inch picture of a helmeted cop standing in surveillance is on newsprint. Three innovative portfolios of a few pictures each are available at $15, a very low price.

—Mr. Meyers writes on photography for The Wall Street Journal. To see his work, visit williammeyersphotography.com.