LONDON—The euro zone's industrial output rose more quickly than expected in November, continuing a strong run and auguring well for economic growth in the final three months of the year. 

Production accelerated on both a monthly and annual basis in the 16 countries that then used the euro, cementing the industrial sector's position as the region's growth engine, data from the European Union statistics agency Eurostat showed Wednesday. 

Industrial production was up 1.2% in November from October. In annual terms, production was up 7.4%, beating the 5.8% forecast and up from October's increase of 7.1%. The October figure was itself revised up from an initial reading of 6.9%. 

"November's sharp increase in euro-zone industrial production confirms that the industrial recovery in the region as a whole remains firmly on track," said  Martin van Vliet, economist at ING Bank NV. He added that the sector's contribution to economic growth in the fourth quarter should be sizable. "The industrial sector is bound to make a strong positive contribution to gross domestic product growth" in the period, possibly adding 0.3 point to the overall growth rate if December's figures are as strong as November's, he said. 

The data reaffirm the industrial sector's position as the engine of growth in the euro zone, offsetting weakness in domestic consumption. Last week, Eurostat said sluggish consumer spending was a key reason for its lowered estimate of economic growth in the third quarter of 2010, to 0.3% from the previous three months. Euro-zone retail sales fell in November by their fastest rate in half a year. 

By contrast, the industrial sector's strong run looks set to continue in the near term. Last week, a December survey of manufacturing-sector purchasing managers in the euro zone showed further growth in activity. 

Wednesday's Eurostat figures are also the latest illustration of the strong divergence between the euro zone's stronger and weaker economies. While output rose year-to-year in 14 out of the 16 member states, it fell in Greece, by 8%, while the smallest gains were posted by Spain, up 2.3%, and Portugal, up 0.7%. 

ING's Mr. van Vliet said the sovereign-debt concerns that have plagued these and other countries don't seem to be hindering euro-zone exporters as a whole. "In fact, the associated weakening of the euro is actually being beneficial to large industrial exporters," he said. 

Industrial production in the wider 27-nation European Union also accelerated in November, growing 1.4% in monthly terms and by 7.8% annually, outpacing October's growth rates of 0.4% and 6.9%.

—Katie Martin contributed to this article.



