Funeral services were held Friday on Long Island for officers from the Nassau County and New York Police departments killed in line-of-duty incidents that happened about nine hours and 40 miles apart last weekend.

  Alain Schaberger, a 42-year-old NYPD officer, was "a quiet and gentle soul who walked softly on the earth and moved easily among different types of people," Mayor  Michael Bloomberg told a crowd gathered at the Frederick J. Chapey & Sons Funeral Home in  East Islip on Friday morning. Born in Vietnam, Mr. Schaberger liked to spend his free time going to "pow wows" in South Carolina with his fiancée, Shoshone Peguese, the mayor said.

Near Mr. Schaberger's casket, which eventually was wrapped in the American flag and escorted to the cemetery with a bagpipe sendoff, was a gray floral arrangement bearing his shield number—28393.

About four hours later, services for  Geoffrey Breitkopf, the 40-year-old slain Nassau County officer, were held at the St. Margaret of Scotland church in Selden, where Mr. Breitkopf, a father of two young boys, also served as a volunteer firefighter.

"He was an all-around great guy," said Nassau County Police Officer  Tom Papaccio. "A dedicated family man, one of those guys who'd always have a smile on his face."

During his funeral mass, Father James Wood said that Mr. Breitkopf had once commented on the inherent danger of police work: "if something happens to me, it happened doing what I love," Mr. Breitkopf told the priest. 

The two police officers have become linked by virtue of the proximity of their deaths.

Mr. Breitkopf was responding to a call of a man wielding knives in Massapequa Park around 8 p.m. on March 13. Other police officers had shot and killed the man by the time Mr. Breitkopf arrived. 

As Mr. Breitkopf walked up to the crime scene carrying a rifle, a retired NYPD officer who had stopped by the scene is believed to have shouted "gun." A Metropolitan Transportation Authority officer who had also responded to the call shot Mr. Breitkopf once through the chest. Mr. Breitkopf died an hour later.

James Carver, president of the Nassau County Police Benevolent Association, said he is calling for the Nassau County District Attorney's office to investigate the incident.

Around 4:45 a.m. the next morning, Mr. Schaberger was called to a domestic assault report in Brooklyn. When Mr. Schaberger and his partner struggled to arrest a man with a long history of domestic violence, the suspect allegedly shoved Mr. Schaberger, who fell over the railing on the stoop of a brownstone. 

He dropped nine feet and landed on his head, breaking his neck.

"The murder of a police officer is not a solitary event," New York Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly said during his eulogy of Mr. Schaberger. "It is an assault upon society. And today, our society grieves with Alain's loved ones over this terrible loss."

 Write to  Sean Gardiner at sean.gardiner@wsj.com 