Greece's bid for more financial aid for next year and 2013 could hinge on accelerated sales of state assets, according to people familiar with the matter. 

Greek government officials are to resume talks with the European Union and the International Monetary Fund in Brussels later Monday to discuss what might become another aid package for the country. 

The meeting comes amid concerns that Greece's austerity and reform program has stalled and that Athens will need more help to fill a funding gap over the next two years. But Greece will be expected to play its part. 

"Any new money would require a faster pace of reforms and privatization," said  Platon Monokroussos, head of financial markets research for EFG Eurobank Ergasias SA, one of the banks advising the government on asset sales. 

Athens is expected to identify a funding gap of up to €60 billion ($85.43 billion) over the next two years. EU officials so far have declined to comment on Greece's funding situation or to commit to any future aid until after a June audit of Greek budgets. But more ministers Monday were raising the possibility of more aid under certain conditions. 

"Greece first itself has to perform much more actions: more reforms, more austerity packages, the privatization program should be definitely rolled out by Greece," Dutch Finance Minister Jan Kees de Jager. 

Eurobank's Mr. Monokroussos, who is familiar with Greece's budget woes, said the range could be €50 billion to €60 billion, depending on whether the government hits its growth and budget targets. 

In May last year, Greece narrowly avoided default with the help of an €110 billion bailout from the EU and IMF in exchange for a multi-year program to fix its public finances and reform its over-regulated economy. 

Those plans will be in stark relief at this week's meeting of European finance ministers, although the weekend arrest of IMF chief  Dominique Strauss-Kahn—who had been instrumental in arranging Greece's bailout a year ago—has cast a shadow on the proceedings. 

An IMF official familiar with the Greek talks said Mr. Strauss-Kahn's arrest prevented his key meeting on Sunday with German Chancellor Angela Merkel, whose backing would be needed for any new program to be considered. 

A spokesman for EU Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs  Olli Rehn said Monday that Mr. Strauss-Kahn's absence will have no impact on any needed decisions. A lawyer for the IMF chief, who is facing charges of sexual assault in New York, said his client would plead not guilty. 

Mr. Rehn's spokesman also said the EU, the IMF and the European Central Bank are making "important efforts" to ease the conditions of the Greek loan—including changes to maturities and interest rates. 

German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble said this weekend that Greece might receive an extension to the repayment of the EU-IMF loans already received, but only if private creditors also agree to wait longer for repayment of their Greek debt holdings. Germany also is stipulating tougher austerity steps in Athens. 

Greek officials are getting the message that any new deal would mean the slow pace of selling government property and other assets would need to pick up. The government is unhappy with suggestions that the privatization process be put under external management. 

"We are resisting this along with proposals that some assets should be 100% privatized," the official said. 

While the government has targeted €50 billion in sales of state assets by 2015—mainly by exploiting state property holdings—the process has been impeded by labor protests, a raft of legal issues and opposition inside Prime Minister George Papandreou's own government. 

The government says that by the end of this year, it hopes to raise between €2 billion and €4 billion from its first privatizations. These would include the listing of a first portfolio of real-estate holdings. 

The government also plans to reduce its 20% stake in former telephone monopoly Hellenic Telecommunications SA this year, and sell a 17% stake in incumbent power company Public Power Corp. SA next year. 

Other privatizations or stake sales involve gambling monopoly OPAP SA, natural gas monopoly DEPA SA and companies ranging from state-owned casinos to local waterworks companies. 

But there have been divisions within the Greek cabinet, including a public spat between Finance Minister George Papaconstantinou and Energy Minister Tina Birbili over whether the state would continue to control 51% of Public Power Corp., which has a virtual monopoly on electric power generation and distribution. 

Where the finance minister wants to privatize the big utility, Ms. Birbili wants to retain state control as an asset of national importance, and to keep power bills down. 

Also resisting the move is PPC's powerful labor union, Genop, which has warned it will stage rolling 48-hour strikes if the government proceeds with further privatizing the monopoly. 

 Write to  Terence Roth at terence.roth@dowjones.com, Costas Paris at costas.paris@dowjones.com and Alkman Granitsas at alkman.granitsas@dowjones.com 