 Aspen, Colo. 

In a big-money town with big-city cultural aspirations, the abode of Carolyn and Bill Powers fits right in.

Their 16,000-square-foot stone-and-stucco Bavarian style house, in the posh Starwood neighborhood, is perched high on a hill with a 70-mile panorama of snow-capped mountains. 

Purchased in 2006 for $20 million before undergoing a multimillion-dollar renovation—Aspen interior designer Linda Bedell said it went from "overdone, Los Angeles nouveau riche" to the look of "a grand European country house"—the house is the perfect springboard for its residents.

"You can imagine the parties we have here," said Mrs. Powers on a recent Wednesday morning. Dressed in red ski pants and a fitted black ski top, her blonde hair pulled into a ponytail, Mrs. Powers, age 48, said that the couple often has musicians and artists over, a side benefit of her role on the boards of the Aspen Art Museum, the Aspen Santa Fe Ballet Co. and Jazz Aspen Snowmass. Mr. Powers, 53, formerly a managing director and senior portfolio manager of Pacific Investment Management Co. (Pimco), is co-chairman of the board of Jazz Aspen. 

"The Powers play a prominent role," says Brian Hazen, a real-estate agent with Mason Morse. "Their house in Starwood is an incredible estate for entertaining. They host a lot of philanthropic events." 

Inside, the views compete with a top-shelf contemporary art collection. It starts in the entry, where Roy Lichtenstein's "Abstraction With Guitar" hangs on gray cashmere-covered walls, facing a bigger-than-life stone sculpture of a woman by Baltasar Lobo. Down a few steps onto a wide plank hardwood floor is the "grand room"—a wide open living room with 50-foot-high wood beam ceilings, where a Joan Miró tapestry hangs above a vast stone fireplace, flanked by a Willem de Kooning oil and a Richard Diebenkorn painting. 

The family TV room has green-and-white velvet wall covering patterned with reindeer and a leopard print carpet (and two Frederic Remington works). The dining room has red cashmere curtains and walls and a David Hockney oil. The hallways have Andy Warhol prints (John Wayne and Annie Oakley); there's a Picasso in the master dressing room and an Ansel Adams in the powder room. Above the long wooden bar in a room next to the living room hangs an Ed Ruscha painting with the word "restraint." 

The breadth of the amenities gives the home the air of a luxury hotel. The best view is from the slate patio in back, where a pizza oven and entertainment area sit next to a steaming infinity swimming pool that seems to spill over the edge of the cliff. A hot tub edged by large rocks is cooled in warm weather by a stream that runs under a wooden bridge. 

There's also a marbled spa with an indoor Jacuzzi and steam room, and an exercise area has treadmills and a room for yoga. A basement rec room has pinball machines, video arcade games, an antique foosball table, a pool table, a large flat screen TV and a bar. Ten-year-old son Will's bedroom has two sets of bunk beds, each with queen-size beds for comfortable sleepovers and adult guests when he isn't around. 

Both Mr. and Mrs. Powers have long been involved in music and the arts. Mrs. Powers's grandparents owned the Mississippi Delta plantation Dockery Farms, known as the "Birthplace of Blues" because musicians such as B.B. King, Charlie Patton, Muddy Waters and Howlin' Wolf played there in the evenings. She's a trustee of the farm, now a historical site, and also funds a program through the Thelonious Monk Institute that provides music education to kids in the South. Mr. Powers, who grew up with a father from New Orleans who loved jazz piano, is now vice chairman of the Hollywood Bowl and is on the boards of the Los Angeles Philharmonic and the Kennedy Center in Washington. 

References to music pop up continuously, from the electric guitar signed by Sting in Mr. Powers's office to the shelf of photos of the couple with Bono, B.B. King, Herbie Hancock and John Legend that's in Mrs. Powers's office. The couple throw parties that showcase participants in the Aspen and Snowmass jazz festivals, letting the musiciansbang away on their grand Steinway piano.

The couple decided on Aspen after they hiked to the town from their former second home in Crested Butte. "People in Crested Butte are very down-to-earth and more reclusive. People in Aspen tend to be more outgoing. Aspen has so much more to offer culturally," said Mr. Powers. Nearby, in the same development, a six-bedroom, 15,000-square-foot "mountain contemporary" in Starwood is currently for sale, asking $19.8 million, down from a prior price of $27.5 million.

 Write to  Nancy Keates at nancy.keates@wsj.com 