BP PLC has agreed to pay a $25 million fine and bolster its Alaska pipeline network as part of a settlement with the U.S. government, according to court documents filed Tuesday. 

The settlement is likely to end a 2009 civil lawsuit the Justice Department filed against BP's Alaska oil-exploration unit over two major oil spills in 2006 on Alaska's North Slope. The settlement requires final court approval. 

The Justice Department said the penalty is the largest per-barrel penalty to date for an oil spill. The fine amounts to nearly $5,000 per barrel.

In March 2009, the government sued BP for allegedly breaking federal clean-air and clean-water laws during the oil spills. In the lawsuit, filed in U.S. District Court in Anchorage, Alaska, the Environmental Protection Agency and other agencies said corroded pipelines operated by BP Exploration (Alaska) Inc. discharged more than 5,000 barrels of oil onto the Arctic tundra and into a nearby lake. 

"This penalty should serve as a wake-up call to all pipeline operators that they will be held accountable for the safety of their operations and their compliance with the Clean Water Act, the Clean Air Act and the pipeline safety laws," Assistant U.S. Attorney Ignacia Moreno said during a conference call with reporters. 

Government investigators determined that the oil spills resulted from BP's failure to properly inspect and maintain the pipeline to prevent corrosion. In connection with this finding, the Department of Transportation's Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration, or PHMSA, ordered BP to repair or replace pipelines and use cleaning and inspection devices, called pigs, to improve pipeline safety. When BP didn't comply with the order, the government sued the company. 

PHMSA officials believed BP "was willful" in not carrying out the requirements the government ordered, the agency's administrator, Cynthia Quarterman, said during the conference call. 

Under a consent decree filed Tuesday with the court in Alaska, BP will pay the fine, plus interest, and continue to implement "corrective measures." Those include replacing oil-transit lines at Prudhoe Bay, improving the leak-detection systems on 1,600 miles of pipeline on the North Slope and improving operation and maintenance of the pipeline system, according to documents Ms. Moreno filed with the court. 

The agencies estimated that the requirements will cost about $60 million over three years and that BP has already spent about $200 million to replace the pipelines that leaked on the North Slope. 

A telephone call to BP's Alaska unit wasn't immediately returned. 

Pipeline corrosion caused the two spills in the BP-operated Prudhoe Bay field, the largest oil field in the U.S., in March and August 2006. The latter spill led to a temporary shutdown of operations that jolted oil prices during a period of limited supply. 

In November 2007, the BP unit operating the oil field pleaded guilty to one count of criminal negligent discharge of oil in violation of the Clean Water Act and was placed on criminal probation for three years. 

In November 2010, the U.S. attorney's office asked a federal judge to revoke BP's probation, in connection with a 2009 oil spill that the government alleged violated the terms of BP's probation. That case is still pending.

 Write to  Cassandra Sweet at cassandra.sweet@dowjones.com 