A plan unveiled over the weekend to convert nearly a third of Detroit's public schools into privately run charter schools has thrust the Motor City into the national debate over education reform.

The proposal is part of a bid to improve academic performance, save the district millions of dollars and prevent massive school closings. But it could also lead to a political fight if scores of unionized Detroit public school teachers lose their jobs.

"We shed all physical plant operations, maintenance, security, central overhead costs. Overall staffing are expected to be lower as well," District spokesman Steve Wasko said in an email Sunday. "Pension costs are a major reason for this." Officials didn't release an estimate of how many teachers may lose their jobs or have to reapply for them as a part of the charter plan.

Detroit already has a larger portion of its children enrolled in charter schools than any other major city except for New Orleans and Washington. Nationwide, about 1.7 million students attend more than 5,400 charters, according to the Center for Education Reform, an advocacy group that promotes charter school growth.

Charters are public schools managed by autonomous groups. They are a favored initiative of U.S. Secretary of Education Arne Duncan, former New York City Schools Chancellor Joel Klein and former Washington, D.C., schools chief Michelle Rhee.

After Hurricane Katrina in 2005, Louisiana officials took control of the New Orleans public school system and have since built it into the only one in the nation where more children attend charters than traditional schools. The transformation has lead to substantial gains on state achievement exams. 

Of Detroit's 142 public schools, the 41 under consideration for independent control currently enroll about 16,000 of the city's 73,000 students and would operate as public school academies starting as soon as this fall. "We want to create a marketplace of schools," said Robert Bobb, the district's emergency financial manager. "It enables us to design a new DPS at a level that is sustainable given our current financial legacy deficit situation along with an opportunity to improve our cash flow."

Supporters of charters say they offer choice to many low-income children trapped in troubled or poorly performing traditional schools. Some teachers' union officials argue that charter schools transfer control of education to private entities and don't necessarily perform better. Most charters also hire non-unionized teachers.

In Detroit, teachers in the new charter schools wouldn't be covered under the current union contract, according to officials. "We shouldn't constrain them in the hiring of their own staff," Mr. Bobb said in an interview Sunday.

But Keith Johnson, president of the Detroit Federation of Teachers, said any removal of teachers from the union's current contract wouldn't be legal under state law and "would not happen under my watch."

Anthony Adams, the president of the Detroit school board, supports the idea of additional charters and said he hoped they would model hiring based on the current contracts. "I don't think the reason schools aren't working can be laid solely at the feet of the unions," he said.

The school board would need to approve the charter-school plan. But that could change if the Michigan legislature expands the power of emergency financial managers in the state. Mr. Adams called the proposed legislation anti-democratic.

Long plagued by some of the worst test scores in the nation, the district's finances have also been hurt by declining enrollment, which is expected to fall to 58,570 students by 2014 from about 73,000 students today.

The savings, still undefined but expected to be more than $28 million, would come in part from money not spent to close and secure schools as well as funds collected from building leases to charter organizations. But the district would also lose out on state and federal aid based on the number of students enrolled in traditional schools.

Detroit's state-required plan to eliminate its $327 million deficit originally called for closing 40 schools next school year. 