NEW YORK—Crude futures settled lower after the death of Osama bin Laden roiled oil markets, as traders tried to gauge the event's effect on stability in the Middle East. 

Light, sweet crude for June delivery settled 41 cents, or 0.4%, lower at $113.52 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange, in a roller-coaster session that saw both 2½-year highs near $115 a barrel and a decline to $110.82 a barrel. 

Brent crude on the ICE futures exchange ended 77 cents, or 0.6%, lower at $125.12 a barrel. 

Oil prices fluctuated after U.S. forces on Sunday killed Mr. bin Laden, the leader of al Qaeda and the architect of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attack in the U.S. The terrorist's death led to swings in commodities, equities and currencies as traders wagered on how Mr. bin Laden's demise will affect the major oil-producing regions of the Middle East and North Africa.

"It's a big unknown, and big unknowns spur volatile action," said  Mike Zerembski, senior commodity analyst at OptionsXpress. 

For oil, Mr. bin Laden's death raised two competing viewpoints that the market weighed throughout Monday's session: whether terrorist groups will increase attacks in reprisal for Mr. bin Laden's killing, potentially disrupting oil supplies from the Middle East and other regions; or if the event marks a turning point in the U.S. war on terror and could lead to greater stability.

"Everybody has a different view on it. Overall it's probably positive for the economy, but do the radicals use this as a rallying cry? That's always a possibility too," said  Kyle Cooper, managing partner of IAF Energy Advisors in Houston. "It's not clear-cut, and that's why you saw the swings today."

Oil prices are up 24% since the beginning of the year, as unrest throughout the Middle East and North Africa has raised fears of oil-supply disruptions. Libya's conflict has taken nearly all of that country's 1.3-million-barrels a day of exports off the market, leaving a dwindling level of global spare production capacity available should violence in other areas cut output.

Mr. bin Laden's death won't end the unrest in the region and could result in retaliatory actions by other groups. Al Qaeda has moved much of its operations to Yemen and other areas, where terrorist cells could still plot attacks.

Still, high prices have made traders cautious about betting on a continued rise. The budgets of businesses and consumers are being strained by high gasoline prices in the U.S., which could lead to lower consumption.

Analyst expect U.S. oil and fuel-product inventories to rise in data due Wednesday from the Department of Energy. 

Traders pointed to already high prices as one reason for slight losses Monday. Separately, analysts said the lack of activity from Mr. bin Laden in recent years suggests his ability to disrupt the global economy had waned. The U.S. and its allies have prevented several terrorist attacks since Sept. 11, 2001, and Mr. bin Laden's death, while a symbolic victory, may not change the security situation in the U.S. or abroad. 

"Had this happened 10 years ago or five years ago, it would have had a major market reaction, but I think the market realized bin Laden didn't have a lot of success against oil facilities, even though those were some of his stated targets," said  Phil Flynn, an oil analyst with PFG Best. 

 Write to  Jerry DiColo at jerry.dicolo@dowjones.com 

  