In a scam-dominated year, the one area where the Indian government has gotten the better of private companies is in investment banking.

What do you think investment banks earned on the hugely successful $3.5 billion initial public offering of Coal India last year, which attracted a record $53 billion of orders from across the globe?

$6 each.

Surprised? Fees paid out were 0.000001% or a measly $35, which was shared by the six banks on the deal.

While this makes taxpayers happy, investment bankers are a worried lot.

The volume of deal making in India is bound to increase making it a market that bankers cannot afford to ignore. But adverse market dynamics make it much more difficult to earn revenues and run a profitable business.

The Indian investment banking market has imploded in recent times with companies issuing around $30 billion of equity, and volume of merger and acquisitions exceeding $71 billion in 2010.

While this works out to a 4x rise, the corresponding increase in fees has been lower than bargained for, and shows signs of reducing even further.

This is not good news. With India's ascendancy on the global stage, the number of banks with operations here have increased. So have the number of bankers, with existing financial institutions expanding their teams and newer entrants making aggressive hires in a bid to gain a foothold.

It doesn't help that the biggest issuer last year was the Government of India, which raised almost $13 billion through several large marquee deals. Competition for these deals hit fever pitch, and banks waived fees and offered to pick up expenses to win bragging rights and race up the league tables.

While most banks have long made peace with their inability to make money off government deals, recent trends in the private sector are particularly disconcerting.

Already, fees in India and indeed most of Asia, historically, have been lower than the western world. Banks in the U.S. routinely charge around 7% as IPO fees, while the norm in India is 2% and lower.

Intense competition has led to a mad scramble for deals with bankers undercutting each other. Further, most issuers prefer to have multiple banks on a deal, reducing the fee per bank down to dismal levels.

Even more worrying is the disintermediation trend, a preference to do deals without bankers that is slowly but surely gaining ground.

Among the earliest of such deals was Ranbaxy's $4.6 billion sale to  Daiichi Sankyo
DSNKY


2.42
%




 in 2008, which the Singh brothers sold without a banker. Similarly, Piramal Healthcare did not appoint a banker when it sold its domestic formulations business to  Abbott Labs
ABT


-1.43
%




 in a well-structured deal for a whopping $3.72 billion last year. The Munjal family didn't seek any banker's counsel when the Hero Group bought out Honda's 26% stake in their Indian joint venture.

A shakeout in investment banking is inevitable though not imminent, and bankers will be forced to reinvent their business model or opt out.





—Samita Sawardekar will write a weekly column on deals and banking issues for Deals India. You can follow her on Twitter @ssawardekar

