A couple of months ago, the euro zone appeared to be within sight of a halfway-convincing solution to its debt problems. Under this solution, the strong would help the weak keep afloat long enough to correct key weaknesses in their economies, in return for permanently ceding a degree of control over their policy making to stop a repeat of the current crisis. Today, it seems a lot further away. 

What has come out of the past three months' negotiations is so far short of the hoped-for "Grand Bargain" that the prospect of a disorderly default has become much more realistic. It shores up the liquidity positions of the troubled states marginally without doing anything to address their solvency issues, and financial markets are starting to price in post-2013 restructurings, making it more likely the whole edifice will collapse even earlier.

The ability of peripheral states to implement further austerity is visibly weakening at the very moment that politics in countries such as Germany and Finland is constraining their governments from making any more concessions. 

Tax collection in Greece is falling far short of what the government promised the European Union and the International Monetary Fund. In the first two months of this year, it was down 9.2% from a year earlier. It was supposed to be up 8.5%. 

Portuguese Prime Minister José Sócrates, who resigned Wednesday night, failed to push through parliament additional budgetary cuts he promised the rest of the euro group only two weeks ago, and it turns out that the country's deficit may actually have been 8% of gross domestic product last year, instead of the 7.3% it initially reported.

The Irish electorate, having sent a new prime minister into the conference room with a resounding democratic mandate to renegotiate the terms of its bailout, is fuming, and, one suspects, about to burst into flames over its treatment at the hands of its creditors. 

Meanwhile, at the other end of the spectrum, German Chancellor Angela Merkel is finding her hands increasingly tied by rebellious lawmakers in her own party and among her coalition allies. The motion passed last week by the Bundestag that aimed to stop the purchase of troubled countries' bonds by the European Financial Stability Facility may not be binding on the government, but a leader whose position is increasingly precarious may well perceive it to be. 

In short, instead of coming closer together, debtors and creditors are drifting apart. For most of the past few weeks, it has been possible to see this all as the usual brinksmanship that characterizes EU negotiations. That view isn't yet discredited, but it's certainly under intense strain.

It doesn't help that Ms. Merkel, the key figure in all of this, is acting more and more erratically. For her to go back on a commitment to pay up Germany's share of the capital for the European Stabilization Mechanism less than 48 hours after her finance minister agreed to it is simply staggering. If a government can't keep its word on a relatively uncontroversial agreement for 48 hours, what does that say about the reliability of the country that likes to consider itself Europe's "anchor of stability"? 

The auspices aren't good. The vacillating chancellor is trying and failing to appease one section of German politics after another. Last week it was the antinuclear lobby. Next week, the odds are that she will have to abase herself before the conservative and relatively euro-skeptic wing of her own party if, as seems likely, the Christian Democrats lose control of the conservative citadel of Baden-Württemberg. That will mean less flexibility and more imperiousness at this week's summit. 

Ms. Merkel's weakness has already resulted in cementing a fatal flaw into the workings of the ESM, one that will make default more likely, rather than less, over the medium term. 

The term sheet of the ESM states that "an adequate and proportionate form of private-sector involvement will be expected in all [my italics] cases where financial assistance is received by the beneficiary state."

The next sentence, that "the nature and extent of this involvement will be determined on a case-by-case basis and will depend on the outcome of a debt sustainability analysis, in line with IMF practice, and on potential implications for euro-area financial stability," is of scant comfort. The implication is clear. Germany will enter into any such negotiations determined that bondholders get squeezed before taxpayers. 

In vain did European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet plead that insisting on an a priori bail-in of bondholders would only make them ask greater risk premiums in the short term, something that—as Portugal is finding out now—only increases the chance of emergency assistance being needed. 

German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble began his briefing after Monday's euro group meeting by reminding his audience that Germany had profited immensely from the euro and that default and exit from monetary union by any member "would have unforeseeable consequences for Germany." 

That's a mantra that hasn't been heard for a while. He may just have been repeating his preamble by force of habit. But he might just as well have been expressing an awareness that the patience of offended debtors could snap at any time. There is still time to rescue more of the Grand Bargain than has been done so far, but it is running perilously short. 

 Write to  Geoffrey T. Smith at geoffrey.smith@dowjones.com 