  American International Group Inc.
AIG


0.72
%




 and the Treasury officially commenced an offering of $8.89 billion in stock, a deal reportedly far smaller than what Treasury officials once hoped for. 

The embattled insurer will offer 100 million shares, while the government will offer 200 million. The Treasury also plans to grant the deal's underwriters the option to purchase up to 45 million additional shares to cover any overallotments. 

The announcement follows a meeting Tuesday in which the insurer's board debated whether to postpone the long-planned offering due to recent weakness in AIG's stock price, one of the people said. It decided to proceed with plans for an offering near the low end of a range envisioned by people familiar with the plan of $7 billion to $25 billion, depending on investor demand and market conditions.

The decision to move ahead was made with the backing of Treasury Secretary  Timothy Geithner, the people said.

The plans for the sale have been widely watched as a test of whether the government will be able to emerge from its 92.1% ownership of the bailed-out company with a profit. The government can still profit in selling a smaller stake, but it pushes to another day the task of selling additional shares, when the market could be more or less robust.

The company is set to hold its annual shareholders meeting Wednesday, and a "road show" to promote the shares is expected to begin afterwards.

The size of the offering may be increased if demand for the stock appears strong during the road show. The new issue is due to be priced and sold around May 24 and more share sales are expected over time.

Plans could change if investor demand in the road shows proves very weak, said one person familiar with the matter. AIG Chief Executive  Robert Benmosche has been concerned about not selling at too low a price, the person said. If the sale price gets too low, the person said, "it's possible both Treasury and the company will say, 'Forget it.'''

The relatively small number of shares of AIG now trading publicly hit a high of more than $50 in January, after adjusting for warrants the company issued, but lately have been swooning, partly in anticipation of the share offering for this month. AIG stock closed at $29.62, down 8 cents, in New York Stock Exchange trading Tuesday. Shares fell further in premarket trade Wednesday.

 The Treasury effectively paid $47.5 billion in cash for about 1.66 billion AIG shares, making its break-even price about $28.70 a share.

The eventual sale of Treasury's majority stake will be used to pay off the $47.5 billion cash investment in AIG shares. Separately, AIG has paid back more than $40 billion, including roughly $6 billion in interest and fees, to the Federal Reserve and Treasury using proceeds from asset sales. That, and expected profits from mortgage securities the Fed took on in the AIG rescue, means taxpayers could still end up making money from the AIG bailout even if Treasury doesn't break even on its sale of AIG shares. 

 Write to  Randall Smith at randall.smith@wsj.com, Deborah Solomon at deborah.solomon@wsj.com and Joann S. Lublin at joann.lublin@wsj.com 