Fox News suspended  Newt Gingrich and  Rick Santorum as paid commentators as they prepare to run for the White House in 2012.

"The suspension is effective for 60 days, then on May 1, their contracts will be terminated unless they notify Fox they are not running for president," said Fox News host  Bret Baier Wednesday. 

Paying the two Republicans as commentators while covering their presidential campaigns would present a conflict-of-interest for the cable network. The network's counsel has said the network was acting out of journalistic principle but didn't elaborate further.

Appearances by candidates could also create a legal problem if federal regulators deem them to cross the line into prohibited campaign contributions. CNN faced a similar issue with Pat Buchanan when he ran for president in the 1990s, ending his duties when it was clear he was seriously considering a bid.

Mr. Santorum, a former U.S. senator from Pennsylvania, said in a statement that he shares Fox's "commitment to ensure news organizations provide balanced coverage of the issues of the day. I intend to use the months ahead to continue my evaluation of a potential presidential run, and I will make an announcement on my final decision sometime in the coming months."

A spokesman for Mr. Gingrich, the former House speaker, also confirmed the suspension. He is expected to announce Thursday that he plans to form a presidential exploratory committee. A more formal announcement is expected at a later time. 

Fox News is owned by  News Corp., as is The Wall Street Journal.

"This had been contemplated from the start," Mr. Baier said, referring to speculation that both men would run for the presidential nomination.

Former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin and former Gov. Mike Huckabee, two other names that have been mentioned as possible Republican presidential candidates in 2012, also have contracts to appear on Fox. The cable network didn't mention either on Wednesday.

 Write to  Patrick O'Connor at patrick.oconnor @wsj.com 