Sunday's NFL Conference Championship games could be among the most-watched football games in the history of the galaxy. Some of the most defining and important plays of the game, though, will come at points in the telecast when many of us will be fetching a fresh beer: first and 10 at the beginning of a new drive. 

You won't see many of these plays in the highlights. More often than not it's a handoff that, on average, goes for just over four yards. But according to an exhaustive study of NFL play data conducted by Yale professor Cade Massey, what happens on first and 10 in an NFL game is a powerful indicator of who will win. 

According to Dr. Massey, an assistant professor at the Yale School of Management, the ability of an NFL team to meet certain benchmarks on each down is one of the best predictors of whether a drive will be successful. When it comes to first down, he says, the magic number is four. That's the number of yards Mr. Massey says teams need to gain on first and 10. Those that do, he says, are more likely to be successful in making a first down and keeping the drive alive. 

Since the NFL changed some of the rules to foster more passing, there's been a cultural shift in the game. As the pass becomes the weapon of choice in tough, short-yardage situations, teams tend to throw the ball more on third downs rather than running it. 

Those types of running plays, the ones where the linemen basically bash into one another in a battle for a handful of yards, are now more likely to take place on first down. And since the linemen on both sides of the ball have a pretty good idea of what's coming, first down has become a crucial test of strength; the rare place in an NFL game where play-calling and deception are less important than how well your players make blocks against the other guys. 

The four teams in Sunday's playoffs have different approaches to first down—and rates of success. The Pittsburgh Steelers, who play the New York Jets Sunday for the AFC title, run the ball 55% of the time on first and 10 in the first three quarters of a game. (The fourth quarter isn't included in the calculation because play-calling can be largely dictated by whether a team is ahead or behind). These runs by the Steelers rarely catch the opposing defense by surprise. 

The Steelers often line up in a formation with two tight ends and send running back Rashard Mendenhall crashing into the line behind them. For all intents and purposes, the Steelers are daring the opposing team to try to beat them in a head-on collision. 

The Steelers are known for their tough running attack, but this season, there's some hope for the Jets. The Steelers have only managed to attain that magic mark of four yards or more on first downs 48% of the time—a number that puts them in the bottom half of the NFL. So far, the Steelers have been able to compensate for their lack of success on first downs by connecting on long passes on other downs. They've also excelled in the reverse role: Pittsburgh's defense is the best in the league on first downs, holding opposing teams to less than four yards about 59% of the time. 

So what will happen when the Steelers meet the Jets Sunday? According to the numbers, the Jets are similar to the Steelers in that their first-down defense is better than their first-down offense. This suggests that the game could be low-scoring, and that it may come down to which team's quarterback is more effective passing on third downs (and which team manages to snag a key interception). 

The Green Bay Packers rank No 2. in the NFL this season in recording successful plays on first and 10. The team also likes to pass on that down and distance 54% of the time—more than any other team in the playoffs and all but four in the NFL. 

When Green Bay played the Atlanta Falcons in the divisional round of the playoffs, the Packers managed to run successfully on first and 10 early in the game with running back James Starks. But later in the game they began lining up in running formations—sometimes with two tight ends—and instead running play action passing plays. Those plays faked out the Falcons and led to big gains. 

So who is likely to prevail? Green Bay is by far the best first-and-10 team left in the playoffs. But their opponents, the Chicago Bears, are also one of the best defenses at stopping offenses in that situation.

A big question will be whether the Packers can overpower the Bears defense or whether they'll start drives by taking to the air the way they did late in the game against Atlanta. One key to watch: the weather. If it's windy, cold, snowing or all three, Green Bay's passing options might be seriously limited. 

—Michael Salfino contributed to this article

 Write to  Reed Albergotti at reed.albergotti@wsj.com 