TOKYO—U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates attempted to reduce pressure on the Japanese government to move quickly on relocating a U.S. military base on Okinawa, instead focusing his discussions here on the threat from North Korea.

Mr. Gates appeared keener to update plans for Japan's response to any North Korean attack and to expand defense cooperation between Tokyo and Seoul than to press ahead on building a controversial new U.S. base on the Japanese island.

That plea for deeper cooperation among the two Asian neighbors, however, was marred Thursday by a maritime tiff between the countries, when Japanese authorities accused a South Korean fishing vessel of violating territorial waters. The Japanese government said it had arrested the boat's captain—an assertion the Korean government denied.

On a 2009 visit to Japan, Mr. Gates angered many Japanese by declaring it was "time to move on" with a 2006 plan to close an existing U.S. base in a heavily populated area on Okinawa and replace it with one in a more rural area. The proposal has drawn vigorous protests from Okinawans who oppose any new bases on the island, which hosts the vast majority of the U.S. troops based in Japan.

On Thursday, Mr. Gates reiterated his support for the 2006 plan but, in contrast with his last visit, took pains not to pressure the current government to move quickly.

"We intend to follow the lead of the Japanese government in working with the people of Okinawa to take their interests and concerns into account," Mr. Gates said.

His message in Tokyo is that the U.S.-Japan alliance should be seen as more than just the issue of bases, and is a critical part of the region's stability.

The Japanese and South Koreans have been participating in each other's military exercises by sending observers, a partnership the U.S. would like to see expanded. Japanese Defense Minister Toshimi Kitazawa said Thursday that cooperation between Japan, South Korea and the U.S. needs to be "stepped up."

However, a minor tussle between the coast guards of the two countries Thursday served as reminder of simmering tensions between the two nations, and underscored the difficulties of moving toward greater cooperation.

In the incident, the Japanese Coast Guard said it had arrested the captain of a South Korean fishing boat Thursday morning, following an all-night chase after the vessel was discovered in Japan's territorial waters. Japanese officials said it was the first arrest of a South Korean ship captain found fishing near the controversial area in March 2007.

The South Korean coast guard denied that the captain was arrested. They say he is only under investigation by Korea and Japan authorities.

South Korean officials said the fishing boat was chased down by several Japanese patrol boats in the water and sailed into the Korean waters. The boat reported the situation to the coast guard, and a Korean patrol boat was immediately dispatched to the area, where they met with the Japanese and talked about what might have happened.

The U.S. wants the Japanese Self Defense Forces to take a bigger role in helping deter North Korean aggression, although Japan's pacifist constitution sharply limits the kinds of operations its military can take part in.

Mr. Gates said his meetings with Japanese officials had included discussions about the "appropriate response" to North Korea's belligerence. He said the U.S. and Japan had agreed to do more planning for "regional contingencies," a signal that the two countries intend to work out in detail how they would respond to a direct military conflict on the Korean peninsula.

"We need the planning to be realistic and effective," Mr. Gates said.

—Yoree Koh and Jaeyeon Woo contributed to this article.