TOKYO—Japanese officials said they will put greater emphasis on protecting the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant from strong earthquakes and tsunamis, after a series of aftershocks over the past week showed the facility's vulnerability to another major incident. 

Prime Minister Naoto Kan defended the government's handling of the monthlong crisis Tuesday, the same day on which the Japanese government raised its assessment of the nuclear crisis to a high-severity ranking matched only by the Chernobyl incident in Ukraine, then part of the Soviet Union, in 1986.

Hidehiko Nishiyama, an official at Japan's nuclear regulatory agency, has acknowledged that Fukushima Daiichi isn't completely secure from the threat of future tsunamis, meaning the effort to fully stabilize the plant is partly beyond the regulator's control. On Monday afternoon, an aftershock of magnitude 6.6 by U.S. Geological Survey estimates left the plant's three most heavily damaged reactors with no power to provide cooling for about 50 minutes.

The plant's reactors have been shut since the March 11 earthquake and tsunami that heavily damaged the plant. Damaged fuel rods in three of the facility's six reactors require constant cooling to prevent them from heating up again. Significant heating could result in further radioactive releases.

"The immediate threat at hand had been to prevent major explosions at the plant. But since then, the situation has somewhat stabilized, and our evaluation now is that the biggest threat is aftershocks and tsunamis," said an official at Mr. Kan's office. Government officials are currently emphasizing more immediate fixes, especially ensuring continuing power in an emergency. After that, they will consider longer-term solutions such as walls to block tsunamis.

Mr. Kan said Tuesday that he has ordered nuclear facilities in the country to make sure they can continue to operate in case of a quake. "After the large aftershocks of yesterday and today, I've ordered all reactors to have stable access to electricity," he said. 

Mr. Kan also defended the government's conduct following the raised assessment earlier Tuesday that the crisis merits the same top ranking as Chernobyl on an international severity scale. He said the upgrade, a month after the nuclear accident, "does not show that we delayed or underestimated the nuclear situation." 

The Japanese government has faced criticism from some residents around the plant as well as scrutiny from experts overseas for many aspects of its handling of the incident. On Monday the government broadened a 12.5-mile evacuation area around the plant to include more towns and villages after experts in the U.S. and elsewhere recommended larger evacuation areas last month.

Tuesday's comments from government officials represent Japan's effort to get a handle on the crisis amid low-but-lingering levels of radiation in the countryside surrounding the plant and amid the slow process of cleaning it up. Government officials and outside experts consider the risk of an uncontrolled nuclear reaction much less likely than before, but recovery efforts will require additional steps, as they are extending past what the government had originally foreseen. 

A reminder of the potential threats facing the plant came early Tuesday when another large quake hit Fukushima prefecture, the second in as many days. The magnitude-6.2 quake caused no damage or disruptions to any of the power plants in northeastern Japan, and didn't result in a tsunami. The quake Tuesday was the 61st with a magnitude of 6.0 or more to strike northern or central Japan since the magnitude-9.0 temblor on March 11. 

Mr. Nishiyama, of the Japan Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency, said the government had ordered plant operators to make sure they can operate if external power is lost. Such plans are expected to include additional lines connecting plants to the power grid, ensuring fixed generators are fully operational, and having a far greater number of truck-based large-capacity generators. The events at Fukushima Daiichi were exacerbated by the loss of both grid power and backup generators.

In the longer term, experts said extra power generators should be kept on higher ground to avoid being submerged in tsunamis, as is believed to have happened at Fukushima Daiichi. Also, "main equipment for the cooling system, such as pumps and diesel engines, should no longer be kept in the basement, as Fukushima Daiichi does," said  Tetsuo Sawada, assistant professor of reactor engineering at the Tokyo Institute of Technology. "Higher seawalls should also be erected to protect the plant against tsunamis bigger than 10 meters," or about 11 yards, he added.



  Kazuya Idemitsu, professor of engineering at Kyushu University, said it seems unlikely that another big tsunami will strike the Fukushima plant again soon. Still, he wants nuclear-plant operators to make sure they have a secure supply of fresh water for cooling the reactors and fuel for powering the backup systems during emergencies.

A new estimate released Tuesday said the March 11 earthquake and tsunami are expected to cost the insurance industry between $21 billion and $34 billion, making it the costliest disaster for insurers since Hurricane Katrina in 2005. 

While the exact cost of the disaster won't be known for months, estimates from such companies can give an early glimpse of the ultimate costs.

The quake caused insured property losses of $18 billion to $26 billion, catastrophe-modeling company Risk Management Solutions said. Life and health insurance claims will add about $3 billion to $8 billion to the tally, it said. 

Many home-insurance claims will be paid by Japanese companies or cooperatives, while the international insurance industry will shoulder claims from businesses. RMS said commercial and industrial payouts are expected to account for 30% to 35% of the property loss, or as much as $9 billion. 

—Erik Holm contributed to this article.