Celebrated director Julie Taymor was ousted Wednesday from the helm of "Spider-Man: Turn Off the Dark," as producers instituted a new artistic team to massively overhaul the troubled production. 

Ms. Taymor, a Tony Award winner who has overseen virtually every detail of the $70 million-plus musical over the past nine years, retains the title of director but accepted a significantly diminished role in the production. She will cede control of the show after March 15, according to a spokesman for the production, Rick Miramontez. Until Wednesday, that day had been the latest opening date for the chronically delayed show.

The show is now scheduled to open in June, which will render it ineligible for consideration for the 2011 Tony Awards.

"The additional time commitment required by this new plan will make it impossible for director and co-book writer Julie Taymor to continue on in her day-to-day duties with the production," according to a statement released Wednesday night by Mr. Miramontez.

A spokeswoman for Ms. Taymor, Mara Buxbaum, said the director had no comment.

Producers Michael Cohl and Jeremiah Harris have hired "The Boy From Oz" director Philip William McKinley to oversee staging and Spider-Man comic writer Roberto Aguirre-Sacasa to rework the book. 

It wasn't immediately clear whether the changes would demand the show go on hiatus, though people familiar with the matter have signaled that revisions of the scale demanded by producers in recent days would require the production to shutter for at least one or two weeks.

A frequent professional collaborator and longtime friend of Ms. Taymor, Jeffrey Horowitz, speaking Wednesday but before the official announcement, said the upheaval "seems to be forced upon her [and is] not a decision she's making herself."

Mr. Horowitz, founding artistic director of Theatre for a New Audience, who produced "The Green Bird" on Broadway with Ms. Taymor in 2000, sympathized with her apparent resistance to demands that she accept assistance. "It's sort of like changing horses in midstream," he said. "I don't see how she can do that."

Other recent additions to the artistic staff include musical consultant Paul Bogaev and sound designer Peter Hylenski, both of whom began work on the production several weeks ago.

Mr. McKinley's previous Broadway directing credit, "The Boy From Oz" starring Hugh Jackman, was a mixed success. Though Mr. Jackman received raves and a Tony Award for his performance, many critics complained that the musical as a whole fell flat.

In recent days, as producers plotted to revamp "Spider-Man" and institute an additional artistic team, Ms. Taymor rejected the prospect of collaborating with other creative forces, according to a person familiar with the matter. She wasn't involved in all of the recent talks with producers about the show's future, according to another person familiar with the matter.

What amounts to Ms. Taymor's demotion is the coda to nearly a decade of tumultuous "Spider-Man" development, a period during which intensifying expectations for what has been billed as the most technically and creatively ambitious production in Broadway history threatened to outpace even its rapidly escalating costs. The involvement of U2's Bono and the Edge, who wrote the music, amplified the show's star power. 

Though celebrated for her work on Disney's hugely successful "Lion King" musical and on films such as "Frida" and "The Tempest," Ms. Taymor has also frequently been described as a micromanager, accused of devoting all her attention to the details of a production while turning a blind eye to budget.

In recent months, she has endured not only a withering series of critical reviews, but also accusations that her technically complex production, which involves numerous aerial stunts, has endangered the "Spider-Man" cast. Between September and December of last year, four actors were injured in accidents, prompting workplace-safety investigations by federal and state agencies.

Still, her imagination and unblinking attention to her creative product have inspired a devoted following among her colleagues.

Producers briefed the cast on the latest developments before Wednesday night's performance, according to Charlie Siedenburg, a spokesman for Green Goblin actor Patrick Page, who said Ms. Taymor's absence could prove difficult for actors like Mr. Page who have grown close to her.

"If she's not in the building, he misses her," Mr. Siedenburg said, referring to Mr. Page.

—Ellen Gamerman contributed to this article.

 Write to  Erica Orden at erica.orden@wsj.com 