Blake Griffin of the Los Angeles Clippers has become legendary in the NBA this year for his thunderous dunks and an intense, aggressive playing style that's at once awe inspiring and, at times, frightening. 

On Sunday, the 6-foot-10, 250-pound 22-year-old forward-center nearly left his sneakers while executing a vicious dunk on Marcin Gortat of the Phoenix Suns. He then came very close to erupting after being whistled for an offensive foul. Griffin has a habit of chewing on his mouthpiece after big plays as if he were gnawing on carrion. 

This unusually exciting and aggressive style has helped Griffin become the first NBA rookie to be named to the All-Star game in 13 years. But it's also raised an interesting question: why does he play that way? 

Griffin was raised in Oklahoma City by a pair of churchgoing schoolteachers who home-schooled him until junior high. Jeff Capel, who coached Griffin at Oklahoma, said there's a perception that many great NBA players came from poverty, that their tough upbringings made them hungrier and that this hunger manifests itself on the court. But even though that's not the case with Griffin, he said, "he's just as hungry as anyone else in that league."

One possible explanation for Griffin's fire is a trait that's been front and center in this year's NCAA tournament: The fact that Griffin has an older brother who plays, too. Taylor Griffin, two years Blake's senior, also played at Oklahoma. He was drafted 48th overall by the Phoenix Suns in 2009 but was waived in 2010 and now plays in Belgium. 

In this year's tournament, we've seen the Morris twins (Marcus and Markieff) hammering home dunks for Kansas, while the Plumlees (Miles and Mason) patrol the lane for Duke. Brigham Young's Jimmer Fredette, whose older brother taught him to play by devising unorthodox drills and challenges (like dribbling down dark hallways), is by far the nation's leading scorer. In 2008, Stephen Curry was the star of the NCAA tournament with his brilliant shooting. This year his little brother Seth is serving as a sniper for Duke.

A study published last year in the Personality and Social Psychology Review may shed some light on all this. The study analyzed performance data on 700 brothers in Major League Baseball and found a major difference: younger brothers were more than ten times more likely to attempt the high-risk activity of base stealing and three times more likely to steal bases successfully. It also found younger brothers were more likely to allow themselves to be hit by pitches to get on base. 

One theory: risky behavior is a way for younger siblings to get attention and distinguish themselves, especially from someone who, for at least some period of time, has been the bigger and stronger competitor. 

The Griffin brothers seem to be a case study for this. "He kinda plays with a reckless abandon—that's probably the reason he's been so successful," Taylor said of his brother. "I'm a more conservative player, more methodical."

"I call it younger-brother syndrome," Capel said. Blake "was always trying to be better than his older brother." 

Blake and Taylor led their high school team to two state titles in the two years they played together. In 2005, Blake followed his brother to Oklahoma as one of the most coveted recruits in the school's history. They led the team to the 2009 Elite Eight.

Taylor said that when they were kids, his parents drilled it into him that his little brother would always try to copy him. But rather than encouraging him to set a good example, he said he spent countless hours thinking up "things they weren't supposed to do" and daring Blake to take risks—like stealing their mother Gail's homemade chocolate-chip cookies. "I may have abused that power," Taylor joked. Blake said his older brother was bigger, faster and stronger, so he always hustled to keep up. "If I didn't do that, I was a failure," he said. 

The boys' father, Tommy, who coached them in high school, says their birth order manifested itself on the basketball court, too. "They're both good ballhandlers and passers," he said, but Blake takes it to a point where he takes it really personal—and that makes him more competitive." If Taylor was to catch the ball in the wing, Blake said, he might not go to the basket. But Blake was so eager to get out of his brother's shadow that he became more likely to go for big plays.

 Write to  Hannah Karp at hannah.karp@dowjones.com 