 A federal grand jury indicted Jared Loughner on new charges, including the murder of two U.S. employees and four others, in the Jan. 8 mass shooting outside Tucson, Ariz., that left a federal judge dead and a congresswoman gravely injured.

The 49-count indictment, which was unsealed Friday, supersedes an earlier indictment that didn't include murder charges. The new charges against Mr. Loughner, 22 years old, could carry the death penalty. U.S. prosecutors said they were still weighing whether to seek the death penalty.

Mr. Loughner pleaded not guilty to the earlier charges. A lawyer for Mr. Loughner didn't respond to a request for comment.

The revised indictment also includes the original charge of attempted assassination of Rep. Gabrielle Giffords (D., Ariz.), who was shot in the head. Ms. Giffords is recovering in a Houston hospital.

Mr. Loughner also faces charges of attempting to assassinate two of Ms. Giffords's staff members, who were wounded in the shooting.

Investigators say that after firing at Ms. Giffords, Mr. Loughner began shooting into the crowd around her. In addition to the six people killed, including a 9-year-old girl, 13 people were shot in the attack and survived.

"This was an attack on Congresswoman Giffords, her constituents and her staff," Arizona U.S. Attorney Dennis K. Burke said in a statement Friday.

Mr. Burke stressed the new indictment covered "all the murdered and injured victims" attending Ms. Giffords's "Congress on Your Corner" event for constituents. "There are no distinctions between victims," he said.

Federal prosecutors in Washington must approve a death-penalty case after a lengthy review process. Mr. Burke said that Justice Department "rules require us to pursue a deliberate and thorough process. That process is ongoing."

Fourteen of the counts—including murder of a federal employee and causing death with a firearm—could carry the death penalty or life in prison.

Mr. Loughner, who is in federal custody in Tucson, is scheduled to be arraigned on the new charges Wednesday in Tucson.

Earlier this week, Mr. Loughner's lawyers complained that prison officials provided reports about Mr. Loughner to federal officials. Prison officials provided the Federal Bureau of Investigation with details of Mr. Loughner's "behavior, demeanor, affect, sleeping patterns, eating habits, facial expressions and other visual observations of him recorded at 15 minute increments 24 hours a day," his lawyers wrote in a court filing.

Under an agreement with federal prosecutors, county attorneys in Pima County, where the shooting occurred, will pursue state charges against Mr. Loughner when the federal case is complete.

—John Emshwiller contributed to this article.

 Write to  Tamara Audi at tammy.audi@wsj.com 