The lesson to take away from  Infosys Technologies' earnings report is that business for India's information-technology outsourcers is improving. It just isn't improving as fast as investors would like. 

The company's results for the December-end quarter fell well short of expectations. Shares of Infosys tumbled 4.8%, pulling down the broader Indian market. 

It's not that Infosys did poorly. Net profit was up 14% from a year earlier, and revenue came in above the company's own forecasts. It was the profit margin, unchanged from the previous quarter and down slightly from a year earlier, that left investors wanting. 

A key factor behind the margin shortfall shouldn't have surprised anyone: In the December quarter, the rupee was up against the dollar. But investors expected that higher billing rates, following a recovery in demand from customers in the West, would offset this. 

They didn't, though billing rates did increase by 1.6% sequentially. This is a situation that could repeat itself. Infosys management says that while volume of business is recovering, very few clients are willing to negotiate on pricing and many are sticking to short-term projects, which could make revenue volatile. 

The rupee, meanwhile, could keep rising against the dollar if global investors continue to invest in Indian markets. 

While it waits for pricing to recover, Infosys continues to face the challenge of keeping employee costs from rising too fast. These increases seem to have leveled off for now, but the company is spending heavily to train college graduates and retain workers. "In India, there is a war for talent," says  Ashok Vemuri, a senior vice president at the company. 

Analysts and stock traders did have some reason to expect good things. Infosys met its own forecasts, but has a reputation for underpromising. Plus, there has been talk across the industry about the pickup in business. 

But of course, investors were carried away. The decline in Infosys shares came after a 7.2% rally over the past month. The stock, along with the Bombay Stock Exchange IT Index, hit an all-time high just last week. 

It's no fault of the company that such high hopes were dashed. 

—Harsh Joshi

 Write to  Harsh Joshi at harsh.joshi@dowjones.com 