In the end, the blue-ribbon panel charged with explaining the 2008 meltdown was beset by problems, like the financial system itself.

The 10-member Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission completed its work Thursday, releasing a 545-page book that assigns blame for the crisis far and wide, from federal banking regulators to Wall Street "captains of finance" and beyond.

But to a greater degree than several other recent blue-ribbon panels, the FCIC's work was marred by delays and drama, and its conclusions contained few revelations. As a result, its legacy for policy-making is likely to be minor, though its findings could aid some litigation against big banks.

The panel's final report drew support from only six of its 10 members, all Democratic appointees. All four Republicans dissented. Already, House GOP lawmakers are ramping up investigations of the commission's work.

"It joins the Hall of Fame for lost commissions," said Paul Light, a New York University professor who studies government agencies. "It was quickly eclipsed" by last year's financial-regulation legislation and became "a backwater."

At a briefing Thursday, FCIC Chairman Phil Angelides, a former California treasurer, defended the panel's work as valuable and pointed to areas of agreement between Republicans and Democrats. 

"But I would say this," he added. "There are fundamental differences. We believe that this crisis was avoidable. We believe that it was a result of human action and inaction." 

The main dissent by three GOP members put more emphasis on economic factors, including a global credit bubble that produced similar problems across Europe.

The FCIC's troubles began even before its formation. In the 2009 legislation establishing the panel, Democratic lawmakers wanted to appoint a majority of its members. The 9/11 Commission, widely considered a model blue-ribbon panel, was evenly divided between Democrats and Republicans. That balance mattered to its eventual success, according to people familiar with its operations.

One of the FCIC's original proponents, Sen. Johnny Isakson (R., Ga.), said he sought a balanced composition, but the panel ended up with a 6-4 split. "Unfortunately, [that partisan split] materialized in the end result," he said.

Mr. Isakson added that "there's good information in both" the majority and minority reports.

The appointees chosen by congressional leaders added to the potential for trouble. Mr. Angelides, an ally of then-House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, was closely identified during his stint as California state treasurer with efforts to become more active in litigating over corporate misbehavior. That fueled worries among conservatives.

Mr. Angelides proved to be inflexible and a micromanager, some GOP commissioners said. An FCIC spokesman declined to comment this week on that description.

The Republican choice for vice chairman, former Rep. Bill Thomas of California, had worked with Mr. Angelides on some matters in the past. But in his years as chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, Mr. Thomas had sometimes volatile relations with leaders of both parties. A pro-business conservative, he worked for a law firm that represented several banking and financial-services clients.

.

Meanwhile, Democratic lawmakers working to move financial-overhaul legislation through Congress—precisely the kind of law that might have been influenced by the report—distanced themselves from the FCIC. They feared GOP lawmakers would try to use the continuing inquiry as a reason to delay action on a bill. Indeed, Democrats couldn't pass the same bill now, because they lost the House in November. 

The commission got off to a strong start in January 2010, with a high-profile hearing where Mr. Angelides grilled chief executives from several top banks. But beneath the surface, dissension was brewing.

In his separate dissent this week, GOP commissioner Peter Wallison, a scholar at the conservative American Enterprise Institute, complained that the scope of the commission's work had been "handed to us" by the panel's leadership without debate or explanation in December 2009.

The commissioners didn't get together to discuss the causes of the crisis until July, he wrote.

Other GOP members also grew impatient at the slow pace of discussions and drafting.

But Heather Murren, a former Merrill Lynch analyst who is a panel member, said she recalled "a fairly robust dialogue and debate" about the commission's agenda. "I don't remember being handed anything," she said.

By late summer, Rep. Darrell Issa (R., Calif.), then the top Republican on the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee, was writing letters demanding details of the FCIC's struggles. In the fall, the panel announced its report would be delayed by several weeks. 

In mid-December, when the report originally was due, Mr. Thomas, the vice chairman, fumed publicly that he thought Democratic appointees were preparing a "hit piece" on Wall Street banks. Democratic members rejected that. The largely partisan debate over financial overhaul "has maybe leaked over into our commission," former Sen. Bob Graham, a Democratic appointee to the panel, said at the time.

 Write to  John D. McKinnon at john.mckinnon@wsj.com 