The bride wore white, the groom wore the dress reds of the British Army's Irish Guards regiment. The royal union took place in Westminster Abbey, a modern tradition that began with the marriage of Princess Patricia of Connaught to Sir Alexander Ramsay in 1919, and has since been honored in both the breach and the observance. 

The bouquet clutched by Kate Middleton—now Catherine, Duchess of Cambridge—has already been derided in the style pages as too plain, but it duly included myrtle from the tree that grew out of a cutting of Queen Victoria's own 1840 bridal arrangement. Catherine's flowers now adorn the grave of the unknown warrior at Westminster Abbey, a practice started by the late Queen Mother (then Lady Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon) in 1923 after she married the future King George VI. Britons feted Friday's wedding much as they have any joyous occasion since the 1919 Versailles Treaty: with thousands of street parties, or "peace teas" as they were originally called.

Not everything was as it has always been. Like the groom's parents before them, William and Catherine did not vow to "worship" and "obey" each other, but instead used alternative vows drawn up by the Church of England. The maid of honor broke tradition by also wearing white, though her dress caused more of a stir for its cut than its hue. And one prominent politician's wife decided to use the wedding to make a sartorial statement, by going hatless. But by and large, William and Catherine gave the world a day of nearly unadulterated—and better yet, unapologetic—British tradition. 

That's something no longer to be taken for granted. The Prime Minister wants us all to call him "Dave," and last month he lamented that Britain is responsible for "so many of the world's problems." On Thursday Britons will vote in a referendum to decide whether to abandon the electoral system that, with only a few tweaks, has peacefully and democratically settled their affairs for more than three centuries. 

Britain is changing, as it always has and as any democracy always will. But on Friday, it didn't just feel good to celebrate traditional Britishness; it felt refreshing.