Later this month, a library of about 4,000 food-related titles belonging to a former British Ambassador is being auctioned off in London. This wouldn't normally cause much of a stir, but in this case, there is considerable interest; the library was created by Alan Davidson, who virtually invented food studies as an academic pursuit. Just before he died in 2003, the 79-year-old was awarded the prestigious Erasmus Prize by Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands for services to food history. 

Among foodies, Davidson had a cult-like status because of his peerless series of books on fish and fish dishes, plus a publishing company called Prospect Books and a quirky food journal, "Petits Propos Culinaires." However, Davidson's supreme achievement was the creation of the annual Oxford Symposium on Food & Cookery and the more durable "Oxford Companion to Food." He was a hero to numerous people who had never even met him, including Tom Parker Bowles, the English food writer. "I always use him as my base reference and check Davidson before anybody else," he says. "It is not just because you knew he had done the research, but it was the grounding, his writing style and the Englishness of him." 

Davidson was one the last great English eccentrics and the hefty "Oxford Companion" is his best memorial, with its erudition interwoven with anecdotes and examples of bizarre knowledge and the foibles of man. For instance, his definition of red mullet includes details of how Ancient Romans kept them in captivity and arranged "for guests to enjoy the highly specialised aesthetic experience of watching the colour of dying fish change." There is also a learned essay about the nickname of the wife of a ninth-century caliph of Baghdad (Buran) and how she was single-handedly responsible for a range of eggplant dishes that are still eaten in the Middle East. It was typical of Davidson's obsession with detail that the book he was commissioned to write in the late '70s didn't appeared in print until 20 years later.

I first met Davidson in Vientiane in 1974, when he was British Ambassador to Laos—the only one to import his own vintage Bentley and to wear full dress uniform, including a plumed helmet, at official functions. He took early retirement at 50 and then dressed more like a hippy sage, with his long hair, silk Nehru-style jackets, a Buddhist medallion around his neck and his wrists wrapped in rotting ceremonial strings, which bestowed good luck. During his tenure as ambassador, Davidson heard about the capture of the rare, giant catfish, pa beuk, the world's largest freshwater fish, in the Mekong River. A friendly American helicopter pilot flew the fish down to Davidson's residence, where part of it was consumed in a banquet. At the end of the evening, two servants staggered into the dining room with the massive fish head on a platter, prompting the wife of the French Ambassador to faint.

For someone obsessed with food and food history, Davidson had no interest in haute cuisine and was also teetotal. He rarely went to expensive restaurants and one friend recalls that on his only visit to Heston Blumenthal's Fat Duck, Davidson was more bewildered than anything else.

Many of the 4,000 books in the auction (www.bloomsburyauctions.com) have Davidson's bookplate affixed—a simple line drawing of the Mediterranean rascasse fish, the essential ingredient of bouillabaisse, of which Davidson wrote a hilarious essay called "The Harlot of Marseilles." The actual collection of books has disappointed the more rarefied culinary collectors, as it doesn't include any great, early classic titles. Instead, this collection embraces all of Davidson's passion for unusual facts on every aspect of food and food history. Where else would you find a 1957 first-edition of the Gibraltar Girl Guides Association's "Favourite Recipes in English and Spanish" (estimate: £100-£150) next to "Foods and Feeding Habits of the Pedi" (estimate: £40-£60). "He wanted to have every conceivable title that was relevant," says his daughter, Caroline Davidson. "If anything took his interest, he would buy it, despite always being short of money." 

Aside from the titles themselves, the interesting fact about Davidson's collection is that it was created because he loathed going to other people's libraries, unless there was absolutely no other place to find a particular volume or essay. Instead, he established a network of rare-book dealers around the globe, who sent him material on an almost daily basis. Only five years into his "Oxford Companion," Davidson's spacious house in Chelsea ran out of shelf space, so he bought a flat around the corner, which became his library. By the end of his days, he had approximately 10,000 books, including an impressive collection of art history books, novels and general reference, plus a growing number of titles on Hollywood screwball comedies, the subject he was working on at the time of his death. "There is a lot of romantic talk about somebody buying the entire collection," says Ms. Davison, "but that doesn't really happen, as by and large it is not practical." The difficulty with the collection is that it is so diverse and eccentric, it would be impossible to find a suitable location to house all of it. "It is not a loss to food history that it is being sold," says Tom Jaine, his close friend and now owner of Prospect Books. "Alan would have been delighted at the idea of his books being used."

 Write to  Bruce Palling at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 