When  Jim Elliston, a former nondenominational pastor, decided to start a technology company in 2007, he turned to a customer he knew best—the church—to win initial business.

Mr. Elliston says his firm, Clover Sites Inc., of Newbury Park, Calif., has since sold its website templates and Web-hosting services to more than 4,500 churches in the U.S. He also counts those institutions' members among his company's clientele, crediting referrals for providing a steady stream of leads. 

He started out promoting his business by placing an ad in a booklet for an annual church-leader conference. From there, he says the business started growing through word of mouth. Some 95% of his business now comes from churches.

"It's a very connected market," says Mr. Elliston, who also promotes his business by investing in  Google Inc.'s AdWords for search terms such as "church website" and "church Web design."

Prior to building Clover Sites, Mr. Elliston says he didn't come across any website-development firms trying to appeal specifically to churches. "We realized there was a huge gap," he says.

The number of U.S. churches has been growing steadily, while at the same time becoming increasingly tech savvy. There are roughly 350,000 churches in the U.S. today, up 12% from a decade ago, according to Infogroup Inc., an Omaha, Neb., database company. These include some 7,900 mega churches—those whose congregations number at least 2,000 attendees on Sundays. 

Small firms that provide an array of services—from audio/visual expertise to website development—are finding that houses of worship can be a lucrative market. 

Among them is Clark Inc., which designs and installs audio, video and lighting in Alpharetta, Ga. Regardless of their denomination, churches often refer the company to other churches, says co-founder  Houston Clark. "It's networking above and beyond what we would typically experience in the secular market," he says. 

  Brad Weston, owner of Renewed Vision LLC, also in Alpharetta, agrees. "It's somewhat uncommon for churches to think of another church down the street as a competitor," says Mr. Weston, who has sold his company's audio and visual-presentation software to more than 9,000 houses of worship. "It was straight through word of mouth that I got more and more customers." 

Churches are increasingly embracing technology. Many now have websites and social-media profiles, and some rely on audio and video tools to aid congregants seated far from the pulpit.

  A Holy Alliance? Selling to Houses of Worship  

Germantown United Methodist Church in Germantown, Tenn., uses the services of several small technology providers, says  Donna Thurmond, communications director. These include a Web-hosting, information-technology, videography and software company. The church, founded in 1840, has YouTube, Facebook and Twitter profiles. "We prefer to work with a small business if we can," says Ms. Thurmond, adding that the church has about 1,000 regular attendees on Sundays. "It's a trust issue and the feeling that we're talking to the person who's going to be doing the work and not someone who's three levels away."

  Barbara Kahn, a marketing professor at the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School of Business, says promoting products or services to a specific demographic is a wise strategy for small businesses. "They don't have the resources to go broad," she says. "It's easier to focus than to try and get everybody." 

By narrowing their efforts this way, small businesses are likely to "develop an expertise," a rationale that applies to all types of clients, including churches, adds Ms. Kahn. "You can imagine if I do it one time for a church, and there are things I learn, I can apply that knowledge to the next church I work with," she says. 

Targeting houses of worship can be especially effective because these offer the added potential of exposing a business's offerings to each of their members. Getting a pastor or church leader interested is key, says  Mara Einstein, a professor of media studies at Queens College in New York. 

"Who better to sell your product or service than the man or woman standing in front of [the congregation] on a weekly basis? It's someone they have a relationship with, and more importantly, it's someone they trust," she says. 

To be sure, many churches haven't been immune to the effects of the recent recession, and even for those that are financially stable, entrepreneurs trying to get a foot in the door may find it difficult if they lack religious affiliations. 

And as much as referrals can help businesses, bad work can put their reputations at risk among the congregation. 

"Anything that provokes an emotional reaction because it's done wrong can result in bad word of mouth, particularly when you have groups that value each other's opinion," says Ms. Kahn. "People tend to talk more about dissatisfaction than they do satisfaction.

 Write to  Sarah E. Needleman at sarah.needleman@wsj.com 