A pair of letters -- one handwritten and one typed on what appears to be Mr. Ho's personal letterhead – was e-mailed to the Journal and others from a public relations firm that said they were issued on behalf of Mr. Ho's second and third wives.



Below is a Wall Street Journal translation of the letters.





To my family members and close friends:

At noontime today, I noticed a television report discussing my family members and other related matters, including a report that the division of the Lanceford shares was not my idea. The report even mentioned family members forging documents and trying to "hijack" affairs. After hearing this, I was extremely unhappy and angry, and for that reason I want to make this special statement: the earlier decision I made to divide the stake in SJM and STDM among my family members is absolutely, 100% my own sincere decision, and under no circumstances did I receive any pressure or orders from anyone.

I am willingly transferring my company shares and dividing them among each of my wives' sons and daughters. I hope that you can all work hard in continuing on the charitable work I have done for the community. Each one of you must treat your brothers and sisters benevolently and act in unity -- all the more should you not fight simply because of some company shares. This arrangement was made after deep consideration and is absolutely the fairest and most just decision.

Moreover, the pronouncement I make today confirms the reality of the final share arrangement I have already made. It is the product of much careful consideration and is, I believe, the product of a most reasonable and good desire. If, tomorrow, someone should emerge with a signed note by me again proposing an amendment, or use any other explanation to alter the share arrangement, consider those words absolutely false. It cannot be treated as a legal document, and should be blocked with legal means.

I hereby renounce the legal actions stirred up by the Lanceford share division, and further cancel any authorizations with  Gordon Oldham and with Oldham, Li & Nie to act as my legal representative. All affairs will now be handed to "Ina" to execute. I urge you all to place harmony and unity first. Harmony begets wealth.

My health right now is very good, and my mood has calmed down. My greatest wish is for my family to accept these arrangements, and for all to be happy and welcome the new year in a spirit of unity.

I wish everyone good health!

  Dr. Stanley Ho 

Jan. 25, 2011







The recent stir over the Ho family has caused an uproar. I think it's time to put an end to this!

Family matters should not involve lawyers, and suing one another in the courts is troublesome! I also hope the media will not misunderstand. My health is very good, and there's no need for anyone to be concerned.

As for family affairs, simply shutting the door and letting family members resolve issues between themselves should not be that difficult. Simply talk things out! This has been one big misunderstanding -- among family members, there is no trickery.

Thank you everyone for your concern!

  Stanley Ho 

Jan. 25, 2011