Of all the characters in USA network's pantheon of show-stars, Federal Marshal Mary Shannon of "In Plain Sight" is among the most appealing. Not to everyone, perhaps. As USA has introduced female leads to its initially male-heavy roster, the additions have tended to be total babes who just happen to have some skills that can be used to drive plots in which they strut or leap around looking "hot."

Actor Mary McCormack, as a marshal who looks after people in the federal witness-protection program, is an attractive woman. But she is not dolled up here to look sexy. She normally wears suits—albeit over fitted T-shirts—that give her a distinctive linebacker look. She likes to wisecrack and drive muscle cars; and while she's smart, it's her relatively laid-back partner (Frederick Weller) who gets to play the brain to Mary's brawn. All this makes the chinks in her armor—a troublesome mother and sister, and her inability to find a man to love—more poignant. 

Each episode normally opens with a backstory showing how a criminal, or an innocent, became an endangered witness. As the fourth season began last Sunday, the plot revolved around a former car thief who was relocated to Mary's base city of Albuquerque, N.M. There, he helped authorities bust a stolen-car ring. Along the way, and this is part of the fun of the show, we got tips on how to disable a GPS antitheft device on a luxury automobile. 



This week the action begins in Minneapolis ("Tell Prince we said hello," Mary quips), where a security expert for a Blackwater-type contracting firm is targeted after uncovering some of the firm's dark secrets. Or maybe not. The man (played by Bradley Whitford of "The Good Guys" fame) doesn't feel safe in Albuquerque, but the marshals need to figure out if he's really in the crosshairs or just going crazy. 

Perhaps because Mary has her own demons, she tends to understand what might be going through the minds of the people she protects. We often hear her thoughts: "Day after day, we struggle to get things right, desperate to sidestep the mistakes of the past." If only she could have hung on to that Dominican baseball-player fiancé of seasons past. 

 "In Search of Food" is a paean to the "locavore" movement—the commitment to cooking with locally grown ingredients. As the introduction to series host and chef Barton Seaver makes clear, it's also about "a passion for creating delicious meals with ingredients responsibly sourced and sustainably farmed." 

Eventually Chef Seaver will travel from Minnesota to New York and San Francisco to meet organic farmers and the cooks who lovingly bring the fruit of their labor to table. Such as the grass-fed cattle who've grazed, their eyes bright, in blissful "peacefulness," or the 2,000-year-old strains of Native American beans "off the charts in antioxidants," or some 50 varieties of "hand-weeded" garlic. And never forget: Somewhere out there a noble farmer is "struggling in the shadow of agribusiness" and working "so hard to make the food that we should respect it."



For a chef like Mr. Seaver, this respect can mean avoiding produce that doesn't look natural: "Boneless, skinless chicken is not real. I don't see any boneless, skinless chickens walking around." And making sure that customers know what they're eating; say, by serving fish with all its parts on the plate: "Since it came with a head...show them what it is."

In its enthusiasm to extol farm-to-tableism, the series tends to talk down to its audience, as during a rave over Indian produce with names like Cherokee Red: "Before America was colonized, these tribes were using organic methods before organic was even a buzzword." Visiting a small farm in the Minnesota countryside, Mr. Seaver grows excited at the sight of some cows, chickens, pigs and farm cats. Oh, the diversity! 

But it is when Mr. Seaver roasts steaks from cattle "raised with a conscience" over a fire whose wood he chopped himself that the romance of the hunter-gatherer really takes off. In which direction I really can't say. But bring your checkbook.



 "Journey of the Bonesetter's Daughter" is a tantalizing look behind the scenes of an opera—one based on Amy Tan's libretto from her novel, "The Bonesetter's Daughter." The San Francisco Opera production was six years in the making, had a cast and crew of 300, and ran for seven performances. The basic story (also in "The Joy Luck Club,") mines a family history involving a mother who immigrated from China to escape a brutal and haunting past central to that history: the rape of her own mother and her mother's subsequent suicide as an act of revenge. 

The documentary is tantalizing because, like all attempts to expose the mysteries of the artistic process, it can only lift the lid a little on (in this case) an effort to blend Chinese operatic idioms and instrumentation with Western styles and storytelling. We see director Chen Shi-Zheng grow frustrated with acting gestures that might seem natural to Western audiences, but which seem false to him, "Most of my work is not naturalistic at all. It's highly stylized. I grew up with Chinese opera [which] is not a realistic family drama, nor a representation of literal theater."

Composer Stewart Wallace explains that he easily grasped Ms. Tan's impulse to explore: "All of us carry a kind of idealized notion of where our people come from. Where they're rooted, what traditions they bring, what phobias and fears, what craziness…." But he could learn about the instruments and music of China only by going there. Most remarkable is the sight of him composing alongside a Chinese percussionist. Neither man speaks the other's language. And yet—communicating only through the medium of music—the two work in excited and productive harmony.