There were 124,000 fewer job vacancies posted online in April than in March, the first dip since 2010, according to research organization The Conference Board Inc.

The 4.3 million jobs posted online in April still beat February's 4.2 million online job ads and far exceeded November's 3.7 million jobs posted online.

However, the April drop might suggest that hiring will slow during the summer, as employers take time to absorb recent new hires, said Conference Board economist June Shelp. Changes in the number of ads posted tend to precede actual hiring by two to three months during upturns, she said.

There were about three unemployed workers for every opening online in March, according to The Conference Board.

That measure of job market competitiveness is a big improvement from the five workers who pursued each opening in May 2009, at the end of the recession, but still off the two-per-opening rate from before the recession.

Even though overall employment is bouncing back, some low-skill industries are highly competitive.

Competition among workers in food preparation, for example, which spiked dramatically during the recession to about 14 jobseekers per opening, remains high even as it approaches pre-recession levels.

In March, there were about eight jobseekers whose last job was in food preparation for every opening in the same occupation.

Even if the job market in food preparation, which includes dishwashers and cooks, returned to its pre-recession level, there would still be more than six workers pursuing every job, Ms. Shelp noted.

"Restaurants are being hit by soaring food costs and higher gas and energy prices," said  Bruce Grindy, chief economist with the National Restaurant Association. "Most existing restaurants will try to bump up employee hours before hiring."

Most of the job growth in the restaurant industry, he said, has come from new restaurants rather than from expansions at existing locations.

On the other hand, the number of jobseekers per opening in computer and math jobs which includes statisticians and computer programmers, at about 0.21, is practically identical to the 0.19 unemployed workers per opening that field had in December 2007, when the recession began.

"The recession didn't treat everybody equally," said Ms. Shelp. 

 Write to  Joe Light at Joe.Light@wsj.com 

