 Houston 

Kurt Schwitters is the forgotten modernist.

Afforded only a paragraph in many tomes and sometimes missing entirely from the chronologies that direct art- history students in a line from Impressionism to the present, the German-born Dadaist should be more than an obscurity who is perpetually rediscovered. Indeed, as a pioneer of installation art who sought to collapse the walls between painting, sculpture and the everyday detritus of a consumer society, Schwitters (1887-1948) has perhaps never been so vital to contemporary trends as he is today.

The succinct and auspicious exhibition "Kurt Schwitters: Color and Collage" at the Menil Collection seeks to increase his name recognition by showing him in the company of Jasper Johns, Robert Rauschenberg and Cy Twombly, artists who discovered Schwitters in the 1950s and kept him close to their hearts. 

 The Menil Collection  Through Jan. 30

Isabel Schulz, curator of the Kurt Schwitters Archiv in Hannover, Germany, and Josef Helfenstein, director of the Menil, make a strong team. Their selection of 100 assemblages, sculptures and collages is smaller by about one-third than a 1985 retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art in New York. They have also outdone that New York event in at least one respect: by displaying for the first time in the U.S. a reconstruction of the visionary Merzbau.

This white walk-in sculptural environment—imagine Dr. Caligari's cabinet decorated by Joseph Cornell and painted by Louise Nevelson—was constructed by Schwitters over almost 20 years. By the time he fled the Nazis in 1937, it filled a room of his Hannover apartment. To see this small re- created section, the original having been pulverized by an Allied bomb in 1943, is by itself worth a trip to Houston. 

An only child, born of middle-class Hannover parents who owned a ladies' clothing store and successfully invested in real estate, Schwitters trained in the Dresden Academy as a painter. A career as a conventional Expressionist seemed to be the limits of his horizons. Then World War I and the postwar defeat of Germany shattered his world. "Everything had broken down and new things had to be made out of the fragments," he later told an interviewer. 

Encounters with the Berlin avant-garde turned him into an eager Dadaist. His 1919 absurdist love poem, "An Anna Blume," which he would recite (and sing) in cafés and concerts, became a European hit. A book of his writings was translated into several languages. 

At the same time, from 1918 on, Schwitters was making collages and assemblages. They incorporated paint and text with material he found in his pockets or on the street: train and theater tickets, stamps, tobacco and chocolate wrappers, bits of cloth and newspaper and commercial images. To describe these pictures he coined the term "Merz" (short for the German "Kommerz" and also a pun on the French merde).

Ms. Schulz wants to underscore that for Schwitters, color was fundamental. The swirl of green around the periphery of "Picture With Light Center" from 1919 is structural, not just decorative, as are the intense blues in "Yes-what? Picture" from 1920.

Merz was an abstract aesthetic composed with elements from the material world. Sometimes the titles slyly reflected this double nature. "Vogel" (1923) refers to the brand of cherry jam whose label he has pasted against a rough brown piece of paper. But he has painted the surrounding space a light azure to suggest the sky where the "Vogel" ("bird" in German) has its home.

From the (too many) examples here of his late sculptures, such as "Chicken and Egg, Egg and Chicken" from 1946, it appears that Schwitters did not get better as he grew older. He seems always to have been surer in handling paper than when inserting three- dimensional objects into the frame. (Rauschenberg might have disagreed.)

There was no market for such art during Schwitters's lifetime. He supported himself, his wife and son with annual trips to Norway, where he painted portraits and landscapes. Alfred Barr at the Museum of Modern Art and Katherine Dreier, Duchamp's patroness, bought his work in the 1920s and '30s. That was about the extent of his clientele.

Much of his time went into the Merzbau. Begun shortly after World War I, it progressed slowly and was constantly in flux. Notes Gwendolen Webster in her catalog essay, "the borderline between a pile of refuse and an artwork was never more than obscure." 

As the piece grew, Schwitters commissioned a photographer to document it. Barr, who visited Schwitters in 1936, included some of the photographs in the 1937 MoMA show "Fantastic Art, Dada, Surrealism." From these photos and memories of visitors, one room of it was reconstructed in Hannover. That is what we see here at the Menil.

A narrow doorway leads to a small, cramped room painted white except for a few panels of red, black and orange. Irregularly shaped walls of wood and mirrors distort the twisting space, which is like a religious grotto, with images of the Madonna and a green wineglass. Press a button and the lighting switches from day to night. The window originally had views of a well-groomed Hannover street.

Schwitters was devastated when he learned of the Merzbau's destruction. "My life is over," he wrote. He made another during his post-1937 exile in Norway, also destroyed, and finished part of a third in northern England before his death there in 1948. Had the original survived, and had he lived long enough to become a postwar New York or Paris celebrity and mentor for the young avant-garde, like his friend Duchamp, Schwitters might not be remembered mainly for his collages. 

Not until the '50s was he rediscovered by critics (Clement Greenberg became a champion of the collages) and by a new generation of American artists. Rauschenberg and Jasper Johns, who came upon the "Merzwerk" at MoMA and the Sidney Janis Gallery, claimed Schwitters as a lost and cherished ancestor. Through them his influence today can be seen in the work of such contemporary artists as Richard Tuttle, Mike Kelley, Jessica Stockholder and Rachel Harrison. 

Blame Schwitters, if you want, for the current state of art. He seldom got any credit when he was alive and would probably be glad to observe the myriad ways, for better and worse, that art and life are now intertwined. 

 Mr. Woodward is an arts critic in New York. 