The strange fight over the origins of Facebook Inc. has new lawyers, new allegations—and possibly new legs.

  Paul Ceglia, who last year surprised Silicon Valley by claiming he was entitled to a large stake in the social-networking company, filed an amended complaint citing emails he says support his claims against  Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook's founder and chief executive. 

Mr. Ceglia, who lives in Wellsville, N.Y., has hired DLA Piper, one of the world's largest law firms, to represent him in the case he filed in U.S. District Court for the Western District of New York. He also has added  Dennis Vacco, a former New York attorney general, as co-counsel.

The suit claims a 2003 contract between Mr. Ceglia and Mr. Zuckerberg entitles Mr. Ceglia to 50% of the founder's equity from when he started the company in 2004.

The case may turn on the authenticity of that contract, which Mr. Ceglia claims came about because he gave Mr. Zuckerberg $1,000 to get his Facebook idea off the ground. Mr. Ceglia says he has an original copy of the signed contract, but he hasn't yet produced the original in court.

Facebook denied the accusations and called Mr. Ceglia a "scam artist." "This is a fraudulent lawsuit... and we look forward to defending it in court," said attorney  Orin Snyder, of Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher LLP, which is representing Mr. Zuckerberg and Facebook.

 Nov. 22, 2003 

I have recently met with a couple of upperclassmen here at Harvard that are planning to launch a site very similar to ours. —Zuckerberg 

 Jan. 5, 2004 

I gave you an extra $1k in November so we could rush it ahead of these other guys and as far as I know you don't even have a domain name or a home page built, let alone the actual database. —Ceglia 

 Feb. 2, 2004 

I'd like to suggest that you drop the penalty completely and that we officially return to 50/50 ownership. —Zuckerberg 

 Feb. 3, 2004 

OK fine Mark 50/50 just as long as we start making some money from this thing. —Ceglia 

 July 2004 

Paul, I have become too busy to deal with the site and no one wants to pay for it, so I am thinking of just taking the server down. —Zuckerberg 

 July 2004 

Grow up, take a f------ ethics class, choke yourself with that silver spoon of yours —Ceglia 

"The alleged emails are phony, just like the alleged contract is phony," Mr. Snyder said.

On Tuesday, Mr. Ceglia's new lawyer,  Robert Brownlie, said before taking on the case he was skeptical of Mr. Ceglia's claims and spent weeks investigating the claims and documents. He said he brought in an outside expert to examine the computer file used to create the contract and to verify when it was first created. He declined to identify the expert.

Mr. Brownlie said he hasn't personally seen the original contract, but the more he studied the matter, he gained "absolutely 100% confidence that [Mr. Ceglia's] agreement is authentic."

Mr. Ceglia's amended complaint, filed Monday, is the latest scuffle over Facebook's origin, some of which was dramatized in "The Social Network" movie last year. As Facebook's valuation has snowballed, the firm and Mr. Zuckerberg have faced litigation. 

Cameron and Tyler Winklevoss, who were once fellow Harvard University students with Mr. Zuckerberg, have claimed the entrepreneur stole their idea to create Facebook. On Monday, a U.S. appeals court ruled the twins and a third plaintiff cannot back out of a 2008 settlement they struck with Facebook to resolve those claims.

Mr. Ceglia's complaint alleges that he hired Mr. Zuckerberg to help him develop StreetFax.com, an online database that was intended to help insurance adjusters access information about traffic intersections. Mr. Ceglia also launched a Western New York wood-pellet fuel company called Allegany Pellets LLC.

Mr. Zuckerberg's lawyers haven't denied he signed an agreement with Mr. Ceglia and did computer programming work for StreetFax when he was a Harvard freshman, but they have said Mr. Ceglia isn't entitled to any interest in Facebook. 

"Facebook didn't exist—and wasn't even a figment of Mark's imagination—at the time this fraudulent contract and many of the bogus emails are dated," said Mr. Snyder.

Mr. Ceglia's amended complaint includes new allegations to back his claims against Mr. Zuckerberg, including purported email exchanges from 2003 and 2004 that he says detail conversations leading up to the launch of Facebook. 

According to the complaint, in July 2003 Mr. Zuckerberg wrote Mr. Ceglia to discuss his plans for "a Harvard site" and again in November seeking money, warning "a couple of upperclassmen here at Harvard that are planning to launch a site very similar to ours."

In early 2004, the complaint alleges, Mr. Zuckerberg wrote seeking to amend their contract, suggesting "that we officially return to 50/50 ownership," according to an email excerpt referred to in the complaint.

While Facebook was instantly popular at Harvard, Mr. Zuckerberg told Mr. Ceglia in April 2004, according to the complaint, that Facebook wasn't doing well and that he was going to shut it down. "Paul, I have become too busy to deal with the site and no one wants to pay for it, so I am thinking of just taking the server down," according to an email excerpt referred to in the complaint.

The complaint alleges that in July 2004 Mr. Zuckerberg was raising money from investors for Facebook, but wrote Mr. Ceglia offering to return $2000 and saying he didn't have time for Facebook. The company was incorporated days later.

"We are trying to put Paul Ceglia exactly in the same position he would have been in if he was treated fairly in 2004," said Mr. Brownlie, of DLA Piper. 

The Palo Alto, Calif., company was recently valued at more than $60 billion, according to people familiar with the matter. Forbes recently calculated Mr. Zuckerberg's net worth to be more than $13.5 billion. 

 Write to  Scott Morrison at scott.morrison@dowjones.com 