 Austin, Texas 

More than 2,000 acts performed here last week during the 25th annual South by Southwest Music Festival. And for five almost-comically chaotic days, from early morning to well after midnight, some 100 venues—including churches, supermarkets, hotel lobbies, hotel rooms, private homes, backyards, vest-pocket parks, parking lots, converted power plants, restaurants and innumerable nightclubs—hosted emerging acts of considerable talent as well as a legion of middling musicians who may never be heard from again. Big names like Kanye West, Jay-Z, Snoop Dogg, the Strokes and Jack White dropped in as if desperate to steal attention from the newcomers.

Meanwhile, Austin resident Gary Clark Jr., who may be the city's next big music star, was an island of easygoing professionalism and aw-shucks charm. He played eight sets, ranging from a solo gig for an industry group to showcases sponsored by Warner Brothers, his new label. As if immune to pressure, he flashed his blend of blues, soul and rock, mixing fluid, muscular guitar with a rootsy bark or a falsetto croon. Though his influences are plentiful—Jimi Hendrix, Freddie King and Smokey Robinson are in evidence—throughout SXSW 2011 Mr. Clark came across as someone who is building something that is distinctly his own.

"I don't want to be stuck in a box," said Mr. Clark, referring to his approach, from an office overlooking Sixth Street, the unofficial midway to the SXSW bazaar. "There's so much soul in Freddie, Curtis Mayfield, Prince. It flows together."

Listen to clips of songs by Gary Clark Jr.

Since it's a short trip from his home in Austin's Oak Hill section, Mr. Clark played SXSW in years past and had his moment in the national spotlight when he was featured in John Sayles's 2007 film "Honeydripper." Last year, facilitated in part by guitarist Doyle Bramhall II, a longtime supporter, the soft-spoken 27-year-old made an impressive appearance at Eric Clapton's Crossroads Guitar Festival. He's among the artists on the live "Crossroads" DVD, playing his own composition "Bright Lights" and joining Messrs. Bramhall and Clapton, Susan Tedeschi and her husband, Derek Trucks, behind Sheryl Crow for two numbers.

The attendant buzz hasn't changed his approach to his music, particularly on stage. He doesn't prepare a set list; instead he prompts the band based on his read of the crowd's mood. "A certain song may be a bad idea," he said with a shrug. "OK. Now we know."

During a solo gig at SXSW 2011, held downstairs at Stubb's Bar-B-Q here, the audience—treated to free brisket, pork loin and collard greens—was inattentive to the point of rudeness. On his first number, Mr. Clark extended the opening riff to let the crowd know he was about to begin. When they kept chatting, he pressed on with a gritty performance.

"It's one of those things," he said afterward. "I'm like 'Hi. If you're not into it, fine. I'll be doing it anyway. I made the invitation. It's no big deal. Maybe we'll meet up later on.'"



With his full group, he could not be ignored. On Thursday night at an outdoor venue behind the Habana Bar, Mr. Clark, who is so tall and thin he appears elongated, sauntered onstage, picked up his red hollow-body electric guitar and soloed effortlessly after leading the band to a weighty modal groove. Though he intentionally tossed in a snippet from Hendrix's "Third Stone From the Sun" during one solo, he avoided the failing of many modern blues-based players by largely refraining from quoting his predecessors.

It's an act of courage for Mr. Clark to pursue his own voice on guitar. The late Clifford Antone, a club owner who championed him as a young teen and put him on stage with blues giants like James Cotton, Pinetop Perkins and Hubert Sumlin, had often encouraged him to emulate the greats who came before.

"He'd say 'Play like Hound Dog Taylor. Play like Freddie King. Play like Jimmy Reed.' But it came to a point where I'm older—I get it, but I'm moving on. It came down to being comfortable with myself as a musician and a dude. You know, you got to be you."

The foundation of his live shows—Mr. Clark's current self-titled album, released about a year ago—unabashedly announces his independence. Among its tracks are a slow blues shuffle, a boogie, a '50s-style soul ballad and a gorgeous minor-key instrumental. On stage, his band—featuring Zapata on guitar, J.J. Johnson on drums and Scott Nelson on bass—adapts readily to the leader's many moods. At the group's final SXSW gig on Saturday night, held in an alley off Sixth, Mr. Clark was on fire, issuing a blizzard of harsh notes from his guitar as Mr. Johnson, who sets his snare drum tight and his kick drum loose, emphasized the one to give the blues mix a taste of hip-hop. Between numbers, Mr. Clark told the audience members he was honored they had come to see him when so many other SXSW shows were on at the same time. But given the power and fury of his performance, music lovers in attendance knew there really wasn't any place else to be.

 Mr. Fusilli is the Journal's rock and pop music critic. Email him at jfusilli@wsj.com or follow him on Twitter: @wsjrock.  