Of all the eye-popping statistics from recent NFL seasons, here's one that stands out: A 2009 report by the University of Michigan's Institute for Social Research concluded that former NFL players are 19 times more likely to develop Alzheimer's or other memory- related diseases than other men between the ages of 30 and 50.

You don't have to be a brain surgeon to connect these findings to the continuing controversy over the long-term effects of concussions and other head injuries on professional football players. Nor do you need a psychology degree to interpret the suicide note left by former All-Pro defensive back Dave Duerson, who, before he took his life on Feb. 17, wrote, "Please see that my brain is given to the NFL's brain bank."

Amid the attention focused on the labor troubles between the NFL and the players' union, an important fact has been largely overlooked: On Feb. 25, the NFL announced standardized concussion-evaluation procedures to determine whether a player is fit to return to a game.

The new rules have been a long time coming. Pro football has become a more and more dangerous game: Numbers for the entire 2010 season are not yet available, but according to the Associated Press, the NFL reported 127 concussions during the preseason through week eight of the regular season—an increase of 21% over the same period in 2009.

Advanced padding and helmet design hasn't helped. "They didn't start using boxing gloves because it made fighting more humane," says sports historian Bert Sugar. "They did it to make fights more exciting. The glove didn't provide protection for the body it hit. It provided protection for the hand delivering the blow, making it into a far more lethal weapon."

The same can be said for football, where state-of-the-art protective equipment may be turning the body into a dangerous projectile. "The field stays the same size," the late San Francisco 49ers coach Bill Walsh once told me, "but the players get bigger, stronger and faster. The extra protection allows them to play with more abandon and means increasingly harder hits."

"If they took away half my padding, they'd take away half my power," former All-Pro safety Ronnie Lott, thought by many to be the hardest pound-for-pound hitter in football, said in an interview years ago. 

No one wants to take anything away from the Ronnie Lotts of football—they're one of the reasons we watch the games. But now there will be a new emphasis on getting the Lotts and the people they hit immediate and thorough examinations on the sideline. No longer will a player be able to shrug off a hit and say, "It's nothing, I'm going back in."

"When you're concussed," says Richard G. Ellenbogen of the University of Washington's department of neurological surgery and co-chair of the NFL's Head, Neck and Spine Committee, "you don't know you're concussed. Players can't make that decision for themselves."

For the first time, all 32 teams will have the same guidelines to evaluate a player's condition. "The guidelines are voluntary, not mandatory," says Dr. Ellenbogen, "but then most of the team physicians have been using most of the same methods."

The examination has three elements: neurological testing, with a doctor checking eye movement; cognitive tests, with the player answering standardized questions; and a balance test. So how do you pass?

"The cognitive tests involve questions anyone can answer," says Princeton University's Margot Putukian, chair of the NFL's Return-to-Play Subcommittee. "Where are we? Who are we playing? What's the score? Who did we play last week? Did we win? They're also asked to list numbers and months backwards," Dr. Putukian adds.

"The balance test," explains Dr. Ellenbogen, "is not unlike a police sobriety test. The BESS—Balance Error Scoring System—is a quantifiable evaluation which requires the player to stand in three positions, such as weight on one leg like a stork, with hands on hips and eyes closed for 20 seconds." 

How do you know if you passed? "The results are compared with neuropsychological testing that each player takes before the season," Dr. Putukian says.

But the treatment doesn't end there. Nirav K. Shah, a neurosurgeon with Princeton Brain & Spine Care, commends both the NFL and the players for the improved guidelines, but cautions that this should be just the first step. "Persistent symptoms after concussions," he says, "require independent evaluation—persistent is the key. Follow-up care might require from hours to months. The NFL doesn't consider this problem resolved when the game clock runs out."

"In modern sports medicine," Dr. Putukian says, "there's no such thing as an offseason for the physicians." 

 Mr. Barra writes about sports for the Journal. 

 Write to  Allen Barra at allen.barra@wsj.com 