EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J.— The biggest favor Lionel Messi did Tim Howard on Saturday was to wear orange boots. The world's most mesmerizing player had made himself even easier to pick out. 

Howard, the United States' 32-year-old goalkeeper from North Brunswick, N.J., is used to facing top opposition for club and country. He is the starter for Everton in the English Premier League. He starred at the 2009 Confederations Cup against teams like Brazil and Spain. And he delivered some heroics during the 2010 World Cup campaign.

But during Saturday's friendly at the New Meadowlands, Messi and his orchestra of Argentine teammates were a cut above the rest. As they danced and darted in front of Howard through the 1-1 draw, they put on a show of hypnotic brilliance.

"You watch him on TV and it's like, 'It's impossible. How does he do that?'" Howard said of Messi. "Then you see it for real and, you know, it's breathtaking. Even as a top-level professional, it's breathtaking. You can't figure out how he's doing some of these things."

When the United States last faced the South American side, two and a half years ago here at the former Giants Stadium, Howard hardly had time to be impressed. For 90 minutes, he was too wrapped up in repelling the Argentine onslaught with a string of stunning saves to preserve the scoreless tie. 

The biggest lesson he learned that night was that Argentina loves to funnel play through the middle. With quick passes, they make acute incisions in the defense before slicing it open with a short through ball. If that final pass reaches Argentine feet, Howard's job becomes infinitely more difficult.

On two occasions Saturday, Howard managed to defuse those situations before they became one-on-ones. Both times, he had to race Messi to the ball and dive at his feet to make crucial blocks—highlights in a series of fine saves. 

When he was not on the end of the Argentine attack, Messi was usually at the origin, winding his way through the defenders. During those moments, Howard noticed that Messi's first instinct was usually to pass rather than shoot.

"So I'm always trying to read his footwork to see where the pass is going to go—and that's dictated by the runners as well," he said.

But what went through his head as he focused on those orange boots? What could he do when they suddenly broke into his penalty area and took a dozen touches without losing the ball?

The only answer, Howard said, is to keep himself and his defenders perfectly calm. Messi and Co. feast on impulsive mistakes. 

It is a duty Howard treats with the utmost seriousness. His normally genial, soft-spoken personality stays in the dressing room with his street clothes. 

Any time Argentina crossed the halfway line, he cupped his giant gloved hands around his mouth to bark instructions at the back line. He pointed at opponents to keep an eye on and he hollered over the noise of 78,936 fans, like a quarterback changing his mind before the snap.

Howard had even more to say whenever Argentina carved out an opportunity. Whether or not the shot actually needed saving was irrelevant to him. Every attempt at goal had the 6-foot-3, yellow-clad goalkeeper streaking off his line to give the defenders a furious rollicking. Even Juan Agudelo, the United States' 18-year-old goal scorer, was not spared a rousting when Howard did not like his positioning on a free kick. 

The players never take it personally. They also tend not to talk back.

"He's always screaming, this guy," defender and captain Carlos Bocanegra said. "He comes out, he's emotional, he's a leader. He's telling us, 'Step up. Cover here. Next time, let's not let that happen.'"

But after Argentina opened the scoring in the 42nd minute, Howard was silent. There had been breakdowns and a bad break. There was no sense in rubbing them in.

Messi had left Bocanegra for dead on his way to the bye-line and cut the ball back to DiMaria. Howard saved his low shot with his legs. The inevitable rebound, however, fell to Esteban Cambiasso. He slammed the ball home from six yards.

Howard looked up from the ground and watched Messi embrace Cambiasso. He stood up, picked the ball out of the net and instantly tried to forget it. He would need to stop everything else for the U.S. to stand a chance. And he did.

"You know what you're going to get when you play them," Howard said of Messi and the Argentine team. "It's just backs to the wall, defend for your life."