From a political cartoonist, to a professor who fights against bias in the criminal-justice system, to the leader of New York's Museum for African Art, the Ford Foundation is hoping to elevate the profile of leaders world-wide.

In honor of its 75th anniversary this year, the New York-based foundation is awarding a onetime prize to a dozen "social innovators" who are changing the world. Recipients of the Visionaries Award will receive $100,000 to continue their work. 

"What sets these individuals apart, in our eyes, is not just the quality of their ideas, but their pioneering work every day to turn ideas into action," said Luis Ubiñas, president of the Ford Foundation. "They are doing the work that leads us into the future."

Mr. Ubiñas added that the award recipients are, "focused on practical solutions that have real impact in people's lives."

Elsie McCabe Thompson, is president of the Museum for African Art, one of the award recipients. The institution plans to open a permanent building on Fifth Avenue between 109th and 110th streets.

Mrs. Thompson said that the award is a "validation" of 13½ years in making the museum's building a reality.

"I joke that this project has taken a while in the making," she said. "Sometimes when you're hitting your head against the wall waiting for the wall to crack, it's reaffirming to hear that someone like the Ford Foundation thinks that what you're doing is on the right track."

Bryan Stevenson, a professor at New York University School of Law, received a prize for his work as founder and executive director of the Equal Justice Initiative. The Alabama-based organization provides legal representation to poor people denied effective representation or those whose race has led to bias or misconduct.

Other winners include: Jeremy Heimans, chief executive and co-founder of New York-based Purpose, a company that helps organizations to build a social movement and community and Kenya-based political cartoonist Godfrey Mwampembwa, who raises awareness of political and social issues through his satirical work.

Recipients are from across the U.S., Brazil, India and Peru, and work on topics ranging from women's rights to architecture. 

Mr. Ubiñas said the recipients are "not just thinkers."

"These are not small projects or boutique ideas," said Mr. Ubiñas. "These ideas have the potential to have national, global impact, to change how we approach pressing social problems and make life better for millions of people."