  Q: I have a 2003 VW New Beetle Convertible. The EPC light comes on every now and then. I can't feel anything different about how the car drives when it does come on. Is this something that could be dangerous?  

—Christina Galvin, Spring Lake, N.J.

A: My understanding is that this is a common problem on New Beetles of that vintage. EPC stands for electronic pedal control, and the EPC warning can indicate problems with mass air flow sensors, throttle bodies, brake switches and other parts. Often the warning is sporadic and isn't accompanied by noticeable problems in how the car runs, but the warning could indicate a serious condition that should be checked by a technician. 

  Q: I used to see many ads for engine oil additives such as Slick 50, which contain PTFE resins (liquid Teflon). Are these additives really good for your engine?  

—Fred Miller, Union, N.J.

A: Some products you mention were marketed to owners of older cars whose engines might be a bit "loose," having lost some of their tight tolerances to years of wear. Some engine and oil treatments were meant to help them run as if those tolerances had been restored, but I was never a big believer in them. Newer engines with vastly improved materials, more precise measurements and synthetic lubricants can run a lot longer with minimal maintenance. 

So I think many of the additives have become obscure to most consumers. Still, you may meet people who attest to the effectiveness of such engine brews, but I think an additive that supposedly "seals" one part of an engine from leaking is likely to clog another part.

  Q: My wife drives a 2003 G35 Infiniti. The dashboard buttons for radio and temperature don't work when she presses them. In fact, often when she is driving, the heat comes on by itself. We contacted several local mechanics and they said only the Infiniti dealer could solve the problem. We spoke with Infiniti and they want a lot of money just for a diagnostic. What do you think is wrong and what do you suggest we do?  

—Allen Virag, Valley Stream, N.Y.

A: I have read about problems with Infiniti dashboard controls and I think it's a common problem that is widely known. So you might approach your dealer with the knowledge that they probably have dealt with many similar complaints. Some drivers say that rather than spending more than $1,000 for the dealer service, they bought aftermarket kits designed to replace the dashboards.

  Q: I currently have a 2003 Honda Accord V-6 which I love. I want to trade it in for a Honda Odyssey. However, I have come to find out that only the Toyota Sienna is the only minivan on the market with AWD. Why do I need AWD? We live on a hill with a steep road that can be difficult to ascend if there is any amount of snow on the road surface. I did want to go with the Odyssey, but alas no AWD. By the way, I put snow tires on the front wheels of the Honda for the winter. They didn't always give enough traction to make the hill. Not enamored with the Sienna. What is the solution?   

—Chris Sophoclides Canandaigua, N.Y.

A: Minivan makers are surely missing out on many sales by not equipping the vans with all-wheel-drive. I have friends who recently bought a Toyota Sienna almost solely because of that traction-enhancing feature. The best alternative could be one of the many crossover vehicles from the Ford Explorer and Chevrolet Traverse to the Honda Pilot, which are a bit like minivans in disguise. Almost all of those offer all-wheel drive.

— Email mecar@wsj.com 