TOKYO—Japan's central bank ramped up provisions of emergency funds, offering 20 trillion yen (US$244.83 billion) in a wide range of operations, including same-day loans, in a bid to calm financial markets shaken by the country's natural and nuclear disasters. 

Tuesday's move underscored the Bank of Japan's efforts to ensure banks have enough liquidity to meet a surge in demand from companies and households scrambling for funds, as news of the worsening situation at nuclear facilities 250 kilometers north of Tokyo deepened worries about the economic consequences from Friday's 9.0-magnitude earthquake and 10-meter tsunami that crippled nuclear power plants. 

The BOJ offered to inject 5 trillion yen in same-day funds into the money market in the morning and received 3.6608 trillion yen in demand from financial firms. In the afternoon, it offered an additional 3 trillion yen in same-day funds and received 1.720 trillion yen in bids from banks. 

Same-day funds effectively make money available immediately to cash-strapped financial firms, avoiding the delay of a settlement period. The fund injections came as the overnight call loan rate rose touched 0.13% Tuesday morning, above the BOJ's policy target range of 0.0%-0.1%.

"The BOJ is likely to add loans again to stabilize the overnight call rate to around the 0.1% target," said  Susumu Kato, chief Japan economist at Crédit Agricole. "The bank will likely keep supplying, as funding demand is expected to remain strong at least for this week due to post-quake fears and ahead of the March 31 end of Japan's fiscal year," he said. 

The central bank said it will also buy about 2 trillion yen of Japanese government bonds via a reverse repurchase agreements. It was the second consecutive day the central bank announced such an operation. 

The bank also offered to provide 5 trillion yen of one-week loans against pooled collateral and another 5 trillion yen of similar one-month loans, receiving demand of 2.5715 trillion yen and 5.3588 trillion yen, respectively, from financial institutions.

The liquidity injections came after the BOJ's announcements on Monday that it would provide a total of 15 trillion yen in same-day funds—the largest amount ever—via three operations to alleviate panic in the money market. Those three operations received a combined 8.926 trillion yen of demand from financial firms. It also doubled the size of its asset-purchase program to 10 trillion yen. 

The scale of the fund injections this week "shows the bank's concerns over the huge negative impact of the earthquake on the economy and also illustrates cooperation with the government to prevent further yen rises, aiming for announcement effects on foreign-exchange players in overseas countries," said  Yasunari Ueno, chief market economist at Mizuho Securities. 

In its mnthly economic report for March, released Tuesday, Japan's central bank noted its worries about potential downside risks caused by the earthquake, though it said the nation's economy will eventually return to "a moderate recovery path." 

"The damage of the earthquake has been geographically widespread, and thus, for the time being, production is likely to decline and there is also concern that the sentiment of firms and households might deteriorate," the BOJ said in the report.

Monday's injections of funds and the plunge in Tokyo stocks prices pushed down the yen. But the currency remained stubbornly strong on Tuesday despite an even steeper fall in stock prices, keeping the Finance Ministry on edge about possible further damage to Japan's fragile export-reliant recovery. 

Finance Minister Yoshihiko Noda said the foreign-exchange market is relatively stable but that he will continue to closely watch the stock market, which he said appeared to be down on temporary factors. 

On Monday, BOJ Gov. Masaaki Shirakawa said the central bank will continue to supply funds, if needed, regardless of the results of the operations. 

"The short-term market is a starting point of all financial and economic activities, so the bank thinks that it's important to relieve any concerns regarding liquidity," Mr. Shirakawa said. 

 Arran Scott contributed to this article.  

 Write to  Megumi Fujikawa at megumi.fujikawa@dowjones.net 