Most of us would count ourselves blessed that we don't live in countries where people are being slaughtered and houses bombed. For photographers who cover war and other disasters for a living, however, such events are their bread and butter. They feel compelled to go looking for trouble. James Nachtwey, whose cameras may have pictured more human misery than anyone ever, once described the sensation to me as "the sweaty need to be there, on the ground, in the middle of an action, where a nation's history is being decided."

The deaths of Tim Hetherington and Chris Hondros in Libya two weeks ago have highlighted the costs paid every year by photographers who work in the thick of war while once again raising perennial doubts about the ultimate goals of the profession itself.

Why do so many young photographers accept the terrible risks? What is gained from bringing back images of corpses and of antagonists murdering one another? And how can photographers keep from becoming disinterested voyeurs to someone else's tragedy? 

A new feature film, "The Bang Bang Club," poses some of these uncomfortable questions. Even if he decides not to resolve them, screenwriter/director Steven Silver doesn't hide his mixed feelings about those who traffic in pictures of anguish and death. Mr. Silver has recognized, as did Oliver Stone in "Salvador" and Volker Schlöndorff in "Circle of Deceit," that the moral quandaries of the job make those who choose it interesting and divided souls. ("The Bang Bang Club" is currently in limited release and available on-demand from cable.)

Based on Greg Marinovich and João Silva's book, "The Bang Bang Club" concerns the co-authors' true adventures as South African photojournalists in concert with two comrades, Kevin Carter and Ken Oosterbroek. The group bonded in 1993-94 as they recorded street battles in Johannesburg between the Inkatha Zulus and the African National Congress supporters of Nelson Mandela. As the film states in its introduction, this black vs. black enmity was fueled by the apartheid government of the time to justify the need for white rule to maintain order.

The ranks of war photographers have been overwhelmingly filled by young white men (with notable exceptions such as Gerda Taro, Susan Meiselas and Lynsey Addario). This film fleshes out the type. Fellowship and competition drive them. They look out for each other and move around as a unit ("safety in numbers" explains one). But they also try to outdo each other in feats of daring and in bedding attractive women. 

The outcome of a bloody showdown is of less concern than whether they got the shots of violence that their newspaper or the world press will feature. As photographers, they can't effectively illustrate the roots of factionalism within the country. The big picture being impossible to capture, they must be happy with the little ones they see in their viewfinders. "You're in my frame" growls one of these territorial males to a rival as they both hover over a slain man. 

Every photojournalist on the scene of a disaster—man-made or natural—has to decide when to snap the shutter and when it's more humane to help those around you. Dusty Compton of the Tuscaloosa News, whose photograph of a tornado ripping through his city was circulated via the Associated Press, found himself in devastated neighborhoods before rescue teams arrived. Not knowing if people were still alive under the rubble, he confessed to wondering, "Should I be shooting photos or should I be lifting boards and bricks to see what was underneath it?"

"The Bang Bang Club" dramatizes these stark choices through the tortured figure of Kevin Carter (Taylor Kitsch). In the Sudan during its 1993 famine, he took a Pulitzer Prize-winning shot of a vulture perched behind a starving child. That he did not intervene or know what had happened to the girl after she appeared on front pages around the world exposed him to harsh criticism that may have contributed to his suicide. The film shows him circling the bird and child, looking for the best camera angle, behaving not unlike a vulture himself. 

In a couple of scenes, ANC supporters object to the freedom to work enjoyed by these young white men and not available to black photographers. Left unsaid is the possibility that shocking pictures of black-on-black violence reinforced a view of nonwhites that apartheid's upholders were eager to disseminate. 

If this was true, was the bravery needed to be in the Bang Bang Club worth the death of two of its members? The question hangs in the air at the end of the film. 

I did not know Chris Hondros. But the outpourings of respect and affection from his friends and colleagues after his death attest to his character. In my one encounter with Tim Hetherington last year at the School of Visual Arts, where I hosted a discussion about photography, politics and war, he was so modest and self-critical that I and the two other photographers were completely disarmed. He admitted that his still pictures functioned well at showing the effects of conflict but poorly in explaining its causes. He was the star of the evening. 

In "Restrepo," both in his book of photographs and in the film he co-directed with Sebastian Junger, Hetherington brought us as close as cameras have been to the daily terrors and boredom of being a soldier on the front lines. During his tours with a U.S. platoon assigned to defend a mountain pass in Afghanistan, he and Mr. Junger could easily have been killed. 

According to his friend Chris Boot, executive director of Aperture, Hetherington was "in the process of changing the possibilities of photojournalism." He wanted to combine video, photography and commentary and to distribute his reports from the field "through mainstream media, in art contexts and through social networks." 

What such an approach might have looked like, and how effective it might have been at presenting a fuller dimension of the world's troubles, we will never know. 

 Mr. Woodward is an arts critic in New York. 