The volume of mergers and acquisitions grew in 2010 by 25%, as bountiful credit markets supported corporate deal making amid wavering confidence in Western economies. 

Read the complete  Year-End Review report .

Always eager to forecast an uptick in business, deal makers say they expect mergers to increase in 2011, as companies look past the lingering economic uncertainty to address questions of their own long-term growth. A survey of top bankers shows that, roughly speaking, they expect deal volume to increase by at least 15% in 2011 from the previous year.

That is a welcome bit of optimism for this small, well-paid community of bankers and lawyers, whose fortunes have risen and fallen on deal volume. Since the middle part of 2008, the mergers-and-acquisitions business has been relatively slow.

"Companies and boards are being much more proactive on new growth initiatives," said  Chris Ventresca, co-head of North America M&A at J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. "We're sensing that the status quo isn't good enough."

Global mergers-and-acquisitions activity for 2010 was $2.74 trillion, compared with $2.2 trillion in 2009, according to data research firm Dealogic. The U.S. accounted for $874.7 billion of that volume, with 9,627 deals. Europe had $786.3 billion of deals and emerging markets, with 32% of the total activity, saw $899.3 billion in deals. For the final quarter of 2010, global deal volume rose 17% to $738.3 billion, from $630.3 billion the same period a year ago. Activity in the fourth quarter globally was down 4% from the third quarter of 2010. 

Pointing to an M&A market that saw a nearly 50% increase in deals of $500 million and up,  Gordon Dyal, the global head of M&A at Goldman Sachs Group Inc., noted that deal-making conditions were ripe this past year. He cited record high-yield bond issuance, stock markets that were mainly higher and relatively low borrowing rates. "All those signs indicate that we've got a decent M&A market," he said, adding that those conditions bode well for 2011.

Still, the year wasn't without substantial setbacks to CEO confidence, which shelved many deals. In May, several private-equity firms were in late-stage talks to take private payments processor  Fidelity National Information Services Inc.
FIS


0.22
%




 in a deal valued at about $15 billion, but those talks fell apart on price. British insurer  Prudential PLC's $35.5 billion deal for  AIA Group Ltd.
AAGIY


-1.05
%




, the Asian life-insurance unit of  American International Group Inc.,
AIG


0.30
%




 collapsed amid dissent from Prudential shareholders. And this past year's largest proposed transaction, the $40 billion hostile offer for  Potash Corp. of Saskatchewan
POT


1.00
%




 by  BHP Billiton Ltd., also got scuttled after Canadian regulators moved to block the deal.

Also denting deal-making sentiment: Some companies were still coping with the fallout from the financial crisis, and the May "flash crash" did little to alleviate concerns about the health of the markets. And the sovereign-debt crisis in Europe cast a cloud throughout the year.

As a result, 2010 lacked some of the headline-busting deals that are supposed to make the M&A business a glamorous place to work. Most companies opted for smaller, "bolt-on" acquisitions—transactions of up to $5 billion that had lower integration risk. For instance, in the fourth quarter, only 10 of the top 50 announced deals were above $5 billion, according to Dealogic data.

"The thing that surprised me was the scarcity of the megatransactions," said  Jeff Raich, managing director and co-founder of boutique investment bank Moelis & Co.

Among the handful of large deals that did get done:  Novartis AG finally wrapped up its deal to acquire the 23% stake in eye-care company  Alcon Inc. it didn't own already for almost $13 billion.  International Power snatched up France's GDF Suez for $21.5 billion. French pharmaceutical company  Sanofi-Aventis SA's $18.5 billion hostile pursuit of  Genzyme Corp. has run into 2011 as the parties continue to haggle over pricing.

Private equity made a strong comeback in 2010, as banks turned on their lending spigots again, and investor appetite for risk jump-started the junk-bond market, where buyout shops typically raise money for transactions. Buyout deals were up 84% in 2010 to $194.6 billion, compared to $105.5 billion in 2009. Still, leveraged buyouts rarely exceeded $4 billion because lenders weren't willing to rush back to the heady buyout boom days before the financial crisis, and private-equity firms still had to put up as much as 35% of their own cash to do a deal.

The $4.4 billion leveraged buyout of British manufacturer Tomkins by the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board and Onex Corp. was 2010's biggest private-equity deal, followed by the $4 billion buyout of  Del Monte Foods by a team led by Kohlberg Kravis & Roberts.

"Heading into 2011, the wind at our back is every bit as strong as it was coming into 2010," said  John Miller, head of the global financial sponsors investment banking group and the global industrials group at Barclays Capital, of the market for private-equity deals.

In Europe, the picture was much the same as in the U.S., with activity improving but restrained by concerns over the health of some of the region's economies. For the fourth quarter, the total volume of deals in the region rose 13% from the same period a year earlier, although the number fell 22%.

But there were bright spots, notably evidence that a trend bankers have long been predicting is finally coming to pass: the emergence of developing countries such as Russia and China as major deal makers.

In 2010, acquisitions involving the BRIC countries—Brazil, Russia, India and China—accounted for 53% of deals involving an "emerging market" company. Entities based in the Asia-Pacific region spent $147.8 billion to buy up targets in other regions as of Dec. 21, which is 47% higher than the $100.7 billion that U.S. and European companies invested in Asia during 2010. Deal making in Brazil reached a peak as well, with M&A volume reaching $150.4 billion—up 154% from the $60 billion of deals involving Brazilian companies in 2009.

That trend will gain in strength if Brazilian beef processor  JBS SA
JBSAY


-2.04
%




 is successful in its pursuit of U.S. food icon  Sara Lee Corp. And food isn't the only thing emerging-market companies are buying up: the telecommunications, finance, energy and mining sectors were high on their shopping lists this past year, too. In February, Indian wireless carrier Bharti Airtel paid $10.7 billion to buy Zain Africa. Russian mobile operator  VimpelCom Ltd.
VIP


0.69
%




 proposed to buy Weather Investments, owned by Egyptian tycoon Naguib Sawiris, for $6.5 billion. And China's  Cnooc Ltd spent $1.08 billion for a stake in Chespeake Energy Corp's Eagle Ford shale assets.

"There's likely to be a lot more cross-border and emerging-markets activity in 2011. That's what will keep a lot of us busy," said  Henrik Aslaksen, the global head of M&A at  Deutsche Bank AG in London.

Several bankers and lawyers are also betting that 2011 will see more ambitious—if not audacious—deals, as companies become inured to market volatility and become determined to use the cash that's earning little in interest sitting on their balance sheets, and take advantage of valuations that are still reasonable.

"Cash is building up at an impressive clip, and companies may be hesitant to deploy it in some of the traditional ways," such as dividends or stock buybacks, which would make the M&A sector a beneficiary, said  Laurence Grafstein, co-head of M&A at Rothschild. Moreover, "as banks look for prudent ways to earn returns in 2011, they may step up their willingness to lend into transactions more aggressively."

Cash, credit and confidence: all the factors are in place for a healthy M&A market in 2011, but deal makers are keeping an eye on Europe to see if the sovereign debt crisis that has hit Greece and Ireland will spread. That, along with a stubbornly high U.S. unemployment rate and tepid growth in gross domestic product, could keep companies from pursuing transformational deals.

"Right now, the easiest thing for companies to do is a deal that moves the needle but doesn't risk the whole company," said  Daniel Wolf, a partner at law firm Kirkland & Ellis LLP.

In global rankings of deal advisers,  Morgan Stanley
MS


0.99
%




 took the top spot for 2010 for advising on $594 billion of deals, followed by  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS


0.97
%




 with $579 billion.  Credit Suisse Group AG jumped three notches to take the third spot. Rounding out the top 10 were  J.P. Morgan Chase
JPM


1.40
%




 & Co.,  UBS AG,  Bank of America
BAC


0.65
%




 Corp,'s Bank of America Merrill Lynch,  Citigroup Inc.,
C


0.67
%




 Deutsche Bank AG,  Barclays
BCS


1.41
%




 PLC's Barclays Capital and  Lazard 
LAZ


-0.43
%




Ltd. 

Among law firms, Skadden Arps Slate Meagher & Flom finished first with $360.4 billion of deals to its credit, followed by Sullivan & Cromwell with $317.5 billion, according to Dealogic. Rounding out the top 10 were Simpson Thacher & Bartlett, Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton, Freshfields, Linklaters, Wachtell Lipton Rosen & Katz, Allen & Overy, Latham & Watkins and Weil Gotshal & Manges. 



 Write to  Anupreeta Das at anupreeta.das@wsj.com, Gina Chon at gina.chon@wsj.com and Dana Cimilluca at dana.cimilluca@wsj.com 