You don't need to actually be good to win a league. You just have to be better than the opposition for most of the season. 

Manchester United's progress in the Premier League this year seemed to underscore this fact, and after its dramatic 3-1 loss Sunday to Liverpool, the point is even more valid. The score stings, especially after a 2-1 defeat at Chelsea on Monday. But Arsenal, the Premier League's second-place club, was held to a scoreless home draw by Sunderland on Saturday, meaning United's lead was reduced by a single point. The gap now stands at three, though Arsenal has played one fewer match.

When United boss  Sir Alex Ferguson looks back on this game, he may well conclude that it was the kind of loss for which he could budget. United's lineups has been ravaged by injuries, while some of its key players have underperformed this season.

The goalkeeper,  Edwin van der Sar, turned 40 in October, and while he's had another productive campaign, he's retiring in June. Together with central defenders  Rio Ferdinand and Nemanja Vidic, he has formed the team's foundation. Yet both defenders were unavailable against Liverpool—Ferdinand through injury, Vidic by suspension—and so Sir Alex went with 21-year-old  Chris Smalling with just 15 Premier League starts under his belt and  Wes Brown, an oft-injured veteran who had not started a league game in nearly four months.

The midfield was arguably hit even harder by absences.  Wingers Antonio Valencia and Park Ji-Sung last played for the club in September and December, respectively, and  Darren Fletcher, usually an automatic choice in central midfield, was struck down by a virus and found himself on the bench. With Anderson, another potential starter, also injured, Sir Alex was forced to turn to the pedestrian  Michael Carrick and his golden oldies —37 year old  Ryan Giggs and 36 year old Paul Scholes—in midfield. Both have rightly been showered with superlatives for their longevity, but they can't be expected to produce on the regular basis the way they once did. 

Nani, the one member of the starting quartet who's a bonafide regular under normal circumstances, was also central to the game's outcome—and not in a good way. It was his wayward-clearing header that found its way to Dirk Kuyt, lying in wait in the United penalty area for Liverpool's second goal. (Kuyt had earlier opened the scoring and would later complete the hat-trick.) A few minutes later, Liverpool's  Jamie Carragher caught Nani with a horrific tackle, which referee  Phil Dowd only punished with a yellow card. It could easily have been a red, which would have given United a man advantage and a chance to claw its way back into the game with 45 minutes to go. To make matters worse, Nani injured a leg in the process and had to be replaced. 

Without Nani—who leads the Premier League in assists and, at this stage, is the team's creative force—United had few answers against a fired-up Liverpool side that has endured a difficult season, changing owners and managers and suffering the sale of  Fernando Torres, a former icon turned  Benedict Arnold. Anfield's legendary Kop stand was in full-throated splendor, serenading its heros with the usual fare of club anthems ("You'll Never Walk Alone" and "Fields of Anfield Road"), as well as a special rendition of "Happy Birthday" for its manager, "King"  Kenny Dalglish, who turned 60 on Friday.

When Sir Alex reflects on the defeat, he may well find that sometimes it's best for a team to take its licks and live to fight another day. The serious damage here wasn't the score. It was the loss of Nani—early indications suggest he'll be out for three weeks—before two home cup games: Arsenal in the FA Cup quarterfinal next Saturday and Marseille in the second leg of the Champions League knockout round the following Tuesday. The first leg finished as a scoreless draw.

But while Nani will be hard to replace, United boasts enough firepower, at least in theory, to ride out the storm.  Dimitar Berbatov is the top goalscorer in the Premier League, yet he doesn't always seem to enjoy Sir Alex's trust. (Saturday was his first league start in a month.) Wayne Rooney is enduring a horrendous season despite his highlight-reel overhead kick in the  Manchester Derby last month, but, sooner or later, he's expected to turn the corner. And young striker  Javier Hernandez has been one of the few truly bright spots this season.

Is this trio good enough to carry United to a record 19th English title, despite the depleted defense and underperforming midfield? As long as the opposition continues to miss opportunities to make up ground, like Arsenal did Saturday, the answer could well be yes.

Rooting for a team that isn't performing is like enduring the rocky part of a relationship with a loved one. You can rant, rave and boo. Or you can feign indifference. 

Juventus supporters chose the latter Saturday night, when they hosted Serie A-leading Milan. A whole section of the south stand, the traditional haven for the club's hardcore fans, was intentionally kept empty in the otherwise sold-out Olympic Stadium. It was a visual reminder that all was not well. The Ultras, as they are known, also unfurled a banner to make their feelings more obvious: "No more patience, all you get is silent indifference."

If it was designed to get some kind of reaction from the team, it did not work. Juve produced nothing offensively and capitulated to Milan in the second half, when  Rino Gattuso scored the only goal of the game. Italy's biggest and best-supported club is now a whopping 20 points off the pace, back in seventh place. And barring a minor miracle, once again, there will be no Champions League for the Bianconeri next season, which may bring even more of the silent treatment.

—   Gabriele Marcotti is the world soccer columnist for The Times of London and a regular broadcaster for the BBC. 

