"I was raised with falcons and eagles," a Kazakhstani falconer says mournfully in "Feathered Cocaine" (2010), a documentary by the Icelandic directors Thorkell Hardarson and Örn Marino Arnarson, before describing how visitors from the Middle East cleared an area of golden eagles with Kalashnikovs to make their falconry easier. It's just one of the global issues tackled by the latest installment of Scandinavia House's popular series "New Nordic Cinema," which begins Wednesday and will present shorts and features from Denmark, the Faroe Islands, Finland and Iceland. (The series offered movies from Norway and Sweden in fall 2010 and will pick up again this fall, though the countries and films have not yet been selected.)

"Feathered Cocaine" follows an eccentric falconry expert and trainer who now runs a conservation group and is passionately devoted to stopping falcon smuggling and out-of-control genetic pollution and hybrids. The film explores the Middle Eastern falconry craze not only as a prized tradition, but as a means for terrorists to network, veering into stranger territory when it addresses the possible location of Osama bin Laden and the prospect of tracking him through electronic devices used in falconry.

In "The Red Chapel" ("Det røde kapel," 2009), another colorful documentary, albeit one with a jaw-dropping premise, the Danish investigative journalist, TV host and provocateur Mads Brügger remarks that "comedy is the soft spot of all dictatorships." Mr. Brügger enlisted two young Korean-born Danish comedians, Simon Jul and Jacob Nossell, to travel to North Korea in the guise of the titular theater troupe, having convinced the regime of their enthusiasm for cultural exchange. Mr. Brügger initially wonders why they are allowed to stage their crude act, but the answers become increasingly clear, as does the strain on the comedians—especially Mr. Nossell, who has a handicap that his hosts urge him to hide during his performances. Whether their loopy mockery was courageous or foolhardy, the danger was real, with secret police reviewing the footage every night.

The event's lineup of fiction films includes several stories that touch on the impact of international conflicts on the Nordic region, all anchored by strong female characters. In Danish director Annette K. Olesen's "Little Soldier" ("Lille soldat," 2008), Trine Dyrholm rivetingly portrays Lotte, a burly, laconic woman recently returned from military service in Afghanistan. Emotionally shut down and at loose ends, Lotte accepts a job ferrying hookers for her shady, once-estranged father in his Jaguar. At first she observes the proceedings sardonically, but as she bonds with her father's Nigerian prostitute girlfriend, Lily (Lorna Brown), she awkwardly begins to change her life.

Kathrine Windfeld's "The Escape" ("Flugten," 2009), also from Denmark, stars Iben Hjejle, a warm, willowy actress familiar to English-speaking audiences from "High Fidelity" and "Defiance." Ms. Hjejle plays Rikke, a journalist who is kidnapped and maimed by Afghan terrorists, lives to tell her story in a best-selling book, and then grapples with a moral quandary when a young man who helped her escape surfaces as a refugee in her native country. The suspenseful narrative paints a not-always-flattering picture of Denmark's treatment of refugees, though the moody tone and cutthroat media milieu are more convincing than some of the plot twists. Rikke's affair with her less idealistic married ex-boyfriend, Thomas (Lars Mikkelsen), treads familiar ground, but the actors generate quiet electricity.

Jörn Donner, the founder of the Finnish Film Archive and the producer of Ingmar Bergman's "Fanny and Alexander," directed yet another drama in the series about a daring woman entangled with a military conflict. "The Interrogation" ("Kuulustelu," 2009) is inspired by the real-life experiences of Kerttu Nuorteva, a Soviet spy of Finnish descent who parachuted into Finland during World War II.

The Faroe Islands' cinematic tradition has been limited to a few features. But recently younger Faroese directors have been nurturing a small but growing film culture. A program of shorts highlighting their efforts includes Marianna Mørkøre and Rannvá Káradóttir's "Magma" (2010), a Super-8 film transferred to video that depicts ritualistic choreography set amid the islands' dramatic landscape, and Heidrikur á Heygum's "Waves—A Portrait of Maria á Heygum" ("Aldur," 2010), about an elderly woman who has bathed in the frigid Atlantic daily for nearly half a century. These movies promise to serve as a reminder of the continuing importance of place in a globalized world.