NEW YORK—U.S. stocks fell slightly as investors fretted over the potential for more tightening measures from China following stronger-than-expected economic growth from the country, but improvements in U.S. jobs and housing helped limit the decline.

The Dow Jones Industrial Average closed down 2.49 points, or 0.02%, to 11822.80.  Caterpillar
BAC


2.28
%




 was the measure's worst performer, falling 2% after the heavy-equipment company said it has received requests from the Department of Justice for additional information about its proposed $7.6 billion acquisition of  ﻿mining-equipment company  Bucyrus International. Investors also worried that with 11 plants in China, Caterpillar could also be squeezed by further tightening in China. 

Concerns over further tightening in China also dented oil majors  Exxon Mobil
XOM


-0.22
%




 and  Chevron
CVX


-0.64
%




 and aluminum giant  Alcoa.
AA


-0.65
%




 Exxon Mobil fell 0.6%, Chevron slipped 0.3%, and Alcoa declined 0.5%. 

However,  Home Depot
BA


-0.30
%




 and  Wal-Mart Stores
WMT


-0.39
%




 kept the Dow's gains in check, boosted by the stronger-than-expected employment and housing data. Home Depot climbed 2.4%, while Wal-Mart added 1.7%.  J.P. Morgan Chase
JPM


-0.08
%




 was also strong, up 2.4%. 

The Nasdaq Composite dropped 21.07, or 0.77%, to 2704.29. The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index shed 1.66, or 0.13%, to 1280.26, with its material and energy sectors leading to the downside while consumer stocks gained on the U.S. data. 

The declines across the material and energy sectors came as commodities weakened on concerns about the impact to demand if China announces more policy moves after data showed its economy unexpectedly accelerated in the fourth quarter of 2010. 

While China's strong economic performance reflects improving demand for Chinese goods in the U.S. and elsewhere, it adds to expectations that Beijing will feel the need to yank the reins back harder to fight inflation. That has worried global investors, who fear that Beijing might overcorrect and sap the strength of an economy that has accounted for a huge share of global growth in recent years.

"The concern is with the inflation risk growing," said  Barry Knapp, managing director of equity research at Barclays Capital. "They'll have to tighten policy quite a bit more. The fact of the matter is that the broad level of prices are starting to rise in China, and they're going to have to take more significant steps." 

Earlier in the session, stocks had been much lower on the worries, but "as the day went on and people found that there wasn't any continuing liquidation in the momentum-trading stocks and that the fundamentals held pretty well, the market just lost its downward pressure," said  Stephen Lieber, chief investment officer at Alpine Mutual Funds. 

He said the market was supported by a round of U.S. economic data that "were fundamentally supportive of modest optimism." 

U.S. economic data mostly topped expectations. The number of U.S. workers filing new claims for unemployment benefits fell by more than expected last week, sales of previously occupied homes rose more than expected last month, and the index of leading economic indicators also improved more than expected. 

However, the Philadelphia Fed's business-activity index slipped to 19.3 in January versus a 20.8 reading in December, missing economists' expectations for a reading of 19.5. The survey showed employment improved sharply, but price pressures were also building. 

Among stocks in focus,  Morgan Stanley
AXP


-0.05
%




 added 4.6%. The bank's fourth-quarter profit rose 35% as revenue climbed across its investment banking, wealth and asset-management businesses from a year ago. The company's chief financial officer,  Ruth Porat, said the firm is "encouraged by the pace of recovery" in capital-markets activity. 

  Wendy's/Arby's Group
WEN


-0.19
%




 climbed 6.9% after the restaurant company confirmed it is exploring strategic alternatives for its Arby's sandwich chain, including a possible sale of the business. 

Dillard's jumped 12% after the regional department store said it plans to form a real-estate investment trust to have broader access to debt and equity markets, according to a regulatory filing. 

 Write to  Donna Kardos Yesalavich at donna.yesalavich@dowjones.com 