ATHENS—Greece said that the arrest in New York of the chief of the International Monetary Fund,  Dominique Strauss-Kahn, would have no impact on the government's resolve to fix the country's public finances. 

"We have a specific program that the IMF also takes part in, and we are continuing to implement that program," Greek government spokesman  George Petalotis said. "As such, it is not an issue of individual personalities, it is an issue of institutional arrangements."

New York police on Sunday charged Mr. Strauss-Kahn with attempted rape, criminal sexual act and unlawful imprisonment. Mr. Strauss-Kahn was taken into police custody on Saturday night after being removed from an Air France plane bound for Paris. A law enforcement official said Mr. Strauss-Kahn allegedly forced a cleaning woman onto his bed and sexually assaulted her at around 1 p.m. Saturday inside his room at the Sofitel Hotel near Times Square.

Greek officials privately conceded that if Mr. Strauss-Kahn is proven guilty, it would amount to a major blow for country's search for allies if it needs further financial aid.

During a visit to Athens in December the IMF chief had been highly critical of other European leaders for not reacting more quickly to the euro-zone debt crisis, and had lauded Greece for its reform efforts.

Mr. Strauss-Kahn also is on friendly terms with Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou. He has been a supporter of Greece's reform efforts and was instrumental in helping to hammer out the €110 billion ($155.18 billion) bailout package with the European Union and IMF in May 2010 to keep Greece out of default.

Greece cut its deficit by roughly a third to 10.5% of gross domestic product last year. But so far it has failed to convince investors that it will be able to service its giant public debt and dispel fears that Greece may be forced into a debt restructuring—something the government has repeatedly denied.

But faced with prohibitively high borrowing costs on international credit markets, Greek officials believe that the country will need further aid to help finance its debt in 2012 and 2013. This is expected to become clear after an IMF audit of the Greek budget next month.

Mr. Strauss-Kahn had publicly rejected talk of a Greek debt restructuring. But Greece remained hopeful that the IMF would agree that Greece needs more time to repay its debts.

The arrest came as Mr. Strauss-Kahn was due to meet German Chancellor Angela Merkel on Sunday to discuss Greece's finances, among other things. He was also scheduled to participate in talks with euro-zone finance ministers in Brussels Monday and Tuesday, where possible extra aid for Athens will be discussed.

Outside the government, Mr. Strauss-Kahn has been broadly criticized by protest groups and the media as a co-architect of harsh austerity measures imposed on Greece in exchange for last year's bailout.

During an protest strike against government reforms earlier this year, an effigy of Mr. Strauss-Kahn was burned in front of parliament. Public opinion polls show many Greeks blame the IMF for the country's current financial problems and recession.

Several Greek media outlets have also highlighted the IMF's own spending habits, focusing on the high-priced office that the fund rents in an upscale district of Athens, as well as Mr. Strauss-Kahn's pricey hotel bill during his last visit to the Greek capital.

 Write to  Alkman Granitsas at alkman.granitsas@dowjones.com and Costas Paris at costas.paris@dowjones.com 