John "Sonny" Franzese, a convicted mobster and major figure in New York City's mafia history, was given eight years for extortion, a penalty that could effectively serve as a life sentence for the 93-year-old.

The sentence, handed down by U.S. District Judge  Brian Cogan in Brooklyn federal court, was less than the 12 years prosecutors sought. Mr. Franzese faced a maximum of 15 years on the charges, which alleged that he shook down Manhattan strip clubs and a Long Island pizza restaurant.

  Richard Lind, an attorney for Mr. Franzese, argued before the sentencing that a long sentence would be pointless and tantamount to a life sentence. When the judge asked Mr. Franzese if he had anything to say prior to being sentenced, he uttered, "I didn't get a fair…" before Mr. Lind stopped him from talking by covering the microphone.

Mr. Franzese, who regularly took in performances by  Frank Sinatra and  Sammy Davis Jr., has a long criminal history as an underboss in the Colombo crime family. His first arrest, on an assault charge, came in 1938. He spent his life in and out of prison.

"This was certainly a legendary New York gangster," said  Jerry Capeci, who's written on the city's five crime families for decades. "He had his hands in a lot of legitimate businesses, from the record industry to bars and nightclubs. But he also had a reputation of violence and as a guy who got away with murder."

Indeed, prosecutors had an FBI agent testify Friday, citing a taped conversation in which Mr. Franzese said he played a role in 60 gangland killings. 

According to the agent, Vincent D'Agostino, Mr. Franzese said he considered putting out a hit for his own son,  John Franzese Jr., who had testified against him and acted as an FBI informant. 

Mr. Lind, who said he plans to appeal the sentence, suggested that his client's talks were simply empty boasting. 

Over the years, as Mr. Franzese became one of the city's best known mobsters, he also developed into one of law enforcement's biggest thorns.

  Joe Coffey, a retired NYPD detective who dealt with mafia investigations, said Mr. Franzese was a hard catch. 

"Even with his old age, it's a big deal to put him away," he said of the sentencing. "He's the epitome of a criminal."

He recalled a time where detectives were trailing Mr. Franzese into Jahn's, a now-defunct ice cream parlor in Queens, during the dead of winter. The detectives watched the man take his coat off and place it on a chair. They assumed he'd stay for a while before coming out, presumably allowing them to pick him up. They retreated to their warm car and waited about 20 minutes for him to come out.

The authorities, still seeing the coat on the chair, assumed he couldn't have left. But when they walked in to figure out what had taken him so long, they found that he'd escaped through a separate exit, apparently knowing the authorities were after him.

 Write to  Chris Herring at chris.herring@wsj.com 