When it comes to the Yankees, it's always been all about the money. But in 2011, they'll be spending less of it than they have in years. 

At the moment, the payroll stands at $189 million, according to team sources, and this Yankee team should open the season with a payroll under $200 million for the first time since 2007. 

 The opening day payroll should rise slightly depending on which veteran players among a group including Bartolo Colon, Freddy Garcia and Eric Chavez make the roster. That could drive the total to anywhere from $190 million to $193 million. 

Regardless, it's a significant drop from 2010, when the opening day payroll was roughly $206 million. It's also less than both 2009 and 2008, when the payroll topped $200 million. 

Assuming the Yankees keep either Colon ($900,000 base salary) or Garcia ($1.5 million base salary) and take Chavez ($1.4 million base salary) north with them as expected, they will see the payroll rise to the $192-$193 million level. 



The Yankees made one major free agent signing this winter, reliever Rafael Soriano, at $10 million for 2011.

 That deal was consummated over the objections of GM Brian Cashman, who wanted to save his fiscal bullets for another day,

It should be noted that if the Yankees had signed their prime free agent target, Cliff Lee, and stayed away from Soriano, their payroll would likely have been exactly what it has been in previous years—just under $210 million. So they're not at $189 million for lack of effort. 

While they didn't land Lee, the Yankees didn't quite sit this winter out, re-signing Derek Jeter and Mariano Rivera to deals worth more than $80 million total.

After months of protracted and often contentious negotiations, the Yankees agreed to a three-year deal with Jeter worth $51 million guaranteed, with an option for a fourth year that could take the guarantees as high as $56 million. Jeter's new deal actually lessens his impact on the Yankee payroll.

Despite the smaller payroll, the Yankees should be hit with major league baseball's luxury tax for the eighth straight year. 

The luxury tax, which discourages teams from spending too much on player salary, was paid by the Yankees and the Red Sox this past season. Both clubs, who were the only ones to pay the tax last year, figure to pay it again this year. 

The luxury tax threshold for the 2011 season is $178 million. As repeat offenders, the Yankees will be taxed at a rate of 40 percent on all dollars spent above that mark. 

The luxury tax is calculated on the average annual value of each long-term contract. Then players' medical benefits are factored in. 

Team sources said the benefit figures are not yet finalized, but they are usually upwards of at least $10 million.

 Assuming the payroll as calculated for luxury tax purposes is roughly $205 million, the Yankees would be starting the season facing a luxury tax payment in the neighborhood of $10 million.

The luxury tax figures will not be finalized until after the 2011 season, however, when in-season moves and performance incentives figure to drive up that number. 

The Yankees have routinely paid $20 million or more in luxury tax in recent seasons, but their $18 million bill for 2010 was the lowest since 2003, sources said. 

The team-by-team breakdown of tax money paid to Major League Baseball.