The 28 NATO nations agreed that the alliance would take over command of the operation to enforce a no-fly zone over Libya, a move the U.S. had advocated. NATO is expected to agree to expand its role to take the lead in all military operations in Libya soon. Military commanders have said the focus of U.S. and coalition air patrols had shifted from only enforcing a no-fly zone to hitting the Gadhafi regime's ground forces where they are poised to attack civilians. But as the coalition of nations fighting Gadhafi continued to pound targets, airstrikes on his ground forces have so far failed to end their siege of the key western city of Misrata, prompting residents to flee. Russia's former ambassador to Libya said Gadhafi, who remained defiant in televised addresses, is surrounded by aides willing to fight with him to the end, but can't hold off Western-led forces for more than a few months. The U.S. is considering providing arms to Libyan rebels, a senior U.S. diplomat said. Earlier in the week, a two-man crew safely ejected before a malfunctioning U.S. jet crashed during a mission. 

Japanese officials said a breach involving one reactor at the damaged Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power complex was responsible for a dangerous radiation leak. That further complicated the protracted and perilous efforts to bring the plant under control, even as workers failed to restore cooling systems at the six-reactor complex, a key goal. Revelations that the facility has a history of mechanical and operational flaws, and regulators' having ignored the vulnerability at existing reactors, came to light. Tokyo Electric Power, which operates the stricken plant, is seeking about $25 billion in loans for repairs at power stations damaged by the March 11 earthquake and tsunami. The government, already weighed down with debt, said damage from the disaster could reach $300 billion. More countries are blocking the import of food products from the Japanese prefectures hit by the nuclear crisis, as the government found more radioactive materials in food and drinking water. A government official said Japan had little choice but to expand nuclear power, saying the alternative is "blackouts." 

Increase in the number of antigovernment protests associated with a 10% rise in global food prices. Despotic leaders, entrenched inequality and new forms of communication have all played a role in the political turmoil now shaking the Middle East. New research by economists at the International Monetary Fund points to another likely contributor: global food prices. Looking at food prices and instances of political unrest from 1970 through 2007, the economists find a significant relationship between the two in low-income countries, a group that includes Tunisia, Egypt, Sudan and Yemen. To be exact, a 10% increase in international food prices corresponds to 0.5 more antigovernment protests over the following year in the low-income world, a twofold increase from the annual average. Given the recent trend in food prices, leaders of low-income countries, including China, might have reason for concern. In February, global food prices were up 61% from their most recent low in December 2008, according to the IMF. 

 Mark Whitehouse 

Bahrain warned Iran that an escalation in the dispute over its crackdown on a Shiite uprising could lead to "conflict." Iran, a supporter of Shiite movements in Iraq and Lebanon, has denounced the Sunni-ruled kingdom's decision to allow Saudi troops into the country to help suppress protests calling for the monarchy's downfall. Thousands of protesters demanding political liberalization marched in cities across Syria Friday, an unprecedented display of public dissent that sparked violent clashes with security forces and left dozens dead and injured, according to witnesses and news media reports. Rocket attacks by Gaza militants on Israeli cities followed a bombing in Jerusalem that killed one, rocket attacks in Beersheba and Ashdod, and the killing of four Palestinian civilians. Israel appeared to be limiting its fire in an effort to avoid a broader conflict with Hamas that could feed into the unrest sweeping the Arab world. 

Yemen's president and the country's leading general are hitting snags on an attempted political settlement in which both would resign in favor of a civilian-led transitional government. President Saleh has lost the support of more than half the country's top military commanders and powerful tribal and religious leaders. The political crisis escalated this week amid bloody crackdowns against protesters and new laws that suspend the constitution and provide for the arrest of opponents. 

Portugal's premier resigned after opposition parties voted down an austerity package, pushing borrowing costs to unaffordable levels and threatening to force the country to follow Greece and Ireland in seeking a bailout. Portugal's plight now puts Spain into the bailout spotlight. 

Canada's opposition parties toppled the ruling Conservative minority government of Harper in a historic parliamentary finding of contempt, which doubled as a vote of no confidence and set the stage for the country's fourth national election in seven years. 

BP came within 1.4 inches of preventing the worst offshore oil spill in U.S. history, engineers hired by U.S. investigators said in a new report, blaming the design of the well's blowout preventer rather than misuse or maintenance. They found that the force of the explosion in last year's Deepwater Horizon disaster in the Gulf of Mexico bent the drill pipe, knocking it off center and jamming shears meant to cut through pipe and seal the well. Drilling rigs around the world depend on blowout preventers, most with the same basic design as the Deepwater Horizon's. The report helps BP. A separate finding thwarted BP Chief Executive Bob Dudley's efforts to revive the company's fortunes in the aftermath of the spill, as an arbitration tribunal blocked its $16 billion partnership with Russian state-run oil company Rosneft to explore for oil in the Arctic. The decision could also mark a setback for Igor Sechin, Russia's powerful deputy prime minister and Rosneft chairman, who has sought to attract billions of dollars of foreign investment into Russia's oil sector and who placed his personal imprimatur on the deal. 

The Hispanic population grew faster than expected and accounted for more than half of the nation's growth over the past decade, with the group's increase driven by births and immigration, the Census Bureau said. Meanwhile, in Detroit, the flight of middle-class African-Americans from the city to the suburbs fueled an exodus that slashed the city's population by 25% in the past decade to 713,777, according to new Census Bureau data, the city's lowest population level since the 1910 census

Bernanke in April will start holding quarterly, televised news conferences, in the Federal Reserve's latest effort to better explain its actions.

Sales of previously owned home fell 9.6% in February, with the median price, $156,100, the lowest in nine years. That could bring steep discounts, which with low interest rates could finally push some buyers off the fence as the real estate industry prepares for its busiest season. Over in the commercial real estate market, moves by budget-minded governments to cut back on office space are dragging on the sector's recovery. The biggest impact is likely to come at the state and local levels.

A prosecutor in the criminal case against Barry Bonds said people close to the retired baseball slugger would testify that he knowingly used steroids and that they changed his body. His is the highest-profile case stemming from a seven-year government probe of sports doping that has ensnared Olympic gold-medalists, track coaches and others.

The Obama administration has revised rules to let investigators hold domestic-terror suspects longer than others without giving them a Miranda warning in "exceptional cases," significantly expanding exceptions to the instructions that have governed the handling of criminal suspects for more than four decades. The rules mark another step back from pre-election criticism of unorthodox counterterror methods.

Social Security's disability fund will run out in four to seven years without federal intervention, according to government auditors. Separately, public employees are retiring at a quickening pace around the country, fearful of losing benefits that state and local governments are targeting. It's a mixed blessing for the governments, which need to save money but rely on these veterans to maintain the quality of their public services. 

Former Minnesota Gov. Pawlenty formed a presidential exploratory committee, taking a formal step that could prompt other Republicans to declare their intentions. Most polls show his national support in the low single digits, behind Palin and Gingrich and far behind Huckabee and Romney, who has begun a 15-city push to secure commitments from the big-money fund-raisers known as bundlers.

The effort in Ohio to restrict union rights is being scaled back on concerns it is vulnerable to legal challenges and a backlash by voters.

AT&T said it would buy T-Mobile USA from Deutsche Telekom for $39 billion in cash and stock, a move that would create the largest wireless carrier in the U.S., with nearly 130 million customers, and shift the competitive landscape of the American industry. In stitching together the second- and fourth-largest U.S. mobile carriers, AT&T is showing a fearless attitude toward U.S. regulators, who will be carefully scrutinizing the largest planned merger deal of 2011. T-Mobile has long been an antagonist of AT&T and chief rival Verizon Wireless, offering low prices that have kept pressure on rates. The combined carriers would be able to make an estimated $40 billion in cost cuts, AT&T said. The moves would probably involve thousands of job losses. 

NRG Energy said its plans to build two big reactors at its South Texas nuclear plant could be delayed or even canceled in light of earthquake-related failures at a Japanese nuclear plant. Any setback would be the most tangible repercussion so far on the U.S. nuclear industry from the nuclear-plant disaster in Japan. Separately, the shutdown of two factories by Japan's earthquake took out a quarter of the world's supply of silicon wafers, the building blocks of computer chips. Inventories of the wafers, as well as another important product—BT resin, used to make printed circuit boards—each seem to be holding up, but other disruptions had a more immediate impact. The world's auto makers, for instance, have had trouble coping with the shutdown of a Hitachi factory north of Tokyo that makes airflow sensors used to measure the amount of air coming into engines.

Google's six-year struggle to bring all the world's books to the Internet suffered another big setback at the hands of a federal judge in Manhattan. The judge rejected a 2008 settlement that Google forged with authors and publishers to make millions of books available online. 

Research In Motion posted a 32% jump in quarterly profit, but the BlackBerry maker warned of lower earnings and revenue in the current period. The Waterloo, Ontario, company also said it plans to allow Android applications to run on its PlayBook tablet computer, due out next month. The move will greatly expand the number of apps available on the PlayBook. 

Groupon's president and chief operating officer said he is stepping down from his position at the fast-growing Internet company in the coming months. 

ConocoPhillips said it will sell an additional $5 billion to $10 billion in assets over the next two years and said it will use the proceeds to fund its buyback and capital-spending programs. Chief Executive Jim Mulva said the company plans to sell a total of $12 billion to $17 billion in assets in a three-year period, including at least $1 billion in refining and marketing properties this year.

Federal regulators are blaming Wall Street's biggest firms for the collapse of five institutions at the heart of the nation's credit-union industry and are seeking to recoup tens of billions in losses on securities that doomed the five. The National Credit Union Administration has threatened to sue Goldman Sachs Group, Bank of America's Merrill Lynch unit, Citigroup and J.P. Morgan Chase unless they refund more than $50 billion of mortgage-backed securities sold to the five institutions, as regulators flex their legal muscles against executives, directors and outsiders blamed for the demise of financial institutions during the crisis. In other derivatives news, Fannie Mae was warned in a 2006 internal report of abuses in the way lenders and their law firms handled foreclosures, long before regulators launched investigations into the mortgage industry's practices. The report could add ammunition to those calling for stronger regulation of mortgage servicers. And in Germany, the nation's highest civil court ruled that Deutsche Bank failed to properly advise a client of the risks of interest-rate swaps, in a verdict that could trigger a host of judgments against the bank and lead to greater restrictions in the sale of derivatives in that nation. 

Gold prices hit another Comex record and oil surpassed $105 a barrel this week, spurred on by turmoil in Libya and the Middle East. Investors worry that high crude prices could temper the economic recovery, adding to gold's allure. The Dow industrials advanced 3.1% on the week, ending at 12220.59, its biggest weekly percentage gain since July. Japan's Nikkei climbed 3.6%, its best weekly performance since November.

Citigroup will reinstate its dividend at a penny a share after a 1-for-10 reverse stock split. Without the split, the payout would have been just one-tenth of a cent. The move comes after the Fed allowed some banks to resume dividends for the first time since the financial crisis. Bank of America was the first lender to acknowledge that it didn't receive approval to raise its dividend.