The tables have turned on central banks in the developed world.

For years, their actions reverberated through the developing world. Now, as inflation builds in places like China, India and Brazil, and the risk rises that these countries' central banks are behind the curve in that fight, it is the Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank and others that are grappling with the aftershocks.

This reversal of fortunes weighed on central bankers, political leaders, business executives and economists who gathered in Davos, Switzerland, for the World Economic Forum, which wrapped up Sunday.

Right now, central banks in the West are hoping that rising prices for oil, grains, and other commodities—driven by demand in emerging markets—will prove isolated and transitory. But officials have become increasingly worried that commodity price gains could persist and cause prices to rise for a broad range of consumer goods.

They also worry that price increases in areas such as gasoline and food could cause a shift in household expectations in Europe or the U.S. Driven by experience to expect little inflation, consumers might begin to expect more inflation as they see prices rise at the pump and the grocery store. A shift in expectations could become a self-fulfilling prophecy that results in continually rising consumer prices.

This would present a dilemma. If inflation takes off in the West, central bankers would have to combat it by raising interest rates to cool demand. But that's the last thing they want to do while their own economies are still weak and recovering from financial shocks.

"If it's a longer-term rise in inflation, the answer is that you have to run tighter policies to deal with the inflation. That may be uncomfortable, but inflation really matters and we have to prevent it rising," said Stanley Fischer, governor of the Bank of Israel and former deputy managing director of the International Monetary Fund.

Until recently, the Fed had been more preoccupied with the risk of deflation—a fall in the overall level of consumer prices—rather than inflation.

The U.S. and Europe could go in different directions. In public comments recently, ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet has signaled growing concern about inflation, which could mean interest-rate increases.

Fed officials, on the other hand, believe that underlying inflation in the U.S. is still very low. U.S. consumer prices excluding food and energy were up 0.8% in December from a year earlier, well below the Fed's informal 2% goal. That could give the Fed the comfort it needs to keep interest rates near zero for a while. Another U.S. worry is that higher food and energy prices could sap household disposable incomes and slow economic growth, making interest-rate increases to tame inflation even less appealing.

The roots of the currentinflation spurt are a matter of disagreement among central bankers. Bank of Canada Governor Mark Carney was outspoken at the Davos meetingsinurginged Chinese officials to shift the policy of linking their currency, the yuan, to the U.S. dollar. This strategyhas caused China'sown interest rates to be low and is helping to spur its economy to overheat. "There certainly are central banks that are behind the curve," he said in an interview. "And there are certainly parts of the world where inflation is running substantially above desirable levels."

On Sunday, China's central-bank governor warned that the People's Bank of China had to be vigilant about inflation. Speaking on the sidelines of meetings in Kyoto,Zhou Xiaochuan said that Chinese price growth slowed slightly in December, but signaled that it had more room to climb. 

In the developing world, the Fed is widely seen as the inflation culprit because it has pushed interest rates to zero and pumped trillions of dollars into the global financial system through a policy known as quantitative easing.

The disconnect in world views means the days of coordinated global action to save the world economy in 2008 now look long gone. "I don't think there's much hope of international coordination on the issue of how to deal with rises in commodity prices," Mr. Fischer said. "Each country is going to do what it thinks best for itself."

 Write to  Jon Hilsenrath at jon.hilsenrath@wsj.com 