TRIPOLI, Libya—Col. Moammar Gadhafi's forces shelled the besieged city of Misrata on Sunday, pressing a deadly offensive to dislodge rebels in the wake of North Atlantic Treaty Organization airstrikes that Libyan officials said killed a son and three grandchildren of the leader.

Mobs protesting Saturday night's NATO assault on a Gadhafi family compound vandalized the British and Italian embassies, the U.S. consulate and a United Nations office in Tripoli early Sunday. The U.N. withdrew its 12 Tripoli-based international staffers from Libya. Britain, whose embassy buildings were badly burned, ordered the expulsion of Libya's ambassador to London.

The bombing marked the sharpest escalation yet of a campaign to pressure the Libyan leader from power, and it raised questions about the scope of NATO's U.N. Security Council mandate to protect civilians from attacks by Col. Gadhafi's forces on rebel-held cities.

Libyan officials called the airstrikes an assassination attempt on Col. Gadhafi, who they said was in the compound but escaped harm, and an attack on a residential neighborhood of Tripoli. The leader's 29-year-old son, Saif al-Arab Gadhafi, was reported killed while hosting a family gathering. Two of his nieces, aged 5 months and 2 years; a 2-year-old nephew, and an adult friend also died in the blasts, the officials said. 

There was no sign that the NATO bombing had curbed the Libyan government's practice of shelling civilian areas involved in a 10-week-old uprising against Col. Gadhafi's rule. 

On Sunday, government forces shelled the port of Misrata, the main rebel stronghold in western Libya, killing two port security guards and striking close to a Maltese ship as it unloaded food and medical supplies, witnesses reported. Last week government forces tried to mine Misrata's harbor to close the city's only link to the outside, NATO officials said.

Medical workers in Misrata said 12 people were killed in the long-range shelling Sunday.

Track the latest events in Libya.

Track events day by day in the region.

See the level of unrest, plus the economic and politic status of some countries across North Africa and the Middle East.

Popular demonstrations in Tunisia toppled a president and spread to countries across the region. See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

Thousands of Libyans have been killed since the revolt began in mid-February and eventually turned into an imbalanced war between a band of novice rebel fighters and Col. Gadhafi's well-armed government forces.

U.S. and NATO officials have insisted that killing the Libyan leader isn't an aim of their month-old air campaign. But in recent days, they have vowed to step up strikes on the instruments of his power, including broadcasting facilities and command centers in the capital.

The alliance said Sunday it had carried out a "precision strike" against "a known command and control building." In a statement, the NATO mission's operational commander, Lt. Gen. Charles Bouchard, said he was aware of the reports of Gadhafi family deaths but added: "All NATO's targets are military in nature and have been clearly linked to the Gadhafi regime's systematic attacks on the Libyan population and populated areas. We do not target individuals."

The Pentagon said Sunday that it had no independent evidence to confirm reports of the deaths.

Gerard Le Clouerec, a private French orthopedic surgeon in Tripoli who examined the bodies at the request of Libyan officials and studied prior photographs of Saif al-Arab Gadhafi, said he had concluded that the leader's son was "most probably" one of the dead. "I can't say 100% yes," he told reporters, "but from the physiology of the face and other indicators, [I would say] it's that person." 

Libyan government spokesman Moussa Ibrahim said the attack was neither permitted under international law nor morally justifiable, and that it contravened the U.N. mandate. He said intelligence about Col. Gadhafi's whereabouts or plans must have been leaked to NATO.

"We ask the world to look into this carefully, because what we have now is the law of the jungle," he said."How is this helping in the protection of civilians?'' 

The attack on the compound came hours after Col. Gadhafi had repeated his call for a mutual cease-fire and negotiations with NATO powers to end the bombing. NATO officials have dismissed such appeals, saying the regime has violated its own cease-fires in the past. 

News of the attack was announced shortly after midnight early Sunday. State television showed crowds of defiant supporters of the regime firing guns into the air and clapping in unison in the streets of Tripoli. Libyans called in to a late-night television talk show to proclaim Saif al-Arab a martyr.

Hundreds from those crowds attacked the U.S., British and Italian diplomatic missions, which had been vacated earlier, witnesses said. Britain and Italy accused Libyan authorities of failing to protect their embassies. Britain, which plays a leading role in the NATO campaign, gave Libya's ambassador 24 hours to leave the U.K.

Libya's deputy foreign minister, Khalid Kaim, said the attacking crowds vastly outnumbered the police, who had orders not to shoot. He called the vandalism "a regrettable action" and promised that physical damages would be repaired.

A small crowd of Libyans was on hand to greet journalists taken by government escort to view the compound, whose four buildings lay in ruins. Some of the Libyans engaged in organized chanting, clearly mobilized by the regime.

Others spoke quietly of genuine shock, less over the reported deaths of Gadhafis than over the bombing itself, which shattered windows and caused minor injuries to residents in the surrounding well-to-do neighborhood.

"I want my country to be safe," said Mohammed Khalfallah, 31 years old, who lives two blocks away. "If the international community is doing this because it doesn't like our form of democracy, how can I protect my home and my children?"

Libyan authorities used the bombing to portray the NATO operation as a mission to kill and dominate, rather than to save them.

"Today they do this to Libya; tomorrow they will do the same to other countries," Mr. Ibrahim, the government spokesman, told several African diplomats as they visited the damaged compound. "They want to our countries to be under their control."

Neighbors said the bombed compound, across town from the Libyan leader's main residential complex at Bab al-Aziziya, has belonged to the Gadhafi family for decades. Saif al-Arab, the sixth of the colonel's seven sons, lived there, but it was also used by his parents and other relatives, neighbors said. Its walled grounds encompass two residences; two other buildings, one used as a den and the other as a kitchen; and an empty stable.

Two missiles struck the compound, one stopping the kitchen clock 45 seconds after 8:08 p.m. Several pots of food—pasta, rice, fish, stuffed peppers—had been cooking on an electric stove.

For all the damage, it is hard to imagine how anyone could have escaped unhurt. Mr. Ibrahim said Col. Gadhafi and his wife did just that, but gave no details.

Libyans in rebel-held cities rejoiced over news of the airstrike. But some were skeptical about the reported death of Saif al-Arab, the least known of Gaddafi's eight children. Hafez Abdel Goga, the spokesman for the de facto rebel government in Benghazi, said he believed Col. Gadhafi could have fabricated the report in a bid to curry sympathy among Libyans.

Saif al-Arab was overshadowed by his politically active elder brothers, including Saif al-Islam Gadhafi, one of their father's top aides. The younger brother studied for years in Munich, Germany, and had several run-ins with law enforcement there. Between 2006 and 2010 police led investigations against him on 10 accounts, ranging from speeding incidents to bodily harm and possession of illegal weapons, the Associated Press reported.

All the investigations against him were dropped.

—Charles Levinson in Benghazi contributed to this article.



 Write to  Richard Boudreaux at richard.boudreaux@wsj.com and Charles Levinson at charles.levinson@wsj.com 