LONDON—The euro zone's inflation rate rose more than expected to a 30-month high in April, fueling expectations the European Central Bank could tighten monetary policy again as early as June, official data showed Friday. 

The prospect of higher interest rates comes at a difficult time for many euro-zone countries, especially Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Spain, where unemployment has hit a 14-year high. All four are facing severe economic problems that risk being aggravated by higher rates. 

The annual inflation rate rose to 2.8% from 2.7% in March, the highest level since October 2008 when the rate was 3.2%, Eurostat, the European Union's statistics agency, said in a preliminary estimate. Economists were expecting the rate to remain at 2.7%. 

"Today's batch of economic data, on balance, will probably harden the ECB's determination to continue to gradually reverse its ultra-loose monetary policy stance," said  Martin van Vliet, an economist at ING. "We expect a [0.25 percentage] point rate hike in July, with the risk of an earlier move in June." 

The ECB raised interest rates by a quarter of a percentage point to 1.25% on April 7—the first increase since mid-2008—to prevent rising consumer prices from leading to broad-based inflation. The ECB aims to keep inflation just below 2% over the medium term. 

Eurostat doesn't publish a breakdown of its preliminary inflation reading. But there is no doubt the rise stems in part from higher energy costs, which have fueled an increase in prices for transport, heating oil, electricity, and gas compared with a year earlier. 

Some economists suspected that core inflation has also picked up in April. That would reflect higher prices in the leisure and entertainment sectors after the spending boost from Easter came later than usual this year, although that impact may prove temporary. 

"A rate hike by June is now very likely," said  Michel Martinez, an economist at Société Générale in Paris. He said he expects the ECB to deliver further quarter-point increases in September and December to bring the key rate to 2% by the end of the year. 

Figures released by the European Commission Friday showed the mood among euro-zone businesses and consumer soured unexpectedly in April as they faced high oil prices, the prospect of higher interest rates, and the lagging impact of the earthquake and nuclear disaster in Japan. 

The overall economic-sentiment indicator for the 17 countries that make up the single currency area fell to 106.2 in April from 107.3 in March, a much bigger fall than the drop to 107.0 predicted by economists. 

"Worryingly, consumer sentiment fell particularly markedly to be at a nine-month low in April, which heightens concern that consumers will remain reluctant to spend and hold back euro-zone growth," said  Howard Archer, chief European and U.K. economist at Global Insight. 

Other Eurostat data showed the euro zone's unemployment rate held steady at 9.9% in March, the lowest level since September 2009. But the number of jobless people across the 17 countries that share the euro dropped only 9,000 in March following a 47,000 fall in February, suggesting the improvement in the labor market is very gradual. 

The steady unemployment rate also masks stark differences within the currency area, with regional powerhouse Germany registering a drop to 6.3% from 6.4% in March while joblessness rose in Spain and Italy, among others. 

A trio of weak official data from Spain highlighted that country's economic problems. Unemployment has risen to 21.3%, the highest level since early 1997, retail sales slumped 8.6% year-to-year in March, but inflation jumped to 3.5% in April from 3.3% the previous month. 

  Dominique Barbet, an economist at BNP Paribas, said the ECB probably won't be swayed by signs of weak activity. 

"With inflation being the single target of the ECB, this should comfort the governing council that the tightening policy is the correct strategy, despite disappointing activity data," he said. 

 Write to  Nicholas Winning at nick.winning@dowjones.com 