 (Best of the tube this weekend: We'll be on the political panel of "Lou Dobbs Tonight," 7 p.m. ET tonight on Fox Business Network, and discussing Libya and Wisconsin on "The Journal Editorial Report," 2 and 11 p.m. ET Saturday on Fox News Channel.) 

 Gallup found a striking result in a survey this week: Only 47% of American adults approve of "the current U.S. military actions against Libya." That is a plurality (37% disapprove), but it is also the lowest proportion at the outset of any military action of the past three decades. Even the second-least-popular, Kosovo in 1999, had majority (51%) approval.

Here's a number that should be worrying the president's political team: While majorities of both Democrats (51%) and Republicans (57%) approve of the Libya action, only 38% of independents do, vs. a 44% plurality who disapprove. 

By contrast, when Ronald Reagan bombed Tripoli in 1986, 71% approved. To be sure, lots of today's adults hadn't even been born then, but it's hard to believe those young voters, who supported Barack Obama so ardently, were unmoved by the president's speech the other day in which, among other things, he rehearsed Moammar Gadhafi's history of terrorism against Americans.

Haha, we're pulling your leg! Actually, it's easy to believe, because Obama gave no such speech. His administration is speaking with many voices, including that of national security aide Ben Rhodes, who, as the Washington Examiner reports, memorably described the Libya campaign not as war but as "kinetic military action."

In fairness, this ridiculous bit of jargon is not an Obama-era coinage; Bushies were using it way back in 2002, as Slate smart aleck Tim Noah noted at the time. In unfairness--and in honor of France's leadership--we are going to start referring to the Libya effort by the Frenglish acronym KLAM, for Kinetic Libyan Action Militaire. 

Don't hold your breath waiting for that Obama speech. Politico reports that the president is clamming up about the KLAM:

What makes this such a head-scratcher is that Obama was supposed to be the World's Greatest Orator. The other day at lunch, a Brazilian lady observed that the president had been a big hit in her country, because "he's so well-spoken." This made us incredulous until we jogged our memory and remembered that, oh yes, they used to say that about him here too.

And it's true that Obama is good at expounding sweet nothings: One America, two America, red America, blue America, that sort of thing. His 2004 Democratic National Convention speech and his 2011 Tucson memorial speech were memorably good. The crowds in Rio probably got something similar.

Obama's indifferent performance in taking the country to war--sorry, to KLAM--can be explained by his indifference to the topic. By all accounts, he followed the lead of Hillary Clinton and her kettle of hawk hens, just as America followed the lead of the French, the British and the Arab League.

But Obama cared about ObamaCare, and he couldn't sell the public on that either. Has he ever managed to convince anyone of anything of substance?

  The Wisdom of the Insiders   "When it comes to policy, the political class doesn't have a lot of faith in the public's IQ," National Journal reports:

Republican insiders have a higher opinion of the public, with 52% answering "yes," vs. just 28% of Democrats. But what kind of opinion should you have of political insiders?

Another National Journal piece, by Charlie Cook, reports that "GOP strategists privately admit that the president has a good chance of winning reelection in 2012." 

He observes that "the truism that the Republican Party is hierarchical, that Republicans inevitably nominate whomever's turn it is, does not appear to be the case this time." That is because there is nobody whose turn it is.

His main point, which he gleans from "conversations with GOP strategists, donors, and activists"--political insiders!--is that "the bullishness that pervaded the Republican Party's efforts to capture a majority in the House and the sense of Democratic vulnerability that existed a year ago is not so obvious today." He concludes by summing up why:

How much does a subscription to National Journal cost? If you have to ask, you can't afford it, but it's in the four figures. "Political insiders" are people who pay thousands of dollars a year to read blindingly obvious insights like the ones we've just quoted. And they think you're dumb!

  Paul Krugman's Senior Senator   Hey, how's that "civility" thing going? Blogger Jordan Rickards has video of Sen. Frank Lautenberg, a New Jersey Democrat, speaking at a rally for Planned Parenthood, a government-subsidized group that performs abortions and other services. Quoth Lautenberg: 

In one sense, "They don't deserve the freedoms that are in the Constitution" is a trivial truth. Those freedoms are a matter of right, not desert. But Lautenberg's emotional message is unmistakable. He resents that his political opponents have constitutional rights--and he says so just before complaining that "they want other people not to be able to have their opinions." Projection, anyone?

  It's a Scandal After All?   Yesterday we laughed at the Capital Times of Madison, Wis., for its "editor's note" explaining that reporter Steven Elbow, who wrote a long story on a suddenly hotly partisan (though officially nonpartisan) state Supreme Court race, had donated $5 to de facto Democratic candidate JoAnne Kloppenburg in December, which he asked to have returned after his editors found out so as "to avoid the appearance of bias."

It turns out, however, that a $5 donation may be a more serious matter than the sum itself would indicate. This is because of a Wisconsin statute with an Orwellian name, the Impartial Justice Act, which provides for taxpayer financing of judicial campaigns.

As a memo from the state's Government Accountability Board explains:

The qualifying period ended Jan. 4, so that Elbow's donation would have counted toward the "benefit," which is $400,000 in taxpayer money: $100,000 for the primary and $300,000 for the general election. On a pro rated basis, then, Elbow's $5 contribution would have enriched Kloppenburg's campaign to the tune of $405. So it turns out the Capital Times, far from being overly fastidious, was not even fully forthcoming about the help its reporter gave the candidate he's covering.

  Beer and PIzza   Yesterday we noted a new report that claims 1 in 4 Americans have a "criminal record," making it hard for them to find work. We were skeptical of the claim--and we were right to be. Here's the explanation from the report, conducted by the National Employment Law Project, which describes itself as "a national advocacy organization for employment rights of lower-wage workers":

No numbers are given to support the assertion about "the increased arrests associated with the 'War on Drugs,' " or even the claim that the proportion of people with "criminal records" has increased.

It occurs to us, though, that while "arrests associated with the 'War on Drugs' " may account in substantial part for the size of the prison population. a more common reason for "criminal records," as NELP defines it, is arrests for driving under the influence of alcohol.

NELP complains that "some of the nation's largest companies have imposed overbroad background checks," such that "people with criminal records 'need not apply.' " One of those companies: "Domino's Pizza (170,000 employees worldwide)." Would you want a DUI veteran speeding to deliver your neighbor's pizza in 30 minutes or less?

 Out on a Limb 

  Sonia Sotomayor for Guide of the First of September Great Revolution of the Arab Libyan Popular and Socialist Jamahiriya!   "If the Obama administration genuinely wants to see Gadhafi defeated, it must take affirmative action instead of waiting around to see what happens next."--Daily Gamecock (University of South Carolina), March 24

 Life Imitates Diplomacy 

  Life Imitates 'The Office'   "Keller @ Large: High-Paid Official Caught Loafing by Paper"--headline, WBZ-TV/AM website (Boston), March 22

  There Once Was a Haughty, French-Looking Massachusetts Democrat From Nantucket   "Second-Half Kerry Blast Too Much for Limerick"--headline, Irish Examiner, March 25

  It All Went Wrong With the 19th Amendment   "Ill. Treasurer: 'Testosterone' Needed to Solve States' Fiscal Woes"--headline, WSJ.com, March 24

  At Least We're Not Going Bankrupt!   "Dementia: A Silent Crisis That May Bankrupt America"--headline, Puffington Host, March 24

  There Is Unrest in the Forest, There Is Trouble With the Trees   "Plants Face New Worries"--headline, The Wall Street Journal, March 24

  'Cause the Boy With the Cold Hard Cash Is Always Mr. Right   "Madonna's Charity Fails in Bid to Finance School"--headline, New York Times, March 25

  Is That What They Call It Now?   "Target Sues Gay Rights Group to Stop Activists From Canvassing Outside San Diego County Stores"--headline, Associated Press, March 25

  The Lonely Lives of Archaeologists   "Archaeologists Discover Saber-Toothed Vegetarian"--headline, Associated Press, March 24

  It's Luckey the Plane Landed Safely   "With no one answering in the tower, security layers designed to ensure that jets don't stray from their path and that passengers are protected from acts of terror are frayed, says Stephen Luckey, a former airline pilot who operates a security consulting firm. . . . The two jets, which were carrying 165 people, landed after pilots were advised by a controller at a regional facility in nearby Warrenton, Va., that it would be OK to do so. 'That's just not a good idea, especially with the White House right there,' Luckey says."--USA Today, March 25

  That's What Yeast Is For   "China Sees Food Need Rising"--headline, The Wall Street Journal Asia, March 25

  It Didn't Go With His Robe   "Judge Returns Texas Beauty's Crown"--headline, Arizona Republic, March 25

  Of Complications From Being Sawed in Half   "Dorothy Young, Houdini's Stage Assistant, Is Dead at 103"--headline, New York Times, March 25

  Somebody Call 911 Already!   "Triangle Shirtwaist Fire Still Burns a Century Later"--headline, Chicago Sun-Times website, March 25

  'You Don't Know Where Those Tourists Have Been'   "Shark Bites Cancun Tourist in Surf Despite Warning"--headline, Associated Press, March 25

  Questions Nobody Is Asking   "What Will Sarah Palin Whine About, if Not the 'Liberal Press'?"--headline, Vanity Fair website, March 24

  Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking   "Why I'm Quitting Blogging at the Huffington Post [sic]"--headline, LeeStranahan.com, March 24

 Look Out Below! 

  Too Much Information   "Gaddafi's Entourage Sends Out Secret Peace Feelers"--headline, Reuters, March 24

 News You Can Use 

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  Let's Move!   "The federal government says more overweight Americans are squeezing onto buses, and it may have to rewrite bus safety rules because of it," USA Today reports:

Where's Michelle Obama when you need her? A much better solution would be to limit the size, not the number, of passengers. Let the weightiest walk and you'll deal with the source, rather than the symptom, of the problem.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to T. Young, Ed Lasky, William Schultz, Ethel Fenig, Hillel Markowitz, Michele Schiesser, David Gerstman, Jeanie Ribble, Steve Duffey, Mike Hussey, Robert Kay, Kyle Kyllan, Mike Galiger, Israel Pickholtz, John Sanders, Richard Belzer, Hugh Phelps, Ed Grinberg, Stuart Sullivan, Clifford Crouch, Tom Mayer, Craig Iskowitz, Joel Northwall, Scot Billman, Tom Plunkert, Jerry Saperstein, Jim Carr, Joey Bedford, John Field, Rowe Sergent, Zack Russ, John Bobek, Brian Dawson and Jeffrey Sadow. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)