SHANGHAI—China said Saturday the European Union's move to slap tariffs on imports of Chinese coated fine paper is against the world trade organization principle and it will take measures to protect local companies' interests. 

The comments by the Chinese commerce ministry spokesman Yao Jian come after the EU earlier Saturday said it would impose duties, ranging from 4% to 12%, on Chinese coated fine paper, which is used for high-quality printing such as brochures and magazines. 

The move "will severely hurt the interests of Chinese enterprises," Mr. Yao said in a statement posted on the ministry's website. "The Chinese side is strongly discontent with the EU's wrong decision and will firmly oppose it." 

The duties will last five years, according to the EU. It is the first time the 27-nation bloc has acted against subsidies that European manufacturers claim give China an unfair advantage on global markets. 

Mr. Yao said China's coated-fine paper market is a highly competitive industry, as the government neither intervenes in the management of companies nor decides market prices. 

He said the EU had taken "discriminatory and unfair" measures during the investigation on Chinese paper makers. "The approach of imposing antidumping and antisubsidy duties on the same product at the same time is against the WTO principle," he added. 

"China will carefully study and assess the EU's decision, and reserve the right to take corresponding legal measures to safeguard the rights and interests of Chinese companies," Mr. Yao said. 

The European Commission, the EU's executive arm, started its investigation last year after receiving complaints from a group of EU paper producers, led by the European unit of South African paper giant Sappi Ltd. 

EU officials say that the main subsidy given to the paper makers is cheap financing from government-controlled banks. The companies were also sold land by the government at low rates, the officials say, along with a host of lesser subsidies. 

—Rose Yu