What are the auto industry's plans for greener vehicles? And what are the biggest hurdles that must be overcome?

Read the full  ECO:nomics report .

To find out, The Wall Street Journal's Jeffrey Ball spoke with  Bill Ford, executive chairman of Ford Motor Co.

Here are edited excerpts from their discussion.

  MR. BALL: Ford has said that it anticipates in 2020 that 1% to 2% of your lineup will be pure electric vehicles, and 10% to 25% will be hybrids of some sort.  

 MR. FORD: I think plug-in hybrids will be a much more useful technology to most customers.

The thing about electric vehicles is one size doesn't fit all. You've got pure electric vehicles, but those are constrained by range today. They're very good for certain applications, particularly urban environments and urban delivery.

But a plug-in hybrid liberates people. If you live in San Francisco and you drive mostly in the city, you're going to drive on your battery for the most part. If you want the freedom to go to Los Angeles for the weekend, you can go and your battery will discharge and then your conventional engine will kick in.

In terms of what the projections are, who knows? A lot of it has to do with fuel prices. It has to do with ubiquity of charging, the build-out of the smart grid, all those things that will play into this. We could give you a number, but it's just throwing a dart.



  MR. BALL: With respect to fuel cells and the initial wave of electric cars, what happened? You promised pretty aggressively back then, and those promises didn't come to fruition.  

 MR. FORD: There is a bit of a chicken-and-egg here with our industry because we can develop the hardware, but is the country ready to support that hardware?

We were playing with two different types of hydrogen. We were playing with internal-combustion hydrogen and with fuel cells. But hydrogen has some basic issues. One is it's tough to store, either in its gaseous form or in its liquid form. It's tough to fuel for the customer. You don't just slop it in like a gas hose. You've got to have some secure sealing. It would be a different customer experience.

The other thing is, fuel cells are inherently complicated and expensive. They may make more sense as a stationary source than as a mobile source. You could actually have a fuel cell power the power station which makes electricity which then goes into the car.



  MR. BALL: What is it that makes you more confident about the viability of electric cars now than five years ago?  

 MR. FORD: First of all, the technology has developed quite a bit in the last few years, and the range is better.

The other is charging time. Our Focus charging time is about three hours.

  MR. BALL: To what extent do you think environmental issues, as opposed to saving a buck at the pump, are resonant with consumers? And to what degree does the answer vary across the world?  

 MR. FORD: I think there's a very high correlation because if you ask anybody on the street, "Are you environmentally concerned?" everyone's going to say, "Yes." But then you say, "What more are you willing to pay for it?"

When it came to cars, people wanted everybody else to be an environmentalist, but they wanted to drive what they wanted to drive. But as soon as their economic interest started to align with that—i.e., fuel prices going up—then you start to see real alignment between what people are saying and what they actually do.



  MR. BALL: Is what you've just laid out applicable everywhere in the world, or are there differences that matter in terms of your selling between Americans and Europeans and Asians?  

 MR. FORD: Europe took a point of view a few years ago that they wanted to lower the CO2 emissions in that region, and the way they decided they were going to do that was promote diesel and tax the heck out of gasoline.

By doing so, they drove customers to diesel, and it worked because again the pocketbook interest was aligned with society's interest. So you had a very different kind of buyer reaction in Europe than here where gasoline was very, very cheap. But I think as fuel prices start to harmonize around the world, I think customer behavior does too.

  MR. BALL: In 2009, the auto-industry executives were at the White House and agreed with President Obama on a plan to raise fuel-economy standards to 35.5 mpg by 2016. And now the administration is proposing 62.5 mpg by 2025. And my sense is that you're not so supportive.  

 MR. FORD: Before, we had a very adversarial relationship—we, Ford, and I suspect the industry—with a lot of the rule makers. And today that's all changed. We work much more closely with them.

I don't know the right ultimate number, and we haven't hit on that yet, so I can't really give you what's the magic number. But the good news is it's an iterative process. It's not a "here you go, folks. Hope you like it."

Let me touch on something. We're going to hit the limits of growth and we're going to have global gridlock in a way that we've never seen before. Today there are 800 million vehicles globally on the road. By midcentury we think that number is going to be between two billion and four billion. You've got all the futurists saying that by midcentury 75% of the world's population is going to live in urban areas. How are people going to move? How are goods going to move?

If we don't solve this issue, it's going to stifle global economic growth. And actually it becomes a human-rights issue. How are you going to move food? How are you going to move health care, if you've got global gridlock?

And the answer isn't going to be just build more roads because in urban areas you can't build more roads. So, it's going to spawn a whole new raft of technology that's going to have to be employed into the vehicles.

It's a huge social issue, but it could be a very interesting business issue and a business opportunity as well.