LONDON—The Bank of England kept its key interest rate at a record low Thursday, but pressure is growing on the central bank to respond to building price risks. 

Annual consumer-price inflation has been at least a percentage point above the BOE's 2% target since the start of 2010, and the bank's Monetary Policy Committee has warned that it could accelerate to 4% by the spring, peaking in the midst of the next round of private-sector wage negotiations. 

The persistence of high inflation rates is due to a string of shocks—including tax rises, commodity-price gains and sterling's depreciation—but there is a serious risk that what started off as temporary could become more permanent if the public loses trust in the central bank. 

"The bank is grappling with the need to balance the two conflicting issues of inflation and growth," said  Ian McCafferty, chief economic adviser to the Confederation of British Industry. "While this hold announcement is not a surprise, decisions in the coming months will be more difficult as the bank's anti-inflation credibility comes under greater pressure." 

At Thursday's meeting, the nine-member MPC voted to keep bond purchases under its program of quantitative easing at £200 billion ($315.36 billion) and its key interest rate at 0.5%. 

But the challenges that BOE policy makers must confront are arguably the toughest facing a major central bank, and starkly illustrate the two-tier nature of the global economic recovery. 

A number of fast-growing emerging markets have raised interest rates and taken measures to control rapid capital inflows, as economic activity gathers pace. 

Earlier Thursday, South Korea's central bank unexpectedly lifted its key interest rate, while the government issued a package of steps to stabilize consumer prices. Thailand and China's central banks also recently tightened monetary policy. 

While the strength of growth in these economies is vital in driving the global upturn, it is also increasing demand for commodities, inflating prices in parts of the world where activity is less healthy. 

In the U.K., that is being aggravated by the government's January increase in the sales tax to 20% from 17.5%, and the 25% depreciation in sterling since the start of the financial crisis, which as yet has failed to boost export demand as BOE officials had hoped. 

At the same time, the government's promise of £111 billion of fiscal tightening by 2015 and continuing banking-sector strains are set to weigh on demand, creating an unenviable mix of stubborn inflation and lackluster growth. 

Policy makers will be hoping that the latter prevents workers from pushing for, or employers agreeing to, higher pay increases, which would risk sparking an upward price spiral. 

"Albeit with reduced confidence, we are retaining our view that the Bank of England will hold off from raising interest rates until the fourth quarter," said  Howard Archer, an economist at IHS Global Insight. "This reflects our belief that growth will slow appreciably in the first half of 2011 and that a soft labor market will prevent higher inflation expectations feeding through to lift wage growth significantly." 

Despite the rapid increase in prices, the committee is likely to keep policy unchanged for some months to come, until members are confident that the still-fragile U.K. recovery is more strongly entrenched. 

BOE officials have stressed that it is too soon to rule out further bond purchases, perhaps if conditions in the euro zone—the U.K.'s major trading partner—deteriorate further. 

But their language has grown noticeably more hawkish over recent weeks, signaling that the option of more stimulus is now firmly in the plan B camp, only to be deployed in the case of a serious relapse. 

The next quarterly inflation report in February—containing the MPC's updated forecasts for inflation and output growth—will be key in guiding investor expectations of the future pace of tightening. November's report still showed below-target inflation at the two-year horizon, which would usually indicate more loosening ahead. 

Analysts also will be closely monitoring meeting minutes to see how soon  Andrew Sentance—the only member so far to vote for an immediate rate increase—gathers the support of his colleagues. 