Michelle Rhee, who gained national attention as the chancellor of schools in Washington, D.C., called Monday for giving students government-funded vouchers to attend private schools, rating principals based on student achievement and getting rid of teacher tenure.

The release of the blueprint was the first formal action of Ms. Rhee's new advocacy group, StudentsFirst, which she launched in December, after leaving her job heading D.C. schools in October. Ms. Rhee said she was in discussions with the governors of Florida, New Mexico, New Jersey, Tennessee, Nevada and Indiana to adopt part, if not all, of the agenda.

In an interview Monday, Ms. Rhee said she recognized her platform would be controversial and tough to implement but that her group could help push through the changes. 

StudentsFirst has attracted 140,000 members, including nearly 20,000 teachers, and collected $1.4 million in contributions, Ms. Rhee said. She has said her group would donate to political campaigns and help school districts fund chosen strategies.

In many respects, the plan is modeled after the strategies Ms. Rhee tried to implement in Washington, some of which she wasn't able to push through.

"A lot of the reason I started the group is so we can provide the cover a courageous political leader needs to push this agenda," she said. "In these incredibly tough budget times, when school districts will take a big hit, we have an opportunity to rethink public education and put students first."

The nation's two largest teachers' unions criticized Ms. Rhee's agenda. John Wilson, executive director of the National Education Association, said that instead of focusing on proving strategies—such as high-quality early childhood education—it centers on punishing teachers. "I don't see her organization challenging the NEA's 3.2 million members and the 10 million members of the PTA," he said. "She cannot simply declare herself the national student advocate when over four million teachers work in schools every day helping children learn." 

Randi Weingarten, president of the American Federation of Teachers, criticized Ms. Rhee's agenda as "wonderful rhetoric" that presents a "false choice." 

Ms. Rhee's attempts to turn around the faltering D.C. school system drew widespread attention and loud criticism from the teachers unions. Washington Mayor Adrian Fenty, who appointed Ms. Rhee, was ousted in a September election that many saw as a referendum on Ms. Rhee's aggressive policies to close schools and fire teachers in low-performing classes. The teachers and public-employee unions played a big role in drafting Mr. Fenty's opponent, Vincent Gray, who won the election and is now mayor.

The detailed plan Ms. Rhee released Monday focuses on overhauling teacher pay and evaluation plans, giving parents more say in their child's education and spending tax dollars more wisely. 

In addition to doing away with tenure, it calls for ending the practice of paying teachers based on years of service and on the master's degrees they collect. Ms. Rhee said pay should be based on whether teachers boost student achievement.

She also is calling for districts to get parental consent before placing children in the classrooms of low-performing teachers. Ms. Rhee said firing ineffective teachers can be time-consuming and expensive.

"Too many districts hide the fact that they have ineffective teachers and we are saying, 'If you can't change the laws, then you have to give parents the information,' " she said.

The blueprint also prods states and districts to adopt "parent trigger" laws that let parents force a major overhaul of a school if more than half of them sign a petition. They could vote to turn the school into a charter school or force the district to get rid of most of the teaching staff.A similar policy was used in Compton, Calif., last year.

Ms. Rhee's document also calls for an end to what she calls ineffective policies that waste taxpayer money, such as class size reduction policies in the higher grade levels. Her plan, she said, wouldn't increase spending but would ensure taxpayer money was spent more wisely.

StudentsFirst's initial foray into policy could be in Florida, where Republican Gov. Rick Scott, who was elected to office in November, appointed Ms. Rhee to his transition team. In a news release, Mr. Scott praised Ms. Rhee's agenda and said he supported her call to eliminate tenure and expand the number of charter schools, public schools run by independent groups.