The New York Times's idea of a conservative is a guy who loves to puff Barack Obama. "I remember distinctly an image of--we were sitting on his couches, and I was looking at his pant leg and his perfectly creased pant," David Brooks told The New Republic two years ago, reminiscing about an encounter from 2005, when Obama was a newly elected U.S. senator. "And I'm thinking, a) he's going to be president and b) he'll be a very good president."

How's that working out? Pretty well, to go by Brooks's column today. Obama is the dynamic young John F. Kennedy and the wise old Dwight Eisenhower all rolled into one: "The campaign of 2008 was marked by soaring calls for transformation. Now the administration spends much of its time reacting to events and counseling restraint." Here is an anecdote that, to Brooks's mind, captures Obama's Ikelikeness:

"Prudence is always a nice trait in a leader, especially in the face of a thorny problem like Libya," Brooks writes. But is it really prudent to stand idly while a vicious dictator reasserts power--especially when the president blustered just a week and a half ago that Moammar Gadhafi "must go"?

Far from likening his prudence to Ike's, we'd say Obama's passivity is a worrying flaw. Actually, we'd put it a lot more strongly than that. We just borrowed the language in this paragraph's topic sentence from Brooks's column--from the penultimate sentence, meaning only people who didn't get bored by Brooks's cheerleading (or who get paid to read this stuff, as we do) got to it.

Actually, though, "passivity" doesn't quite tell the whole story. Obama is passive about the big things that really matter: the Middle East crisis, the ballooning national debt. He was manically active--JFK-like, in Brooks's taxonomy--when he had a Democratic Congress that was willing to pass ruinous left-wing legislation. Now that voters have placed a check on his power, he still has his manic side, but it's devoted to comparatively trivial matters:

On Saturday, the day after his no-news conference on Libya, he delivered an address to the nation in which, according to the White House website, he "pays homage to former First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt, commends the great strides that have been made to create a more equal American society, and reaffirms his resolve to pass the Paycheck Fairness Act." 

On Sunday he penned an op-ed piece for Tucson's Arizona Daily Star calling for "at least . . . the beginning of a new discussion on how we can keep America safe for all our people"--which is Obamaspeak for stricter gun-control laws.

Today, notes National Review's Jim Geraghty, quoting Politico's Mike Allen, he "will tape interviews from the Map Room with KOAT Albuquerque, KDKA Pittsburgh and WVEC Hampton Roads on education reform and the need to fix No Child Left Behind." He also "is taping his NCAA [basketball] picks today, and they'll be revealed tomorrow on ESPN."

 Forbes reports that this weekend, amid crises in the Middle East and Japan, Obama will travel overseas--to Brazil.

And this past Saturday, ABC News reported, "for the second week in a row, the most powerful man in the world stepped away from the White House to hit the golf course."

Maybe Brooks is on to something. After all, Eisenhower was a golfer too.

  We Were Cool to Warming Before Cooling to Warming Was Cool   "Americans' perceptions of the issue of global warming appear to be cooling," CNN reports:

Why might this be? One obvious answer is that the Climategate emails ratified the skeptical view by showing the corruption of "climate science." 

Looking at the poll results, another explanation occurs to us. Like the 2011 poll, the 2008 one was taken in early March. Since then, we've faced one actual crisis after another: a financial panic, a recession with continuing high unemployment, a vast increase in government spending, a legislative assault on the health-care system; an oil spill, Mideast instability and a concomitant increase in fuel prices. (Japan's earthquake, tsunami and nuclear accident don't make the list because they came after this year's poll.)

In the midst of real crises, faddish speculative ones become less compelling.

  America's Second Mortgage   Liberalism's Baghdad Bob, E.J. Dionne of the Washington Post, reassures his readers that America is in fine fiscal condition. Among the evidence he cites is a report from Bloomberg:

Isn't he describing a situation roughly analogous to that of homeowners who took out second mortgages to pay for luxuries just before the housing bubble burst?

  Wisconsin Leads the Way   "Civility" turns out to have been the most evanescent political fad since . . . well, we don't remember the previous one either. The other day Time magazine's website asked: "Wisconsin's Governor Wins, but Is He Now Dead Man Walker?" The writer, Dawn Reiss, noted without evident disapproval that outside the Wisconsin Capitol "chalk outlines around fake dead bodies etched with Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker's name remained in dismembered parts."

Did Scott Walker lose by winning? Wisconsin's government employee unions certainly succeeded in raising a backlash, and it's possible they'll be able to keep it going long enough to do some damage to Badger State Republicans. Elsewhere around the country, however, government unions are finding themselves on the defensive.

In Tallahassee, the Associated Press reports, "a Florida Senate bill that prohibits union dues from being automatically deducted from public employees' paychecks has barely survived a vote out of the Community Affairs Committee." The AP notes that "union foes have dubbed the measure the Worker Gag Bill"--and the AP adopts that Orwellian moniker in its headline.

Even the liberal media can't always be counted on to take the unions' side. Suffolk County, which includes Boston, recently abolished two minor Revolutionary War holidays, Evacuation Day and Bunker Hill Day. But a Boston Globe editorial notes that the move will end up costing Boston $1.5 million. The reason? The holidays are still in union contracts, so that the city will have to pay overtime to get employees to work those days, an absurdity that, even the ultraliberal Globe notes, "can only further the continuing backlash against public-employee perks."

And guess what state capital is the dateline for this Washington Post story: "Thousands of union members rallied before the State House on Monday night, vowing to protect their employee pensions and public school funding." Annapolis, Md., where the governor and both legislative houses all are Democratic.

What's more, Baltimore's WBAL-TV reports that "Anne Arundel County Executive John Leopold signed into law Thursday a measure giving the county government more power over its public safety union":

But WBAL notes that "the move puts Anne Arundel County in line with what the majority of Maryland counties do with union negotiations." It seems clear that Wisconsin is leading, not bucking, a nationwide trend.

 NPR or Radio Moscow? 

 Life Imitates the Movies 

  'Reporting for Duty'   "Kerry's Hoping to Have Reality TV All Sewn Up"--headline, Wanganui (New Zealand) Chronicle, March 15

  The Lonely Lives of Scientists   "Predicting Change: Scientists Enjoy Fertile Times"--headline, Reuters, March 14

  'You Can Call Me Ray . . .'   "Stingless Stingrays Discovered"--headline, RealClearScience.com, March 14

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking   "Tim Kaine Might Not Be the Perfect Answer"--headline, Roll Call, March 15

  Durango Goats Now Allowed to Have Policies--Now That Would Be News   "Durango Police Now Allowed to Have Goatees"--headline, Associated Press, March 14

  Everything Seemingly Is Spinning Out of Control   "Snake Dies of Silicone Poisoning After Biting Model's Fake Breast"--headline, AOLNews.com, March 14

 News You Can Use 

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  Won Ton Chutzpah   Red China is calling on New Zealand "to give special compensation to Chinese families who lost children in last month's Christchurch earthquake," the New Zealand herald reports:

It reminds us of that old joke about the definition of chutzpah: when a communist country imposes a one-child policy, then pleads for mercy because its citizens are childless.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Sam Rearic, Ed Grinberg, Joe Perez, Hillel Markowitz, Tom Elia, T. Young, Zack Russ, Ethel Fenig, Lew Olowski, David Hallstrom, Randy Smith, Anthony Brunsvold, Jeff Gilbert, Christopher Bolling-Georgoff, Kevin McNally, John Sanders, Kyle Kyllan, Terry Holmes, Larry Morris, Bradford Sterling, Michele Schiesser and David Mead. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)