WASHINGTON—Can the West win in Libya without a dominant and sustained American role?



That is the bet President Barack Obama is making as he seeks to define his foreign-policy doctrine by ordering only a limited U.S. military engagement.

The outcome could have far-reaching impact on Washington's position globally in the coming years, said strategists and diplomats, as well as on Mr. Obama's re-election hopes for 2012.

Democrats and Republicans alike have questioned the end-game Mr. Obama seeks, particularly given Washington's budgetary constraints. Conservatives have also attacked the perception that the White House has ceded control of its military assets to NATO or European control.

"If the president is successful in transferring the leadership of this somewhere else and minimizing our role, I think the likelihood that it will do damage is quite small," said Democratic pollster  Mark Mellman. "If it drags on for a long period of time and people perceive that somehow what we're doing is not working, that's a different matter."

A Gallup poll released this week shows a majority of Americans support the Obama administration's position on Libya.

The Obama administration repeated Wednesday that the U.S. involvement would be limited and secondary to other European and Middle East states. "The president has made clear that the United States is not going to be in the lead in this operation for the longer term, and in fact, for more than a week or so," Defense Secretary Robert Gates said on a visit to Cairo.

House Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio) ratcheted up his complaints Wednesday about what he considers Mr. Obama's insufficient consultation with Congress on Libya, writing a letter asking for more clarity. He asked whether the administration considers it acceptable for Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi to remain in power, which foreign partners take the lead on the no-fly zone, what will happen if the coalition dissolves and what standards a new regime must meet to be recognized by the U.S., and similar questions. "All of these concerns point to a fundamental question: What is your benchmark for success in Libya?" Mr. Boehner wrote.

  Read Mr. Boehner's letter to Mr. Obama .

Sen. Richard Lugar (R., Ind.), the ranking Republican on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, on Wednesday wrote to Sen. John Kerry (D., Mass.), the committee's chairman, urging him to immediately schedule committee hearings on the Libya conflict. 

U.S. and European officials said Wednesday that they expect the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to play the leading role in enforcing the no-fly zone and arms embargo in Libya, as well as in overseeing humanitarian efforts, as the Pentagon pulls back. The French government of Nicolas Sarkozy is also pressing for the establishment of a contact group with Arab and Middle East governments to give them a greater voice in overseeing military operations in Libya.

Still, French and British diplomats continue to voice concerns that some members of this emerging coalition, including NATO members Germany and Turkey, could seek to constrain the more-aggressive actions Paris and London are contemplating. Turkey, a Muslim-majority country, has voiced objections to participating in any offensive military actions and has sought to resume a dialogue with Col. Gadhafi's government.

Track the latest events in Libya.

"The French continue to seek a more robust approach," said a European diplomat involved in the discussion. "They don't want other states to compromise the mission."

The French and British governments have made clear that they see the ouster of Col. Gadhafi as the ultimate objective of their operations, even if this isn't mandated by last week's U.N. resolution. The Obama administration, however, continues to offer mixed signals at to the ultimate objective of its Libya policy.

On Wednesday, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton voiced one recurring U.S. line that holds out hope that Col. Gadhafi will either resign or his men will mutiny. But U.S. and European officials also fear he will survive and engage in a drawn-out war with the rebel forces headquartered in Libya's east. Mr. Obama has ruled out the deployment of U.S. ground forces in Libya, but Mr. Gates on Wednesday acknowledged that Washington's role in policing the no-fly zone over Libya would likely continue for months, even if the Pentagon is no longer in command. U.S. defense officials said the Pentagon would also continue to play a role in areas like intelligence gathering and jamming Libya's communications and radar systems.

Sen. John McCain (R., Ariz.), an ardent believer in intervention, has suggested arming the Libyan rebels. Others, such as Rep. Candice Miller (R., Mich.), have called for the U.S. to pull out of the coalition.

The split is showing up in debates over how much the military action will cost and whether the country can afford it.

There "have been ballpark estimates" of the costs, but "I'm not going to pass them along because they are too inaccurate, too broad," said Sen. Carl Levin (D., Mich.) chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee. "That cost is going to be affected by when the handoff takes place. The cost these first few days is a lot larger."

—Siobhan Hughes, Keith Johnson and Naftali Bendavid contributed to this article.

 Write to  Jay Solomon at jay.solomon@wsj.com 