HONG KONG—Glencore International PLC said Thursday demand for commodities remains strong despite a recent price correction as the company seeks to raise up to 2.47 billion Hong Kong dollars (US$318 million) in a Hong Kong retail offering. 

The Swiss commodities trader plans to sell 31.25 million shares at an indicative price range of HK$61.24-HK$79.18 (US$7.89-US$10.19) each in an initial public offering on the Hong Kong exchange as part of an IPO under way in London and Hong Kong. The Hong Kong portion represents about 2.5% of its global initial public offering that could raise up to US$11 billion. 

Glencore's global offering comes on the backdrop of strong commodity prices during the past year, but its outlook is overshadowed by concerns about a slower global economic recovery, which could be derailed by the rising cost of oil and raw materials. 

Glencore Chief Executive  Ivan Glasenberg said in a video conference that underlying fundamentals in the commodities market remain strong as countries such as India and China increase their consumption for various commodities. 

"We still see strong demand in Asia and we continue to see miners, mining companies struggling to produce and increase production to meet the demand," he said. 

He said China, one of the world's biggest consumers of commodities, accounted for about 15% of Glencore's revenue in 2010. 

Analysts said Glencore's long-awaited share sale would help the firm boost its financial capability for securing merger-and-acquisition opportunities and help partners who intend to cash out to realize value. A secondary listing in Hong Kong could also help raise the company's profile in the region. 

"We won't do deals for the sake of growing our business. We won't do deals for the sake of being a bigger company," Mr. Glasenberg said, noting that potential acquisitions have to add to earnings. 

About US$5 billion of the projected net proceeds will be used for capital expenditures including fresh investment in subsidiaries and new markets, Glencore said. 

More than 30% of the shares on offer are earmarked for "cornerstone" investors including sovereign wealth funds from Abu Dhabi and Singapore, U.S.-based BlackRock Inc. and China's Zijin Mining Group Co. 

Cornerstone investments, in which big names are guaranteed large chunks of an IPO in return for agreeing not to sell the shares for at least six months, are commonly used in Hong Kong to promote interest in a deal among other investors. 

"A secondary listing in Hong Kong will enable us to build long-term mutually beneficial relationships with Hong Kong investors, as we have with customers, suppliers and capital providers world-wide over the years," Mr. Glasenberg said, adding that a Hong Kong listing would help enhance its profile in region. 

The commodities trader's net income rose 41% to US$3.8 billion in 2010 from US$2.7 billion a year earlier, boosted by higher product volume and commodity prices. Its 2010 revenue totalled US$145 billion, up 36% from the previous year. 

Morgan Stanley wrote in a note earlier it expects the commodities trader's 2011 net income to increase 85% to US$6.92 billion from US$3.80 billion a year earlier, largely driven by rising commodity prices in its industrial assets, and contribution from its holdings in public companies including Xstrata PLC. 

Glencore holds stakes in publicly traded companies, including Anglo-Swiss miner Xstrata and Russian aluminum producer United Co. Rusal PLC. It also owns a stake in non-listed Kazakh zinc producer Kazzinc Mines. 

The company produces and markets a series of commodities, including zinc, copper, aluminum, nickel and coal. 

Glencore, which is slated to list in London on May 24 and in Hong Kong on May 25, will price its deal on or around May 19

 Write to  Prudence Ho at prudence.ho@dowjones.com 