Having ordered the raid that killed Osama bin Laden, President Obama plans to follow up by . . . giving a speech. All we can say is it's about time. America waited 9½ years to be rid of bin Laden, and it's been practically hours since we last heard from the World's Greatest Orator.

But this isn't just any Obama speech. As The Wall Street Journal reports, it's "a fresh outreach to the Muslim world"! Obama will boldly "ask those in the Middle East and beyond to reject Islamic militancy in the wake of Osama bin Laden's death and embrace a new era of relations with the U.S."

It gets better: "The president intends to argue that bin Laden's death, paired with popular uprisings sweeping North Africa and the Middle East, signal that the time has come to an end when al Qaeda could claim to speak for Muslim aspirations."

So the Obama administration's view is that until last week, al Qaeda could claim to speak for Muslim aspirations? Perhaps that's an overly uncharitable reading, yet the Journal story repeatedly attributes to the administration the view that bin Laden's death proves the inadequacy of his ideology--as if such proof were necessary:

So Obama is going to speak out boldly against a dead terrorist whose killing occasioned only scattered protests in the Arab world? "Even before Osama bin Laden was killed, he seemed largely irrelevant to the Arab Spring," as Paul Wolfowitz told us last week. "I don't know of a single instance of these Arab freedom fighters holding up pictures of bin Laden. I know many instances of them displaying American flags in Benghazi or painting 'Facebook' on their foreheads in Cairo."

The "failed approach of the past" that is relevant today is not terrorism but tyranny--not al Qaeda but the regimes against which the freedom fighters are revolting. There is no indication in the Journal article that the president plans to take on that question.

To be sure, it would be awkward, and perhaps ill-advised, for a U.S. president to denounce undemocratic regimes in Arab and Muslim lands indiscriminately, since some of them are, to varying degrees, friendly with the U.S. But one could at least ask for a tough line on regimes that abuse their own people and are enemies of America.

Yet Obama has consistently fallen short in this regard. In June 2009 he launched his earlier "outreach" effort with the much-hyped Cairo speech. Just over a week later, Iranians took to the streets to protest a stolen election--and Obama could hardly be troubled to say anything.

When Libya's Moammar Gadhafi started massacring protesters, Obama was dragged by Britain, France, the Arab League and the hawk hens in his own administration into participating in a NATO military action--but that action has been desultory and the U.S. role in it even more so.

And consider Syria, where the New York Times reports the regime "has gained the upper hand over a seven-week uprising against the rule of President Bashar al-Assad, a senior official declared Monday, in the clearest sign yet that the leadership believes its crackdown will crush protests that have begun to falter in the face of hundreds of deaths and mass arrests."

In an interview with The Atlantic's Jeffrey Goldberg, Secretary of State HIllary Clinton explains the administration's approch:

"We have tried . . . to give him an alternative vision of himself." That's one heck of a strategy, isn't it?

Having dispatched Osama bin Laden, Barack Obama is enjoying an aura of strength that could be turned into an opportunity to take a stand for freedom and against dictatorship in Arab and Muslim countries. The Journal story gives no indication that he intends to do so. 

It does mention that "the White House is still debating . . . whether Mr. Obama should lay out a concrete plan for revitalizing the stalled Arab-Israeli peace process." Talk about failed approaches of the past!

  Apparently It Wasn't Over When the Germans Bombed Pearl Harbor   "Internationally, we've gone through a Teutonic shift in the Middle East that could have enormous ramifications for years to come."--President Obama, May 10, quoted by USA Today, which reports the White House says he meant "tectonic."

  Gingrich for President? Nah.   Newt Gingrich is "set to give an interview Wednesday night on Fox News Channel, explaining his rationale for a candidacy," the Associated Press reports. That's a candidacy for president, folks. "He'll give his first speech as a full-fledged candidate at the Georgia Republican Party's convention in Macon on Friday."

The AP headline reads "Analysis: Gingrich's Past a Plus, a Minus." We were going to run this under "Out on a Limb," but it seems to us that doesn't quite do it justice. But actually, that would not be in keeping with the sarcastic tone of that feature. To call Gingrich's past a "plus" really is to go out on a limb. Here's the best the AP can do to present Gingrich's past as a plus:

The next sentence: "But Gingrich himself has a mixed legacy from those days." No kidding.

To be sure, Gingrich was arguably the most effective House minority whip in American history. That was the title he held in the 103rd Congress (1993-94), when he masterminded the successful Republican campaign to win a majority in 1994. Since Minority Leader Robert Michel was retiring, Gingrich was in line to become speaker in the 104th Congress. The AP's Shannon McCafrey, assigned to Gingrich's campaign, reminds us how that worked out:

We've met Gingrich a bunch of times, and we like him--which is to say, we find him engaging and entertaining. But the thought of him in the White House makes us uneasy. For one thing, he has an outsized sense of his own historic destiny (a trait he shares with Barack Obama).

For another, while he is undoubtedly very intelligent, he is erratically so. People on the left love to stereotype conservatives as "incurious," but Gingrich is too curious--too quick to latch onto ideas and drop them rather than give them thoughtful consideration. Thus the outbursts that raise those eyebrows.

And they aren't all outbursts. Back in March, National Review's Jim Geraghty posted a video of Gingrich in a 2008 ad "sitting on a couch with Nancy Pelosi, talking about how he completely agrees with her that 'our country must take action to address climate change,' and that 'if enough of us demand action from our leaders, we can spark the innovation we need.' "

That looks to us like a winning ad--for any of Gingrich's rivals in the Republican primaries.

  The Slippery Slope   Pakistan has yet to permit the U.S. to question Osama bin Laden's widows, but a former CIA officer tells CBS News it may not matter:

And we kept hearing that compulsion doesn't work! You mean that isn't true?

Meanwhile, our item yesterday on waterboarding prompted this comment from reader Alex Levendahl:

But often there are slippery slopes in both directions. As it actually turned out, the Bush administration never sanctioned any technique harsher than waterboarding, which was used only on three detainees. That led to such overwrought criticism that the Obama administration refuses to use any interrogation technique beyond asking nicely.

  Out on a Limb   "Al Qaeda Likely to Elevate No. 2--or Name No One"--headline, Associated Press, May 10

  'I Want to Spike the Football!'   "Obama to GOP: Stop Moving Goalposts on Immigration Reform"--headline, TheHill.com, May 10

  Teresa Told Him She Needed Her Space   "Kerry to Visit Pakistan to Get Relationship on 'Right Track' "--headline, TheHill.com, May 11

  'We Need to Shut Up and Move On'   " 'Shut Up and Sing!' to Feature Westport Talent"--headline, Patch.com (Westport, Conn.), May 10

  So Much for the War on Drugs   "Tablet Proliferation Continues"--headline, TechnologyReview.com, May 10

  Apt Pupil   "Neo-Nazi Father Is Killed; Son, 10, Steeped in Beliefs, Is Accused"--headline, New York Times, May 11

  'He Just Didn't Do It for Me'   "Girlfriend Turns In Ho-Hum Bank Robbery Suspect"--headline, Associated Press, May 9

  'Do You, Beavis, Take This Chick . . .?'   "Three Hearts Butt Heads in One Marriage"--headline, New York Times, May 9

  The Grass Is Always Greener   "Lawn Wins in 10th Middlesex Election"--headline, Boston Globe website, May 10

  Hey, Kids! What Time Is It?   "Time to Correct Off-Course Labor Board"--headline, DailyCaller.com, May 10

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

 Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  Too Much Information   "Sen. Kerry Against Rapid Pullout"--headline, United Press International, May 11

  Someone Set Up Us the Bomb   "The GOP Stupids Step Out"--headline, National Review Online, May 11

  News You Can Use   "Chick Sex Swayed by Farm Grazing"--headline, BBC website, May 11

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  Pit Stop   Airborne terrorism did not die with Osama bin Laden, reports San Jose's KNTV:

Thank goodness there was a trained police officer on board, or it might have escaped everyone's notice that anything was amiss. 

London's Daily Mail, however, reports that a cousin, Rageh Almoraissi, thinks al-Murisi merely mistook the cockpit door for the bathroom. And after all, don't we all shout "God is great!" when we really have to go?

Almoraissi adds that al-Murisi has rheumatoid arthritis and gets uncomfortable if he sits too long: "If a flight attendant has the nerve to grab me and try to force me to my seat, believe me, you would hear about other people having injuries." And if that doesn't reassure you, you're a hopeless Islamophobe.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Taylor Dinerman, Arlene Ross, Ed Thompson, Joe Perez, Ethel Fenig, John Bobek, Rod Pennington, Ben Mittman, Andrew Pietila, Christopher DeLange, Jerry Skurnick, Arnold Nelson, Scott Siegel, David Gerstman, Ed Elverud, John Sanders, Paul Williamson, Bruce Goldman, Michele Schiesser, Clifford Crouch, Ed Grinberg, Roy Alanis, Aaron Davidson, Hillel Markowitz, Stephen Murray, Armen Devejian and Monty Krieger. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)