Hear Ye! Hear Ye! A new, extremely urgent emergency meeting of the Esteemed Membership of the New York/New Jersey Metro Area Chapter of Rex Ryan Bashers is now officially declared in session!

Helloooooooo? Is anyone out there? Anyone? 

If you're still a Rex Basher, give a signal! Whisper something! If you're hiding in a closet, or in a place where it's not safe to speak—tap lightly on a metal surface or scratch the wall. Send a text message. A PG-rated text message!

These are trying days for the Esteemed Membership of the New York/New Jersey Metro Area Chapter of Rex Ryan Bashers. Did you read Cormac McCarthy's apocalyptic novel "The Road"? It's just like that. A few sad, hungry Rex Bashing refugees on the run—being chased by a lot of very excited guys in REVIS and MANGOLD jerseys.

The Rex Bashers never thought it would come to this. New England…in New England? There wasn't supposed to be a chance. Bill Belichick was supposed to finish the job. The Patriots would stomp the Jets and push on to the AFC Championship and the Super Bowl. Rex was Rex—but he'd never be Bill.

The Rex Bashers were borderline cocky. Their first official "Told You So" Parade had been postponed after the upset in Indianapolis, but they were certain they'd have one this week. There were going to be fiery anti-Rex speeches about watching your words, about never giving an opponent motivation, especially an all-business opponent like New England. Mr. Ryan would be censured and humiliated. 

Then…Jets 28, New England 21. Shonn Greene's pretending to be sleeping after a touchdown, Braylon Edwards is imitating a 747, Rex Ryan's running to the end zone and CBS's Jim Nantz is howling.

The Rex Bashers are in shock. Now it's looking like Mr. Belichick could use some Rex. The dour Patriots coach has three Super Bowl titles but he's also lost his past three postseason games. Magic Khakis, meanwhile, is 4-1 in two years. The Jets are in their second consecutive AFC Championship.

Where do the Rex Bashers go from here? Win or lose against Pittsburgh, the Jets have exceeded last year's performance. They had a better regular-season record, and that Patriots stunner will be talked about for generations. Even if the Jets go out and stumble against the Steelers, how do you possibly argue Mr. Ryan's act has grown ineffective and counter-productive?

This is for certain: the Esteemed Membership of the New York/New Jersey Metro Area Chapter of Rex Ryan Bashers will somehow find a way to complain.

But what if the Jets pull it off in Pittsburgh? What if all of Mr. Ryan's ridiculous talk on HBO's "Hard Knocks" in August actually proves true, and the Jets bombast their way to the Super Bowl at Cowboys Stadium? And what if they beat either Chicago or Green Bay and win their first Super Bowl since LBJ was in office?

What if there's an actual Jets parade—a real parade, down the Canyon of Heroes with Mr. Ryan balancing the Lombardi trophy aloft from a middle finger in front of thousands of schoolchildren?

What hope do the Rex Bashers have then?

Until further notice—remain in hiding, Rex Bashers. Protect yourselves and memorize your talking points. And on Sunday, tap twice on a metal surface if the Jets lose. If the Jets win, run as fast and as far away as you can. 

 Write to  Jason Gay at jason.gay@wsj.com 