PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla.—Carlos Beltran keeps a small stack of baseball cards on the top shelf of his locker here at the Mets' spring-training complex. All of them feature the same player: Carlos Beltran.

After a batting-practice session earlier this month, he slid the cards off the shelf and thumbed through them. He does this sometimes. At his lowest moments over the past two years, ever since his knees began to betray him, he has read and re-read his career statistics on the back of each card, taking in the tangible evidence of the player he once was and hopes to be again.

"I look back, and I say, 'I know I'm better than this. I'm better than how I'm playing right now,'" he said.

That Beltran needs to remind himself just how good a player he used to be—and as recently as 2008, he was arguably the best all-around center fielder in baseball—is another sign of how much his physical decline has shaken him, how much it has changed the way he views himself. Earlier this spring, he relinquished center field—the most glamorous outfield position, the only one he has played during his six years with the Mets—to his friend Angel Pagan, moving to right for the good of the team and himself.

But until the past few days, he has been more of an idea, a distant wish, than he has been a participant in the Mets' preparations for the regular season. He has hit on his own, jogged on his own, lifted weights on his own—all in the name of defying what his body seems to be telling him. 

In overcompensating for his right knee, which doctors have operated on twice, he has cultivated tendinitis in the left, a condition that has done more than isolate him from his teammates and threaten to keep him out of the Mets' Opening Day lineup. It has compelled him, at age 33, as the last season of his seven-year, $119 million contract is about to begin, to confront the precariousness of his playing career.

"You have to be realistic with yourself," he said. "I told my wife that I will play this game until I feel that I can't produce. If I don't feel I can produce, it doesn't matter if they pay me one, two million dollars. There's no reason for me to play. I'd embarrass myself. I don't want to embarrass myself. No one wants to embarrass himself."

For those Mets fans old enough to remember the 1973 World Series, the image of a once-great center fielder struggling with the erosion of his skills already has been burned into memory. In Game 2 of that Series, Willie Mays, then a Met, stumbled while running the bases and misplayed two fly balls, losing sight of them amid late-afternoon sun and shadow.

Mays was 42 at the time, and the sight of him staggering around the outfield stained his legacy as a national icon and distorted people's perspective on his two years as a Met, said James Hirsch, author of the book "Willie Mays: The Life, The Legend."

"Big plays that are amplified by the media tend to overshadow everything else," Hirsch said in a phone interview. "The threat that Beltran faces, if he continues to try to get back into the lineup, is he'll get there, and in some big play, he's going to look bad, and that is going to overshadow his career."

Beltran already had one such moment last August, bumping absentmindedly into the center field fence at Philadelphia's Citizens Bank Park as he reached to catch a deep fly ball. The play represented the nadir of his most trying season as a major-leaguer; following off-season surgery, he rejoined the Mets after the All-Star break and in 64 games hit just .255, his lowest batting average since 2000. Eight games over .500 when Beltran returned, the Mets slid to fourth place in the National League East with him, finishing with a 79-83 record.

The team's tumble from postseason contention last year only reinforced the notion in the minds of some Mets followers that Beltran was never as valuable as his statistics suggested he was. "I don't know if it's a direct correlation to Beltran being there or not, but in my mind, it was," said Joe Benigno, who co-hosts a midday sports-talk show on WFAN 660-AM and is perhaps Beltran's most vocal critic. "I just think there's been too many times where this guy hasn't gotten it done for this team."

Before signing with the Mets in January 2005, Beltran combined speed and power in a manner rare for any player, averaging 29 home runs and 37 stolen bases a season from 2001 to 2004 for the Kansas City Royals and Houston Astros. Yet to say his career with the Mets has been star-crossed would be a vast understatement. 

In 2006, for example, he enjoyed the finest of his 13 seasons in the majors, hitting 41 home runs, scoring 127 runs, winning the first of his three Gold Gloves and leading the Mets to their first division title since 1988. But the everlasting image from that year is of Beltran frozen in the batter's box, watching a third-strike curveball from St. Louis's Adam Wainwright sail past him for the final out of the Mets' Game 7 loss in the National League Championship Series.

With Beltran healthy, the Mets faltered down the stretch in 2007 and 2008, squandering sizable leads in the NL East and missing the playoffs. (The irony of those collapses is that over those two Septembers, Beltran batted .310 with 14 home runs in 203 at-bats.) The next year, a bone bruise on his right knee limited him to 81 games, set the stage for the chronic problems that followed and further complicated any evaluation of his tenure with the Mets.

"Injuries kept him from being a superstar," said Yankees outfielder Andruw Jones, as if Beltran—who averaged 34 home runs and posted a .909 on-base-plus-slugging percentage from 2006 through 2008—had not already been one. Now, it is difficult not to view this latest rehabilitation as his last chance to both justify his lucrative contract and earn himself a new one.

"Even though I have done a lot in this game and they say you don't have to prove nothing to nobody, I have to prove to myself," he said. "I want to finish strong—not even for New York, for myself. I know what kind of player I am."

So he has gone through his base-running and hitting drills here, often returning from the workouts to an empty clubhouse, wrapping his left leg in ice and probing it for any hint of pain. A switch hitter, he batted left-handed in a minor-league game on Wednesday and in five plate appearances never hit the ball out of the infield, an indication that perhaps the tendinitis is still weakening his knee and, in turn, his swing.

On Friday, he did have five hits in 10 at-bats during another simulated game, but he did not run at all.

He is scheduled Saturday to make what would be regarded as an important breakthrough: playing right field in another minor-league game. It is a test that will help to determine when he might play for the Mets again and whether he can avoid the same sad ending that marred Mays's career four decades ago. If he can't, Hirsch said, "they're going to forget what a terrific player he was." Those baseball cards, and the history they hold, remain on that shelf to make sure one man remembers.