At least Peter Sellers would be pleased. On Tuesday, Sotheby's in New York got $16.8 million for a Jeff Koons sculpture of the British actor's animated alter ego, "Pink Panther," embracing a buxom blonde. 

The work anchored Sotheby's $128.1 million sale of contemporary art, a total that edged past its $120.8 million low estimate but saw a number of works by well-known artists like Ed Ruscha and Ellsworth Kelly go unsold. 

That's mainly because contemporary-art collectors who weathered the recession are now taking a magnifying glass to art values, with most content to sit on their paddles when an asking price seems high. Gone are the days when sellers could buy a work one season and resell it for three times as much the next.

On the other hand, an influx of newly wealthy Asian bidders is injecting a fresh dose of exuberance—resulting in a volatile atmosphere that feels at once careful and giddy. The Asian telephone bidder who bought Mr. Koons's 1988 porcelain "Panther" got it for well under its $20 million low estimate.

The mood in the Sotheby's salesroom started out upbeat, its seats packed with collectors like Los Angeles billionaire Eli Broad, designer Valentino Garavani, Dallas collector Howard Rachofsky and Miami collectors Don and Mera Rubell. But these auction regulars didn't do any bidding, leaving much of it to telephone bidders and New York dealers like Christoph van de Weghe and Jack Tilton. 

Sculptures fared well. Yoshitomo Nara's van-sized dog made from glossy black fiberglass, "Your Dog" (2003), attracted at least four bidders, with a woman in the salesroom getting it for $602,500. It was priced to sell for at least $300,000. Collectors also lined up to vie for Louise Bourgeois's bronze totem "The Winged Figure," which sold for $2.4 million, over its $1.5 million high estimate.

A few auction veterans tried, but failed, to secure major price bumps this time around. Back in 1998, Christie's got $107,000 for Mr. Ruscha's wry riff on the Los Angeles commute, "Honey…I Twisted Through More Damned Traffic to Get Here." On Tuesday, Sotheby's asked at least $3.5 million for it but found no takers. Faring better: Jasper Johns's gray "Map" of the U.S. in graphite gouache, which sold for $1.4 million, up from the $1 million it fetched seven years ago at Christie's. 

Andy Warhol's blue-gold grid depicting Jacqueline Kennedy in 1964, "Sixteen Jackies," sold for $20.2 million, over its $20 million low estimate.

Overall, Sotheby's sold 49 of the 58 pieces on offer, helping the sale achieve 88.7% of its total potential value. After the sale, Sotheby's specialist Anthony Grant said the auction house "tried to take baby steps" in raising price levels for some works but conceded, "In a few cases, bidders didn't come with us."

 Write to  Kelly Crow at kelly.crow@wsj.com 