PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla.—Two weeks ago, Jason Isringhausen showed up here just hoping the Mets would let him into camp. Now, the one-time phenom is emerging as a legitimate candidate to make the Opening Day roster.

In his first Grapefruit League appearance, Isringhausen pitched a near-perfect inning Monday in the Mets' 9-3 exhibition loss to the Washington Nationals. He allowed no hits and no walks, while hitting one batter with a pitch. It was his first time facing major-league hitters in a game since he underwent Tommy John surgery in 2009.

"I'm sure he was a little nervous," Mets manager Terry Collins said. "But as we all expected from what we know of him, he was aggressive and he went after the hitters. I'm sure he wanted to show everybody his fastball is still good."

It was only a glimpse of what Isringhausen can do, not nearly enough for the Mets to draw any conclusions. The biggest test will come later in camp when he pitches on back-to-back days. But Collins has already seen enough to believe that Isringhausen, 38, could help the Mets as a middle reliever.

"If he's healthy and he can throw with the velocity we know he can have and the breaking ball, with his experience, I think he's got to be certainly one of the front-runners for that bullpen," Collins said.

That's already a significant change from the Mets' thinking two weeks ago. After Isringhausen threw a bullpen session in front of J.P. Ricciardi, the Mets' head of pro scouting, Ricciardi told Collins the team would likely extend Isringhausen an invite to its minor-league camp.

There, Isringhausen would have time to get his arm back in shape. Perhaps he'd be ready to pitch in the majors by May.

"The next thing you know, 25 minutes later he's in our camp," Collins said. "And two days later, he's throwing a bullpen as good as I've seen. I said, 'Are you ready?' He said, 'Yes, I'm ready.'"

Isringhausen is one of several pitchers competing for what Collins said were two or three open spots in the Mets' bullpen. He last pitched in the majors for the Tampa Bay Rays in 2009.

Isringhausen, who was once one of the Mets' top pitching prospects, last pitched a full season in the majors in 2008. He had a 5.70 ERA in 42 relief appearances for the Cardinals.

In 2010, Mike Pelfrey finished spring training with an unsightly 6.15 ERA. Then, the regular season started, and he got off to the best start by a Mets pitcher in 40 years. So neither he nor the Mets will put much stock into how he fares in exhibition games.

Already designated as the Mets' opening-day starter, Pelfrey allowed one earned run on five hits in three innings Monday against the Nationals. Predictably, he said he was glad he "got my work in" and shrugged off the results. "You guys can worry about it," Pelfrey told reporters, "but I'm not going to."