TRIPOLI, Libya—The Libyan regime is feeling the impact of sweeping financial sanctions that have been tightened further as part of the U.N. Security Council resolution authorizing international military action against government forces in their battle with rebels.

Latset developments

Some observers say this may be one reason behind the regime's announcement on Friday of a tentative cease-fire and an end to military operations against the rebels. 

But the regime also appears to be using the sanctions to rally the Libyan people behind it, telling them that any hardship they suffer will be a direct result of punitive measures imposed by the U.N. and Western powers.

The financial sanctions were invoked in the terse cease-fire statement delivered by Foreign Minister  Moussa Koussa on Friday, and their repercussions on the Libyan economy, government revenues, investment and banking system were detailed on Thursday night in a press briefing by  Abdel-Hafidh Zlitni, the finance and economy minister, who is also acting as the interim central banker.

"The total freeze of Libyan accounts and funds will hurt the Libyan people and prevent the state from meeting its domestic obligations," said Mr. Koussa.

Earlier this week, the U.S Treasury Department froze the assets of Mr. Koussa, a member of Col. Moammar Gadhafi's inner circle who served previously as the head of the country's intelligence agency.

Treasury also prohibited U.S. citizens from doing business with him and 16 Libyan companies in the aviation, banking, investment and oil sectors which are believed to have ties to Mr. Koussa and other members of Col. Gadhafi's regime.

A U.S.-based banker with intimate knowledge of the finances of Col. Gadhafi's regime said the financial sanctions outlined in the Feb. 26 U.N. resolution on Libya—reaffirmed and tightened in the second resolution on Thursday—were "tailor-made" to hurt Col. Gadhafi, his family and key regime figures the most, while minimizing the impact on the rest of the population.

But he said he expected the regime to exploit the sanctions to whip up public resentment toward the U.S. and Europe, as it did during previous international sanctions against Libya, most notably between 1993 and 2003 when Col. Gadhafi refused to hand over Libyans suspected of bombing Pan Am Flight 103.

"This is an old trick that they have used in the past," said the banker, who spoke on condition of anonymity because he had not obtained clearance from his employer to make public statements on Libya.

Track events day by day.

On Thursday, Mr. Zlitni, the Libyan finance minister and interim central banker, said the sanctions were "illegal," "not imaginable at all," and imposed without thought given to their impact on average Libyans.

"The money that has been frozen—current accounts, deposits, investment funds, portfolios—they belong to the Libyan people and they need it," he said. "If they are still frozen, then seven million will suffer."

Mr. Zlitni said oil revenues invested abroad were needed to pay civil servants' salaries, retirement pensions and subsidies for water, power and other state utilities totaling almost 29 billion dinars ($22.3 billion) a year. They also paid for such things as the education of almost 15,000 Libyan students studying overseas, he said.

He warned that sanctions coupled with plummeting oil exports, the exodus of foreign companies at the start of the current crisis and disruption of the banking sector would cripple the Libyan economy in the long term.

He said vital infrastructure projects worth nearly 133 billion dinars as well as investments in the oil and gas sector valued at almost $30 billion had been halted. The Libyan state would not be able to honor its commitments to foreign contractors, he said.

Mr. Zlitni predicted government revenues of 56 billion dinars would be slashed in half while economic growth would decline to 2% to 3% from a forecasted 7%.

 Write to  Sam Dagher at sam.dagher@wsj.com 