HONG KONG— Citic Pacific Ltd.
CTPCY


10.46
%




 said Thursday its net profit rose 50% in 2010 to 8.92 billion Hong Kong dollars (US$1.14 billion), its second-highest result on record, due to improved special steel sales and asset disposals. 

Chairman  Chang Zhenming said Citic Pacific's state-run parent, Citic Group, is working on a plan to list in Hong Kong. Earlier media reports said state-owned Citic Group, the largest conglomerate in China, plans to list in Hong Kong by the end of this year in a deal that will raise as much as 80 billion yuan (US$11.8 billion). 

"We do not have a concrete timetable for the listing plan. It involves a systematic change in the company. It also depends on whether we will meet the requirements of the regulator and the market conditions," Mr. Chang said. 

Citic Pacific's net profit for the year ended Dec. 31 was up from HK$5.95 billion dollars in 2009 and surpassed the average HK$6.65 billion forecast of 10 analysts surveyed by Thomson Reuters. 

Revenue rose 52% to HK$70.61 billion from HK$46.41 billion the year before. 

Mr. Chang said in a statement the Hong Kong-listed company, with operations including steel, iron-ore mining and property, has "emerged from the difficulties faced two years ago and has become stronger and better positioned for the future." 

The blue-chip company had a net loss of HK$12.69 billion in 2008 owing to unauthorized bets it made on the Australian dollar that eventually went sour and caused losses in the billions of dollars. Former Chairman  Larry Yung and former Managing Director  Henry Fan lost their jobs over the matter. 

Mr. Chang said the firm has tightened its focus on its special steel, iron-ore mining and property businesses, which together accounted for 72% of its assets at the end of 2010. 

Citic Pacific's special-steel operations contributed HK$2.10 billion to its overall net profit last year, up 49% from HK$1.42 billion the year before, owing to improved demand and as the company expanded its production capacity and product range. Mr. Chang said the company is on track to reach its annual production capacity target of nine million tons this year. 

Its iron-ore mining operations recorded a net loss of HK$346 million in 2010, compared with a net profit of HK$376 million a year earlier, following delays in the construction of its magnetite iron ore project in Western Australia's Pilbara region, which the company said will be the biggest such mine in the country. 

Mr. Chang reiterated Citic Pacific's earlier statement that it expects the project to begin exports later this year and that all the components needed for the operation of the first production line should be ready by the end of July. 

"The mining project is the company's top priority this year," he said at the news conference. 

Citic Pacific's property business contributed HK$960 million to its overall net profit in 2010, up 4.2% from HK$921 million the year before. 

Mr. Chang said Citic Pacific is a "long-term developer" and its current land bank is sufficient to withstand the market volatility caused by the Chinese government's tough measures to control property prices. 

Asset disposals contributed HK$4.40 billion to the company's net profit last year, up 67% from HK$2.63 billion a year earlier. 

Citic Pacific recommended a dividend of 30 Hong Kong cents a share, higher than the 25 Hong Kong cents it recommended in 2009. 