Seen from the air, the Regent Street shopping district cuts a majestic path through central London. The whitish gray facades of the multistory buildings owned by the queen of England's asset manager are a major destination for international shoppers. 

It also was here that Norges Bank Investment Management went shopping when the Norwegian sovereign-wealth fund decided to make its first property investment ever. In one of the biggest European property deals this year, Norges Bank is paying £452 million ($734.8 million) for a 150-year lease on a 25% stake in Regent Estate, a group of properties on Regent Street owned by the British crown.

The deal, which was finalized this year, is a sign that the rise of investments in retail property is set to continue.

The amount of money going into retail property has increased as a share of total European commercial-property investment, according to a survey by Jones Lang LaSalle. In 2010, the retail sector accounted for 28% of total commercial-property investment, up from 21% in 2006. Investment in offices accounted for 49% of total commercial-property investment in 2010, down from 53% in 2006. 

Big institutional investors stepping back into property markets since the financial crisis largely have sought the security of income-generating assets such as shopping centers. Office buildings still account for the largest share of commercial-property investment, but many investors have reduced their exposure to these properties, which have suffered from vacancies during the recession.

Allianz Real Estate, a unit of German insurer Allianz SE, is telling investors in roadshows that it plans to invest about €11 billion ($15 billion) in European property, aiming to take its portfolio to €30 billion. Allianz Real Estate, which is looking for yields of between 5% and 6%, wants to have about 45% of its portfolio in offices, 25% in retail and 15% in residential. Offices account for 63% of Allianz's portfolio, residential is 20%, and retail is about 17%, according to Allianz Real Estate.

Real-estate investment trusts, or REITs, also are on the prowl for retail-property investments, a shift in strategy. For the past two years, REITs and other listed property companies have been sellers of stakes in retail holdings to raise cash to pay off debt. In June, Allianz Real Estate bought a 75% stake in the Espace St. Quentin shopping center in Paris for €235 million. The seller was U.K. REIT Hammerson PLC. 

But analysts said REITs will want to reverse the trend this year, continuing to team up with cash-rich partners such as Allianz, but now as joint buyers in order to expand, rather than reduce, their retail portfolios.

To be sure, the overall economic outlook remains murky. Germany's economy keeps chugging along, pushing unemployment down to 6.5%, the lowest in the euro zone, but joblessness in Spain is highest in the zone at 20.4%. That wide range raises questions about consumer spending and the health of retail property. There also are concerns over rising oil prices in the wake of unrest in the Middle East and North Africa, worries about inflation and rising food prices.

Harm Meijer, head of European property research at J.P. Morgan Chase, said that among U.K. REITs, a handful are well-placed to withstand any headwinds blowing in the face of shopping centers and stand to benefit from the retail sector. He estimates that property stocks with exposure to U.K. retail will provide total returns of 18% in 2011, but cites  British Land
BTLCY


1.52
%




 PLC,  Land Securities
LAND


0.38
%




 PLC and  Metric Property Investments PLC as the best-positioned of the U.K. REITs.

A few countries even are seeing a rise in retail development. ECE Projektmanagement GmbH, the German shopping-center developer controlled by the Otto family, and DWS, the German fund manager, launched construction of a new shopping and entertainment center in Istanbul, Turkey, on Tuesday. The 100,000 square meter center will cost €220 million to develop, with €115 million in financing provided by the Turkish Finansbank. ECE and DWS, a unit of  Deutsche Bank AG, each hold 50% stakes in the venture. 

The 25% stake in Regent Estate was sold by Crown Estate, the asset manager of the British crown. The deal values the property at €1.8 billion. Retailers in the crown's Regent Street properties include Apple, Banana Republic and Jaeger. 

"Regent Estate has been managed by the crown with a very long-term perspective," said  Jeremy Eddy, international director of capital markets in Europe, the Middle East and Africa for Jones Lang LaSalle. "This is the kind of asset that is best-suited for the pension funds and sovereign-wealth funds that are now looking for long-term, stable returns."

 Write to  William Boston at newseditors@wsj.com 