TEL AVIV—At least eight Palestinians were killed and 13 were injured Tuesday in two Israeli attacks against militant targets in the Gaza Strip, part of a recent escalation that threatens months of calm and could undermine plans for a visit to Gaza by Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas.

The first strike killed four civilians, among them two children playing soccer in the neighborhood of Shuja'iyya, Palestinian officials said. In the second attack, the army said aircraft attacked a militant group preparing to fire a Katyusha rocket. 

The violence marked one of the deadliest days in Gaza since the end of a three week war between Hamas and Israel two years ago. Since then, Hamas has enforced on Gaza militants a mutual calm with Israel, but a spokesman for Hamas' military wing suggested the organization is reconsidering. 

"The resistance cannot control itself any further,'' said a masked militant spokesman identified as Abu Obeidah. ``The occupation will pay an expensive price for what it did.''

In a statement, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu expressed regret for the ``mistaken injury'' to innocent Gazans, and added it was a response to Hamas fire at communities in southern Israel. He said that while Israel does not wish to destabilize the region, the Israeli army will continue to defend Israeli citizens. 

Before the upsurge in violence, Palestinians were focused on youth demonstrations pushing to reconcile an internal feud between Mr. Abbas' Fatah party and Hamas, which violently wrested control of the Gaza Strip in 2007. The rift has stymied Palestinian politics and complicated peacemaking with Israel.

Inspired by youth protests around the Arab world, tens of thousands of demonstrators around the Palestinian territories on March 15 called for unity talks, prompting overtures for a summit in Gaza. 

Mr. Abbas' offer to visit Gaza immediately, the first such trip in four years, raised expectations among Palestinians and in the region that Hamas would make good on its invitation, said Palestinian analysts.

The continued destabilization of the Gaza-Israel border region would make such a visit, a potential breakthrough in Hamas-Fatah, ties unlikely. 

In a previous attack late Monday, 18 Palestinians, some of them children, were wounded in strikes which Israel said targeted smuggling tunnels, weapons-storage facilities and militant bases. Over the past day, Israel's army and Hamas' military wing have issued mutual warnings about further hostilities, while adding they don't seek an escalation.

The rise in hostilities began Saturday, when Gaza militants fired dozens mortars into southern Israel, an unusually intense attack for which Hamas claimed responsibility, breaking from its policy of maintaining relative calm along the border with Israel. Before Tuesday, the violence had claimed the lives of two Palestinians.

Before the fighting, Hamas' security forces had come under criticism by Palestinian human-rights activists for using force and arrests to quash youth protests in Gaza City. Some Palestinian analysts see the attacks on Israel as an attempt by Hamas hardliners to scuttle any reconciliation with Mr. Abbas. 

In addition to the mortar fire, Gaza militants have in recent days fired a Katyusha rocket at the Israeli city of Ashkelon and attacked an Israeli border post. Hamas only claimed responsibility for the mortars.

"Hamas is trying to shift Palestinian attention, especially from the local problem in Gaza,'' said Mkhaimar Abusada, a political-science professor at Al Azhar University, a center of the demonstrations in Gaza City. "Hamas knew that Israel was going to escalate the situation. Hamas is trying to sabotage the visit of [Mr. Abbas].''

In response to the mortar fire on Saturday, Israel issued a formal protest to the United Nations Security Council, calling it an "unprecedented'' increase in fire from Gaza "with the clear intention of targeting and terrorizing Israeli civilians.''

Israel has also criticized the idea of a Hamas-Fatah reconciliation. In an interview with CNN last week, Prime Minister Netanyahu likened the idea to a peace deal with Al-Qaeda.