NEW DELHI -- India's eastern state of Orissa expects to complete buying land for South Korean steelmaker Posco's proposed plant by June 18, but the main group opposing the plant vowed to continue its fight as it claims the project will snatch away land from local villagers and destroy their agriculture-based livelihoods.

"The nodal agency in charge of land acquisition in the state, Orissa Industrial Infrastructure Development Corporation, will start buying land on May 18 and is targeting a month to complete the process," an Orissa government official, who didn't wish to be named, said over the phone.

Earlier this month, the federal environment ministry gave its final clearance to Posco's proposal to build a 4.0-million-ton plant in the first stage of the project at Orissa's Jagatsinghpur district.

The project, which Posco hopes to scale up to 12 million tons a year gradually, has been cited as India's single-largest foreign direct investment, estimated above $12 billion.

Protests against the project center around two villages, Dhinkia and Gobindpur, which have laid claim to the land on which the project would be built.

Indian law says forests can't be cleared for an industrial project without explicit approval of villages that have claims to the land. The state government of Orissa, however, told the Ministry of Environment and Forests that the claims of villagers about living in the forest which would become the project site were fraudulent and that local authorities would file cases against the head of at least one village council.

The government, however, isn't ruling out further protests.

"Protests are quite natural in land acquisitions," the official said. Even if the land acquisition is completed within a month, it won't be handed over to Posco immediately, he added.

"IDCO [Orissa Industrial Infrastructure Development Corporation] would take time to develop the land. Besides, with the initial pact between the Orissa government and Posco already expired, Posco has submitted a fresh proposal for a new agreement and the Orissa government is examining this," he added.

Federal Environment Minister Jairam Ramesh had said he is concerned about a clause in the previous pact that allowed Posco to export iron ore from the state and he had recommended to the Orissa government that it shouldn't allow any export of the raw material by the South Korean steelmaker.

Meanwhile, the main protest group, Posco Pratirodh Sangram Samiti, or Posco Protest Committee, has said it would continue to hold protests at the site to oppose the project.

"The government may want to complete land acquisition [by June 18], but we won't let that happen. We won't accept any relief and rehabilitation package or submit to compromise," said group spokesman Prashant Paikary. "Our only demand is Posco should go."

He said the group, along with some political parties, would hold protests at the project site on May 18.

"The government isn't letting people demonstrate freely against the project. So, protesters are now thinking of how to carry on their struggle amid the bullets and sticks that will be targeted at them by the police," said Prafulla Samantara, secretary of the left-leaning protest group Lok Shakti Abhijan, or People's Power Movement. 

 Write to  Prasenjit Bhattacharya at prasenjit.bhattacharya@dowjones.com 