For decades, the Ho family has dominated political, social and economic life in Macau, a special administrative region of China that is the country's only legal gambling center. Here's a look at Stanley Ho, the gambling empire's patriarch, and some of the people surrounding him. 

 Stanley Ho, 89. A Eurasian of Dutch extraction who speaks Portuguese and Cantonese, Mr. Ho during World War II fled a Japanese invasion of Hong Kong to neutral Macau. He became wealthy trading supplies for a company owned by the Japanese military, the Portuguese government and local Chinese merchants.

He and a group of investors won a gambling monopoly from the Portuguese-run colonial government in 1962. Mr. Ho ran a network of casinos, anchored by the Lisboa casino and hotel. He branched out into many parts of the Macanese economy, including a department store, hotels, a bank, housing projects and a high-speed ferry service linking Macau to nearby Hong Kong. He also opened North Korea's only casino, in the basement of a Pyongyang hotel. 

The woman considered his first wife, Clementina, is deceased; their children keep a low profile. There are currently three women he and others refer to as his wives. 

 Lucina Laam. Considered Mr. Ho's second wife, Ms. Laam has been living in Canada in recent years. She is the mother of five of Mr. Ho's children.

 Pansy Ho, 48. Ms. Ho, the eldest daughter of second wife Ms. Laam, is managing director of Hong Kong-listed Shun Tak Holdings, which controls Mr. Ho's transportation, retail and real-estate holdings. In her own personal capacity, she also controls half of a joint venture with MGM Mirage that operates the MGM Grand Macau casino-resort. 

 Lawrence Ho, 33, a son of his second wife. 

Mr. Ho's oldest living son, the younger Mr. Ho was educated in Canada and now runs three casinos in Macau under a 50-50 joint venture with Australian casino heir James Packer. 

 Josie Ho, 36. Ms. Ho, a sister of Pansy Ho, is a pop star in Hong Kong and Macau. 

In addition to releasing a handful of pop albums, she has starred in a number of televised dramas and movies, winning an acting prize at the Hong Kong Film Awards in 2004.

 Daisy Ho, listed as 45 in a public filing in April 2010. Ms. Ho, a younger sister of Pansy Ho, is a director at Shun Tak.

 Ina Chan. Mr. Ho's third wife and mother of three of his children.

 Angela Leong, listed as 49 in an April 2010 public filing. Mr. Ho's fourth wife, in 2005 she was elected as a legislator in Macau. 

Ms. Leong and Mr. Ho have five children.

 Write to  Jonathan Cheng at jonathan.cheng@wsj.com 