A backpack bomb found Monday along the route of a Martin Luther King Day parade in Spokane, Wash., was "lethal" and appeared to be targeting the gathering, the Federal Bureau of Investigation said. 

Workers for a local company doing routine maintenance work found an abandoned backpack just before the parade was set to make its way along downtown streets. Spokane police rerouted the parade and the local bomb squad deactivated the device found inside, the FBI said. 

A preliminary analysis of the device shows it was "operational and had the potential to be very lethal and cause many casualties," Frank Harrill, the FBI's supervisory senior resident agent in Spokane, said Wednesday. 

Mr. Harrill said investigators have received "numerous fruitful" leads on the case but haven't identified any suspects and haven't been able to determine a motive for the attempted bombing. Law enforcement isn't aware of any warnings or threats made to the event, he said. 

Based on "the confluence of the route of the march, the timing of march, and the placement of this device," FBI investigators are operating under the view that the attack was aimed at the King event, Mr. Harrill said. 

In recent years, law enforcement in the region has dealt with numerous groups with white supremacist and other ideologies, Mr. Harrill said, but has not found any indications the Monday bombing attempt was related. 

Another bomb was found last March near the federal courthouse in Spokane and that case remains unsolved. Mr. Harrill said investigators haven't found any indications that the two attempted bombings are related. 

The region around Spokane in eastern Washington and northern Idaho has long been a hub for white hate groups. Among the best known was the Aryan Nation, a white supremacist organization that largely collapsed after a successful civil lawsuit in 2000 against the group and its founder, Richard Butler. The suit was brought by the victims of an attack outside the group's compound in Hayden Lake, Idaho. Mr. Butler died at the age of 86 in 2004. 

"That part of the world has a very well-developed white-supremacist movement and over the years has produced a great deal of criminal violence," said Mark Potok, director of the intelligence project at the Southern Poverty Law Center, an organization that monitors hate groups and which represented the plaintiffs in the civil lawsuit against the Aryan Nation.

 Write to  Evan Perez at evan.perez@wsj.com and Nick Wingfield at nick.wingfield@wsj.com 