The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria has named a former senior U.S. government official and Botswana's former president to co-chair an external review of its financial systems, amid heightened scrutiny from donors over misuse of some grants and a potential funding reduction from the U.S. 

On Tuesday, the Global Fund named Michael Leavitt and Festus Mogae to co-chair a panel that will review its mechanisms for disbursements of grant money, potentially recommending improvements. 

The panel is meant to provide reassurance to donors and will report its findings within a few months, said its executive director, Michel Kazatchkine. "If they say these are additional measures you should consider, then of course we will implement them," he said. 

The large international financier of drugs and programs to combat the three killer diseases suspended grants or implemented new safeguards in four countries—Zambia, Mali, Djibouti, and Mauritania—after uncovering evidence last year of fraudulent invoices for training, payments to suspicious vendors, and other incidents of misuse. 

The Global Fund disclosed the fraud itself through reports from its own inspector general, and media reports in January drew further scrutiny from some donors. Germany, one of the fund's largest donors, froze disbursements and asked for a review of the fund's financial controls.

The appointment of Mr. Leavitt, a former Republican governor of Utah who held two cabinet positions under George W. Bush, puts a seasoned U.S. expert in politics, management, and global health on the panel. Mr. Leavitt served as Secretary of Health and Human Services from 2005 until 2009. 

The U.S. is the Global Fund's largest donor and the formation of the panel comes as Congress is weighing a potential 43% reduction in the U.S. contribution for fiscal 2011 to $600 million from $1.05 billion in fiscal 2010.

As president of Botswana from 1998 to 2008, Mr. Mogae made combating HIV/AIDS one of his top priorities in a country hard hit by the epidemic. Under his leadership, Botswana was the first African country to provide free anti-retroviral drugs to people in need, and also significantly expanded HIV testing. 

The Global Fund is seeking to recover $43.3 million in funds from 11 countries. Of that amount, $11.2 million was stolen, predominantly in Mali and Mauritania, the fund says. The remaining $32.1 million was either not properly accounted for or was spent on program activities that were not in the original grant agreements, according to the Global Fund. 

The Global Fund has disbursed about $13 billion to programs in 145 countries since its formation in 2002; the fraud was uncovered from an audit of $1.41 billion disbursed. 

The panel, which will include three to five other members, is part of a larger effort by the Global Fund to strengthen its financial controls that also includes enhancing fraud protection and nearly doubling the budget for investigations by its inspector general, to $19.2 million this year from $10 million in 2010. 

The Global Fund, whose grants go to domestic programs and organizations in countries in need, has "proved to be an important part of the way health care is delivered around the world," Mr. Leavitt said in an interview.

"The world will get a candid report," he said. 

Mr. Mogae said in an interview he agreed to join the panel because "the Global Fund is of great importance to me," particularly given the spread of tuberculosis across Africa, to which people infected with HIV are particularly susceptible. "There are countries in our region for whom without the Global Fund a great many people would have died," he said. 

He said he would reserve judgment on potential improvements needed at the Global Fund until the panel completes its work.

 Write to  Betsy McKay at betsy.mckay@wsj.com 