 Anastasia Photo  166 Orchard St.  (212) 677-9725, through April 30

Most of the contemporary photography coming out of China looks like work done in fulfillment of the requirements for an MFA: huge, cerebral and with lollipop colors. Muge is uncredentialed and superior. The prints at Anastasia are medium format, either 19-by-19 or 15-by-19 inches, black-and-white, gelatin silver, and on occasion almost painfully emotional. Many were taken on a Kiev 60, a camera once made in Ukraine and notorious for its shoddy construction, whose one advantage is that it is cheap. Muge says, "To be a great artist you must not be afraid to be hungry."

"Untitled #1" (2008) is an attractive young woman standing alone in a grove of saplings. The trees are evenly spaced in neat rows, so it isn't a natural forest. The scene is shrouded in mist or fog, giving it an aura of hushed insubstantiality. The woman has a cellphone or iPod in her right hand and holds her left hand to her mouth. Like the lone figures in many of Muge's images, she seems isolated in space and time. In "Untitled #17," (2006) a ship's passengers about to leave home in search of work stand at the railings with expressions of sadness, anxiety and fear. "Untitled #8" (2009) is a landscape in the tradition of Chinese scroll painting—a single windswept tree in the middle distance on a flat plane with a dimly seen mountain far, far away. Muge illustrates the sorrow and dislocation behind China's commercial glitter.

 Windows Gallery, Kimmel Center, NYU  60 Washington Square South  (212) 998-2130, through May 1

First, a word about the Windows Gallery: It consists of 13 vitrines, 70 by 80 inches, on the outside of the Kimmel Center—eight on LaGuardia Place and five around the corner on West Third Street. The displays are lighted so they can be viewed around the clock without passersby having to break stride. Chester Higgins Jr. has work up that pedestrians should stop for. Mr. Higgins's portraits of Ethiopians are ethnographic in nature: The titles include the subject's tribal identity. So the "Amhara Woman" (2009) is seen in three-quarters profile, a garment of rough white cotton covering her shoulders, neck and the top of her head, where it culminates in a knot with red edging. 

The "Gnangaton Woman" (2010) is shown in profile: Her features are different from those of the Amhara woman and her shoulders are bare, but she wears a mass of bead necklaces and an elaborate headpiece decorated with soda-bottle caps. Mr. Higgins is a distinguished photographer, not an ethnographer, so he varies the format of his portraits. The "Dessanech Man" (2009) is seen dramatically from behind his left shoulder, the sage "Amhara Man" (2010) looks directly at us, and the face of the "Afar Woman" (2010) takes up the entire frame, a monumental presence. Beyond their genetic and cultural differences, and their adornments, ranging from shells and bones to hip sunglasses, Mr. Higgins captures their individual personalities.

 Deborah Bell Photographs  511 W. 25th St.  (212) 691-3883, through April 30

Susan Paulsen's best photographs represent the triumph of simplicity. "Yorktown, 2010" is an informal color portrait of a young girl. She is a pretty child with pale skin, blue eyes, tousled blond hair, and is wearing a plain sundress. She looks at the photographer calmly. The picture appears to have been taken by natural light, producing the pastel colors that are Ms. Paulsen's usual palette. The picture is so casual, so free of gimmicks, it seems to have taken itself, which is precisely the hardest of artistic accomplishments. The same could be said of "Evanston, 2009," a snapshot-like picture of an infant in white held by an anonymous woman in a dark dress.

There are pictures of fruits and of flowers that are reminiscent of Josef Sudek; "Katonah, 2009" is a bunch of pale-pink hydrangeas wrapped in a newspaper's classified ads. Among several nudes, one also titled "Yorktown, 2010" is a seated woman, full-figured, with her face turned away from the camera and toward the light. Her expression is introspective. A towel or bathrobe on the floor behind her and an unmade bed in the next room hint at a narrative. Besides these works, there are enigmatic pictures of hands, dead animals in bell jars and a recurring dog.

—Mr. Meyers writes on photography for the Journal. To see his work, go to williammeyersphotography.com 