A federal appeals court said the federal government can continue to fund research involving human embryonic stem cells, a victory for the Obama administration in an area of medical and ethical debate.

The 2-1 ruling overturned a trial judge's injunction in August 2010 that barred funding for the research.

Supporters of the research say the stem cells, which can develop into any type of body tissue, could help treat ailments from diabetes to heart disease.

Opponents question the morality of using cells derived from embryos in a process that destroys them, saying that amounts to taking a human life. 

Since 1996, Congress has barred federal funds for research in which human embryos are destroyed.

The Obama administration argues it can fund research on stem cells derived from embryonic stem-cell lines that were created with private money. 

The two-judge majority on the U.S Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit agreed with that view, saying the National Institutes of Health made a reasonable interpretation of an ambiguous law.

The majority, in an opinion by Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg, also said that barring the funding would be a substantial blow to researchers. 

All three judges in the case were appointed by Republican presidents.

In dissent, Judge Karen LeCraft Henderson, said the majority engaged in "linguistic jujitsu" and "produced a result that would make Rube Goldberg tip his hat." 

She said that when scientists use a stem cell line originating from a destroyed embryo they are engaging in the type of research Congress intended to ban in 1996.

Samuel B. Casey, a lawyer for the plaintiffs who oppose the research, said the ruling was a narrow one on the question of a preliminary injunction and didn't address most parts of the case. 

Those parts are pending before U.S. District Judge Royce Lamberth, who issued the injunction against the research last August.

"Our case remains intact," Mr. Casey said. He said the plaintiffs would ask the full appeals court to reconsider the case and would then go to the Supreme Court if need be.

NIH director Francis Collins hailed the ruling as a "momentous" one for "thousands of patients and their families who are relying on NIH-funded scientists to pursue life-saving discoveries and therapies that could come from stem-cell research."

Scientists have pushed for federal funds to support embryonic stem-cell science because they believe it offers great promise in treating a host of diseases through tissue transplantation. 

Privately funded research has continued, but federal money is the biggest source of funding for such projects. 

The NIH spent $1.4 billion on stem-cell research in 2010, including both embryonic and nonembryonic stem cells.

The more-optimistic predictions about medical breakthroughs have failed to pan out so far, as scientists struggle to turn the basic research into practical therapies.

Last October, Geron Corp. of Menlo Park, Calif., enrolled a patient in what it called the world's first clinical trial of embryonic stem-cell therapy in humans. The company seeks to help people with paralysis by injecting cells directly into the injured portion of a patient's spinal cord.

Geron said this month that the first patient passed the six-month mark with no serious side effects but also no significant change in neurological status. 

Many scientists are also pursuing an alternative and less-controversial approach—using embryonic-like cells derived from mature tissue that have been "reprogrammed" into a stem-cell state. That is a less-studied method and faces significant technical hurdles. Despite the promise of reprogrammed cells, embryo-derived cells are likely to remain the gold standard for experiments for quite some time.

One of President Barack Obama's first acts on science policy after taking office was to expand stem-cell research beyond limits set by President George W. Bush in August 2001. While Mr. Bush had limited research on embryonic stem cells to a small number of then-existing cell lines, Mr. Obama in March 2009 opened up federal funding to research using cells derived from embryos that were created by in-vitro fertilization for reproductive purposes and were no longer needed.

The plaintiffs in the lawsuit, scientists James Sherley and Theresa Deisher, contended that Mr. Obama's loosening of embryonic stem-cell funding rules had unfairly diverted money away from adult stem-cell research, their specialty.

—Janet Adamy contributed to this article.

 Write to  Brent Kendall at brent.kendall@dowjones.com and Gautam Naik at gautam.naik@wsj.com 