The Bay Area's tentative housing recovery sputtered in the final months of 2010, with many formerly rebounding coastal areas losing ground while some of the hardest-hit inland communities appeared to reach bottom or gain modestly, according to new data.

The overall market showed signs of strength through the middle of the year, industry analysts say, but began retreating in many cities amid continued economic weakness and the expiration on June 30 of a federal tax credit for first-time buyers.

The median transaction price for a previously owned, single-family home dropped 1% as the number of sales fell 11.7% in the nine-county Bay Area during the fourth quarter, compared with the same period in 2009, according to MDA DataQuick, a data provider in La Jolla, Calif.

Wendy Major in San Jose is feeling the impact of the sluggish market. The 55-year-old retired accounting clerk has had her four-bedroom house on the market since July, with no takers. Initially priced at $623,000, Ms. Major said she has cut the price several times to $575,000. In the meantime, she is living on a fixed income and is having to make mortgage payments on two homes, including one she bought in Los Banos, Calif., and now lives in. 

"What it comes down to is the people who would buy my home are waiting to see what the market will do," said Ms. Major. "It's frustrating."

While sales of higher-price homes are stalling, the doldrums are helping buyers at the lower end of the market. For 44-year-old Annette Corsetti, the price drops in her hometown of Concord enabled her to buy a home for the first time. "I could never afford a home before," said Ms. Corsetti, a single mother of one who paid $225,000 in September for a three-bedroom home in Concord that in 2007 was valued at about $500,000.

In 2010's fourth quarter, 29 of 99 communities around the Bay Area posted gains in median price, or roughly the same number as the year before, according to DataQuick, which bases its figures on sales that have closed. But unlike 2009, when cities closer to the coast dominated the gainers, in 2010 there was more of a mix between coast and inland—in part because inland markets have fallen so far, real-estate brokers say.

"Prices have gone down so far they didn't have much more room to go," said  Andrew LePage, a DataQuick analyst.

In the inland Solano County city of Rio Vista, for instance, the median price increased 1.4% in the fourth quarter after falling almost steadily the past three years, according to DataQuick. Still, Rio Vista's median price of $176,500 remained less than half its 2006 peak of $415,000. 

 In pricier locales along the coast, brokers say housing sales varied widely. One of the strongest markets was in the central part of Silicon Valley, where houses in cities like Palo Alto and Los Altos were snapped up by employees of Facebook Inc.,  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.94
%




 and other fast-growing technology companies. 

In tony Atherton, the median price jumped 9.2% in the fourth quarter from a year earlier to $3,112,500 on a 71% increase in sales volume, according to DataQuick. "We're seeing a lot of relocations here from other parts of the country as these companies grow, plus profits have gone up and there are a lot of bonuses," said  Ed Graziani, a real-estate agent in Los Altos.

But farther away from mid-Silicon Valley, median prices in San Francisco and San Jose dropped 3.4% and 2.1%, respectively, after rising 4.8% and 4.4% in the previous year, according to DataQuick. 

Two of the worst-performing markets in the Bay Area were in Marin County, where the median prices in Larkspur and San Rafael fell 23.1% and 10.8%, respectively. Brokers attribute the declines, in part, to a shift toward purchases of lower-price properties.

"What's happening in San Rafael is a good deal of the sales have been in the lower part of the market, due to [bank-owned] sales and foreclosures," said  Mary Kay Yamamoto, owner of Re/Max of Central Marin, a brokerage in San Rafael. She added the higher end of the market has remained sluggish in Marin and throughout the Bay Area now that banks are using stricter lending standards on jumbo loans in the wake of the mortgage crisis. Jumbo mortgages are required for loans above $729,750 in the Bay Area.

As a result, some transactions for higher-price homes are being handled outside of normal banking channels, through private lenders who often require much higher interest rates and faster loan repayments. Bookkeeper Dee Dee McCloud said she and her husband, Dave, in February pooled money with her mother, Vera Calhoun, to buy a five-bedroom, four-bathroom house for $1.05 million in Morgan Hill, south of San Jose.  Lianne Pinkston, an agent who represented the family, said that also was the listing price for the home, which in 2007 was valued at about $2 million and was sold by a bank. 

Ms. McCloud, 55, said the two families put up a cash down payment of 50% and borrowed the rest from a private lender, whom they must repay in a year. She said the money for the repayment is expected to come from sales of her home and that of her mother, which were both put on the market in San Jose a few weeks ago.

"This is more than I could have dreamed of having," said Ms. McCloud of her new, 4,000-square-foot house, which is more than twice the size of her old one and features amenities like two living rooms and two Jacuzzi baths and sits on 2.5 acres.

Few experts expect a strong rebound in Bay Area housing until the economy gets back on track with job creation. Still, agents throughout the area report stepped-up buying activity in the past few weeks. 

"You can feel the uptick," said  Michael Clancy, branch manager of the Better Homes and Gardens Mason-McDuffie Real Estate brokerage in Walnut Creek. "But the people I've had the hardest time trying to convince things may be changing are not the buyers, but the agents who have been beat up the last couple of years."

 Write to  Jim Carlton at jim.carlton@wsj.com 