  Fairholme Funds Inc., a Miami-based mutual fund manager, on Monday won a battle for control of  St. Joe Co.
JOE


-0.42
%




, the largest private owner of land near the white sand beaches of Florida's Panhandle, a change that may signal a new direction in the way northwest Florida is developed.

  Britt Greene, president and CEO of the 75-year-old company, resigned as a director and agreed to give up his executive positions later this week. Three other St. Joe directors said they would follow Mr. Greene in resigning from the board.

The unexpected move, which comes after a pitched battle over the governance of the company, hands effective control to the company's largest shareholder, Fairholme, and its well-known founder  Bruce R. Berkowitz. Fairholme began accumulating shares of St. Joe in 2007 and now holds about 29% of the company.

"I would think that would mean some quicker changes to the company's strategy, and that's not necessarily a bad thing," said  Sheila McGrath, an analyst at Keefe, Bruyette & Woods Inc. who follows St. Joe. "The company has been the victim of a very tough economy."

In December, Mr. Berkowitz and Mr. Fernandez joined the board, but stepped down six weeks later, citing disagreements over how to reform the company. 

Mr. Berkowitz then threatened a proxy fight, calling for shareholders to replace the entire board. But over the next two weeks, Fairholme and Mr. Berkowitz negotiated with St. Joe directors, and a compromise was reached recently. Mr. Greene and three other directors agreed to step down this week, but three existing directors, including Chairman Hugh Durden, will remain on the board. 

Under Mr. Greene, who become CEO in May 2008, and earlier chief executives, St. Joe spent much of the past two decades building vacation-home communities near Panama City, Fla. 

As the housing market boom was losing steam in 2007, St. Joe folded its home building operations, but continued to develop land in master-planned communities, selling it to other builders, and managing and selling timber land.

Mr. Berkowitz argued the board was moving too slowly and said managers had wasted money on operations and overpaid its executives. "In the past it has been mismanaged," Mr. Berkowitz said at an investment conference in New York on Feb. 3. "You have the company and it's generating no cash, doesn't have any debt. It's just sort of dead in the water."

Under Messrs. Berkowitz and Fernandez, the company will most likely make deep cuts to its operations and swing the focus away from developing master-planned communities and selling off cheap timber land and instead focus more on commercial development designed to attract defense contractors and businesses related to the military.

"I want it to be a metropolis. I'm not just talking about a vacation community," said Mr. Berkowitz in an interview last month. "When industry comes, which it will, to the area, because that area is in an aerospace corridor, it's going to be one of the best places to live and work in Florida." 

St. Joe was hit hard by the downturn in the national housing market. The company does not release sales figures for the homes in its coastal resorts, but in October, an activist investor gave a presentation saying that sales of new homes and home sites at St. Joe communities have essentially halted since the housing crash. 

St. Joe was founded 75 years ago as a timber company by an heir to the du Pont chemical fortune, but in the last three decades has remade itself as a resort developer, building high-end vacation homes in gated communities along the Florida Panhandle. But the housing crash that began in 2007 and has sunk home prices in some parts of Florida by as much as 40% has stalled sales at St. Joe properties and forced the company to cut back on new developments.

But under Mr. Greene, St. Joe had already begun to concentrate on commercial development and on attracting new businesses to the area around the Northwest Florida Beaches International Airport in Panama City. The airport opened in May after being built on 4,000 acres that St. Joe donated for that purpose, and the company owns land approved for about 11.6 million square feet of commercial space.

Delta Air Lines Inc. and Southwest Airlines Co. operate from that airport surrounded by forest land, most of it owned by St. Joe or the state. Men and women in military uniform mill about the airport's terminals, bound for one of the nearby military installments, which include Tyndall and Eglin Air Force bases. Many of St. Joe's investors and managers, including Mr. Berkowitz, hope to build office parks and homes for defense contractors attracted by the area's military presence. 

 Corrections & Amplifications  The last name of Britt Greene, who will step down this week as president and chief executive of St. Joe Co., was incorrectly spelled Green in the photo caption in a previous version of this story.