Most major Asian markets advanced Tuesday, with higher crude-oil prices helping to support energy producers in Hong Kong and property stocks lifting Chinese stocks.

Leading the gains in Hong Kong,  Cnooc rose 2.3% and  PetroChina added 1.8% after crude-oil prices jumped back above $89 a barrel overnight. 

Property shares jumped on mainland Chinese bourses as cheap valuations attracted buying interest, despite continuing concerns about possible policy tightening.  Gemdale soared 7.8%,  Poly Real Estate Group 5.6% and  China Vanke 3.3%.

Hong Kong’s Hang Seng Index rose 1% to 23760.34, China’s Shanghai Composite and South Korea’s Kospi each added 0.4% to 2804.05 and 2088.32, respectively, and Taiwan’s Taiex climbed 1.3% to 8931.36.

Japanese stocks ended on a mixed note amid lingering concerns about the euro zone’s sovereign-debt worries. The Nikkei Stock Average dropped 0.3% to 10510.68—though the broader Topix edged up 0.1%—as trading resumed after Monday’s holiday and investors got their first chance to respond to weak U.S. jobs data released Friday. 

Without fresh homegrown data to take direction from, regional markets will focus on global developments, said  Dariusz Kowalczyk, senior economist at Credit Agricole. “In particular,” he said, “investors will watch the situation in the European sovereign-debt space for clues to the evolution of investor risk appetite.”

In Tokyo,  Resona Holdings slumped 7.3%. The company said Friday it will issue about 1.24 billion in common shares, including an overallotment arrangement, which will enable it to raise around $7.2 billion in capital.

  Elpida Memory fell 3.8% on a Nikkei report that the company likely logged an operating loss exceeding 20 billion yen ($241.8 million) for the October-December period.  Nippon Steel was up 3.8% after the Nikkei reported Saturday that the company reached a broad agreement with some electronics manufacturers to raise steel prices for the six months to March by 4% from a year earlier.

Indian shares gave up early gains to end slightly lower, losing ground for the sixth straight day, with Reliance Industries falling 1.6% and technology stocks leading the decline. The BSE Sensex shed 0.1% to 19196.34. 

Some small and midsize banks gained on speculative buying after Taiwan’s  Fubon Financial Holding said late Monday it planned to take its Hong Kong-listed banking unit private in a deal that values  Fubon Bank (Hong Kong) at 5.86 billion Hong Kong dollars (US$753.6 million).

“This event could trigger a trading rally in perceived takeout/privatization candidates trading on relatively low (price-to-book) multiples,” said BOC International in a note.

  Dah Sing Banking Group gained 2.4% and  Chong Hing Bank rose 2%. Trading in Fubon Bank has been suspended since Monday. In Taiwan, Fubon Financial added 1.4%.

Australia’s S&P/ASX 200 eased 0.03% to 4710.67 amid massive flooding in the state of Queensland. In Sydney, insurers were weaker, with Suncorp Group falling 3.7% and  Insurance Australia Group falling 1.3%.

“You’ve got to think what implications this (flood) has on the banks as well as insurers,” said  Mark Fitzgerald, UBS executive director. “A lot of the state is underinsured and there is speculation of floods hitting Brisbane, where there is a lot more wealth. There is a lot of uncertainty.”

  New Hope
NHC


1.87
%




 fell 2.6% after the coal miner said it had suspended all production to assess the flood damage to transport infrastructure.  Alumina dropped 4.3% on disappointment over its potential share of profit from its joint venture with  Alcoa.
AA


-0.46
%






In Seoul, euro-zone sovereign-debt problems as well as caution ahead of the Bank of Korea’s policy-rate decision Thursday hurt local shares. Hyundai Motor declined 1%. But shipbuilders rose on a positive order outlook, while chemical makers gained on hopes for an improvement in earnings for this year due to growing demand. Hyundai Heavy Industries rose 3.9% and STX Offshore & Shipbuilding added 1.6%.

Elsewhere in the region, New Zealand’s NZX 50 rose 0.2%, Philippine shares declined 2%, Singapore’s Straits Times Index was up 0.4% and Indonesian shares were down 0.7%. 

—V. Phani Kumar contributed to this article.

 Write to  Colin Ng at colin.ng@dowjones.com 