SEOUL—U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates said talks between North and South Korea were possible, although he reiterated the U.S.'s warning that Pyongyang must end its belligerent behavior.

Mr. Gates arrived in South Korea on Friday, at the end of a weeklong trip to Asia, for brief talks on how Washington and Seoul should handle any future aggression from Pyongyang.

Kim Kwan-jin, the South Korean minister of national defense, told Mr. Gates that many South Koreans expect further provocations this year.

In March, 46 sailors died when a South Korean patrol boat was sunk by what investigators determined was a North Korean torpedo. In November, a North Korea artillery barrage on a South Korean island killed four people, including two civilians.

Mr. Kim, a former top military officer who took charge of the defense ministry after the shelling of the island, has promised a stronger military response to any future attacks by Pyongyang.

"In order to respond effectively to North Korea we must act from a position of strength," he said Friday.

U.S. officials have in recent months said they don't want to see the conflict on the Korean peninsula escalate to war. 

In comments at South Korea's defense ministry, Mr. Gates signaled that he didn't oppose "diplomatic engagement" between the North and South. 

A senior South Korean official said Seoul has proposed two areas of dialogue with Pyongyang: the attacks on the patrol boat and the island, and the sincerity of the North on denuclearization. 

North Korea has yet to respond to the proposal, he said. The official said dialogue between the two Koreas was a prerequisite to any resumption of "six-party" multilateral talks.

Mr. Gates reiterated his position that broader six-party talks among regional powers are only possible once Pyongyang takes action to show it is serious about negotiations.

"The [North Korean] leadership must stop these dangerous provocations and take concrete steps to show that they will begin meeting their international obligations," Mr. Gates said.

Mr. Gates said this week he wants North Korea to put a moratorium on nuclear and missile tests as a precondition to a resumption of international talks.

Mr. Gates also warned earlier this week that North Korea is moving to become a direct threat to the U.S., warning that he believed Pyongyang would develop a missile capable of hitting the U.S. within five years.

—Alistair Gale contributed to this article.