ISTANBUL—Turkey's central bank warned that lending is growing too fast but denied the country's economy was overheating, as it responded to worries over the bank's low interest-rate policies.

Speaking to business delegates in Istanbul, Durmus Yilmaz, governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, said consumer-loan growth needed to slow and indicated the bank could further raise banks' reserve requirements to cool the boom.

"The Turkish economy is not overheating…but loan volume has been increasing strongly due to the robustness of the financial sector. Thus, our problem is slowing down the pace of lending," said the governor, whose term ends on April 18.

The central bank in December simultaneously raised reserve ratios and cut the benchmark interest rate. It said its goal was to stem lending and the rising tide of speculative investment that is flowing into the economy because of low interest rates in the U.S., the U.K. and the euro zone.

So far, however, it isn't clear whether the two-pronged policy is working. Firm data on hot money flows since the bank acted aren't yet available. Data released this week by Turkey's bank regulator BRSA showed bank loans surged 34% in 2010.

Mr. Yilmaz and Economics Minister Ali Babacan in December called 49 banking chiefs to Ankara to urge them to cap credit growth in 2011 at 25%. Market players are increasingly nervous that the surge in lending is magnifying the economy's key structural weakness: a mushrooming current account deficit financed by hot money that leaves it vulnerable to external shocks.

"The bank is clearly worried about how credit growth is affecting the current account and they're right to be. The pace of the widening is crazy and the market is fixated on this weakness," said  Murat Ucer, an Istanbul-based economist at Global Source Partners, a research consultancy.

The latest data from the Turkish statistics agency show the current-account deficit more than tripled in November from a year ago to a hit a record of $5.93 billion, or about 6% of forecast gross domestic product, as imports grew more than 10 times faster than exports. Ratings agencies regularly cite the current account imbalance as the principle reason for keeping Turkey's rating below investment grade, while the International Monetary Fund warned in November that the deficit leaves Turkey vulnerable if market sentiment turns negative.

Mr. Yilmaz's decision to lower rates in December was seen as bold, but highly risky. Turkey's economy expanded 8.9% in the nine months to October, one of the fastest growth rates of any Group of 20 nations. Expansion has been underpinned by record low interest rates, after the central bank slashed its key rate 14 times from an October 2008 high of 16.75%.

Inflation so far has remained under control. But lending, propelled by tightly regulated banks, has outpaced the expectations of even the most bullish analysts. The recent numbers have heightened concern among some analysts, despite Turkey's relatively low debt burden. 

Turkish household debt, at around 16% of GDP, is much lower than the 30% in Eastern Europe, over 60% in the euro zone and 80% in the U.S.

Government ministers here warn with increasingly regularity that the economy's exposure to hot money could undermine recent gains. 

Mr. Yilmaz on Thursday appeared to warn the ruling AK Party not to undermine fiscal stability ahead of the national elections due this summer. "There will be no problem in the Turkish economy as long as fiscal discipline is maintained... All authorities with capacity to regulate, oversee and balance should coordinate their actions," he said.

Government ministers have said they believe a current-account deficit of 5% to 6% of GDP is "manageable," but if credit growth continues at current levels, forecasters expect the funding gap to widen toward 8%. 

"A current account deficit of 5%-6% of GDP is acceptable, but if there is credit growth of more than 25%…there is a risk of the current account deficit rising more than 5%-6%," Economy Minister Mr. Babacan said last week. " We must pay attention to this during 2011."

 Write to  Joe Parkinson at joe.parkinson@dowjones.com 