NEW YORK—Treasurys fell in the first trading session of 2011, as optimism about the U.S. economic outlook lured many investors into riskier assets. 

U.S. stocks rose to two-year highs, while crude-oil prices moved above $90 a barrel. 

The selling continued a dynamic seen in the past few months of the year, when Treasury yields, which move inversely to the prices, surged to multi-month highs as market participants became more optimistic about U.S. economic growth in the new year after some better-than-forecast data. 

Some economists have raised their economic forecasts for this year, believing that the Federal Reserve's easy monetary policy and tax cuts approved by the government last month are likely to deliver a double boost to the economic recovery. 

"Risk is back in a big way at the start of the new year and, if stocks are rallying on the better economic outlook, you can bet your bottom dollar that bonds are going to suffer losses," said  Chris Rupkey, chief financial economist at Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ in New York. 

The benchmark 10-year note fell 12/32, or $3.75 for each $1,000 invested, pushing the yield up to 3.344%. The two-year note fell 1/32, to yield 0.609%. The 30-year bond fell 1, to yield 4.399%. 

The 10-year note's yield, a benchmark for consumer and corporate borrowings, has risen more than one percentage point from the trough of 2.332% hit in early October, which was the lowest since January 2009. The yield rose to 3.568% on Dec. 16, the highest since May. 

Bonds moved off the lowest levels of the session after the release of a U.S. manufacturing-sector indicator. The manufacturing index released by the Institute for Supply Management was 57.0 in December. Though up from 56.6 in November, that was a tad below the 57.1 forecast by economists surveyed by Dow Jones Newswires. The employment component of the index slipped to 55.7 from 57.5 even as new orders rose to 60.9 from 56.6.

Meantime, the Fed bought $7.79 billion in Treasurys with maturities ranging from February 2018 to November 2020.

The Fed plans to buy Treasurys each trading days this week. The purchases are part of the central bank's $600 billion Treasury-bond buying program launched in early November. By buying Treasurys regularly until June, the Fed hopes to push long-dated borrowing costs lower for consumers and businesses to boost an economic recovery.

Mr. Rupkey said the U.S. nonfarm payroll report on Friday will be the key driver for the bond markets in the short term, and a strong report could send bond yields higher still. The median forecast calls for a rise of 140,000 jobs in December. Private payrolls are projected to rise 138,000, almost triple the 50,000 added in November.

"With most balance sheets now open for business in the new year, the rate space is repricing what many expect to be a better-than-expected economic outlook for the new year. And that is pressuring bond prices lower," said  Christian Cooper, head of U.S. dollar derivatives trading at Jefferies & Co. in New York.

Corporate-bond supply also is weighing on Treasurys, traders said. Many companies plan to sell new debt in the first month of the year as signs of an improving economy boost the allure of higher-yielding corporate bonds compared with Treasurys. Companies typically sell Treasurys to hedge undesired swings in interest rates to price their corporate debt sales.

Mr. Cooper said the 10-year note's yield will range from 3.3% to 3.5% in the short term.

Treasurys handed investors a loss of 1.8% in December, paring the 2010 advance to 5.87%, according to data from Barclays. In contrast, the Dow Jones Industrial Average returned 11% last year, while crude-oil prices rose 15%.

"If the sentiment is beginning to accept that the recovery is self-sustaining and, as a result of substantial monetary and meaningful fiscal support, is likely to be higher than previously estimated, then an increase in bond yields would be perfectly normal," said  Dan Greenhaus, chief economic and bond strategist at Miller, Tabak & Co. in New York. 

 Write to  Min Zeng at min.zeng@dowjones.com 