 China is looking for ways other than rapid yuan appreciation to ease tensions with global trading partners, the nation's commerce minister said. His comments indicate that while the government wants to reduce its large surpluses, it remains wary of allowing rapid appreciation of the currency as a means to do so. 

 Nomura Holdings shuffled its senior management, promoting a foreigner to the highest role in the firm's history and naming its first female senior executive.  

 LVMH will take a controlling stake in Italy's Bulgari in a deal valued at $6.03 billion, adding to the French firm's watch and jewelry brands and underscoring the strength in the luxury sector.  

 Terumo is buying U.S. medical company CaridianBCT for $2.63 billion, in the latest overseas acquisition by a Japanese company buoyed by the strong yen.  

 U.S. stocks fell as an analyst downgraded the technology sector and concerns over supplies kept crude-oil prices above $105 a barrel. Asian shares also dropped, with the Nikkei down 1.8%.  

 A Chinese company settled separate copyright-infringement lawsuits with Microsoft, Adobe and Autodesk, marking the latest triumph for the U.S. software makers against piracy in China.  

 Hitachi is selling its hard-disk-drive business to Western Digital for about $4.3 billion in cash and stock, creating a dominant player in the segment.  

 The U.S. Fed is unlikely to withdraw its economic stimulus until more evidence of a self-sustaining recovery is seen. 

 Japan suspended the use of Pfizer's Prevnar and Sanofi's Act-HIB pending a probe of whether the deaths of four children are linked to the vaccines.  

 Barclays CEO Diamond received total compensation valued at more than $32.5 million for 2010, making him the best-paid British banking boss and a likely lightning rod for criticism.  

 Tullow Oil and the Ugandan government resolved a tax dispute that should allow Tullow to bring Total and Cnooc into its oil projects in the East African nation.  

 Developer China Vanke said profit rose 37% in 2010 on higher sales and property prices, and it expects the market to shift in favor of home buyers this year.  

 The dollar fell to a nearly four-month low against the euro.  

 Thai AirAsia plans an IPO in Bangkok in the fourth quarter.  

Hard-line Bahraini opposition protesters gathered in Manama in a new escalation of tensions between antigovernment demonstrators and the ruling family. Also, Oman's government shuffled its cabinet and Tunisia dissolved its state security department. 

 A Taiwan general at the center of a spy case is suspected of leaking details to China about an electronic-defense system being sold to the island by Lockheed Martin, a senior Taiwan lawmaker said.  

 Pyongyang raised the pressure on four North Koreans who defected to the South, saying it wants them to face their relatives at a meeting this week.  

 Secretary of Defense Gates arrived in Afghanistan on a surprise trip to meet with U.S. troops and Afghan leaders, as the U.S. looks for signs that its strategy is starting to pay security dividends.  

Fighting erupted in Ivory Coast between forces backing the men who both claim to be president.

A Vietnamese rights lawyer was freed from prison after serving a four-year sentence for advocating a multiparty system.