LONDON—A series of public-relations debacles—including ties to a convicted sex offender and connections to controversial figures in the Middle East—have called into question Prince Andrew's position as the U.K.'s special trade envoy and threatened an embarrassment less than two months ahead of a royal wedding.

  Errant Prince Has to Watch His Step  

Prince Andrew, the 51-year-old son of Queen Elizabeth II and the younger brother of Prince Charles, has repeatedly stumbled into controversy in recent years in his role as U.K. special representative for international trade and investment, in which he serves as a volunteer cheerleader for British business abroad. 

Recently, scrutiny has intensified of his relationships with relatives of Libya's leader Moammar Gadhafi and Tunisia's ex-president Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali, as well as press reports about his ties to 58-year-old Jeffrey Epstein, a U.S. financier who in a Florida court in 2008 pleaded guilty to a felony charge of solicitation of prostitution involving a minor. Mr. Epstein, who admitted guilt as part of a plea deal with prosecutors, was released last summer after serving about 13 months in jail.

On Monday, the U.K. government and the royal family issued strong defenses of Prince Andrew and his role as trade envoy.

The problems come less than two months ahead of a big event in Prince Andrew's family—the wedding of his nephew, Prince William—and on the heels of other public-relations disasters. Those include a sting operation by the tabloid News of the World last year in which Prince Andrew's ex-wife, Sarah Ferguson, was recorded agreeing to sell access to him for £500,000 (about $814,000). News of the World is owned by News Corp., which also owns The Wall Street Journal. Ms. Ferguson later apologized in a statement,, calling the incident "a serious lapse in judgment."

Since his release, Mr. Epstein's association with Prince Andrew has generated renewed media coverage of the case. Gerald Lefcourt, a New York lawyer who represented Mr. Epstein in Florida, declined to comment.

Last week the Daily Mail, a U.K. tabloid, printed a photo of Prince Andrew walking alongside Mr. Epstein in December in New York. The paper also printed a photo of Prince Andrew with his arm around an underage woman involved in the case against Mr. Epstein. On Monday the paper reported that Ms. Ferguson accepted money from Mr. Epstein to pay off a debt to a former employee. A spokesman for Ms. Ferguson said Monday that she would return the money. A Buckingham Palace spokesman declined to elaborate on the relationship between Prince Andrew and Mr. Epstein. 

Separately, the uprisings in the Middle East have spurred criticism of Prince Andrew's activities. In the House of Commons last week, Chris Bryant, a Labour member of Parliament, criticized Prince Andrew's meetings in recent years with Saif al-Islam Gadhafi, the son of Libya's Col. Gadhafi. Mr. Bryant asked: "Is it not time that we dispensed with the services of the Duke of York?"

A Monday editorial in the Times of London newspaper called for Prince Andrew to step down and accused him of "boorishness, arrogance, questionable standards, sloppy preparation and dubious friendships." (The Times is owned by News Corp., which also owns The Wall Street Journal.) 

The U.K. government and Buckingham Palace moved quickly to defend the Duke of York. A spokesman for Prime Minister David Cameron said Monday that he had "full confidence" in Prince Andrew and added the U.K. government is not reviewing the prince's post.

"The Duke of York remains fully committed to his role as special representative, and is pleased that the government has continued to support him in that role," a spokesman for Buckingham Palace said Monday. 

The spokesman confirmed that Prince Andrew had met Col. Gadhafi and his son several times, and that Prince Andrew had also hosted a lunch for Mr. Ben Ali's son-in-law at Buckingham Palace late last year, noting that U.K. policy at that time was to engage with those countries. 

Though Prince Andrew isn't on the payroll, the U.K. government covers some expenses for his envoy role. His frequent travel, some paid for with public money, has led Britons to nickname him "Airmiles Andy."

This isn't the first time Prince Andrew has faced controversy. The sale of his house in Berkshire, England to a Kazakh buyer for a reported £3 million above the asking price caused a media firestorm in the U.K. a few years ago. A spokesman for Prince Andrew at Buckingham Palace said the deal was made between two private trusts, but wouldn't elaborate.

U.S. diplomatic cables released by WikiLeaks also caused turbulence in Britain. According to one, the day after Scotland released the Lockerbie bomber from prison, Libyan leader Col. Gadhafi appeared on TV to thank the U.K., Scotland, the prime minister and the queen, but also Prince Andrew, who as Col. Gadhafi put it, "against all odds encouraged this decision." A Buckingham Palace spokesman said that, in his interactions with Col. Gadhafi, Prince Andrew made it clear that the case was the responsibility of Scotland.

Another cable said when a group of U.K. businessmen complained to Prince Andrew about corruption in Kyrgyzstan during a brunch with the U.S. ambassador in the country, Prince Andrew responded, "All of this sounds exactly like France." 

Buckingham Palace declined to comment on the WikiLeaks cables.

—Devlin Barrett and Joann S. Lublin contributed to this article.

 Write to  Paul Sonne at paul.sonne@wsj.com 