The fabled house Frank Lloyd Wright built for the Kaufmann family over a stream in southwestern Pennsylvania turns 75 this year. Below are bits of wisdom gleaned from 'Fallingwater,' a new book edited by Lynda Waggoner and with beautiful photography by Christopher Little.

 1 / If Fallingwater is so important, why don't more buildings look like it? 

It is a question Wright asked many times himself, and the answer is not one he would have enjoyed hearing. Despite its fame, Fallingwater has often been referred to as a masterpiece with no progeny. That's mainly because by the late 1930s, just as the Kaufmanns' house was being completed, the moment had come in architecture when the "industrial" strain of modernism would finally conquer the handmade. That's why there are a thousand cheap copies of the Seagram building and not so many of this house.

 2 / Is Fallingwater a work of modernism? 

No. Philip Johnson's Glass House is a modernist building. Lever House is a modernist building. Fallingwater is modern in the sense that its form is untraditional, but not Modern in terms of belonging to a school of architecture like that propagated by Ludwig Mies Van der Rohe and Walter Gropius. It is a unique example of a path championed by Wright and not taken up by the field generally: a kind of streamlined, handmade, organic architecture that at the top of its list of goals relates to, and celebrates, nature. Fallingwater was seen as beacon and highly appreciated in its time—the first MoMA show devoted to this house was in 1938, and the accolades have continued ever since—but still almost everybody went the other way. You know how people love and respect Patti Smith, but Aerosmith is the bigger band? Integrity does not always translate to cultural dominance. This happened to Le Corbusier and Louis Kahn as well.

 3 / Does great architecture always lead to happiness? 

Fallingwater was a utopian project commissioned by a family who, among many other blessings, managed to keep their money during the Depression. But living in a masterpiece doesn't appear to have made anybody any happier than they might have been living in a normal house. Liliane Kaufmann died after overdosing on sleeping pills. The house's architect and the Kaufmanns' son Edgar Jr., whose career at MoMA was boosted by his association with the project, were the big winners. And us.

 4 / Does it take time to design a masterpiece? 

Not if you're a genius. I've heard this story so many times I'm going to have to start believing it, so here goes: Wright, who was about as self-effacing as Donald Trump and enjoyed being addressed as "the Master," received the commission and topographical survey in March 1935. Then for seven months he did nothing. One day in September 1935 a curious Edgar Kaufmann Sr. phoned him at Taliesin, Wis., said he was in town, and expressed his interest in paying a visit to Wright's studio to see how the design for the house was coming along. With maximum theater, Wright intoned, "We have been waiting for you, Mr. Kaufmann," and invited his neglected, unsuspecting client to come and have lunch, after which they would go over the designs for Fallingwater together. Wright then put down the phone and sketched furiously in the time before Kaufmann's arrival, handing off the scraps to draftsmen for whom lunch that day was out of the question. It is said they couldn't sharpen pencils fast enough—the ideas just "fell from Wright's sleeve."

—David Netto