It sounds like the unlikeliest of blockbusters: a debut novel from an author with a hard-to-pronounce name that tells the story of Lithuanians forced into Stalinist work camps during and after World War II. Aimed at kids—12 and older.

But Penguin's young adult imprint is betting that "Between Shades of Gray," by Ruta Sepetys (suh-PET-tees) will stand out in a young-adult landscape littered with vampires and dystopian romances.

Early hype suggests the novel may resonate equally with adults and teens. The book has already sold in 23 countries, and 16 of the foreign publishers will release it as an adult novel. In Britain, Penguin U.K. will publish two versions—adult and "YA"—with separate covers and marketing campaigns. In the U.S., Penguin is featuring the book in both its adult and young adult catalogs, and has been promoting it with adult book clubs. 

"Between Shades of Gray" is narrated by Lina, a 15-year-old aspiring artist, in stark, unsparing prose. The tale is at once a suspenseful, drama-packed survival story, a romance and an intricately researched work of historical fiction. It opens in 1941 as Soviet secret police arrive at Lina's home and force her family onto trains with thousands of other Lithuanians who are targeted as dissidents and shipped to work camps. Lina, unaware of the deprivation ahead, grabs ribbons and a hair brush but leaves behind a loaf of bread. Separated from her father, Lina and her mother and brother are sent to a collective beet farm where they are given tiny rations of bread, then moved to a camp in Siberia, where dozens of prisoners freeze and starve to death.

Ms. Sepetys, a Michigan native who lives in Nashville, speaks with a cheery, Midwestern twang when describing her Lithuanian roots. Her father's family fled that country during the Russian occupation. 

In 2003, Ms. Sepetys was running her artistic management firm and "bailing rock stars out of jail" when she decided to write a YA novel. Touring with musicians, among them guitarist Steve Vai, left little time to write, so she spoke her novel into a voice recorder while driving. 

During two research trips to Lithuania, Ms. Sepetys interviewed some 25 survivors, family members, historians and politicians about Soviet occupation, when thousands of Lithuanians were deported to Siberian gulags. 

She spent 20 hours in a historical immersion program at a former Soviet prison in Latvia, which she now calls "one of the stupidest decisions I've ever made." She and the other "inmates" were deprived of food and water, interrogated and roughed up. She ruptured a spinal disk when a re-enactor stood on her back while she did push-ups, and encountered huge rats and human feces around the prison, though she is quick to note that her suffering was minor compared with that of actual prisoners.

Many of the anecdotes and details in the book come from interviews with survivors, Ms. Sepetys says. One woman told her she learned to speak Russian by reading a Russian translation of Charles Dickens' "Dombey and Son," as the book's protagonist does. Another said the last time she saw her father was in the train yard, where he handed her his wedding ring and a piece of ham through a train's bathroom hole—a scene enacted in the book. 

The first draft was unbearably dark. "I killed practically everyone," Ms. Sepetys said. She went through eight revisions with her agent before they shopped it. Tamra Tuller, Ms. Sepetys' editor at Philomel, Penguin's young adult imprint, suggested bringing some characters back to life and leaving the fate of others open- ended to inject more hope into the narrative.

 Ms. Tuller says she hopes a real-life tragedy will stand apart from the crush of futuristic science fiction flooding the market. "It feels really good that in this day and age of dystopian fantasy, people can connect with a real-life story," she says.

 Write to  Alexandra Alter at alexandra.alter@wsj.com 