WASHINGTON—U.S. officials stood by their dire warnings about the risks posed by radiation leaking from a crippled Japanese nuclear complex, but after challenges from Japanese regulators conceded their information is "inconclusive."

U.S. officials said Thursday they were ramping up their ability to collect their own information about radiation levels and the condition of the stricken Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant. 



The Energy Department has delivered to Japan what officials called "pods" with radiation detecting sensors. A military drone aircraft and a U2 spy plane are flying missions over the plant to gather data.

Concern among U.S. officials about the reliability of information coming from the Japanese government during the unfolding calamity has risen dramatically in recent days, say administration officials. U.S. officials are concerned they may not be getting the full picture of what is happening on the ground.

"There is a simmering amount of frustration about the speed and accuracy of information flowing from the Japanese government," one administration official said.

The sentiment, and the delicate diplomatic approach required in dealing with a proud and close ally like Japan, has factored into U.S. decisions in recent days that have seemed at odds with the approach of the Japanese government, administration officials said. It has driven the U.S. to err on the side of caution to protect its citizens. 

The U.S. has increased its presence in Japan, sharing information with the government while being mindful of not overstepping its boundaries in the country, officials said. 

Signs of a split with Tokyo emerged Wednesday when Nuclear Regulatory Commission Chairman Gregory Jaczko told a congressional panel that a cooling pool protecting spent nuclear fuel rods at the plant's No. 4 reactor had dried up, exposing the rods and releasing a surge of radiation. 

Citing that threat, Mr. Jaczko and the White House said Wednesday U.S. citizens living within 50 miles of the facility should evacuate, contradicting their own prior statements about the radiation risk, and a Japanese recommendation that only people living within 12 miles of the plant needed to leave. 

The information the NRC had about the Fukushima plant's spent fuel pools "was really one of the major changes that led us to re-evaluate some of our information and come up with a recommendation, and we did," Mr. Jaczko said.

On Thursday, French and Japanese regulators said the spent fuel pool in reactor No. 4 did have water in it, after helicopter crews sent to drop water on the pool noticed that, so they diverted flights to reactor No. 3, according to the French Institute of Radioprotection and Nuclear Security.

Deputy Energy Secretary Daniel Poneman defended the NRC, saying readings from two radiation-sensing "pods" indicated radiation levels justifying the evacuation.

"The bottom line is that there clearly appears to be a challenge keeping that spent fuel filled with sufficient water," Mr. Jaczko said. 

An NRC spokesman said Thursday "the evidence is so far inconclusive" on the condition of the fuel pool at the No. 4 reactor. But, he said, "we have to err on the side of caution."

The events in Washington and Japan only underscored the confusion around the Fukushima plant and efforts to keep it from spinning into a catastrophe. 

As officials at plant owner Tokyo Electric Power Co. have sought to calm fears, Germany and China have halted nuclear-power development. 

President Barack Obama on Thursday put himself out front of the U.S. response, using a short Rose Garden appearance to reassure Americans that "we do not expect harmful levels of radiation to reach the United States, whether it's the West Coast, Hawaii, Alaska, or U.S. territories in the Pacific." 

Mr. Obama said he has ordered a "comprehensive review" of safety at U.S. nuclear-power plants—a step urged by members of Congress. White House officials had previously said such a review would be a matter of course at the NRC.

"The situation is moving too rapidly to make sense of it," said one White House official.

Mr. Jaczko's statements on the spent fuel cooling pools surprised nuclear experts. 

  David Albright, a United National nuclear inspector and president of the Institute for Science and International Security, said he had figured the NRC's information was "iron-clad." 

Instead, he said, two different theories of surging radioactivity for reactor No. 4 had emerged, one concluding the spike was coming from the reactor, the other saying it came from the spent fuel. Mr. Jaczko appears to have sided with the latter group.

But Mr. Albright and other experts said the NRC's decision to evacuate an area far larger than the one recommended by the Japanese was sound. 

Environmental groups and anti-nuclear activists say the NRC hasn't responded vigorously enough to the safety issues raised by the Japanese crisis.

Arjun Makhijani, president of the Institute for Energy and Environmental Research, said regulators and the industry have resisted recommendations that most spent fuel rods be removed from cooling pools and put into dried casks or hardened storage, Mr. Makhijani said. 

For their part, industry officials questioned the "scientific basis" of the U.S. evacuation order. 

Steve Kerekes, a spokesman for the Nuclear Energy Institute, a U.S. trade group, said Japanese orders to evacuate an area within 12 miles appeared "sufficient to minimize public health impacts."

—Tennille Tracy and Carol Lee 

—contributed to this article.