ISLAMABAD - Pakistan has sought U.S. help to ensure security for a proposed 1,680 kilometer-long pipeline that will transport natural gas from Central Asia to South Asia through war-ravaged Afghanistan. 

Pakistan's finance ministry said in a statement it informed a U.S. delegation led by  David Lipton, senior adviser on economy to the U.S. president, of its concerns about the security of the proposed Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India pipeline. 

About 735 kilometers of the pipeline will pass through Afghanistan, including the violent Kandahar province that has high Taliban presence, and 800 kilometers will pass through Pakistan, including its tribal areas, posing a big security challenge to the project. 

The pipeline has been under discussion for about two decades and has U.S. backing as it will provide millions of dollars to Afghanistan in the form of transit fees and also job opportunities. It will also cut down South Asia's dependence on Iran, which has been seeking to supply gas to India and Pakistan through another proposed pipeline. 

Turkmenistan, which has the world's fourth-largest gas reserves, is looking to seal deals with new consumers. India and Pakistan have been trying to secure energy supplies for their economies. 

The four participating nations signed an inter-government gas pipeline framework agreement and a gas sales purchase agreement in September. An inter-governmental agreement and a deal on measures to implement the project was signed in December. The governments will now start discussions on pricing and transit terms. 

"The road ahead is long for this project, but the benefits could be tremendous and are certainly worthy of the diligence and interest demonstrated by these four countries so far,"  Robert Blake, U.S. assistant secretary of state for South Asian affairs, said on Jan. 19. 

However, analysts are skeptical as financing and security, which have derailed the project, remain key concerns. 

The implementation of the pipeline seems a distant possibility due to security concerns and disagreement on pricing, Dayanand Mittal, an analyst at Mumbai-based Anand Rathi Securities, said in a Jan. 5 note. 