Roman-born Nicola Bulgari may be the quintessential European, but the vice chairman of the Bulgari Group and honorary president of the Italian Government Tourist Board has had a long love affair with all things American. The grandson of Bulgari founder Sotirio Bulgari holds jazz concerts at his home, avidly collects vintage American automobiles (he prizes a Buick limousine built in 1928) and even attends Nascar races—all while helping steer Bulgari to almost €1 billion in revenues last year.

Now, the company cherished for its bold use of colored stones, cabochon cuts and serpentine coils is making its brashest move yet: a merger with French luxury giant LVMH. The marriage with a conglomerate whose holdings stretch from high fashion to fine wines provides Bulgari with the size and scale for global growth, particularly in China.

Despite the changes ahead for the 127-year-old firm, Mr. Bulgari insists the brand's DNA will remain the same. "Our family is not going anywhere," he said. "There is a uniqueness and continuity of design that guides everything we do—from jewelry and watches to fragrance and apparel." Although he has homes in Rome and Tuscany, here he chose to discuss his favorite American cities—as well as diamond cuts, bespoke shoes and the car it took him 65 years to find.

 The most beautiful modern city in the world is Chicago. I always visit the Art Institute, walk on Lake Shore Drive and take the architecture boat ride. The Chicago Tribune building is one of my favorites.

 My all-time favorite film remains John Huston's "The Asphalt Jungle."

 My great passion is jazz, particularly classic musicians like Erroll Garner and Oscar Peterson, but also younger players like Brad Mehldau. I often invite jazz quintets to play in my home on a pair of fully restored Steinway grand pianos. One is from 1876, the other from 1883. Hearing two jazz pianists playing them side-by-side is really the ultimate indulgence.

 My latest obsession is my 1939 Nash Ambassador 8 Sedan, which I've longed for since I was a child. It took me 65 years to find it and a year and a half to restore it. I used parts from three separate wrecks to complete the final overhaul.

 I love to walk—especially in New York which has the widest sidewalks in the world. Every morning when I'm in the city I walk from the Upper East Side through Central Park to our store on 57th Street; it's like a milk run for me. 

 Much as is it was for my father, India remains a great source of inspiration for me. What the maharaja were able to achieve with gems is simply extraordinary. 

  My favorite stone is the sapphire. You find the entire color spectrum in them—from pink to mauve, white to black. The range is fantastic. 

 The Asscher is my favorite cut of diamond. It originated with the Royal Asscher company, which is still owned by the same Amsterdam family. This square-shaped cut has either 58 or 74 facets and was the first cut in the world to be patented back in 1902.

 One of my most beloved hotels  is the Hôtel Le Bristol in Paris. I've been staying there since I was a child with my parents. 

 I am a big fan of Nascar. There is something really fearless, almost unhuman about the drivers—they're truly a different kind of animal. While people like to criticize the crowd, I actually find the fans to be quite a mixed lot.

 My shoes are made by George Cleverley in London. These bespoke shoes take months to finish. For me, they are the best shoes around—try them and you'll understand why.

 Discretion is a core value at Bulgari. We never reveal a client's identity—even under torture!  

— Edited from an interview by David Kaufman 