LONDON—The euro zone's debt stresses are back in force at the end of the first trading week of 2011, touched off by new political paralysis in Belgium, signs of slowing economic recovery and a proposed European Union rule that private investors take a hit in cases of bank failures. 

The euro slipped to its lowest levels since September against the dollar Friday, with chart patterns pointing to a potentially large decline. The cost of insuring Western European government bonds against default hit a record high as fiscally-weaker government bond markets slumped. 

December had brought a period of calm in this long-running drama, as investors pared back bets towards the end of the year. Now, government bond markets are in turmoil once again, the euro currency is falling, and nerves are building over the timing of the next big bailout for an under-pressure euro zone member. 

Analysts at Danske Bank pointed to a "change in sentiment", with a "renewed focus" on the fragile sections of the euro-area government bond markets—chiefly Portugal and Spain, but also Belgium. 

The resurgence of risk-aversion in euro zone markets complicates efforts by European policy makers to agree to new rules and mechanisms to shore up fiscal management and bailout mechanisms, after Greece and Ireland sought help last year. 

Many market watchers expect the euro to remain under pressure this year as governments try for consensus in responding to the debt crisis, which many believe could claim Portugal or even Spain as the next fiscal casualty. 

A key trigger for new nervousness has come from the European Commission, which late Thursday proposed a region-wide framework for confronting bank and investment-firm failures that could see bondholders sharing the burden. 

In a 100-plus page consultation paper that aims to abolish the excuse that a bank is too big to fail, the commission asked whether bank bondholders should share in paying for future bailouts. It is also seeking to give greater authority to national regulators over bank leadership and business strategies when a country's economic stability is at risk. 

One trader at a Portuguese bank described these potential new rules as "the final killer" for Portugal, since it may lead to considerably higher funding costs for banks, especially weak ones. "Everyone is expecting the International Monetary Fund to enter the country now," he said. 

"Portugal is likely to access the European Financial Stability Facility soon," said Willem Buiter, an economist at Citigroup who spent several years as a member of the monetary-policy committee at the Bank of England. 

"The current size of the liquidity facilities looks insufficient to prevent speculative attacks or even to fund Spain completely for three years," he also warned. 

European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet said Friday he had not yet looked in detail at the European Commission's new plan. 

The euro was under pressure against other currencies Friday, falling below $1.30 against the dollar and also dropping just under 1.25 Swiss francs. 

Worries about weaker euro zone countries are boosting bond yields and default insurance costs again. The spread between Portugal's 10-year bonds and benchmark German bunds was 11 basis points wider at 412 basis points Friday morning, according to Tradeweb, with the yield on Portugal's bonds back above 7%. 

Portuguese bond yields rose around 30 basis points Thursday after the country said it planned to sell between €750 million and €1.25 billion of three- and nine-year government bonds at an auction Jan. 12. The prospect of new supply would usually cause yields to rise in anticipation of new bonds pricing at a concession to existing debt. 

"Concession building may persist, thus pushing spreads even wider," analysts at Credit Agricole said in a note Friday. 

But the stakes will be particularly high at next week's Portuguese auction. Gary Jenkins, head of fixed income strategy at Evolution Securities in London, said this event "could be a tipping point for Portugal as the auction could determine whether the country needs to call in the EU/IMF and clearly the increasing funding costs makes it look more likely than not that they will need support." 

However, there is the possibility that the European Central Bank could buy Portuguese bonds and the relatively small size of the auction might also help it succeed. 

Spanish, Italian and Irish 10-year yields were also higher Thursday, while the cost of Belgian credit default swaps—derivatives that function like a default insurance contract for debt—hit an all-time high. 

Johan Vande Lanotte resigned Thursday as mediator of talks between Belgium's two main language groups, prolonging a deadlock that has left the country without a government since elections in June. 

"The political upheaval in Belgium is nothing new, but the latest failure to form a coalition government hurt [Belgian government bonds]. Belgium has effectively been without a government for more than 200 days, which does raise concerns that the country's debt could get out of control," said Credit Agricole. 

The iTraxx SovX Western Europe index, which allows investors to buy or sell default protection on debt issued by a basket of 15 western European sovereigns, including both core and non-core euro-zone countries and non-euro-zone members like the U.K., was at an all-time high of 216 basis points Friday, according to index owner Markit. 

It now costs more to buy default insurance using the Western Europe index than it does on its equivalent for central and Eastern Europe, the Middle East and Africa.