By William H. Gass (1968)

Born in Fargo, N.D., in 1924, William H. Gass has recreated a mythical Midwest that overpowers all his characters and has a palpable, frightening presence in his best stories and novels. That's most apparent in "The Pedersen Kid," the centerpiece of this short-story collection, where we encounter isolation beyond endurance, a break from all humankind. A boy is found in the snow during a blizzard. No one seems to know how he got there. But a mysterious man with yellow gloves might have murdered the kid's Ma and Pa. The narrator is also a boy, Jorge, who has a lushness of language and the same malicious instincts as the man with the yellow gloves. Jorge seems to inhabit his own "burning space" in Gass's mythical country. The author makes us doubt everything in the story—Jorge, the Pedersen kid and our very existence—as he lulls us to sleep with his crisp, hallucinatory prose.

By Nathanael West (1939)

Novels about Hollywood rarely work. Few novelists have been able to find the right quotient to deal with the apocalyptic vividness of the place—but Nathanael West is one of them. "The Day of the Locust" is a masterpiece of disaffection. Even the moon over Hollywood "looked like an enormous bone button." West's Hollywood is ruled by rapacious desire. Tod Hackett, the novel's hero, is in love with Faye Greener, a gorgeous Hollywood extra. Staring at a photograph of her in a provocative pose, he realizes that "her invitation wasn't to pleasure, but to struggle, hard and sharp, closer to murder than to love." This Hollywood is not a land of movie stars and moguls, but of bit players, hookers, dwarfs, and dying vaudevillians and their daughters, who all blend into a ravenous mob, ready to "grab and rend." Yet the novel still manages to delight and hold us in thrall with its startling sense of detail. West is like a cunning snake charmer as he describes a cockfight in a garage or an army of extras moving across a papier-mâché mountain in a Napoleonic swirl.

By Margarita Karapanou (1974)

Margarita Karapanou was a modernist and a master of the macabre, as shown in "Kassandra and the Wolf," a morbid fairy tale recited by a 6-year-old girl who stutters: "The words scratch my throat like shoes." She was born at dusk, the hour of the wolf, and she inhabits a universe where little girls can have babies, grandfathers go to nursery school and paradise is "jammed with murderers." Her mother, also named Kassandra, has largely abandoned the little girl, who lives in a big house near the palace, where the king and queen are prisoners, like Kassandra herself. But this "imprisonment" also comes from the stark, if beautiful, prose—there is no decoration here. Nothing is adorned or wasted in Karapanou's heartbreaking novel. We move in and out of nightmare with Kassandra, who guides us through all the dangers and delusions that might trap any precocious little girl. 

By Italo Calvino (1972)

'Invisible Cities' is a novel that reads like a mischievous travel guide. Italo Calvino is a master of dislocation and deceit as he attempts to hide his own nostalgia and longing for home. He poses for us as the great Venetian traveler Marco Polo, who meets with Kublai Khan and tells him about all the cities he has visited. The Khan soon realizes that his own empire, which had seemed to him "the sum of all wonders," is really "an endless, formless ruin." When Polo talks of cities such as Isidora, the land of desire, he reveals nothing but his loneliness: "Every time I describe a city, I am saying something about Venice." So the novel is a subterfuge, a mask within a mask, whereby Calvino relives Venice through the meanderings and ruminations of Marco Polo. But finally the novel isn't about Venice at all—it's a luscious dream voyage through space and time, where no one can really find a proper landing place.

By Dashiell Hammett (1966)

The character known as the Continental Op is Dashiell Hammett's most startling creation, even if we are never told his name. Like Sam Spade and Nick Charles, he's a private detective, but he has none of their allure. He appears in Hammett's earliest short stories, collected by Lillian Hellman in "The Big Knockover." The Op is "a nervous little fat man," relentless and alone. His boss sends him out "to be crucified on suicidal jobs." But the Op doesn't really solve cases—he stirs up trouble. Raymond Chandler once said that Hammett, starting with the Continental Op, took murder out of the Venetian vase and dropped it into the gutter. But Hammett also had a Venetian vase, and that was the relentless poetry of his prose, where bullets rip through walls "with the sound of hail tapping on leaves" and a man lies dead-still, "a thin worm of blood" crawling out of his hair.

—Mr. Charyn's books include the novel "The Secret Life of Emily Dickinson" and, most recently, the biography "Joe DiMaggio: The Long Vigil."