WASHINGTON—U.S. nuclear facilities lack the "best-in-class" preparedness necessary to ensure government workers and the public would be protected in an emergency, the Department of Energy's inspector general said in a report released this week. 

The Jan. 3 report is the latest in a series of internal investigations stretching back more than six years questioning whether government facilities that house nuclear material are adequately prepared for events like natural disasters or terrorist attacks. 

"It's unfortunately business as usual at DOE, and it's a bad sign for the public," Edwin Lyman, a senior scientist at the Union of Concerned Scientists who tracks nuclear issues, said of the findings. 

Inspector General Gregory Friedman's office focused on the documentation, drills and information-sharing systems that U.S. facilities use to make sure they are ready for worst-case scenarios. Its report was based on observations at four Department of Energy facilities where nuclear material is located, including Los Alamos National Laboratory, a nuclear research hub in New Mexico. 

In 2009, the report found, the DOE had "finally approved" just 70 of 214 required surveys and assessments of possible hazards at the four locations. About 40 reports had been submitted to DOE administrators but not approved. 

"An emergency plan on paper is worthless unless you actually verify that it's workable," Mr. Lyman said. 

The report also outlined failures to correct problems that occurred during emergency drills. During a drill at a former plutonium production facility in Hanover, Wash., for example, clean-up contractors experienced recurring communications problems and had to resort to "personally-owned cellular phones to communicate," the report said. The same problem occurred in subsequent drills. 

In addition, during a 2007 tornado-response drill at Argonne National Laboratory in Illinois, emergency staff had inconsistent information about the quantity of hazardous materials in containers on the site, the report said. During an emergency, responders might use that kind of information to assess the danger of exposure to radiation in a given area. The report said Argonne "was still in the process" of correcting that issue about two years after the problem was identified. 

The inspector general's office said the problems it noted "could result in loss of life and/or the destruction of Government property." 

"We didn't have a disaster to test it against," said Deputy Inspector General Rickey Hass. "But if plans aren't completed and they don't cover all chemicals or materials, there's a possibility that we could have a very bad result." 

The report also said that after drills at all four locations, DOE staff "routinely failed" to share "lessons learned" with other facilities even though the DOE has an internal system in place for that purpose. 

In response to the report's recommendation, three DOE offices responsible for emergency management said they were already taking corrective action to ensure that problems that occur during emergency drills are fixed. They said they would share "lessons learned" and ensure required surveys and assessments were completed in the future. 

The full report is available at http://www.ig.energy.gov/documents/IG-0845.pdf. 

 Write to  Ryan Tracy at ryan.tracy@dowjones.com 



