ISTANBUL—Every fall, at least for the last couple of thousand years, people here have been going nuts for fish.

The cause is an annual mass migration, which has been late this year, of finned creatures as they head south from the cooling waters of the Black Sea toward the warmth of the Aegean. To make the journey, however, the bluefish, bonito, sea bass, horse mackerel and other species have to crowd from the open sea into the tiny Bosphorus strait, just 820 yards wide at its narrowest, past an estimated 10,000 waiting rods and nets on any given day.

Anglers, from women in head scarves to men in wool suits, pack so tightly along the Bosphorus that on some stretches they're less than a yard apart. Adults shoo kids from the boardwalk because of the risk of getting snagged. Anglers routinely pull up 10 little fish at a time on their multiple-hook lines.

"We call it the Central Bank," says Mustafa Kokos, head of one of the main commercial fishing co-operatives on the Bosphorus, referring to the narrow throat of the 20-mile strait. 

Back before the Turks conquered Constantinople in 1453, and then renamed it Istanbul, the Byzantines thought so, too. Their empire stamped coins with the image of a bonito. The Golden Horn, the famed estuary that leads off the Bosphorus under the city's ancient walls, was likely named "Golden" because of the quantities of tuna caught during the three-month fall migration, historians say.

Aristotle thought the tuna hugged the right shore because they saw better with their right eye. (They do steer to the right, but their left eyes are just fine). Homer, in the Iliad, had Agamemnon offer Achilles the riches of the Bosphorus fishing grounds among other treasures as a bribe to keep the hero fighting at Troy. 

Today, a micro-world of commerce revolves around even the small-time anglers who throng along the Galata bridge, across the Golden Horn. Some man stations in tag teams, around the clock, selling what they catch to passersby. Carpenters sell the anglers rod holders to strap onto the bridge railings; kebab, tea and corn vendors feed them; bait sellers bring worms in buckets from a sewage-processing pond outside the city.

But the Central Bank is running out of gold. Mahir Ersin, who fishes for small quantities in his tiny boat says that while little fish are abundant, the tuna are long gone, as are the swordfish, large bonito and Atlantic mackerel that used to make the run when he fished here with his father in the 1950s and '60s. "We used to catch 300-500 kilos of mackerel in a day," recalls the 65-year-old Mr. Ersin. Now, there are none.

Mr. Ersin, a retired journalist for state television, blames overfishing by people such as Mr. Kokos, commercial fishermen who use sonar fish finders and large circular nets that close like a bag from underneath. These, says Mr. Ersin, catch babies and mature fish alike. He's leading a web-based campaign to tighten restrictions on what can be caught in the strait and where the big boats can fish. 

"They aren't fishermen" but retired civil servants with a hobby who contribute nothing to the economy, Mr. Kokos says of people like Mr. Ersin. "They want all these regulations on the Bosphorus and then they sit around and talk and drink raki." He denied that the commercial boats catch undersize fish.

The dispute digs deep into ancient rivalries. Mr. Kokos calls his opponents "Greeks in Turkey." Unwittingly, he says, they are helping Greek fishermen to catch the fish once they make it into the Aegean, passing the Dardanelles strait. "The fish we catch here are migrating. If we don't catch them, then the Greeks and Italians will," he says.

The European Union is another Trojan Horse, according to Mr. Kokos. If Turkey were to join the bloc, the EU would demand as a condition of entry that it ban commercial fishing in the Bosphorus altogether and slash the number of fishing businesses from 18,000 to 4,000, he says. Mr. Kokos doesn't want Turkey to join the EU.

"They're basically saying, we will take you into the common market, and meanwhile we'll give €100 billion ($133 billion) in aid to the Greeks and you can buy your fish from the Greeks," he says. A spokeswoman for the European Commission said the EU hasn't yet finalized a negotiating position, because the fisheries element of the talks are blocked because of a dispute over Cyprus.

"There's enough fish in Turkey to feed the world," says Mr. Kokos, who is also fisheries adviser to Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan. He says he recently put a proposal to Mr. Erdogan to develop Turkey's annual fish exports to €5 billion in five years from €180 million today, in part by keeping the processing in Turkey. "We should put three hamsi (Black Sea anchovies) in a can, squirt some sauce on it and sell it to the Americans." 

If the big fish aren't crossing the Bosphorus anymore, that's not because of overfishing, but because of the pollution dumped into the sea by a city that has grown more than 10 times in size since 1955, Mr. Kokos says. Lights also disturb the fish, as do the churning propellers of the 55,000-plus tankers, container ships and other large vessels that steam through the Bosphorus every year. And what about those 10,000 rod anglers, he says: "If each one of them catches just one kilo, that's 10 tons of fish!" 

All true, says Saadet Karakulak, professor of fisheries science at Istanbul University. But the biggest threat? "Overfishing," she said, while acknowledging that, due to lack of funding, no research has been done to prove it.

The fish most prized here is the lufer, a mature, bluefish that doesn't have the intensely oily flavor that causes many Americans to throw the lufer's bigger Atlantic cousins back in the water. This year, the lufer haven't come at all. Mr. Kokos and other fishermen are still waiting, hoping that the migration was just delayed because the weather was too warm right up to early December. Mr. Ersin believes the lufer migration may be going the way of the mackerel, because too many less-mature bluefish, known as cenekop and sarikanat according to their sizes, are being caught. Mr. Kokos is having none of it.

"We heard about a Romanian ship that pulled up a ton of lufer in a single net," he said ruefully. Turkish boats aren't allowed to fish in Romanian waters.

—Ayla Albayrak contributed to this article.

 Write to  Marc Champion at marc.champion@wsj.com 