The line between professional and social is often difficult to navigate in the workplace, especially early in your career.

While some companies may have explicit rules about socializing, most employees are left to their own devices. Though you will inevitably learn from experience, there are a few unwritten rules to ensure you're not closing yourself off to professional opportunities or overdoing it, says  Jacqueline Whitmore, etiquette expert and author of "Business Class: Etiquette Essentials for Success at Work."

 Company events. Planning to attend a company fund-raiser or athletic event? Be aware of the protocol, such as dress code and if you should bring a date, by asking your human-resources department or co-workers. Etiquette experts say attire typically depends on a company's culture, but it's always best to err on the conservative side.

Company events are great opportunities to connect with co-workers and other managers, so don't be afraid to approach people. If you know ahead of time that you would like to meet a specific person, ask around about the person's interests so you'll have an easy conversation starter.

During an initial conversation, "don't jump to discussing work," Ms. Whitmore says. If it's a person in authority, let him or her "dictate when it's time to talk business," she says. Sports and entertainment are always easy topics.

  Lizzie Post, author and spokeswoman for the Emily Post Institute, says if you are chatting with co-workers, steer clear of talk about salaries and bosses.

And what if you blank on the name of the person you've been interested in meeting? Try introducing a person you do know first, such as "Have you met so-and-so?" If that doesn't work, be honest and admit you have a mental block, says Susan RoAne, a professional communications speaker.

An easy way to get to know co-workers is by participating directly in activities, such as playing on a sports team or helping organize and set up events. If you play on a team, you want to be seen as a team player, not aggressively in it to win it, says  Rob McGovern, founder and CEO of CareerBuilder.com.

 Food and drinks. When socializing with co-workers at lunch, dinner or happy hour outside company time, it's important to remember these are professional relationships, not personal ones. That means the conversation rules for a company event apply.

When ordering at lunch or dinner, it's best to follow someone else's lead so you're not the only one ordering an appetizer or drink, Ms. Post says. If the waiter looks to you first, you could say you are still deciding. When selecting something from the menu, stick with a medium-priced entrée. You don't want to order the most expensive item and you don't need to prove you're cheap, Ms. RoAne says.

If drinks are involved, "less is more," Ms. Whitmore says. She suggests a two-drink maximum; you could also switch off between water and an alcoholic beverage if you want the crutch of a drink in your hand.

If you've been invited to lunch by a superior, chances are he or she will pay, but you can still offer to cover your share. If it's appropriate, suggest that next time you'll pay. If you go to lunch or dinner with peers, expect to split the bill. At happy hour, expect to pay for your own food and cocktails. If someone buys you a round, Ms. Post says you should reciprocate either that night or at the next outing.

—Email: emily.glazer@wsj.com 