The blogosphere lit up this week when Park Slope resident Jennifer McMillen posted a petition calling for an establishment planned for the neighborhood to opt for indie music rather than hip hop because a rap crowd could lead to an "elevated crime rate." 

A day later, another purported resident posted a petition that began, "Send the message to Jennifer McMillen to move to the Hamptons." 

It was provocative stuff, especially for a famously liberal and oft-mocked Brooklyn enclave. Except it might not be true. 

At a recent meeting, most locals who turned out in force to air gripes about the establishment—tentatively called Prime 6 and set to open in May—didn't know a Ms. McMillen. Efforts by The Wall Street Journal to find a person with that name in New York City were unsuccessful. 

Residents insisted none of their concerns had to do with any playlist at the spot, planned for Flatbush and Sixth avenues, just a few blocks from the Atlantic Yards development, which includes a new basketball arena for the Nets. 

"I care about the 4 a.m. closing hour," said Michael Rooney, an attorney. 

"No one—even among the most concerned neighbors—said anything about hip-hop music. That's a complete invention with racist overtones," said Steve Ettlinger, a writer and Park Slope resident of 26 years. He thinks the petition must be a hoax.

From the beginning, Prime 6 has been the subject of rumors and innuendo, stoking neighborhood fears of an invasion of restaurants and bars catering to crowds expected from the arena. 

So wary are neighbors that the arena will bring a shift in the local character that several years ago, when a bagel shop opened as Arena Bagels and Bialys, the owner changed the name to A.R.E.A. to avoid an outcry.

"It's undoubtedly going to have a real impact on the area," said City Council member Stephen Levin, whose district includes northern Park Slope. "That's just a fact in terms of just the amount of foot traffic and the amount of people there."

Locals turned out in force at a Community Board meeting Monday after some in the community believed the space was going to be a strip club based on misinformation from construction crews and the establishment's Facebook and MySpace pages.

 Owner Akiva Ofshtein said he was taken aback by the sharp opposition and insists that he wants to open an upscale restaurant with a basement lounge and outdoor patio—not a club. He said the websites were put up without his knowledge or consent; they have been removed.

Many residents remain unconvinced. Mr. Ofshtein's application to the city Department of Buildings seeks to amend the certificate of occupancy to 230 people.

But unless Mr. Ofshtein agrees to a compromise, residents have little recourse. The State Liquor Authority granted Mr. Ofshtein a license last month to operate three bars, said William Crowley, a spokesman for the SLA.

Mr. Ofshtein said he's willing to listen to concerns but insists he has no plans for dancing, regular live music, and certainly not hip hop. Except in one instance.

"If Jay-Z, one of the owners of the Nets, were to show up, I'd let him sing," he said, laughing.

 Write to  Sumathi Reddy at sumathi.reddy@wsj.com 