Following are excerpts of the Wall Street Journal's interview with South Africa's Finance Minister  Pravin Gordhan in Pretoria. 

 WSJ: I'd love to start off by asking your outlook on growth. There's been so many external events this year—the crisis in Japan, the Mideast, the markets are down, commodity prices are rising. Is all the uncertainty going to pose a challenge to your growth targets? 

 Pravin Gordhan: We've said as a Treasury, we've set a fairly modest growth target of 3.4%. Others are already talking about 3.7%, let's see, we'll review that later in the year. We've said that we would go slightly beyond 4% next year, and 4.4% the year after. But you're right, with all the dynamics in the world today it's hard to predict two years ahead.

The last month or two have produced fascinating data: Job creation up, PMI up, business confidence up, manufacturing, productivity and exports up. All of those numbers seem to be indicating—notwithstanding [the Mideast and north Africa], notwithstanding Japan and the other clouds that hang over our heads from Europe—the South African business community seems to be more positive. Obviously that will vary from sector to sector. 

Like other countries, we've had challenges on the exchange-rate side. But, I think there's a dynamic that's unfolding there as well, where business over the last year are probably, have undertaken their own adaptations in terms of business models, how to improve productivity and competitiveness and so on. 

And realize that there are major structural dynamics out there that not all of us can actually influence, over and above the big players, directly or indirectly, managing their exchange rates, in a way in which it fits in with their national interests, which in a G-20 context is a issue of major concern for us as well. So as relatively small players in that context, there's not much we can do but constantly remind the world that pursuing national interest without being mindful of the spillover effects of one's national decisions—and the IMF would now say the same as well—is going to be detrimental to global co-operation, in terms of inspiring similar activity amongst other countries. Then we're going to have a race to the bottom, either in protectionist terms or others managing their currencies differently and so on. 

The current scenario globally is not a very healthy one, in the sense that the willingness by major players on this terrain to come to an understanding to set of policy initiatives which would help to create a more stable global framework, in which policy adjustments can be made by individual countries, is the challenge. The IMF itself, I think last week, emerged with its guidelines on capital controls and has again warned about countries being careful about the spillover effect of their policies. 

Coming back to home, I think all of those factors impact on us as well. At the same time, you would be aware that we have been increasingly debating in South Africa and giving a lot of attention to how we change the growth trajectory from maximum 5% to maximum 7% or slightly beyond that. I believe that the efforts that we're putting in as government will soon begin to give us leverage over undertaking micro-economic changes and other changes, which will assist in removing our own binding constraints or diluting them to some extent, and putting us on a much more favorable growth trajectory.

If we're now looking at the billion consumers [in Africa], the consumer needs money in their pockets to become consumers, and effective ones. This takes us back to a year and a half, two years, when we've been talking about new poles of growth and demand. We've seen this organically grow, it's been fascinating to watch. Certainly, after the World Cup in South Africa and the ... effect that has had on perceptions of Africa. Over and above that, the search for yield and the search for new sites of profitability, which is a factor, as the Asian economies mature in their own right and new possibilities open up as well.

That's a long answer to a short question.

 WSJ: The changes you're eyeing in the growth trajectory, could you talk about that in more detail? Also, Nigeria has also been posting higher growth rates and there seems to be a little bit of a rivalry between SA and Nigeria for the leadership position of the continent.

 Mr. Gordhan: We're developing the notion of "co-operative competition." My leader, President Zuma, is sitting with his BRICS [Brazil, Russia, India, China] colleagues in the next 48 hours. Each of the BRICS countries is on the one hand competing, and on the other hand attempting to find a common basis for co-operation, politically, economically in terms of trade, banking and other areas as well. In terms of our own efforts, you'd be aware that we've formulated a framework for what we call a new growth path for South Africa.

Essentially, what we're looking at is what kind of macroeconomic policy would give us a stable environment in which other initiatives would be taken, both from monetary and fiscal point of views. And their underpinning principle is one of counter-cyclicality and fiscal prudence, so that one is more or less in place. The second area is the binding constraints, as an international panel in 2008 described as some of the challenges South Africa faces, which you can find on our website. Lots of intensive work says your logistic chain doesn't work too well, your ports are too expensive, our energy situation and skills situation requires attention and so on. Those are well known. What this administration is doing is putting in place plans and activities that will ensure that we beginning to deliver on each of those and not just talk about them. That's always a challenge because policy formulation and talking is always easier than doing, I confess that. But there's a huge pressure that we're placing upon ourselves to say that we can do better, and if we do certain things right we can put ourselves on a completely different trajectory. 

The third thing is that looking at is evaluating the growth and job creation potential. Here in particular, the sharply motivating factor is that we need a much higher level of labor absorption in South Africa than we have. We have a number of sectors identified within the new growth path, and a supplementary part of that is the industrial policy action plan, which also details a number of sectors. 

What's fascinating is that some of the problems we're looking at are not too different from, therefore similar, but also slightly dissimilar from what the developed countries are looking at. The problem of de-industrialization in the developed countries today, is something President Obama is looking at …, the U.K. is looking at in terms of to restructure its economy and create more jobs in that environment, Spain and other countries are looking at the same problem as well. Many of us are sharing notes about how to tackle this unemployment problem. 

Some of us think it's time, just as much as we focused on the financial crisis in the last two years, to focus on the unemployment crisis. What is it about the growth models that we've been using which appear to create good GDP numbers, but don't necessarily create jobs and create less inequality, which is the other concern we've been hearing. In the G-20 in Seoul, it began to emerge in the context in the relationship between growth and development, and what investment would do to advance development particularly on the African continent. 

You've got to look at a better and larger set of indicators, which would say whether societies are actually advancing in a broader economic sense rather than a narrow one. I think there's interesting questions there about the relationship between the financial economy and the 'real' economy which the recession has taught us as well. Some of us say, who is the servant to whom? The real economy is supposed to be served by the financial economy, and growth in the real economy is what we should be looking at, particularly if you want to create jobs in a more stable environment. Those are issues, both within our own context, and the wider context can be looked at. Skills [are] a particular challenge for our society. 

 WSJ: I've been struck by the economic disparity in the country.

 Mr. Gordhan: That's the South African contradiction or paradox, and that's what our history has been about. Some of it we've been able to overcome but a lot more needs to be done. In a different way, it's reflected elsewhere in the world. In India, I'm sure you spotted the growing divide between the upper middle classes and the not so privileged people and in China I'm sure it's the same, to an extent. In terms of global stability, either form an investment point of view or even from a state, humanitarian point of view, those are issues that we need to look at. …

 WSJ: One of the things you're struggling with is the appreciation of the rand right now, which is challenge to your exports. With President Zuma in Bejing for the BRICS summit, will currency come up in the discussions? What is your view of China and its currency policy and how it presents challenges?

 Mr. Gordhan: The currency issue, as far as I know, is not on the agenda —otherwise I would've been there as well. The BRICS meeting is more about finding a basis upon which gradual steps can be taken towards co-operation on a whole range of fronts. As the agenda says, a common perspective on how you get shared benefits rather than shared benefits for some people. Secondly, it also provides a platform for improving the channels for what is now popularly called "South-South" trade, which is playing an increasingly important part in the trade volumes that are moving around. I'm sure that will also be followed in terms of South-South investment and job creation possibilities, and probably lay the basis for better—if you like—co-operation around job creation and economic development. 

On the currency issue, South Africa finds itself in an interesting position, in that most things that big players are doing could impact on us either positively or negatively. We are firm adherents of multilateralism in the terms of the way we see solutions to many of these problems, and the latest World Economic Outlook is still essentially saying the same thing, which is that surplus countries need to do certain things, deficit countries need to do other things, and either you are on the large side or not-so-large side, you would have different propositions to actually pursue in order to help with the rebalancing process. I think it will be unfortunate if we just look at China as the problem in this mix. 

At the end of the day, as one colleague said at a G-20 meeting, what we're looking for is a "grand bargain," which I see is more popularly used now, which basically asks of all of us that we make that contribution that we can make, whilst recognizing our national interests and national imperatives, which will assist in creating a better environment for managing currency. Within the G-20 itself, the broader issue of international monetary system was under discussion. I think we're getting to a point of convergence. We're not quite there yet, but at least now we recognize there are challenges that the international monetary system faces. We've identified five or six areas … the IMF frequently talks about, and we need to now apply our minds to both what we think are possible options, in terms of solutions, but also find the political will to actually do something sooner rather than later. Our own frustration is that the political will on all sides is not adequately in place to ensure that we can get more concerted action on this front, which I believe if we put our heads to it, if it's possible to do. 

South Africans are quite used to the idea of doing impossible things, like making sure there was no bloodshed in 1994 and pulling off the World Cup. In our approach to life, we believe that if there's goodwill on all sides and the approach is a win-win approach, we can certainly find a solution.

From China's perspective, they have set meeting after meeting, they have a particular view on their economy, on their need for social stability, their requirements for growth in their own environment. How do you reconcile each of the imperatives that each country faces, is part of the challenge. The U.S. wants to export more, but who is it going to export to if you don't find the right stability elsewhere in the world? Similarly, Africa would want to export more as well. There's a whole lot of possibilities for us to do things together, if we can take a slightly longer term view of things, rather than respond to some of the short-term pressures we find on ourselves.

 WSJ: So if I hear what you're saying, you don't think South Africa will follow Brazil in terms of capital controls, and you're advocating a more comprehensive approach rather than each country doing what it feels it needs to do. 

 Mr. Gordhan: We've said that for a long time. We're not saying capital controls are out, we're saying we recognize that capital controls have been resorted to by many countries. And we've said, last year in October, and now in February in the budget speech, that we're carefully observing and analyzing the structural nature of the problems associated with global liquidity. There's one view which says that if we can get the investment climate right, where the liquidity exists, then you don't have these massive flows looking for you, in a sense. You come back to square one, if you can get your economy right and I can get my economy right, then you have a better balance and a better equilibrium around the globe. 

How each of us does that within the political and economic constraints that we face, while taking into account the broader spillover effects of what we do, is really the art that we've got to develop within the multilateral situation. So right now South Africa is saying, we've done a few things in terms of loosening flows outwards, accumulating reserves, keeping swaps as a possibility and utilizing it to some extent, and we'll continue to watch what's going on in the world and whether there are other mechanisms, and at the same time, take the view which I've articulated, which is, can we put our heads together and find a multilateral solution?

We can't repeatedly say, "Unilateral action is bad, multilateral action is good!" and then not invest in the multilateral side, and continue to act unilaterally. It doesn't make sense.

 WSJ: Following on that, is there a certain level that you're looking at for the rand? Obviously it's appreciated quite sharply in the last year. Do you think right now at a rational level or is it too strong? What is the right level?

 Mr. Gordhan: It depends where you are. If the oil price is sitting at one place, then one level of the rand is fine, if it's sitting at another place, then another level is fine. If you ask people now, we'll say we're very glad we have a strong currency because oil, when I last checked, was 121 [dollars a barrel]. That's providing an important buffer in ensuring we don't have major disruptions within our own macro-economy. But more importantly, not too negative an impact upon the larger ordinary folk, and what they have to pay for their transport and fuel costs more generally. Secondly our major concern now would be the volatility. Here again, it's not so much the capital flows that seem to be impacting more recently, as much as volatility in other currencies which seem to impact on us as well. The kind of complexities and drivers of the rand positions at any one point in time seem to be quite flexible. One day it's one thing, another day it's another thing. We don't, as a matter of policy, say "x is the level we want." What we want is more stability, predictability, competitiveness, yes, but now you have a new factor, which is buffering against extraneous shocks which have nothing to do with us. Just like the financial crisis had nothing to do with us, but we still lost a million jobs in the process. So we watch with some interest what's going on in the world, and hope we can find a formula for managing that qualitatively.

 WSJ: What's your view of the U.S.? What's happening there in terms of grappling with our own problems such as the deficit?

 Mr. Gordhan: No, we don't like any friend to be in trouble! We recognize as South Africans that we live in a very interconnected and interdependent world. Some of us might be weaker in that world system and others stronger. But the stronger you are, the more responsibilities you carry in that sort of environment. We've always looked to the U.S., China or Europe or indeed Brazil as well, as major players who will manage their own situations and multilateral situations in a way in which we can promote our common welfare and get new forms of global governance to develop, get new forms of concerted action to develop. There was a high level of reciprocity in the middle of the crisis. The investments in China, India—and the extraordinary things that all of us had to do within the limits of our own macroeconomic situation. We went from a surplus of 1% to a deficit of 7.3% so that we could cushion the shock that the recession brought upon us. It was a testimony to the fact that the world is capable of concerted action in order to respond to what was a very severe level of crisis. 

In the 1980s, when activists were at odds, even at war, with the local security forces, they would create zones within a township where the police would not be able to enter, even digging trenches so the vehicles couldn't cross. At that time, particularly in '87, '88, they would say, "We've tasted freedom for a hours—these guys couldn't get here!" What the world tasted during that period of high levels of cohesion, co-ordination and collective action, was what it was capable of potentially. But those are high moments—we go back and retreat over a period of time. You've got to find the high moment again where you can piece it together. We don't want to comment on the domestic dynamics within the U.S., and we hope that you are able to find forms of reconciliation within your own situation, which allow government to do what it has to do in order to take the U.S. onto a consistent path of recovery, which is important for the rest of the world, because the U.S. still remains the largest economy in the world. 

 WSJ: Looking at the FDI [foreign direct investment] figures, the challenge you have in terms of increasing them. There's been such a buzz about South Africa that I've been hearing the past year or so, helped by the World Cup in many sense, but yet you're still not seeing FDI turn around. You started talking about growth and some of the indicators turning a corner. Are you hopeful about FDI levels as well?

 Mr. Gordhan: We've had some indicators, which are accompanied by clouds over them as well. Wal-Mart has come to South Africa and said it wants to buy big retail company Massmart, as you know. The trade unions involved in that sector have taken a particular view. Hopefully that will be resolved sooner rather than later. 

There is some interest in South Africa. What we hope is that, through the preparatory processes I outlined earlier, that we are putting in place now, we will have more shovel-worthy projects. So rather than say: "What are you as an investor interested in? Let's see if we can respond to you." Across the continent, certainly in South Africa, we have large numbers of things we need to do. We need to package that so we can come to you with a portfolio of projects and say, "What are you interested in? Well here are examples of what we do, and here are some of the specs that go with that as well." I think we'll get here in a short while. If you take on the infrastructure side, there's this huge need, both within South Africa, in the region—our immediate neighbors - and beyond as well. The African Union, I think late last year, took a decision to get five or six heads of state who would become sponsors of major infrastructure projects. There's a lot of interest from the Chinese, for example, to partner with South Africa, because we have logistical skills, construction skills, we know the continent, and we have financial systems in place. Some of those are in their formative stages in terms of discussion as well. It's true, we haven't seen a big burst in FDI, but we see a lot of people coming through, talking, investigating if you like, and establishing whether they have the appetite to come to the continent. 

It's like running with a ball, but now you need to score the goal. We've got to start scoring goals now, and that would be the objective we need to keep in mind for the next six to nine months.

 WSJ: You're heading to Washington today, you said you'd be discussing recommendations and you'd prefer more collective action on the part of countries. Can you discuss in more detail the things you will be talking about? 

 Mr. Gordhan: The first is that, we normally have a view of the global growth situation and more general economic situation, and there the key issue that's been around for a while is, what does rebalancing mean and how do we find an appropriate and acceptable formula for rebalancing? The IMF has put a set of proposals on the table in respect of what surplus and deficit countries have to do. We need to now engage with those and get into frank discussions about what would be within the realm of possibilities within the next year that we can actually do and not just talk about, so that we can indicate to the global community and the business community that political leaders, finance ministers and governors are willing to take on this challenge and find that win-win formula between national and global interest.

On the international monetary system, we've clearly identified that there's challenges of liquidity, there's challenges with massive flows in and out of emerging market countries, that those flows are disruptive to our own domestic environments, that those flows have now forced all sorts of countries to take all sorts of measures, including capital controls. We've demonstrated our inadequacy, in terms of tackling more assertively this issue, by giving total legitimacy to something that was totally unacceptable a year ago - capital controls.

We've moved from unacceptable, to 'let's think about it,' to 'here's ten guidelines that you can follow if you want to implement it.' What it demonstrates is that we're still not coming to terms with, what are the practical things we could do, which would enable us to say again to the constituencies that are looking up to us, that we can reassure you that we are working on a formula and that formula will get us somewhere. In that regard, let's take the discussion on SDRs and whether the yuan should be in or out and so on. Clearly the dynamic is moving towards a basket of currencies of some kind. Can we find a bridging mechanism that will enable us to reconcile our different views on what's acceptable and not acceptable? I don't think we're too far from each other, if we seriously engage in win-win discussions on these sorts of issues.

Similarly there are structural issues around the globe, around, as I said, creating better investment possibilities, which would lock in some of that liquidity. And on the other side, find mechanisms which would enable some of those capital flows to be converted to long-term flows rather than short-term flows. Again, whether it's South Africa or the African continent or other developing or emerging markets, there's a huge need for—just take infrastructure alone. Why is that we aren't able to reconcile high liquidity and high flows with huge needs to invest? Clearly, we should be able to put our heads together and find the equation that will combine the two, with the business community already indicating with its own feet, let alone anything else, that it's shifting its gaze, for example, to the African continent. We are very mindful that those are early days, but nonetheless this is something that we can do.

The third is the emerging problem of unemployment, or the inability of current growth models to create employment. That clearly is a challenge that we need to take on. The fourth is the link between growth and development. If we truly want to take a medium-term view of what we want to engage with, then linking development and growth initiatives, linking business enterprise and adequate returns for investment with development of countries in Africa and elsewhere is in the best long-term interest of everyone concerned. Even from a purely self-interest point of view, it would be in the interest of business to begin to work with that paradigm, so that you ultimately have win-win on a much wider basis, and you don't carry the risk of social instability as a result of inadequate attention to the development component as opposed to just the growth numbers that we usually look at.