A security vulnerability on Facebook Inc. for years gave advertisers and other third parties a way to access users' accounts and personal information, according to security firm  Symantec Corp.
SYMC


-0.55
%






But Facebook said Tuesday it had fixed the problem and found no evidence of the issue resulting in private information being leaked.

The issue, which Symantec described as accidental, centers on Facebook applications, the third-party programs that allow users to play games, shop and do other tasks on the Facebook website. In some cases, those applications shared with advertisers and analytics companies so-called access tokens, which act like spare keys (originally intended for the apps) to access or post information on a user's account, including reading wall posts, accessing a friend's profile, posting to a user's wall and mining personal information.

As of April, Symantec estimated that the flaw affected close to 100,000 Facebook apps—and that since Facebook introduced apps in 2007 potentially hundreds of thousands of applications may have inadvertently leaked millions of access tokens to third parties.



It is possible that the third parties didn't realize they had the ability to access this information. Still, "the repercussions of this access token leakage are seen far and wide," wrote Symantec researcher  Nishant Doshi in a blog post.

Symantec informed Facebook of the problem in the second week of April, and the social network took steps to address it.

"We've conducted a thorough investigation which revealed no evidence of this issue resulting in a user's private information being shared with unauthorized third parties," said a Facebook spokeswoman in an email, without specifying how the company conducted its study. She also said contractual obligations with advertisers and developers prohibit them from obtaining or sharing user information in a ways that violate Facebook's policies.

Facebook's spokeswoman said the company has "strong policy enforcement and technical measures that allow us to quickly catch and take action against suspicious behavior on the platform."

Last fall, Facebook punished several app developers for passing along identifiable user information to ad companies after a Wall Street Journal investigation found that many apps were sharing such data. 

"Facebook's complex ecosystem—with thousands of independent apps and complex data flows to and from apps—is a problem of its own creation," said Ben Edelman, an assistant professor at Harvard Business School. "No one asked Facebook to create this system, which sharply reduces my sympathy for Facebook when things go wrong."

 Write to  Geoffrey A. Fowler at geoffrey.fowler@wsj.com 