(See Corrections and Amplifications below.)

Forces loyal to Col. Moammar Gadhafi seized the central square of a rebel-held city west of the capital and stalled rebel forces in the east, as Libyan officials began a campaign to block international measures against the government.

As the U.S., the European Union and other governments looked into options for intervention, including imposing a no-fly zone over Libya as well wider economic sanctions, a delegation of Col. Gadhafi's government headed to Europe carrying messages for North Atlantic Treaty Organization and EU ministers scheduled to hold meetings in Brussels on Thursday, European officials and diplomats said.

NATO defense ministers and EU foreign ministers and leaders have declined to meet with the group, according to a senior European diplomat, though Libyan government envoys met officials from Egypt, Malta and Portugal. EU leaders are also scheduled to discuss Libya at a Brussels summit Friday.

In fighting Wednesday, pro-government forces stalled the rebels with a barrage of rockets in the east and threatened to recapture some towns where key oil facilities are situated. 

Government forces seized control of the downtown city square in Zawiya, 30 miles west of Tripoli, from opposition fighters on Wednesday afternoon, government officials said. The patch of land had become symbolic ground for rebels, who had held it for two weeks. 

It was uncertain how firm a grip government forces had on the square. State television broadcast scenes said to be from the square, which before nightfall was filled with dancing government soldiers waving green flags and newly printed pictures of Col. Gadhafi, but TV coverage abruptly halted Wednesday night. Officials refused to allow foreign journalists in Tripoli to travel to the city, where telephone, Internet and electricity have been off for days.

There was growing evidence that Col. Gadhafi was supplying fresh arms to tribes in the west who had pledged to defend his regime. A Tripoli resident from Bani Walid, southeast of Tripoli, said he received calls from a leader in their tribe of Warfala, one of the largest in Libya, to collect weapons.

A Tripoli resident who returned Tuesday from Yafran, to the south of Zawiya, said he had witnessed rebel movements with an intent to close in on Tripoli, though his account couldn't be confirmed.

Track events day by day.

See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

A look at the economic and political status of selected countries facing unrest in North Africa and the Middle East.

In other fighting, a diesel storage tank exploded at the Sidr oil facility, 360 miles east of Tripoli, sending thick smoke into the air.

Shukri Ghanem, the chairman of Libya's National Oil Corp. and Libya's de facto oil minister, said the explosion didn't damage any key oil installations. He said the storage tank carried roughly 200 gallons of diesel fuel used for a local power plant. He didn't comment on the cause of the explosion.

Fighting in the country has reduced Libya's oil output to 500,000 barrels a day from 1.6 million barrels before the conflict broke out, according to Mr. Ghanem. 

He said that the National Oil Corp. was intent on honoring all agreements with foreign oil companies and wasn't contemplating ending contracts or re-opening tender processes for exploration, despite the heavy international pressure that Libya is facing from key oil company partners in Europe. 

He said that Libya's political crisis had caused the country to declare force majeure and that it could not fulfill its export contracts temporarily, but that the country too was intent on resuming those export contracts as soon as the situation allowed.

"We are honoring our contracts and staying with these commitments.…Everyone is willing to come back" when the political situation allows them to, said Mr. Ghanem.

The EU's top foreign-policy officer, Catherine Ashton, said the EU would widen the scope of sanctions against Col. Gadhafi's government, and backed calls for a United Nations-led investigation into events in Libya.

A senior European diplomat said the Libyan delegation that headed to Europe Wednesday carried messages that Col. Gadhafi's government was trying to solve the crisis peacefully, but that any rebel attack on Tripoli would result in a massacre because of the large numbers of people there who are armed and loyal to the Libyan leader.

The delegation also carried the message that the imposition of a no-fly zone and asset freezes would make it hard to resolve the situation for the benefit of the Libyan people, and that the government was ready to talk to anybody representing the opposition. 

Separately, central bank governor Farhat Bengdara said he had been in touch with the U.S. Treasury, the EU and other institutions in a bid to soften the impact on ordinary Libyans of any freeze on central bank assets. 

However, Mr. Bengdara, who left Libya on Feb. 22 on what he said was a tour to lobby foreign governments, said he had been temporarily replaced by the country's finance minister. He said he was disputing the government's decision.

In Tripoli Wednesday night, a virtual curfew was in effect, with most streets deserted. Internet service was still shut down throughout western Libya, crippling communications with the outside world for two million residents. 

The government cut off Internet service on March 3, ahead of what was expected to be a day of large antigovernment demonstrations.

Banking services in Libya were severely curtailed Wednesday by new regulations requiring all foreign-currency transactions get central bank approval. 

 Corrections & Amplifications 

Libyan National Oil Corp. Chairman Shukri Ghanem said Wednesday that Libya's oil output had fallen to 500,000 barrels a day from 1.6 million barrels. An earlier version of this story incorrectly said Mr. Ghanem said output had fallen to 500 million barrels. 

—Tahani Karrar-Lewsley contributed to this article.

 Write to  Charles Levinson at charles.levinson@wsj.com and Margaret Coker at margaret.coker@wsj.com 