By Mark Bowden (2001)

No doubt the research for a gripping new book on how U.S. intelligence tracked down Osama bin Laden is already under way. But in the meantime let's look at some other nail-biter manhunt tales. One of the best is Mark Bowden's "Killing Pablo," about Pablo Escobar, who was, throughout the 1980s and early 1990s, the richest, most ruthless and most elusive cocaine kingpin in the world. The Medellin cartel in Colombia was Escobar's personal fiefdom, a terror state within a state. The story of his rise to power and his bloody downfall is one of almost operatic extravagance. (Escobar once burned a pile of cash just to cook some food while on the lam; the meal cost $2 million.) Bowden, a master practitioner of narrative nonfiction and a world-class reporter, used Escobar's outsize life to forge one of the classic manhunt stories of our time. Bowden shows how Colombian authorities, together with the DEA, CIA and the Army's Delta Force, blended high-tech surveillance with old-school shoe leather to track down the narco-gangster and stop his reign of terror in 1993. The book is exhilarating—but sobering: Killing Pablo got rid of one drug tyrant only to see him replaced by others every bit as murderous.

By James L. Swanson (2006)

After umpteen-thousand books on Abraham Lincoln's life and times, who would have thought that there could be another one as thrilling and briskly alive as this? James L. Swanson finds fresh ground by tightly focusing on the search for John Wilkes Booth—a search that employed thousands of men, horses and dogs. By slowing down the clock, the author allows us to see the story unfold day by day and sometimes minute by minute, with the vantage point shifting between the hunters and the hunted. As often happens in chase narratives, I found myself thinking like the fugitive and perversely rooting for him to get away. "Manhunt" demonstrates a pleasurable truth about well-crafted nonfiction: Real, pulse-pounding suspense can be extracted even from stories that (we think) we already know.

By Scott Anderson (1999)

Not all manhunt stories are about chasing down bad guys. In this nonfiction mystery, Scott Anderson goes on a far-ranging quest to discover what happened to an intrepid American relief worker named Fred Cuny, who vanished in Chechnya in 1995 and became the subject of a vast international search. Known as "The Master of Disaster," Cuny was an organizational maverick who had saved thousands of refugees in conflicts ranging from Bosnia to Somalia before he was lured into "the viper pit," as Anderson calls it, of Russia's corrupt, war-torn republic. Anderson proves an engaging and intrepid sleuth as he endeavors to learn Cuny's fate while exploring the many enigmas and contradictions of his character. This is a smart, taut, obsessively well-reported narrative of intrigue and pursuit that reads like a Graham Greene novel.

By Maryanne Vollers (2006)

Eric Rudolph, the cunning neo-Nazi nutjob behind such crimes as the 1996 Atlanta Olympics bombing, became something of a folk hero when he eluded an extensive, years-long manhunt by scavenging in the mountain fastnesses of North Carolina. In this engrossing true-crime narrative, Maryanne Vollers carefully unsnarls the mysteries of one of America's most notorious homegrown terrorists and shows how Rudolph was able to stay just ahead of the authorities for so long. (Among Rudolph's weirder survival tips: poisoning dogs with stolen antifreeze before they could reveal his whereabouts.) Although he fits into a larger American tradition of disaffected loners that includes Ted Kaczynski and Timothy McVeigh, Rudolph ultimately proves as hard to fathom as the fugitive was hard to catch.

By John Vaillant (2010)

This is an altogether different kind of manhunt story. Here, it's a cat that's doing the hunting—a vengeful Amur tiger on the trail of a poacher in the primeval woods of Siberia. The tiger in question is a critically endangered species whose body parts fetch astronomical prices in China for their imagined aphrodisiacal properties. John Vaillant, a fastidious reporter and an elegant stylist, is especially adept at capturing the atmospherics of the Siberian landscape as he spins a multi-species chase story with many classic turns. Predator becomes prey, facile notions of hero and villain are shattered, and the reader gradually comes to understand the socio-economic and ecological pressures that compel the main characters to do what they do. The pursuit culminates in a breathtaking stand-off of man versus cat in a forest clearing—a denouement every bit as explosive and surprising as the raid in Abbottabad earlier this week.

—Mr. Sides is the author, most recently, of "Hellhound on His Trail: The Stalking of Martin Luther King Jr. and the International Hunt for His Assassin," now out in paperback (Anchor).