After proposing to slash more than 16,000 government-funded child-care slots, Mayor Michael Bloomberg's budget proposal, released Friday morning, reverses those plans. Instead, the mayor has proposed cutting or laying off 6,000 public school teachers, a move that was met with swift and strident criticism Friday.

At a briefing with elected officials Friday morning, the mayor presented his executive budget proposal for the fiscal year beginning July 1.

The administration said it devoted nearly $2 billion in additional city money to education to cover state and federal funding losses. But even with the additional funds, the mayor proposes cutting the teaching slots through a combination of layoffs and attrition.

Manhattan Borough President Scott Stringer, a potential 2013 mayoral candidate, called the proposed budget a "political" document and said he didn't believe the teacher layoffs are necessary.

The mayor's budget also shows that the city anticipates business-tax revenue in the next fiscal year to exceed levels prior to the global financial meltdown. 

Parents and educators hoping for good news on plans to lay off thousands of teachers will be disappointed: The new budget proposal is essentially the same on that front as a preliminary proposal the mayor released in February.

The mayor's presentation comes one day later than expected because of President Barack Obama's trip Thursday to the site of the World Trade Center terrorist attacks. The final budget, due June 30, must be negotiated with the City Council.

Mr. Bloomberg is expected to lay the blame for any cuts at the feet of the state and federal governments. 

"While the city's economy and fiscal situation continue to improve, Albany and Washington continue to face serious challenges and their cuts are real and will have a serious impact on our budget," Deputy Mayor Howard Wolfson said in a prepared statement.

Deflecting any criticism Wall Street might face for city budget woes, the mayor plans to highlight a rise in projected business-tax revenue to $5.75 billion in the fiscal year beginning July 1, compared with $5.41 billion in fiscal year 2008, before the financial-sector collapse.

Business-tax revenue this fiscal year is expected to be $5.2 billion.

The budget proposal will allow roughly 1,400 police recruits to be included in the July class. In April, the mayor delayed a class of 540 police cadets that was scheduled to start that month, prompting strong criticism from City Council Speaker Christine Quinn and Finance Committee Chairman Domenic Recchia Jr.

At the time, the mayor's office said it planned to combine the April class with an expected class in July, but the administration refused to specify how many cadets would be in the combined class. 

At Ms. Quinn and Mr. Recchia's urging, the class will be about 1,400, roughly what the police commissioner planned as of March.

Patrolmen's Benevolent Association President Patrick Lynch said he is pleased the council "recognizes that government's first responsibility is to protect its citizens."

Mr. Bloomberg also is backing off plans to eliminate more than 16,000 day-care slots next year.

Earlier, in response to City Council pressure, the mayor backed off a "crash tax" proposal to impose an emergency response fee on vehicles involved in accidents. 

To preserve day care for all children currently in the system, the city will spend $40 million, an administration official said. The city currently provides child-care support for 106,000 children. 

Last week, 45 of the city's 51 council members sent a letter urging Mr. Bloomberg to restore the cuts. 

As part of his presentation, the mayor plans to outline how the cost of providing the same level of city services has increased dramatically; at the same time, he plans to say, the state and federal governments have systematically pulled support from New York City during the past decade.

If the city continued to receive the same percentage of its total budget from the state and federal governments as it did in fiscal year 2002, the city would have received an additional $6.1 billion in state and federal aid in the upcoming fiscal year, an administration official said.

 Write to  Michael Howard Saul at michael.saul@wsj.com 