  Q: I own a flower shop that is very well-known in my town because I provide my customers with background information about the flowers they buy (e.g. origin, symbolism, etc.). I plan to launch a website to help me grow my customer base. I want to build a personal brand so people will one day see me as "the" expert in the flower market. What are some marketing and media strategies and tools that I can use to become a niche expert in my field and get my expertise out to the masses? 

 —Trisha, N.Y. 

 A: As the creator of your service, you know that you offer your niche marketplace valuable insight and advice. However, simply proclaiming that you are an expert will get you nowhere. It's not enough to just shamelessly pimp your own service; you also need to become a leading authority for your target customers.

My advice: Devise your own moniker for marketing and public-relations purposes. Perhaps you want to be known as "The Flower Gal" or "Ms. Flower Power." The media loves to work with branded personalities.

Second, be authentic. Authenticity builds credibility. Don't speak down to your customers; relate to them. Whenever and wherever possible, tell the story of how your service was founded. What problems did you encounter? How did you solve them? Give people a reason to listen to you by offering value to their lives with relevant and targeted information. 

Scott Gerber is a serial entrepreneur, syndicated columnist and author of "Never Get a 'Real' Job." He is the founder of the Young Entrepreneur Council, a nonprofit led by young entrepreneurs who take action against unemployment through programs and initiatives for starting a business.

Once you've perfected your message, syndicate your way to success by distributing content through the "expert" media outlets that target your niche marketplace, such as blogs, forums, press releases, newsletters, Web video and podcasts. Find guest-blogging opportunities by reaching out to like-minded websites and offering your services at no charge. Build online communities centered on your expertise. Remember, no one knows your marketplace better than you.

Here's more advice from members of the Young Entrepreneur Council: