They'll always have New Haven.

Yes, it's a lovely accomplishment just to make the NCAA basketball tournament. It's the standard question when you're a hopeful team on the bubble, and everyone answers it in the same, sweet, unassuming way: We want in. Far better to be one and done on the main stage than plow through the B-list NIT.

But c'mon. When you there, you want to win. Nobody remembers who got to the NCAA. Moral victories are for suckers, and corny movies.

That's where the 13-seeded Princeton sat on Thursday in the closing moments of Thursday's NCAA tournament contest against four-seed Kentucky. The game was tied 57-57, owing to a crafty fall-away shot by guard Dan Mavraides with 37 seconds left in regulation.

Here we go. Cue Bill Murray at Bushwood Country Club: A Cinderella story was on the verge. Forget Morehead State stunning Louisville and Rick Pitino earlier in the afternoon. That was nothing. Humble Ivy League Princeton was all tied up with powerhouse Kentucky and its slick sideline roamer, John Calipari.

It had to happen. It was meant to happen, right? The past week and change had been a giddy blur for the Tigers: a loss to Harvard in Cambridge, a must-win-and-did against Penn, a staggering buzzer-beating victory over Harvard in a one-game playoff at, of all places, Yale. The thrilling win—and the happy Princeton mob rushing the neutral court—had pushed the program back into a spotlight it hadn't enjoyed since Pete Carril's Ben Kenobi days.

But this was a modern Princeton outfit, coached by 36-year-old Sydney Johnson, a star on the 1995-96 club that stunned the defending champion UCLA Bruins. These Tigers could still burn you with a backdoor cut, but they could also accelerate the tempo and play big. 

"Princeton can beat us," Calipari said beforehand. "They can beat just about anybody."

It was going to happen. Wasn't it? It seemed that way in the first half, when Kentucky's vaunted freshmen couldn't find daylight and Princeton kept the margin after twenty minutes to 34-33. Even when the Tigers went cold and began getting sloppy in the second half, letting the Wildcats take a 53-48 lead with a little more than five minutes to play, it appeared doable.

But when Mavraides made that game-tying jumper that rattled around the rim, it appeared really doable.

It was time to walk away from the computer. To text your old roommate, slap your co-worker on the back and sprint to the office conference room with the TV. Princeton was going to do it again. Princeton!

But then, suddenly, as if he'd awoken from a two-hour nap, one of those vaunted Kentucky freshmen, Brandon Knight, suddenly became the NBA lottery pick he is expected to be. After not scoring the entire game, Knight broke right and curled around the Princeton defense and lifted a difficult layup off the glass.

Knight 2, Kentucky 59, Princeton 57.

Princeton called a timeout with two seconds left. Two seconds was plenty! Hadn't they had 2.8 seconds against Harvard? Of course, this time had to take the ball the length of the court...

It didn't happen. Kentucky moves on, with its future professionals and its multimillion-dollar coach. Princeton is going home, just like Harvard, which fell to Oklahoma State Tuesday the opening round of the NIT.

It was a memorable Tiger season that had a brush with the historic. 

There's nothing wrong with wishing for a little more.