Read the full  ECO:nomics report .

Venture capitalists never know for sure which energy innovations will succeed, but they've learned a lot about what it takes to give them a chance. The Wall Street Journal's Kimberley A. Strassel discussed the makings of a successful venture with  Ray Lane, managing partner at Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, and  Matthew Rogers, a McKinsey & Co. director and former senior adviser to the secretary of energy for Recovery Act implementation.

Here are edited excerpts of their conversation.

  MS. STRASSEL: People have come to understand over the past year or two that sometimes energy projects are incredibly capital-intensive, a billion dollars sometimes to create a plant, and sometimes it's going to take seven or eight or years to build one of those. How does a venture-capital market evaluate the risk of that, and do they have the patience and time to do those kinds of investments?   

 MR. ROGERS: You're going to have to think through how you deal with existing infrastructure, because you're going to try and displace it in a finite market. You're going to have to understand where all the capital is going to come from during the life cycle, because otherwise it doesn't make sense for a venture capitalist. The idea is to take a lot of risk in an early stage and hope you have enough ownership and liquidity to get a 10X return, because you're going to have a lot of losers in the portfolio. 



  MS. STRASSEL: Can venture capital do this alone, though?   

 MR. ROGERS: Well, let me take a couple of specific examples. An electric-vehicle battery cost $1,000 a kilowatt-hour two years ago. Last fall it was running for about $500 a kilowatt-hour, and we're on pace to take that to, let's call it $250 to $300 a kilowatt-hour by, let's call it the end of 2015. That kind of steepness to an innovation curve is the kind of thing that all of a sudden the market can begin to pick up—not only because of the fuel savings, but also because that battery in that car provides great acceleration.The consumer is now willing to pay for that product at a $400-a-kilowatt-hour price point and be really happy.

What that is is a partnership between some venture-capital funding that got companies like A123 Systems Inc. started, but also a set of partnerships with some very large companies that can integrate that technology into a platform that consumers want to buy. Consumers don't want to buy an A123 battery. Consumers want to buy a car.

 MR. LANE: Venture capitalists provide a great lever for bringing this to reality. Just staying on the electric-vehicle example, we all know that the automobile industry has not taken electric vehicles very seriously. You hear the stories that we could have produced them 10, 20 years ago—yes, at great expense, but they could have been produced. With venture capital being interested and with other circumstances such as the difficulty in the automobile business caused by the recession, you saw big bets, big risks being taken by venture-capital funds to fund car companies or component companies or battery companies to produce electric vehicles. That created enough momentum to get the original-equipment manufacturers to be serious about it. The Department of Energy understands this. The DOE, by providing some funding to the start-ups, is causing the large OEMs to pay attention to this. 

 MR. ROGERS: Investing in venture-backed companies or in companies where there is a significant private cost share is a much better way to deploy governmental capital to accelerate the rate of innovation, because then you have a set of managers who are incented to get this right, as opposed to, I just gave a 100% grant to somebody to go do something or the government just goes and does the research.The competition among the recipients helps accelerate the path even further.

 MR. LANE: You need scale-up capital. It's about passion and falling in love with an entrepreneur who's typically technical and has a great idea. Then you go on to a B round or a C round, but then you get co-investors and now you've got some decent capital involved. But you do not get across to success until you get either some strategic partner, government, or big private-equity player that's willing to build a plant to demonstrate it at scale. That is not venture capital.



  MS. STRASSEL: Isn't there a risk, though? The government partners with VC and then one of these companies fails. The taxpayer doesn't necessarily have the tolerance for that failure that a VC company does. Does it endanger government support?  

 MR. ROGERS: The government's interest is in making sure that the end market goal is achieved. So, if vehicle batteries arrive at $250 a kilowatt-hour sometime this decade, that program will have been successful.