 Washington 

A so-called supergroup is formed when singer-songwriters from existing groups come together in a new venture, and it's usually a signal that their original ensembles are kaput. Not so with Middle Brother. Taylor Goldsmith, John McCauley and Matt Vasquez remain in their bands Dawes, Deer Tick and Delta Spirit, respectively. They say Middle Brother's self-titled new album, which arrived last week, is a one-off. Further, they see the project as just another way to promote their other groups.

"We want people to like it," said Mr. Goldsmith by phone, "but at the same time we don't want it to take precedent over our projects."

So committed to their own groups are the members of Middle Brother that Dawes and Deer Tick are opening for them on their current tour. With Mr. Vasquez out front, Delta Spirit will play a few major outdoor events this summer, including the Coachella Music & Arts Festival on April 16.

Listen to clips of songs from "Middle Brother"

Though the three musicians insist "Middle Brother" came about quickly, the album doesn't sound like it was cobbled together between assignments. For all the album's good cheer and loose vibe, the pacing, vivid production and tight harmonies of "Middle Brother" reveal the care that went into its creation. The group comes out of the late-1960s and early-'70s tradition: We hear a little bit of the Beatles and the Band, with a touch of Neil Young tossed in, almost as much as we hear echoes of the three members' own groups.

The album was cut last year in Nashville, Tenn. "We had no plan," said Mr. McCauley by phone. "It was, 'Let's go to Nashville.'"

Mr. Goldsmith agreed. "We had no expectations. A lot of the quality comes from not being overthought. Some bands are in preproduction for six months. These songs were arranged the day they were recorded."

When I visited Mr. Vasquez this January at the house in Long Beach, Calif., he shares with the members of Delta Spirit, he said Middle Brother was formed "out of mutual friendship and boredom." But as the conversation continued, it became clear why the album has its integrity. Mr. Vasquez said he had several songs that didn't fit the flow of Delta Spirit's 2010 releases, the album "History From Below" and the EP "The Waits Room." He contributed three songs to "Middle Brother."

Mr. Goldsmith said that different versions of two songs he brought to the new project, the solo folk tune "Wilderness" and "Blood and Guts," were recorded earlier by Dawes. Mr. McCauley had already written "Daydreaming," the album's gentle opener, before arriving in Nashville.

The band-within-bands concept unfolded at a concert at the 9:30 Club here last week. Dawes opened with a very strong set; the audience sang along with smile-inducing joy, especially on "When My Time Comes" from the band's recent album "North Hills." Next, Deer Tick offered a lengthy program, which ranged from ragged to charming and intense, with the intuitive keyboardist Rob Crowell providing the glue in the midrange. Both bands opened the stage to guests: Dawes hosted Jonny Corndawg, a lanky, seemingly eccentric and talented West Virginian whose off-kilter sense of humor encourages him to write songs like "Keep Your Body Happy through Exercise." Mr. Vasquez joined Deer Tick for "Idaho," a song he wrote while on tour with Delta Spirit, and a raved-up reading of Bruce Springsteen's "Racing in the Streets." Sam Cooke's "Bring It on Home to Me" served as Deer Tick's encore, with Mr. Vasquez joining in.

Middle Brother's music took on new textures in concert. With support provided by Dawes, the rock tunes were grittier, especially when Mr. Vasquez stepped forward. The audience was held rapt by the quieter tunes, played on electric rather than folk guitars, especially Mr. Goldsmith's "Wilderness" and Mr. McCauley's "Daydreaming." And in "Million Dollar Bill," each singer took a verse and the voices rang out in high harmony on the chorus and the bridge. It was a promising performance by a band playing only its third gig. "It's pretty cool that you guys stuck around for a band you never heard before," Mr. Goldsmith said to the audience. They were well rewarded for having done so.

 Mr. Fusilli is the Journal's rock and pop music critic. Email him at jfusilli@wsj.com or follow him on Twitter: @wsjrock.  