PITTSBURGH—Long before papers found at Osama bin Laden's Pakistani hideout revealed a plot to attack U.S. railroads, security experts warned that the nation's 140,000 miles of track presented an attractive—and difficult to protect—terror target.

Passengers riding Amtrak, commuter rail or subway systems face little of the routine security screening Americans have come to know at airports. And once out of the station, every mile of track presents a potential security vulnerability.

The much-larger freight-railroad system also presents a daunting set of security challenges. Hazardous materials crisscross the U.S. and pass through major cities, often on tracks protected by little more than no-trespassing signs. 

Yet for every $50 the Transportation Security Administration spends on aviation security, the agency budgets $1 to protect surface transportation. In addition to that money, the Department of Homeland Security distributes grants of between $300 million and $400 million annually for security of surface transportation, which includes railroads and buses. 

In the U.S., there have been six high-profile plots to attack surface transport since 9/11, though none have succeeded. That includes the 2009 plan to blow up subway cars in New York City and a 2010 plot, foiled by a sting operation, to blow up metro trains near Washington.

Rail transport has often been a target for terrorists world-wide, including deadly bombings on Madrid commuter trains in 2004, subway and bus bombings in London in 2005, a rail assault in Mumbai in 2006, and more recent subways bombings in Moscow. 

Since 9/11, terrorists have planned attacks on trains and subways.

"Terrorists see surface transport as a killing field," said Brian Jenkins, the director of the National Transportation Security Center at the Mineta Transportation Institute in San Jose, Calif. "We know that derailment and bombs on crowded trains are in their playbook."

Globally, there are more than 90 terrorist and guerrilla attacks a month on surface transportation, with about a third of those targeting trains, according to the Mineta Transportation Institute. Since 9/11, there have been 1,738 attacks world-wide on trains, subways, and buses that have killed 3,749 people, according to the MTI.

Security experts say the absence of such attacks in the U.S. largely reflects terrorists' wider failings. Al Qaeda-inspired terrorists haven't carried out any major attack against the West since 2005, notes Mr. Jenkins, though among their many failed plots broken up by law enforcement have been several plans to attack transit systems.

The plot sketched out by al Qaeda in February 2010, discovered by U.S. intelligence analysts poring over the cache brought back from Pakistan, involved plans to derail a U.S. passenger train. Since 1996, terrorists world-wide have tried to derail trains almost 150 times, and sometimes succeeded, Mr. Jenkins said.

"As homegrown threats develop, this will be more of an issue," said Jena McNeill, a homeland-security analyst at the Heritage Foundation in Washington.

She highlighted the danger of homegrown extremists inspired by American-born Yemeni cleric Anwar al-Awlaki, now one of al Qaeda's top remaining leaders. 

"He is an American and can think somewhat more strategically about our vulnerabilities," she said. 

Railroad-security efforts focus largely on deterrence, including patrols of rail and subway stations by police officers and canine teams. Some rail and subway systems also use random bag checks. Freight railroads have their police officers patrolling along rights-of-way, and the railroads track hazardous materials, along with restricting access at some facilities. 

CSX Corp. one of the largest U.S. railroads, maintains the only team in the U.S. dedicated to countering terrorism threats to railroads. Members of the Rapid Response Team, an 18-man unit of CSX police officers created in 2004, spend most of the year helping protecting CSX's huge rail network. 

But for about 30 days a year, the team travels on a custom-built, one-of-a-kind locomotive, teaching SWAT teams how to blow the doors and windows off trains and storm down narrow aisles gunning for bad guys.

"Seven minutes to clear the entire train, outstanding!" cheered Robert Flake, the team's chief, after watching trainees storm through four rail cars during a recent exercise in Pittsburgh.

Mr. Flake wasn't surprised to hear of al Qaeda's latest plot to target trains.

"We have the events of London, Madrid and Mumbai to remind us that terrorist groups including al Qaeda have looked at using rail transportation to further violent pursuits," he said. 

In a three-day training course in September, the Rapid Response Team, with help from German officers, taught 16 SWAT members from 10 police forces how to use a shotgun to breach train doors, mix the right amount of explosives to pop windows out of their frames without harming passengers, cut steam lines to cripple trains, and man a locomotive's control panel.

One scenario involved an Amtrak train taken over by a handful of assailants with hostages on board. Trainees quickly drew up an assault plan, rigged flash-bang diversionary grenades and four-man ladders, and sneaked along the sides of the train. On cue, some stormed through locked doors using bolt cutters while others blew out windows and poured into carriages, long guns drawn.Other courses zero in on different threats, such as improvised-explosive device attacks against tank cars loaded with hazardous chemicals. The team gets more than 90 training requests a year; it is already booked through the end of 2011.

 Write to  Keith Johnson at keith.johnson@wsj.com 