I recently stopped by a joint on 14th Street where I dined by the fire on organic chicken and roasted vegetables. Afterward, I watched a little TV, relaxed in the lounge with a magazine and asked the concierge to help me with my shopping.

This all went down, of course, at the gym. Clay, a downtown fitness club, is among the most expensive in New York, with a monthly membership running $200. That's twice as much as your standard club, and 32 times more than the fitness centers run by the city. 

Is it 32 times better? Good luck figuring out the differences in service and price between the city's 800-plus gyms. Most clubs make you call for information, and before you know it you're chatting with a pushy "membership consultant" who won't let go until he has your credit card and a date with your little sister. 

My solution: avoid the gym entirely. I prefer trotting around Cobble Hill in an old sweater. This sorry routine costs zero dollars and provides a ridiculous feeling of superiority. When I spot the gym huffers paying to literally run on a treadmill, I think of that line from Shakespeare: "Oh Brave New World, that has such people in it!" Still, I was curious to see what you get for your money.

You can't complain about the rates at the Chelsea Recreation Center—or, as I like to call it, Club Bloomberg. The city offers an insane deal: $75 for a year's access to the 25th Street center and 31 additional public gyms. Yes, you get what you pay for. But you also get more! And less!

Here is a list of Chelsea center amenities you won't find at the competition: foosball tables, teenagers breakdancing in the aerobics studio, signs warning against washing your shoes in the sink. Amenities most fitness centers offer that you won't find at the Chelsea center: television, music, towels, toilet paper. 

Signup is an adventure. The lady handling my registration gleefully noted my misspellings. I got no ID because the printer was broken, and the guard wouldn't let me in until I produced a padlock for my locker. (The hardware store around the corner sells 10 locks a day.)

The six-story, $22.4 million center is impressive: There's a huge, six-lane pool with beautiful dolphin mosaics, an airy lobby where kids hang out doing homework (they're banned before 2 p.m. and after 6 p.m.) and a full-size basketball court. 

There are more than 800 gyms in the city. Monthly dues as quoted over the phone or online, based on a one-year membership for a single location. 

$6.25

Richie's Gym

Bushwick, Brooklyn

Bronx YMCA

Castle Hill, Bronx

$44



$69



David Barton Gym

Astor Place

Clay

West 14th Street

But getting fit here requires fortitude. The cardio room was hellishly hot, and there's a line at rush hour (three of the nine treadmills were out of order). The bustling locker rooms are suitable for changing, but not showering. And the evening's packed conditioning class started 20 minutes late. Fellow students said this was typical—after all, the volunteer instructor schleps in from Brooklyn. 

The New York Sports Clubs chain is distinguished by its ubiquity—108 city locations, more than the number of Burger Kings. You're probably in one now and don't even realize it. An $89 monthly "passport membership" buys access to all. 

I tried the Rockefeller Center location. A former movie theater, it occupies a three-story underground space connected by a series of stairs, escalators and twisting corridors. I accidentally walked into the men's locker room.

Despite the wacky layout, this is a serious Dilbert gym, built for the busy office worker. The spacious locker rooms offer huge, well-lit mirrors, blow dryers and toiletries including generic moisturizer and purple, grape-scented shampoo. There's enough equipment to handle the rush hour, and trainers supervise a free, hyper-efficient 22-minute strength training routine. There's a TV on every cardio machine, so you can track your heart rate, record your mileage and watch  Charlie Sheen go crazy all at the same time.

Still, it all felt a bit institutional until I took the evening's sparsely attended Vinyasa yoga class. The instructor had plenty of time to unpretzel our awkward poses, and her approach was unusually gentle. (Sample advice: "Try to let go, whatever that means to you.") The soothing Indian music almost masked the Lady Gaga hits pounding from the cycling studio next door.

You won't hear much of Ms. Gaga at Clay. Was that  Charlie Parker playing in the locker room? The gym, which doubles as a spa, is relentlessly New Age—all skylights and earth tones. In front, by the café (gluten-free waffles; eco-friendly shrimp), there's a fireplace pit that looks like something your cool but nutty Aunt Francie might install in her Miami condo: gas flames leaping from a bed of crystals, bowls of polished pebbles. 

I'm not sure what this has to do with getting fit, and as far as I can tell Clay has equipment similar to that of the less exalted gyms. But the cardio machines have personal fans and iPod docks to display your playlist. There are individual saunas—you can roast like a turkey in your own little oven. The shower soaps smell expensive, the chilled towels are drenched in eucalyptus and hoarders can stock up on free Q-tips, razors and cotton balls.

Recruits also get a free consultation with a wellness guru. I was thoughtfully questioned, measured and callipered by the lovely and engaging  Christy Maskeroni. Until then, I was laboring under the delusion that I'm doing well. Wrong! According to Ms. Maskeroni's software program, my stats did not rate me an "excellent" or even a "good." I was only "fair." And not as in "fairest of them all." As in, lots of room for improvement.

Yikes. Ms. Maskeroni is an expert, with a master's from Columbia. Maybe I needed to join a gym after all, and book her for a couple $100 follow-up sessions. Could I afford it? 

Back home, I had a better idea. I searched online until I found an obscure website that classified my stats as not only "good," but borderline "ideal." Problem solved! I'm back to trotting around the neighborhood. And if I feel like waiting for a treadmill, there's always the city gym.

—Ms. Kadet, who writes the "Tough Customer" column for SmartMoney magazine, can be reached at anne.kadet@dowjones.com