President Barack Obama on Friday will name Gene Sperling, a veteran of two decades of legislative battles, as director of his National Economic Council, signaling a shift from driving policy to deal-making on Capitol Hill.

The selection comes amid a broad reshuffling of White House personnel as the Obama administration retools to confront a new Republican House and begin the president's re-election campaign. White House press secretary Robert Gibbs said Wednesday he would leave his post early next month and become a paid consultant to the Obama re-election campaign, likely later this year.

Mr. Obama's 2008 campaign manager, David Plouffe, will begin work Monday as a new senior White House adviser. And a decision will come as soon as next week on a new permanent White House chief of staff. It's expected to be either acting chief of staff Pete Rouse, a longtime Obama aide, or Bill Daley, a former Commerce secretary who now leads the Midwestern operations of J.P. Morgan Chase. Mr. Daley met with the president at the White House Wednesday.

"It's a pretty major retooling," Mr. Gibbs said.

The choice of Mr. Sperling, now a senior adviser to Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner, to succeed Lawrence Summers at the NEC is a sign that Mr. Obama is ready to strike some deals with congressional Republicans—but also is prepared to fight them. 

Because the next two years are likely to be dominated by fights over spending and taxes, the president appears to have opted for an insider with extensive experience negotiating legislation and explaining economic policy to the public, said one person knowledgeable about the search. 

Mr. Sperling was a deputy NEC director during President Bill Clinton's first term, holding the job during budget showdowns with Republicans that ended up shutting down the government. He was then NEC director from 1996 to 2000, a time when Mr. Clinton and the GOP struck a series of bipartisan legislative compromises, including a balanced budget agreement.

Mr. Sperling's star rose in December when he led negotiations as a representative of the Treasury with Senate Republicans over extending the Bush-era tax cuts. He secured a slew of concessions from the Republican senators that even White House officials hadn't been pressing for, such as allowing businesses to write off 100% of investments in plants and equipment on their taxes this year, according to people familiar with the NEC selection.

After Mr. Summers announced he would step down in September, White House officials moved to find a business leader to fill the spot. But initial overtures to chief executives got a cool response, and the White House's thinking shifted, according to these people familiar with the process.

While the president remakes the West Wing, his re-election campaign is already taking shape. Senior adviser David Axelrod will depart in February, along with Mr. Gibbs, to be followed by Jim Messina, a deputy chief of staff who will head Mr. Obama's re-election effort. The three of them will form the heart of the campaign, expected to gear up later this year.

Mr. Plouffe will bring discipline and calm to a sometimes frazzled West Wing, said White House officials, who were also hopeful he would bring a fresh perspective. 

"There's a bubble in here," Mr. Gibbs said Wednesday. "So I think having new voices and having fresh voices ...[is] an important part of this process."

No successor was named for Mr. Gibbs. White House officials said the president would look at external candidates as well as insiders for the job. The insiders viewed as leading candidates were Bill Burton, one of Mr. Gibbs's deputies, and Jay Carney, communications director for Vice President Joe Biden.

 Write to  Jonathan Weisman at jonathan.weisman@wsj.com and Laura Meckler at laura.meckler@wsj.com 