In her second collection as Alexander McQueen's lead designer, Sarah Burton just had her first tour de force. 

It's been a year since Lee Alexander McQueen's suicide—which some believed might mean the end of the label. Last season, Ms. Burton tiptoed into her role as creative director. Her spring collection was lovely but lacked the drama of Mr. McQueen's pageants.

This season, at Paris's La Conciergerie, a former prison, Ms. Burton started simply with white wool suits whose pleats were formed with metal zippers that could be partially unzipped. She showed tweeds and fur and then slipped in a leather harness—a hint of the gothic to follow. The looks became more theatrical until it couldn't be denied that there's still a lot of Mr. McQueen's DNA in the brand—or perhaps there was always a lot of Ms. Burton's. The later gowns were worthy of Marie Antoinette, who knew the Conciergerie all too well. One was woven of strips of silk. At the end, the room erupted in cheers.

Karl Lagerfeld is obsessed with youth, and this was his youngest collection ever. This came in a season when many designers aged their collections a good 20 years. Mr. Lagerfeld put his Chanel on the runway the way people actually wear it—tossing a tweedy jacket over skinny jeans and tucking them into booties, for instance. It was as though he was urging people to relax about Chanel—wear it to the farmer's market. It was all fun and enticing until the jumpsuits showed up. The word "ugly" came to mind. Yet they'll probably sell. It is Chanel, after all.

Like olive oil and ice cream, lace and knitwear aren't generally served together. But when designers Maria Grazia Chiuri and Pier Paolo Piccioli paired them for Valentino, the dish turned out to be a delicacy—one of the highlights of Paris. Beige knit suits and dresses were wearable and chic. Soft, simple boots and shin-length leather coats were sleek. Things got really good with a lace-bodice dress that segued into a pleated leather skirt. The designers applied lace to knit, created a fur coat interspersed with lace, and produced a leather dress cut to look like lace. They even used lace and a lacy print to create the lines of a plaid.