Seems like most Jet fans are panicky about this playoff game with the Indianapolis Colts. The Saturday showdown does seem a wee daunting (though if you're a Jets hater, it's hilarious.) Rex Ryan's R-rated Meadowland Hayride piled up a respectable 11-5 record, was one of only two clubs to stomp the mighty Patriots, established a permanent residency on the front page of the New York Post, and for a prize, its first playoff date is a brutal road game against...a team that broke its heart in last season's AFC championship, led by a four-time MVP quarterback.

Why, oh, why, oh, why the Colts?

Calm down. We're here to say: This is not another mesmerizingly methodical Indianapolis Colt-like Indianapolis Colts team. The 2010 Colts are not the blue-shirt steamroller that plowed— real plowed, not fake plowed, New York City Department of Sanitation-style—through the AFC last year before getting shocked by the Saints in the Super Bowl. This is not exactly the Peyton Manning aerial show that tormented the Chicago Bears for a Lombardi paper weight in 2007.

This 10-6 Colts team is something else, something precarious and less graceful, but still skilled. And looking at all of the evidence...OK, they're actually somewhat scary. The Jets should not expect a cakewalk, not the way they've bumbled through this past month. But still! Here's a guide to these Colts:

 They're Banged Up. The Colts have been ravaged by injuries. (Is "ravaged" officially in the SportsWord Hall of Fame? Guess it's better than being "amused" by injuries). They've placed 17 players on injured reserve. Top Peyton target Austin Collie has endured a scary string of concussions. Dallas Clark is done with a wrist injury. Receiver Anthony Gonzalez is gone. So is safety Bob Sanders. By midseason, it got so bleak, the Colts were playing eight men on a side, using a Giant Schnauzer for a wideout and one of those Roomba robot vacuums as a tight end.

 They Lose Games  They Used to Not Lose. They got off to an unflattering start with a loss to Houston in Week One. Later they got zapped by the Chargers at home, where they also fell to the Zombie Cowboys in overtime. A crusher was a November loss to New England in which Mr. Manning appeared to be leading the Colts to a marvelous come-from-behind road win, only to throw a late interception and give Colts fans Super Bowl XLIV PTSD.

 They're Not Boring Savants. The Colts were famously so team-first and businesslike, they became as exciting as a moving sidewalk at the airport. They were led by a serene head coach in Tony Dungy, and when he retired, they replaced him with Jim Caldwell, who makes Mr. Dungy look like Charlie Sheen. This year's Colts are more entertaining because you never know what you'll get. One Sunday, they're the Krazy Good Kolts; the next, they're the Minnesota Timberwolves. Unpredictability—it's the new efficiency!

 Peyton! He looked 44 when he was 24, so aging is no big deal for Eli's big brother. His stats this season are comparable to last year's MVP campaign. But he's not unbeatable—he's 9-9 in the playoffs all-time. 

Compare that to Trent Dilfer's 5-1 playoff record. Does that mean Mr. Dilfer is a better quarterback? Of course it does! Wait, what was the question?

 They're Pure Evil. Sorry: The in-laws are from Baltimore. They made us put this in.

 They've Won Four in a Row. Even if it's a Mr. Magoo-style string of close victories, it's still an impressive recovery. Can't the Jets just play the Chiefs?

 Write to  Jason Gay at jason.gay@wsj.com 