In October, an executive from UBS AG made a startling comment during a conference call with analysts. The Swiss bank, he said, needed to "pull its socks up" to regain lost market share in foreign exchange.

Read the full  Foreign Exchange report .

The admission of weakness—unusual in the tight-lipped industry—led to lots of gloating at other top-tier banks. But they had little cause to celebrate. Competition is a lot tougher than it used to be for all of the big names in the $4 trillion-a-day currencies market.

Until recently, the top banks in foreign exchange looked unassailable. Now other big banks—including BNP Paribas SA and Nomura Holdings Inc.—are taking aim at the leaders, using generous pay to poach staff from the established names, offering clients super-competitive prices and trying to mimic the big banks' trading technology.

As if that weren't enough pressure, nimble nonbank market makers, like funds and proprietary trading firms, are becoming increasingly active in the most basic end of the market: spot currency trading.

It's tough to tell how much share these competitors are grabbing—but they're doing well enough to make the industry leaders nervous, to pull their socks up. Many top names in foreign exchange are pushing to upgrade their trading technology, while a group of them are taking on nonbank rivals with a new banks-only electronic trading system.

"There's no question that we felt the pressure from new entrants to the market in late 2009 and early 2010, particularly through hiring," says  Jeff Feig, the New York-based head of foreign exchange at Citigroup Inc., the fourth-biggest bank in currency dealing.

For a long time, many banks saw foreign exchange as a boring business—safer, perhaps, than other trading activities but not nearly as profitable. The revenue available from individual transactions is tiny, maybe $70 on a deal as large as $1 million in the major currencies.

Foreign exchange is also an expensive business to enter. To make serious money, banks have to handle serious volumes—and that means spending heavily on people and technology. The very fastest banks can pump out and update prices in less than a quarter of the time it takes a human to blink. The smartest can sync up with complex trading models and allow clients to slice giant trades into little chunks, complete them intelligently to minimize market impact, bundle the trades back up again and post them back into possibly dozens of accounts.

When the financial crisis hit, a lot of banks that had avoided the foreign-exchange business gave it a second look. Currency-trading volume shot sky-high when Lehman Brothers collapsed in 2008 and investors scurried into the apparent safety of dollar-denominated U.S. government bonds, but the market itself worked smoothly. Trades flowed through the system exactly as they normally do, and many banks scooped up record currency-related revenue; the overall flows grew by some 20% between 2007 and 2010, according to the Bank for International Settlements.

Foreign exchange, in fact, stands out as possibly the only core banking business to escape the crisis unscathed. Unlike self-destructive businesses like highly structured debt products, foreign exchange is in no danger of disappearing, as everyone from central-bank reserve managers to tourists needs to do currency deals.

All of which makes foreign exchange a much more attractive prospect these days. Numerous large firms have made the business a new priority, including France's BNP Paribas and Société Générale SA, and even Nomura—once a minnow in the currencies business with a market-share ranking in the 70s. Credit Suisse Group, already a sizable player, also has big ambitions. These banks are making investments in technology and personnel to grab market share, a necessity in a business where volume is everything.

"If a bank is anywhere in the top 20, it wants to be in the top 10," says Mr. Feig at Citigroup. "If it's in the top 10, it wants to be in the top five. And the top five want to be top three."

Even at the top of the pile, banks are keen to grow. "[Our] ambition is to be the No. 1 bank in foreign exchange," said  Mike Bagguley, head of foreign-exchange trading at third-place Barclays Capital in London.

Because newcomers' buildup plans are still relatively new, and as so few reveal currency revenue, it's hard to tell whether they're succeeding yet. But even established companies in the business know they will fall behind in this environment if they stand still.

"It takes continuous investment," says  Zar Amrolia, global head of foreign exchange at Deutsche Bank AG, which has held the top slot in the business for the past six years. Over the past 12 months, he says, the bank has added salespeople and increased technology spending.

Investments by the big banks generally focus on shaving microseconds off the time it takes to update prices and ensuring that systems can accommodate demanding high-volume clients, chiefly hedge funds. They spend heavily on their own trading systems, ensuring they offer clients sophisticated ways of executing trades, often in an effort to mimic the success that Barclays Capital has had in building market share with its high-end Barx trading system. Plus, they spend time and money ensuring their prices hit independent trading systems faster, and at more competitive rates, than other banks. Increasingly, banks are also focusing on making their own internal processes as efficient as possible, minimizing the flows they need to pump into the wider market.

At UBS, which has the second-biggest market share in the business, a series of technological upgrades and new initiatives is due for release over the course of this year.  Christopher Purves, global head of electronic trading in currencies at the bank in London, is circumspect about exactly what the new features will involve. Still, he says, "we have a whole list of things coming out that we think our clients will love," particularly in trading technology.

Likewise, HSBC Holdings PLC is refocusing on the business and modernizing its trading technology—a challenge, given its task of serving clients as diverse as "a hedge fund in New York, a [business] in Vietnam and an insurance company in Brazil," says  Frédéric Boillereau, head of currencies and metals at the bank in London.

The No. 6 bank,  J.P. Morgan Chase
JPM


-0.07
%




 & Co., is also renewing its foreign-exchange efforts, with smarter trading technology at the core of the initiative. "We want to maintain our position as having one of the most profitable foreign-exchange businesses of any bank. But you can't do that without being in the top five for volumes," says  Troy Rohrbaugh, currencies chief at the firm.

The biggest banks believe the new competitors that have been grabbing their business and staff will soon start to find this battle too tough, particularly as they seek to excel in all areas.

"Competing with the top six is like setting up a burger shop over the road from McDonald's," says one senior executive at a large firm. "You might make a better burger on that street, but you will not compete on a global basis."

Both Mr. Feig at Citigroup and Mr. Amrolia at Deutsche Bank believe that a shakeout is likely over the next year. The newcomers dismiss this idea as typical bluster by the heavy hitters and insist they're in this project for as long as it takes. "I am convinced ours is a credible, lasting expansion plan," says  Martin Wiedmann, head of foreign-exchange sales and distribution at Credit Suisse.

"We know what it takes" to build scale, echoes  Michael Burton, head of institutional sales at Société Générale.

Still, the enormous volumes and comparatively wide spreads that made 2008 a hugely profitable year for all banks in foreign exchange are not likely to repeat themselves anytime soon, barring major macroeconomic shocks. Revenue in 2009 and 2010 was more modest, bankers agree.

If that relative stability lasts, smaller banks may find it tough to justify the greater physical presence world-wide and huge technology bills needed to push into the business. They will certainly have to start showing results from their efforts over the next year or so, and if they fall flat, these banks may settle into niches, like structured products, regional specialization or a focus on particular types of clients.

"Banks want to get into foreign exchange because it's a flow business with a low usage of capital," says Mr. Boillereau at HSBC. "But it's not as easy as people think, and building up takes time. I think the next two years are going to be difficult for the newcomers. Some will give up, but some will carry on." This year will bring a key test of that theory.

 Mrs. Martin is a news editor for Dow Jones Newswires and The Wall Street Journal in London . She can be reached at katie.martin@dowjones.com. 