 The official death toll reached 1,597 Sunday night local time following Friday's 8.9-magnitude earthquake in Northeastern Japan and resulting tsunami. The number killed is expected to soar—about 10,000 people are unaccounted for in the port town of Minamisanriku alone, public broadcaster NHK reported. Authorities expressed concern the death toll could exceed 10,000. 

 Prime Minister Naoto Kan, his voice rising with emotion, told the nation that the earthquake and tsunami that have devastated the country represent the biggest crisis to face the nation since it emerged from World War II. 

 The events might pummel Japanese shares this week, as many stock investors had little chance to react to the quake before the Tokyo stock market closed. Bond and currency markets could also be hit by the prospect of Japan issuing new debt to fund its rebuilding efforts. 

 The disaster will slow economic growth to a crawl or even push the economy into contraction over the next quarter or two, but reconstruction efforts should lift the economy by the final months of the year, analysts say.  

European leaders agreed on a program of long-term economic overhauls to the 17-member euro zone, and authorized a beefing-up of the bloc's bailout fund for troubled countries. The meeting was marked by several bitter disputes. Ireland, which sought better terms on the €67.5 billion ($93.8 billion) bailout it received last year, was rebuffed after refusing to contemplate raising its low corporate tax rate.

 European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet pleaded with France and Germany to permit the bailout fund to buy some of the bonds of weak countries that the central bank has been accumulating during the crisis; he too was rebuffed. 

Portugal's government pledged a new batch of measures to reduce spending and boost revenue, amid growing fears that its high borrowing costs may soon force it to seek a bailout. 

Italy's economy expanded 0.1% in the fourth quarter from the previous three months, as expected, driven by growth in the services and farming sectors, data showed. 

U.K. producer prices accelerated at the fastest rate in two years in February owing largely to rising oil and food prices, adding to the inflationary pressures that could prompt the Bank of England to raise interest rates in coming months.

Ireland's banks are still heavily dependent upon European Central Bank funding, even as figures released Friday showed they borrowed less last month. But Central Bank of Ireland data also showed that it had separately lent Irish banks €70 billion by the end of February in what is known as exceptional liquidity assistance, up from the €51.1 billion at the end of January. 

U.S. Vice President Joe Biden, fresh off a tough speech on Russian human rights, sided firmly with Moldova's Europe-minded leader over opponents pressing for closer ties to Moscow. In a meeting with Prime Minister Vlad Filat and at an outdoor speech to thousands of Moldovans, Biden sought to boost reformers in this poorest of European countries.

 State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley quit after causing a stir by describing the military's treatment of the suspected WikiLeaks leaker as "ridiculous" and "stupid," pointed words that forced President Barack Obama to defend the detention as appropriate. 

 With forces loyal to Col. Moammar Gadhafi pressing their offensive into eastern Libya, the Arab League's support for a no-fly zone over the country will likely thrust the issue before the United Nation's Security Council this week but may not be enough to assure the measure is implemented. 

 In Bahrain, police firing tear gas and rubber bullets were unable to disperse thousands of mainly Shiite antigovernment protesters who blocked roads and prevented access to buildings in Manama's financial district, posing a further threat to the island's shaky economy.  

 Oman's ruler granted lawmaking powers to officials outside the royal family in the boldest reforms yet aimed at quelling protests for jobs and a greater public role in politics. 

In Yemen, police on rooftops fired live bullets and tear gas at protesters, injuring more than 100 people who were camping near San'a University, the latest in weeks of demonstrations calling for the country's president to step down. 

 Israel has approved hundreds of settler homes after five members of an Israeli family—including three children—were knifed to death as they slept in a West Bank settlement over the weekend. The attack and the government's response threatened to drive Israeli-Palestinian peacemaking even further out of reach.  

Voters in Niger chose between two candidates in a presidential runoff, a vote many hope will usher in democracy in the West African nation more than a year after soldiers blasted their way into the presidential palace and kidnapped the elderly president. 

Southern Sudan is suspending talks and diplomatic contact with northern Sudan over claims that the northern government is funding militias in the south, a top Southern Sudanese official said.The announcement, which follows clashes that have killed hundreds of people in recent months, could further destabilize what will become the world's newest country in July.