LONDON—U.K. Prime Minister David Cameron said Wednesday that the government's planned cull of independent public agencies, known as quangos—quasi-autonomous nongovernment organizations—will save billions of pounds, upping its estimate following criticism of the process.

"The bonfire of the quangos is going to make sure we rationalize all of the nongovernmental bodies there are and it will save billions of pounds in the process," he told lawmakers during the weekly Prime Minister's Questions. 

That represents a bigger claim than the government has previously made. The minister in charge of the process,  Francis Maude, said last week the measures would save "significantly more" than £1 billion ($1.56 billion). 

But a damning parliamentary report last week claimed that the government has "botched" the quango overhaul and that it will fail to deliver the cost savings or increased accountability the government promised. 

Amid union threats of co-ordinated action to protest the government's austerity measures, Mr. Cameron signaled he is now more open to strengthening antistrike laws. 

Until now, the prime minister has stressed he had no plans to change antistrike laws. But asked about the issue Wednesday, Mr. Cameron said he knows that a "strong case" is being made to change the law, to force unions to win backing from a majority of their members for industrial action. 

Currently, unions must win a majority of votes to call strike action but there is no threshold for the minimum number of people that must vote for the ballot to be valid. 

"We don't currently have proposals" to change the law "but I am very happy to look at this argument because I don't want to see a wave of irresponsible strikes, not least when they're not supported by a majority of people taking part," Mr. Cameron said. 

On other topics, Mr. Cameron insisted that U.K. banks will cut their bonuses, alongside a government-led initiative to boost lending to the wider economy. 

"What we all want to see is the banks paying more in tax and we will see that; we want to see the banks doing more lending and we will see that; and we want to see bonuses cut and we will see that," Mr. Cameron told parliament. 

Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne on Tuesday issued a veiled threat to banks, saying no option was off the table if they didn't agree to increase lending to businesses and reduce bonus payments. That came after opposition attacks that the government was effectively giving banks a tax cut by not continuing efforts to rein in bank bonuses. 

Anger has been building in the U.K. over bank bonuses, as banks prepare to pay billions to their employees at a time when job losses in other industries continue to mount. 