AMMAN—The Jordanian government has presented a revised draft budget for 2011 to include some 460 million Jordanian dinars ($650 million) in additional expenditures, to cover a package of new social safety measures taken following public demonstrations. 

Countries have opened coffers in attempts to ease tensions.

The revisions raise the budget deficit to 1.16 billion dinars, up from a previous projection of 1.06 billion dinars, the country's Finance Minister Mohammad Abu Hammour told parliament late Sunday. 

The government decided to withdraw the draft budget presented in November to meet some of the protesters' demands including job creation, better salaries and reducing fuel and basic food prices. 

Abu Hammour said the 2011 budget now stood at 6.369 billion dinars, compared with a projection of 6.239 billion dinars in November. Jordan's 2010 budget was 5.875 billion dinars. 

The revised budget has raised current expenditure and lowered capital expenditure from the original estimates announced in November, he added. 

Last January, the government announced a package of measures including tax cuts on fuel and foodstuffs in a bid to reduce the burden on the country's poor. Total revenues are expected to reach 4.768 billion dinars this year, while foreign grants are expected to hit 440 million dinars, the minister said. Jordan's high bill of crude oil imports is the main reason behind its budget deficit as the kingdom buys more than $2 billion worth of crude oil and oil products annually.The kingdom, in a bid to lower its budget deficit, lifted subsidies on fuel in the last few years. 

Jordan, like other countries in the region, has seen demonstrations across the country in recent weeks against high commodity prices and government policies. 

Jordan's ruler King Abdullah II in early February dismissed the government of Samir Rifai and named Maaruf Bakhit to head a government tasked with introducing general reforms, in hopes of tamping down popular discontent and protests inspired by revolts in Tunisia and Egypt. 

 Write to  Hassan Hafidh at hassan.hafidh@wsj.com 