PITTSBURGH, Pa.—The Steelers lost their Super Bowl MVP, kicked out of town by ownership. 

They lost their two-time Super Bowl-winning franchise quarterback for four games, sat down by the league's personal conduct policy. 

They lost their right tackle, then their left tackle to season-ending injuries. They lost their Super Bowl-perfect placekicker and nearly lost All-Pro linebacker James Harrison after a deluge of NFL-issued fines for his hits.

And now, this Sunday against the Jets, they could win their eighth AFC Championship. 

"It's not surprising to us," veteran cornerback Ike Taylor said, motioning toward the Steelers' locker room behind him. "Just look around here."

Like toward Mike Wallace's new locker stall. This spring, when cornerback Deshea Townsend wasn't re-signed, veteran receiver Hines Ward pointed first at Mr. Wallace, the second-year receiver, and then at Mr. Townsend's then-empty locker next to him.

"So he could keep an eye on me," said Mr. Wallace, who under Mr. Ward's watch became the Steelers' leading receiver.

Or toward placekicker Scott Suisham's bobbing head, who's here because coach Mike Tomlin finds excuses terribly tiresome. Mr. Tomlin jettisoned Jeff Reed, the Steelers' second-most accurate placekicker ever, after he chalked up a missed field goal to bad turf at the Steelers' Heinz Field.

"On this team, everybody has to have the ability to answer the bell," said injured right tackle Willie Colon.

Or even toward the players' parking lot, where a peek doesn't reveal the high-end automobiles befitting high-salaried young men.

"There are no Bentleys, no Mercedes, no 'Lambos,'" Mr. Taylor said, truncating the potentially NFL star-common Lamborghini.

Not even any Ferraris?

"OK, I have one," Mr. Taylor admitted after a long pause and while wearing an impish grin. "But it's not up here. That's not what we're about when we're here. When you walk through this door, it's no flash and no ego."

Mr. Taylor pointed to himself, Ferrari notwithstanding. At the end of the 2005 season, he said he could've tested the free agent market. He re-signed with the Steelers instead, and while he was rewarded with the richest cornerback contract the franchise had ever offered, he's sure he could've gotten more on the open market. And if he regrets that?

"Hell no," he said. "There are a lot of guys on this team who have signed for less money to stay here."

Which at least partly explains this Steelers team's incredible core longevity. There are 19 players on this current group who were here when the Steelers won the Super Bowl in 2006. There are another 17 who were here when the Steelers snagged Super Bowl rings in 2009. 

With three of those players on injured reserve, that means 33 of the 53 players on this active roster have won a championship—and been together at least three years.

"I've been here seven years and it's a lot of the same guys. We don't have a lot of turnover," quarterback Ben Roethlisberger said.

 The Steelers went 3-1 in his absence and he said that his teammates never faulted him for handicapping them with the off-the-field behavior that earned the suspension in the first place.

"We stand up for each other. We look out for each other. I think that's one of the reasons we're having the success we're having, because we're there for each other," he said.

These Steelers do genuinely socialize with each other outside of their facility two or three times a week, Mr. Colon said. New lineman Flozell Adams said he was surprised at first to see defensive backs hanging out with offensive linemen. "We told him that's how we roll here," Mr. Taylor said.

And all the drama of the season—from wideout Santonio Holmes being sent to the Jets to Mr. Colon and left tackle Max Starks going down —only pulled them closer, linebacker James Farrior said. 

A one-time Jet who had three head coaches in his five years in New Jersey, Mr. Farrior said the Steelers' strength is their stability, and that they've overcome these challenges this season.

"It definitely built our character. It made us closer a group," he said.

And of course that all stems from the coach, the players uniformly said. The 38-year old Mr. Tomlin exudes both confidence and charisma. Now in his fourth year, he has yet to show his players a moment's panic, Mr. Taylor said. The Steelers, Mr. Colon said, "are definitely his team."

"Adversity is as much a part of the game as blocking and tackling," Mr. Tomlin said. "I don't think this journey has been different than any of the other ones, some of the specifics are different, but every year, you're presented with adversity, some created by the game, some created by the men involved. I always enjoy the journey, particularly with this group of men. It's been fun.''

 Write to  Aditi Kinkhabwala at aditi.kinkhabwala@wsj.com 