With a possible lockout of National Football League players looming, cable and broadcast companies are girding themselves for the loss of games at a time when the NFL has become one of the most important brands on television. 

A lockout would starve the networks of a crucial way to attract large numbers of viewers as audiences have grown fragmented. Networks also count on football to draw viewers and advertisers to their broader programming slate. 

"It's a fluid situation but it's clear that with any lockout the networks are going to lose a lot of eyeballs," said  Michael Nathanson, a media analyst for Nomura Securities.

The standoff between NFL owners and the league's players is especially threatening to the league's TV partners because record numbers of viewers are tuning in to watch football—and tuning out other programming. For the second year in a row, the Super Bowl smashed records to become the most-watched telecast in U.S. history. About 111 million people watched the game on Fox Broadcasting, according to Nielsen Co. ( News Corp., which operates Fox, also owns The Wall Street Journal).

"The ad dollars captured by the NFL are not going to disappear from the ecosystem, but the eyeballs won't be replaced," Mr. Nathanson says. "No network can say, 'Sorry there's no football tonight but watch this show instead.' " 

A lockout would jeopardize the more than $3 billion a year that advertisers spend for commercials during NFL games, according to analysts. Advertisers could move their dollars to other "marquee" programming such as college football, golf or prime-time dramas and situation-comedies, but there likely wouldn't be enough ad inventory to absorb that money, one media executive said. Some advertisers might also choose simply not to spend. 

Most marketers won't commit to NFL advertising until April or May, when the networks usually sell commercial spots for the coming season. If the NFL still hasn't reached a deal with its players by later this spring, advertisers could delay buying for the season until later in the summer. But media executives and analysts say marketers are still likely to commit to buying spots on the NFL games. And in the case of a lockout, marketers could always try to shuffle those ad dollars elsewhere.

Companies including CBS Corp. say any lockout would have little immediate impact on the profitability of the NFL's broadcast and cable partners, who are estimated to pay the league about $4.2 billion in license fees this year—almost half of the total dollars spent on national sports rights. The networks haven't yet paid those fees for the coming season, although they are contractually obligated to pay the NFL around the time the games are aired. Still, because the fees are so high, most networks don't earn substantial money on showing NFL games, and some even take a loss. 

"Ironically, sports doesn't make nearly as much as prime time, not even close," CBS Chief Executive  Leslie Moonves told investors at a recent investor presentation. "We do make money," Mr. Moonves added, but he said that any lockout "will not have severe financial consequences for us." 

The NFL says the contracts protect the league in case of any work stoppages, natural disasters or similar events. "Any sums paid by the broadcasters to the NFL during a work stoppage have to be paid back in full with interest according to long-term language in the contracts," said NFL spokesman  Brian McCarthy.

As NFL owners and players hover on the brink of an all-out labor war, take a look back at some of the disputes that have upset play in major-league sports. 

In the case that a lockout cancels an entire season, the networks would continue to make the payments required by the contract but would receive credits against licensing fees in future years and, in some cases, would receive an extra season added to the contract at a discounted rate, people close to the networks said.

Most networks remain hopeful a work stoppage won't disrupt the coming season. "We're optimistic that everything will get resolved, said  Amy Phillips, a spokeswoman for sports cable network ESPN, a Walt Disney Co. unit. ESPN currently pays the highest annual rights fee, an estimated $1.15 billion, followed by Fox and then CBS and Comcast Corp.'s NBC. 

For certain partners, a lockout could pose more disruptive effects.  DirecTV Group Inc.
DTV


0.26
%




—which has lured subscribers since 1994 by offering exclusive television access to the NFL Sunday Ticket package, which offers access to out-of-market games—might face a loss of subscribers if the season is canceled. Any cancellation is unlikely to have a material effect on DirecTV in the short term, but analysts forecast that DirecTV could lose as much as 10% to 20% of its 2.2 million subscribers to its Sunday Ticket service in the long term. Still, that is a small fraction of DirecTV's total subscriber base of more than 19 million subscribers across the U.S.



While ESPN has the cushion of college football, which also draws a significant number of the male viewers that NFL advertisers covet, few networks have a fallback. "There are no contingency plans," CBS's Mr. Moonves said at a UBS investor conference in December. The NFL, he added, "is not like a prime-time show and you can say, 'OK, I'm canceling the 10 o'clock on Wednesday and I'm going to put in this.' "

"Obviously, we are guardedly optimistic that they will be able to make a deal," he said. "Will the bottom line be greatly affected? No, it won't be, but we really hope it doesn't happen."

 Write to  Lauren A. E. Schuker at lauren.schuker@wsj.com 