U.S. home prices won't hit bottom until next year, according to a quarterly survey of 111 economists and other housing analysts by MacroMarkets LLC. The survey shows how economists have continued to delay their expectations for a housing recovery.

The analysts expect home prices, as measured by the S&P/Case-Shiller home-price index, to fall an average 1.4% in 2011. The survey was conducted during the first two weeks of March. By contrast, in last June's survey, economists expected prices would gain 1.3% this year. 

"The sentiment among our expert panel regarding the U.S. housing market outlook continues to deteriorate," said  Robert Shiller, the Yale University housing economist who co-founded MacroMarkets. 

Panelists now expect home prices to gain 1.3% in 2012, with a firmer recovery taking shape in 2013. Mr. Shiller attributed the "uninspiring" forecast to "persistently weak" economic fundamentals: high unemployment, a large and expanding supply of unsold homes, and tighter mortgage credit.

About one-third of panelists expect prices to increase this year, but none call for more than a 3% annual gain. The remainder expect prices to stay flat or to fall by as much as 11%. Panelists expect home prices to rise by nearly 10% through 2015.

—Nick Timiraos

Rivals vying for ownership of a private island community off the coast of Miami once home to a Vanderbilt are now dueling in bankruptcy court.

One attorney claiming to represent Fisher Island Investments Inc. on Monday filed court papers consenting to an involuntary Chapter 11 bankruptcy petition that creditors filed against it Thursday, while another lawyer making the same claim said in an interview Tuesday that the company wouldn't consent. That attorney,  Joseph Rebak of law firm Tew Cardenas, said he and the other lawyer "are absolutely not on the same team." He said that they represent different groups battling in state court for control of Fisher Island Investments. 

At stake are the full rights to the 216-acre island's residential development program, its inventory of for-sale condominiums, yacht slips and memberships in the island's club, which is housed in the former mansion of William Kissam Vanderbilt II, the great-grandson of Cornelius Vanderbilt. Fisher Island's white sand beaches have lured such celebrities as  Oprah Winfrey to purchase property there, although the media maven has since sold her holdings.

Six creditors said they are owed a total of $32.4 million from Fisher Island Investments, and sought Chapter 11 protection for the company last week amid the upheaval. 

—Jacqueline Palank

Norfolk, Va., averted a calamity involving its convention-center hotel when the hotel's owner recently resolved a mortgage delinquency.

The partnership that owns the 405-room Norfolk Waterside Marriott attached to the city's convention center had gone delinquent on the hotel's $62 million securitized mortgage in February, according to Realpoint LLC.

But the property's owner, a partnership of London-based Investcorp Properties Ltd. and the Procaccianti Group of Cranston, R.I., and the loan's servicer, C-III Asset Management, recently resolved the matter by modifying the loan, and the past-due payments were made this month. "The matter has been resolved via a mutual agreement with the lender," a Procaccianti spokesman said.

Nationally, delinquencies of securitized mortgages on hotels are declining, to 14.3% of such loans being 60 days or more past due last month from 16.2% a year earlier, according to Fitch Inc.

—Kris Hudson