MUMBAI -- India's divestment plan may not find too many hawkers if the government continues its policy of awarding share-sale mandates to bankers quoting near-zero commissions.

The nation's leading domestic investment bankers have decided to boycott public issues in whiich they have to pay out of their own pockets. At least six bankers of these bankers have confirmed this, but were not willing to be named.

"The idea is to only go after assignments that are fee-positive," said an executive at ICICI Securities Ltd., the investment banking arm of ICICI Ltd., India's largest private lender which is in the process of formulating a new strategy. 

"It doesn't make sense to pitch for cent-fee assignments any more," the person said.

So far, local bankers have been aggressively bidding for share-sale mandates under the Divestment Ministry. Issues of state-owned firms, typically, are larger than those of private companies and handling such large floats enhance the ranking of a banker on the league table — higher the rank on the table, better the prospects of bagging large issuances in the future.

The government plans to raise around 400 billion rupees ($9.04 billion) by selling shares in at least five state-owned firms this fiscal year —Indian Oil Corp. Ltd., Steel Authority of India Ltd, Hindustan Copper Ltd., Power Finance Corp. Ltd. and Oil and Natural Gas Corp. Ltd. 

The current practice is once a bank qualifies for the technical bid, it is selected for managing a public float if it quotes the lowest commission in the commercial bidding. The lowest bidder is named as the lead banker of an issue, and other qualified bankers from the technical round are required to follow the lead banker. The commission received from the government is shared by all.

In 2011, the government raised 227.63 billion rupees ($5.14 billion) by divesting stake in six firms. Bankers said they had to spend between 20 million rupees ($452,080) and 50 million rupees ($1.13 million) on each issue.

"Recently they (the government) said the merchant bankers can't handle similar issues simultaneously," said the head of investment banking at a large domestic firm that has handled several large public-sector issues in 2011.

"We don't have any income from issues and, on top of that, we are forced to forego issues from others. Why should we handle any public-sector issue?" 

Current rules mandate bankers who handle public-sector floats cannot take up an issue by a private company in the same industry until the first float is sold. The rule came into being after allegations of conflict of interest when bankers to a follow-on public offering of state-owned steel maker Steel Authority of India were also bankers on a similar issue from Tata Steel Ltd in January. 

The government took an undertaking from Kotak Mahindra Capital Co. Ltd., Deutsche Equities India Pvt. Ltd., HSBC Securities and Capital Markets (India) Pvt. Ltd., and SBI Capital Markets Ltd. to not take an assignment from a private steel firm until the SAIL issue was completed. It later appointed two more bankers on the issue that is expected to be launched before the end of this quarter.

"Earlier, the fees earned from private-sector assignments would compensate for the lower fees from government mandates; but this is not the case any more," said an executive from an investment bank involved in the SAIL issue.

Another large domestic investment bank circulated an internal note in April, saying the firm will not handle any public issue for which it would have to pay from its pocket.

An official at a mid-sized domestic investment banking firm in Mumbai cited two critical issues.

"Many a time, public-sector issues get delayed and merchant bankers get stuck (because) until the issues hit the market, they cannot pitch for any other public issue by private firms in the same sector," he said. "So, we not only end up paying our own money to handle a public-sector float, but also sacrifice the commission from private floats."

The government tweaked bidding rules for merchant bankers several times last year. Originally, almost all expenses were required to be borne by investment bankers for any public-sector share sale. The rules were changed in 2010 with the government offering a brokerage fee of 35 paise for every retail application and 30 paise for institutional ones. 

Apart from this, the government pays for corporate advertisements. 

All other expenses such as printing costs, book-building charges, listing fees, filing prospectus with the capital market regulator, charges levied by the exchanges, costs for road shows, stamp duty, etc. are borne by the bankers. 

Foreign investment bankers enjoy an edge over domestic bankers when it comes to handling public issues for free. While handling such floats, they aggressively push overseas investors to subscribe through participatory notes —an offshore derivative instrument used for investments in domestic stock markets by foreign investors. 

They are issued by registered foreign institutional investors and sub-accounts in India for facilitating investments by their foreign clients in Indian shares. 

Investors of participatory notes pay fees to these bankers for investing in Indian equities and this compensates for the expenses the foreign bankers incur for handling the floats. 