Don't pretend you're not watching. We've seen your chart. Television ratings for the National Football League soared impressively this season, despite the absence of Luminous Favre-osity, and a gloomy campaign from the Dallas Cowboys, who failed to represent Texas in February's Super Bowl Extravaganza at the Jerry Jones Car Wash/Fitness Center. While the BCS does its best to ensure you never watch college football again—feel free to catch the national-championship game between Oregon and Auburn on May 23, 2014—NFL football maintains a firm cobra clutch on the brain. And no NFL spectacle is more thrilling than the playoffs, in which we watch our favorite teams in high-stakes games, and then watch the high-stakes games of teams we have no geographic or emotional attachment to. It's a beautiful, compulsory event.

But we know you have questions, so here's our playoff Q & A. Reminder: All of this season's playoffs will be broadcast in high-definition 3D on the exciting new Oprah Winfrey Network with the Peabody-winning broadcast team of Dr. Phil, Emeril Lagasse and Marlo Thomas.

 Can anyone stop the Patriots? 

How are you asking the question, Socrates? Are you asking out of a genuine curiosity—as in, "Can anyone possibly beat this wonderful, well-rounded football team led by Bill Belichick and Tom Brady?" Or are you asking it out of nauseous dread, as in, "Am I really going to have to listen to another year of analysts slobbering all over the Patriots? I can't stand it anymore."

This may not be a good month for Patriots loathers. New England went a league-best 14-2, punished teams like Pittsburgh and Chicago and have home field through the AFC playoffs. The old mid-2000s bromides about The Patriot Way, brilliant coaching and interchangeable players are back in heavy circulation, and Mr. Brady is playing so well that New Englanders are embarrassed they actually worried about That Hair and Gisele. Anything could happen, but it looks like another march to the Super Bowl and a tantalizing, half-hearted smile from Mr. Belichick. 

 Who's the NFC's best team? 

Don't believe anyone who gives you a definitive answer to this one. Atlanta (13-3) has home field through the NFC bracket, but they're not a runaway favorite, especially after the home loss to the Saints last week. Defending champion New Orleans has been erratic—is there enough magic left for a repeat run? The Eagles were everyone's hot Super Bowl pick—every typewriter on earth is eager to write a five-part Michael Vick Super Bowl Redemption Saga—but then Philly was a wipeout against the Favre-free Vikings in Tuesday's We're Scared of Snow Bowl. 

 Well, OK. Then what's the Sexy Pick? 

Maybe Green Bay? Clicking at right time, gave the Pats trouble with a backup QB, but then again, pretty sleepy in a must-win 10-3 victory Sunday against the Bears. Still, if the Packers advance to the Super Bowl, Fox plans to install a "Favre Cam" in Brett Favre's Mississippi living room, and cut to reaction shots every time Aaron Rodgers does something reasonably good.

 Earlier this year, the Jets said they were going to win the Super Bowl. Is this plan still operational? 

Yes, of course. However, the Jets will be hampered by the fact that the NFL has cruelly removed "coaches tripping opposing players on punts" from their offensive game plan. They stuffed the Bills 38-7 on Sunday, but their defense versus the Patriots and Bears was like the security at a Wiggles concert. But they're still the Jets! Super Bowl victory or early playoff bounce to Indy, you can count on measured, compassionate reaction from their fans and the New York media.

 Isn't it outrageous that an NFC West team without a winning record can get into the playoffs while winning teams like Tampa Bay and the Giants stay home? 

It's a disgrace. The NFL should do its best to replicate real life, which is always totally equitable and fair. But in future years, the league plans to address this injustice by making any playoff team without a winning record wear a giant letter L, Hester Prynne-style, on its chest. 

 This year's Super Bowl will be played in Cowboys Stadium, but without the Dallas Cowboys. Any adjustments to the schedule? 

Just a few. Because Mr. Jones can't bear to watch, the Super Bowl will be played outside with orange cones on the concrete of Stadium Parking Lot 4. Meanwhile, Jerry Jones's Rockin' Super Bowl Eve Celebration has been rechristened Jerry Jones's Super Bowl Eve Finger-Pointing Cavalcade of Self-Pity. The Jerry Jones Super Bowl Celebrity Golf Pro-Am Classic Starring Megan Fox is now six holes of minigolf featuring Burt Young. Curiously, the Jerry Jones Post Super Bowl Pancake Breakfast Featuring Jason Garrett and the 2012 World Champion Cowboys is still on.

 Are the Black Eyed Peas really playing the Super Bowl halftime show? 

Yes. Like you, we were surprised by this news, as it appeared to violate the NFL policy to only award the halftime show to septuagenarian rock acts. The Peas do seem a bit current and sprightly for Super Bowl midgame entertainment, but we've since learned that they were actually shot into orbit on a Mayan space vessel in 400 A.D., and traveled the universe without aging. They are approximately 1,640 years old, and the oldest Super Bowl act ever—beating The Who by a full six years.

 Did Mr. Favre really retire? 

Perhaps. But the "Dancing With the Stars" countdown has officially begun. As for the Senate campaign…

 Write to  Jason Gay at Jason.Gay@wsj.com 