  Charlie Sheen was fired from the Warner Bros. sitcom "Two and a Half Men," after the star continued an erratic media tour that since Saturday has included live Web video shows beamed from his home.

In a letter dated Monday to Mr. Sheen's attorney, Warner Bros., a  Time Warner Inc.
TWX


0.15
%




 unit, said the actor had committed felony offenses involving "moral turpitude." The studio said in the letter that those offenses included "furnishing cocaine to others as part of the self-destructive lifestyle he has described publicly."

"Your client has been engaged in dangerously self-destructive conduct and appears to be very ill," read the letter, which was earlier posted on TMZ.com. 

In response to the letter, Marty Singer, Mr. Sheen's attorney, said "We believe those claims are totally specious, absurd." Mr. Singer said his client has completed his rehab and is clean, taking drug tests twice a week.

Mr. Sheen's termination leaves in limbo the fate of television's most-watched comedy—but now opens the way for internal discussions over potentially bringing the show back without him, a person familiar with the matter said. Warner Bros., which produces and owns the show, said no decision has been made about its future. 

  Leslie Moonves, chief executive of  CBS Corp.
CBS.A


0.16
%




, which airs the show, said at an investor conference last week that he hoped "Men" would eventually return to the air.

Warner Bros. and CBS pulled the plug on production of the eighth season late last month after a day in which Mr. Sheen lashed out at the two companies and the show's co-creator  Chuck Lorre. At that time, the show had already been on hiatus for a month after the companies had asked Mr. Sheen to enter rehab.

Mr. Sheen was contracted to star in the show through the ninth season.

Mr. Sheen has since given multiple television interviews taking aim at his former bosses, and launched his own Web-video show over the weekend. He has also attracted more than two million followers on Twitter since opening an account last week.

A person close to the network and studio said last week that it would be highly unlikely that Mr. Sheen and Mr. Lorre could work together again, but that the studio and network would not jettison Mr. Lorre.

Last week, Mr. Sheen's attorney sent an aggressive letter to Warner Bros. and CBS demanding payment for the episodes of the current season of "Men" that had been cancelled. The letter said Warner Bros. was in breach of Mr. Sheen's contract, and blamed Mr. Lorre for the cancellation. 

"We're looking for my client to get paid," Mr. Singer said in an interview Monday, saying Mr. Sheen is owed in excess of $10 million. "He's been ready willing and able to work." 

Executives at Warner Bros. spent swaths of the last week in deliberations over how to respond to Mr. Sheen's legal salvos, according to people familiar with the matter. 

The executives' response was Monday's 11-page letter from Warner Bros.'s lawyers, addressed to Mr. Sheen's attorney.

In a one-sentence statement Monday, Warner Bros. said: "After careful consideration, Warner Bros. Television has terminated Charlie Sheen's services on 'Two and a Half Men' effective immediately."

In the letter, the studio offered multiple reasons it said entitles it to terminate Mr. Sheen's contract. It said it could do so, with written notice, as a result of "uncured incapacity," and also said that Mr. Sheen's flurry of media appearances violates part of his contract related to publicity. 

One subject of dispute has been whether Mr. Sheen is subject to a so-called "morals clause" in his contract that would give Warner Bros. grounds to fire him for conduct deemed damaging to the studio's interests. Mr. Singer has said there is no such clause in Mr. Sheen's contract. But Warner Bros. disputed that position in its letter, quoting a contractual section about felony offenses involving moral turpitude that interfere with Mr. Sheen's ability to do his job. 

Mr. Singer responded in an interview that the section "is not a morals clause." He added that Warner Bros. and CBS had previously renewed Mr. Sheen's contract while felony charges against him had been pending.

Separately, Mr. Sheen earlier on Monday scored his first Twitter sponsor: online internship site Interships.com, as he seeks to cash in on his Twitter popularity.

His paid message, which appeared on Monday afternoon, featured a job posting for a "social media intern" for Mr. Sheen.

"I'm looking to hire a #Winning INTERN with #TigerBlood," read Mr. Sheen's tweet.

Los Angeles-based Ad.ly, a start-up that brokers social media endorsements including Mr. Sheen's, declined to reveal how much Internships.com was paying for the endorsed tweet, except to say that it was the highest in Ad.ly's history. The price Ad.ly has charged for celebrity-endorsed Twitter messages thus far has started at $200 and reached the low five figures, said Ad.ly CEO  Arnie Gullov-Singh.

—Emily Steel  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Emily Steel at emily.steel@wsj.com 