 Japan's legions of mom-and-pop currency traders are unwinding a favorite strategy, helping to drive the yen higher as they try to limit losses and increase their cash holdings. Haven currencies such as the Swiss franc rose as well as fears grew about Japan's nuclear crisis.  

 BOJ officials kept up their strong response to events. Fragile markets and the economic toll of the disaster could force the bank to do more in coming weeks. 

 The Nikkei Stock Average gained 5.7% as the selloff of the two previous days attracted buyers. Markets rose across Asia, but U.S. stocks fell after a warning from the EU's nuclear chief.  

 France called for meetings with ministers of the G-7 and the G-20 to discuss the Japan crisis and global energy resources.  

 Worries continued about supply-chain disruptions, with some Asian businesses saying they were slowing output to preserve component stockpiles.  

 Some Japanese auto factories were set to reopen Thursday, while halts on output at other auto factories were extended.  

 A global move away from nuclear power in response to the atomic-plant crisis unfolding in Japan will likely spur a scramble for Australian energy.  

 Goldman is buying India's Benchmark Asset Management, a provider of exchange-traded funds. It also is forming an asset-management partnership with a South Korean company.  

 China Mobile's profit rose 3.9% last year, as tougher competition and additions of low-income mobile subscribers in rural areas balanced out growth in the company's 3G wireless business.  

 Tencent's earnings rose 46% in the fourth quarter as the Chinese online game and messaging firm pledged to step up investments in existing and new businesses.  

 SJM's profit and revenue soared last year, amid a gaming boom in Macau.  

 A judge rejected pleas by Las Vegas Sands to dismiss a high-profile employment case that pits the casino giant against a former Macau manager.  

 A Renault security agent had money in a Swiss bank, but his lawyer said it was there to pay an informant in the car maker's industrial-spying probe.  

 Motorola will start selling a Wi-Fi-only version of its Xoom tablet at U.S. retailers on March 27, at the same price as an equivalent iPad version from Apple.  

 Political opposition to the takeover of ASX by Singapore Exchange mounted as the leader of one of Australia's main opposition parties expressed reservations.  

 U.S. wholesale prices surged last month, while home construction fell by the most in years.  

 Japan's emperor urged the country not to give up and said he was "deeply concerned" about the unfolding nuclear crisis in an unprecedented video address.  

 China halted approvals of new nuclear-power plants pending changes to safety standards.  

 Gadhafi's forces attacked the last rebel-held major city in western Libya and expanded territory near Benghazi in the east.  

Palestinian leader Abbas offered to visit the Hamas-ruled Gaza Strip in four years in a bid to help reunite the rival Palestinian governments.