With the rental market booming, construction has restarted on a downtown Denver apartment building that was put on ice back at the end of 2008.

GID Urban Development Group plans to have the $32 million Manhattan II development finished by August 2012.

The upscale project is part of Riverfront Park, a master-planned community under way on reclaimed industrial land near train and light-rail stations and within walking distance of parks and several sports and entertainment attractions.

Boston-based GID joined with an institutional pension fund to purchase the 236-unit Manhattan I during the housing boom in 2005.

They planned 134 additional units, but decided to wait as the housing and financial markets collapsed.

Now, conditions have improved enough to continue, said  James Linsley, GID's president. Denver's vacancy rate is 6.4%, just below the national 6.6% rate, according to Reis Inc.

Part of this is because little new supply has been built. In the last decade, an average 5,000 units hit the Denver market each year. This year should see just 900, with 2,000 units expected for 2012.

Finally, falling labor and material costs are cutting the cost to build. Mr. Linsley estimates waiting shaved 15% off the construction tab.

"There's an alignment of the stars," Mr. Linsley said. "It's a nice place to be for a developer."

—Dawn Wotapka 

  MetLife Inc.
MET


0.26
%




 has put New Orleans's tallest skyscraper up for sale as property owners are testing the waters to see how far outside New York and Washington, D.C., the recovery in commercial real-estate prices has spread, said people familiar with matter.

The owner of the 51-story One Shell Square, located at the corner of Poydras and St. Charles Sts., is looking to fetch a price in the range of about $130 million, or about $100 a square foot. If successful the transaction would be the city's largest office deal by total price since Real Capital Analytics began tracking sales in 2001. 

The record to date is held by Place St. Charles, which sold for $103 million in 2008.  Evan Stone of Jones Lang LaSalle is marketing the building for MetLife. 

The 1.3-million-square-foot building was designed by Skidmore, Owings and Merrill and completed in the 1970s, according to CoStar Group Inc.Shell Oil Co., a unit of  Royal Dutch Shell PLC, has a lease that extends through 2016 for about 50% of the office space. Shell and MetLife didn't respond to calls for comment.

—Maura Webber Sadovi

Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP has pulled off a trifecta. The law firm advised on three big real-estate deals that were announced this week, one of the most active periods in the business since the recession.

Skadden advised  Centro Properties Group in its sale of its U.S. holdings to Blackstone Group LP;  Nationwide Health Properties Inc., which was acquired by  Ventas Inc.
VTR


0.22
%




; and Genesis HealthCare in the sale of its real estate to  Health Care REIT.
HCN


-0.41
%




 Total value of all three deals: $19.2 billion.

  David Goldschmidt, a Skadden partner who advised Genesis on its deal, said lawyers worked on three separate teams and didn't know about each other's deals. He said he learned about the Centro deal from the radio.

Mr. Goldschmidt said it was just coincidence that all three deals happened at the same time. "Obviously you could tell we had no hand in announcement timing," he said. "It just happens when the deal gets inked." 

—Eliot Brown