Football's Ballon d'Or award is usually reserved for the sport's superstar strikers—lightning fast forwards like Lionel Messi or Cristiano Ronaldo, or whoever happens to be playing up front for Brazil. 

Since the trophy recognizing European football's best player was first handed out in 1956, 44 of the 54 winners have been attackers. Some were orthodox center-forwards, others were second strikers, inside forwards or target men. But they were all basically responsible for kicking the ball into the net.

But as FIFA prepares to announce the winner Monday of the 2010 trophy, which is the first since the Ballon d'Or merged with the FIFA World Player of the Year award to honor the best player on the planet, there's a good chance this year's prize will go to a somewhat unlikely figure. 

Xavi Hernandez, the Spain and Barcelona player, is a pint-sized midfielder who can't run, doesn't tackle and rarely scores goals. You won't see his face on billboard campaigns and he doesn't perform the sort of tricks that show up on YouTube. 

But, despite all that, he's considered by some to be the man most responsible for imposing the style on the finest national team and arguably the finest club side Spain has ever produced.

"What can I say?" Mr. Hernandez said at a press conference before Barcelona's game against Real Sociedad last month. 

"It makes me proud [to be on the shortlist], but I never even dreamed of winning this award."

In an era when most of the game's top players combine blazing speed with laser accurate shooting, the odds of a guy like Mr. hernandez winning the sport's highest individual honor are pretty remote.

By comparison with the other contenders for the Ballon d'Or, his feats can look fairly pedestrian. He didn't score 55 goals in 51 games for Barcelona this year, like Mr. Messi, another contender for Monday's award. And he didn't score the winning goal in last summer's World Cup final like Andrés Iniesta, the other shortlisted candidate.

"In comparison with those other names, you look at someone like Xavi and he might appear pretty ordinary," said John Barnes, a former England and Liverpool midfielder. "But his game is built around simplicity."

What Mr. Hernandez does have—something that separates him from the rest of the 20,000 or so professional football players on the planet—is an uncanny mastery of one of this sport's most fundamental skills: The ability to get the ball and give it to someone wearing the same jersey. And then repeat the trick—again and again and again.

In 51 games for Barcelona in the past 12 months, Mr. Hernandez made over 300 more passes than any other player in Europe and over 400 more than anyone else in the Champions League, according to Opta Sports, a statistics provider. 

In the World Cup in South Africa, he completed 599 of his 669 passes—another record.

His capacity to maintain possession, to pass the ball quickly and accurately, is the inspiration behind the pinball, one-touch football that has made Barcelona the world's best football team over the past three years and established Spain as the world and European champions. 

In short, he is the personification of the "tiki-taka" tactics that have taken this sport by storm. 

"The way Spain plays, the way Barcelona plays, without Xavi it wouldn't be possible," said Mr. Barnes. 

"He's the heartbeat of the team, the conductor."

Of course, keeping the ball is hardly a revolutionary tactic. Football has always had great passers and teams have sought to monopolize possession ever since Scotland underlined the superiority of passing over dribbling by holding England to a nil-nil draw in the first international game in 1872.

But the way Mr. Hernandez has put football's oldest principle into practice is almost revolutionary right now. His awareness of space, his unrivalled mastery of the field of play are almost unique in today's game: In the past 12 months, a player has completed more than 100 passes in a game just 24 times in European football. On 12 of those occasions, that player was Mr. Hernandez. 

"He's a machine," said Josep Guardiola, the Barcelona head coach.

"Xavi is spectacular on the pitch," said Xabi Alonso, the Real Madrid midfielder and a Spanish national team colleague. "He makes it look so easy."

But it's the quality of passes that counts, too. Mr. Hernandez moves the team, providing more assists and more key passes in domestic football and at the World Cup than Messrs. Iniesta and Messi, than Arsenal's Cesc Fabregas and Inter Milan's Wesley Sneijder, and almost any other player you'd care to mention.

Yet the most extraordinary thing about all of this is that opponents find it almost impossible to prevent him from picking out a teammate. While most players see their passing success rate plummet as they advance towards the opposing goal, Mr. Hernandez maintains his accuracy, even when confronted with packed defenses and crowded passing lanes designed to make maintaining possession impossible.

According to Castrol, an official sponsor of the UEFA European Championship, Mr. Hernandez' 89% pass completion rate in the attacking third of the field this season is unsurpassed in European football—and higher than Messrs. Iniesta (86%), Sneijder (84%), Messi (80%) and Fabregas (72%).

All of which helps to explain why, as FIFA gets ready to anoint the world's best player, many observers believe Mr. Hernandez isn't just a deserving winner of the Ballon d'Or, but perhaps an overdue one.

"He's always been this good," said Victor Valdes, Barcelona's goalkeeper. "It surprises me it's taken so long for people to discover him."