Americans logged more miles in their cars last year than in any year since 2007, bouncing back from a steep decline in driving spurred by the recession and the 2008 run-up in gasoline prices.

Americans drove three trillion miles in 2010, the third-highest total on record and an increase of 0.7% from the previous year, the U.S. Transportation Department reported Wednesday. The data marked the second straight year of increased driving and confirmed a reversal from 2008, when gasoline peaked above $4 a gallon and driving plunged 3.6% after two decades of increases.

The extra time behind the wheel was a further sign of a recovering economy. But the data also underscored the nation's continued reliance on oil, a growing concern as turmoil in the Middle East threatens to further drive up gasoline prices and slow, or even reverse, the economic recovery.

U.S. Energy Secretary Steven Chu, speaking at a U.S. Senate Budget Committee hearing, said he wasn't ruling out the use of emergency fuel supplies to combat higher oil prices, saying rising fuel prices could damage the country's fragile economy.

Mr. Chu had said previously that he didn't want to tap into the nation's emergency fuel supplies, known as the Strategic Petroleum Reserve, to reduce oil prices. On Wednesday, however, Mr. Chu declined to rule out any action. 

"You re-evaluate that position if the price continues to rise because we have a very fragile economy," he said.

Economists attributed the increase in driving largely to employment gains, however slight, and improved confidence in the economy. 

As more Americans re-enter the work force, they are driving to work and have more income to drive to restaurants and the mall. Car sales are also on the rise.

The increase in miles driven in 2010 correlated with a 2% rise in oil demand, the first such jump in five years. And sales of pickups and sport-utility vehicles are once again dominating the auto market.

The data, while a bellwether of economic health, ran counter to the Obama administration's goal of reducing dependence on oil in order to improve national security and cut down on emissions of greenhouse gases.

"I think the underlying point is we are still totally dependent on oil for transportation," said Robert Weiner, an international business professor at George Washington University in Washington, D.C., who specializes in the oil industry. "We are vulnerable to what happens in the Middle East just as we were five years ago, 10 years ago."

During the recession, Americans started car-pooling and using public transportation more, which sent Amtrak ridership to record levels. Sales of smaller, more fuel-efficient vehicles surpassed sales of trucks and sport-utility vehicles, reversing a decades-long trend.

Economists said Wednesday the new driving data was further evidence that the most effective way to reduce driving is to raise the price of gasoline through a gasoline tax, a step many European and Asian countries have taken. 

The U.S. tax on a gallon of gasoline, currently 18.4 cents, hasn't increased since 1993.

The trend of increased driving could easily reverse itself, economists said, if the price of gasoline reaches $4 a gallon again, as some experts project it will. The national retail price of gasoline is about $3.38 a gallon and has increased in the past two weeks amid conflicts in Middle Eastern countries.

Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood, speaking before a conference of state transportation directors in Washington, rejected calls to raise the gasoline tax, saying it would be economically risky.

 Write to  Josh Mitchell at joshua.mitchell@dowjones.com 