BANGALORE --India's top information technology companies Tuesday offered to evacuate their employees from Japan on concerns of radiation leakage from an earthquake-hit nuclear power plant, but said the crisis would have minimal impact on their business. 

Japanese authorities have been trying to prevent a nuclear catastrophe after the magnitude 9.0 earthquake and tsunami last week damaged four of six reactors at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear-power complex and led to a sharp increase in radiation levels. 

India's major software exporters have set up offices in Japan to tap into the nascent outsourcing market after growth from their traditional strongholds--the U.S. and Europe--slowed following the global economic crisis. Japan currently accounts for about 2% of India's software exports worth about $59 billion. 

Industry leader Tata Consultancy Services Ltd., second-ranked Infosys Technologies Ltd., third-largest Wipro Ltd. and fourth-biggest HCL Technologies Ltd. said separately they are closely monitoring the situation in Japan and that they are in touch with clients and employees in the country. 

A TCS spokeswoman said the company is ready to bring back its Indian staff and their families from Japan, and move its local employees and their kin to safer locations. TCS has "a couple of hundred" employees at its office in Yokohama and at a client location there, she said, adding that it is too early to asses the impact on business. 

Infosys, which has 250 employees in Japan, said it is facilitating travel for staff members and their families who want to return temporarily. The company has an office in Tokyo and has several employees at client locations in Fukuoka and Nagoya cities. 

"We are providing options to those people who feel the need to come back [to India]," said Nandita Gurjar, senior vice president and global head of human resources. "The numbers are not known yet," she added. 

The company will support its clients locally and from offshore locations until the situation stabilizes, Infosys said in a statement.

Infosys Chief Financial Officer V. Balakrishnan said he doesn't expect any impact on business from the recent events in Japan as the country forms just 1% of the software exporter's overall revenue. 

Wipro Chief Marketing Officer Rajan Kohli also said that it's too early to assess the impact of the events in Japan on the company's business. Wipro has about 400 employees at its offices in Yokohama and Okinawa. Japan forms a small part of Wipro's overall revenue. 

"All of our employees... continue to work with our clients," Saurabh Govil, senior vice president, human resources, Wipro Technologies, said in a statement. 

Wipro Technologies is the global IT services business of Wipro Ltd. 

Govil said the company is giving an option to families of employees to return to India which it will help facilitate. "Many of our customers are back in operation, and we are using options like working from home and gearing up our offshore support to ensure business continuity to our clients in this hour of need," he added. 

 Write to  Dhanya Ann Thoppil at dhanya.thoppil@dowjones.com 