TOKYO—The chairman of one of Japan's most powerful business lobbies on Wednesday lambasted the government for lacking a long-term fiscal approach in dealing with the country's demographic time bomb, saying country's consumption tax has to be tripled to 17% within six years to solve the problem.

"Instead of designing a new system based on a long-term vision, they make sure to avoid facing opposition from people now," said  Masamitsu Sakurai, chairman of Keizai Doyukai, or Japan Association of Corporate Executives, in an interview.

Japan's shrinking and aging population is forcing a divisive political debate on how the country can continue to fund its massive pension obligations and health-care costs. At the center of this debate is how and when to raise the country's 5% consumption tax on everything from store merchandise to food, an issue that could potentially topple the government of Prime Minister Naoto Kan. 

Mr. Kan has said he wants to begin talks with the country's opposition parties on raising the tax—an idea that faces intense opposition from within his Democratic Party of Japan as well as from rivals. It also faces skepticism from voters already worried about Japan's sluggish wage growth. Political observers say talk of a higher consumption tax led to losses for Mr. Kan's DPJ in legislative elections last year. 

But the criticism from Mr. Sakurai—which adds to other voices in business supporting a higher consumption tax—adds impetus to efforts to reach an agreement. Business groups worry that Japan's massive public debt, which is already the largest among industrialized nations, will hurt the nation's long-term fiscal health.

Japan's current tax revenue relies too heavily on income tax, which will decrease as population drops, according to the Keizai Doyukai. instead, the group argues that the country needs to rely more on indirect taxes, such as the consumption tax, which is collected by businesses and not the government.

Mr. Sakurai said the decline in Japan's working population was one of its most urgent issues. "The current system is fiscally unsustainable, and it's also very unbalanced," he said. While the association is proposing a consumption tax increase to 17% in 2017, it is also proposing a cut to pension premiums, so that the overall burden for the average Japanese won't increase. 

Social-security spending is estimated to reach a record 28.7 trillion yen ($351 billion) in a recently unveiled national budget for the next fiscal year beginning April, accounting for nearly a third of the whole budget. The amount is 5.3% larger than the current fiscal year. 

"We must build a new system to reflect the demographic change," Mr. Sakurai said. "The longer Japan waits, the more difficult and painful the change will be".

Under the current social security system, three workers share the burden of supporting one elderly person, but the association expects that it will be two workers sharing the same burden in 2025, and only one in 2050. 

Mr. Sakurai, who is also the chairman of  Ricoh Co.
RICOY


-0.10
%




, the maker of office equipment and digital cameras, added another major challenge facing Japan is the yen's stubborn strength.

Japanese manufactures have been making all-out efforts to restructure and become more resistant against a strong yen, in part by increasing dollar-denominated purchases of materials to offset the decline in the value of their overseas sales in the dollar. 

By increasing dollar-denominated imports to mitigate yen strength, many Japanese companies can probably manage to at least break even when the dollar is at its current level of about 83 yen, Mr. Sakurai said. "But if the dollar falls below 80 yen again, I'm not sure if they can withstand the impact," he said.

In September, the yen's sharp rise to its 15-year highs against the dollar prompted Tokyo to intervene in the currency market for the first time in more than six years.

Mr. Sakurai added that it is particularly difficult to offset the impact of the euro, because it is much harder for manufacturers to find material suppliers they can pay in the euro. "When it comes to the euro, the options are much narrower," he said. 

 Write to  Juro Osawa at juro.osawa@dowjones.com and Mariko Sanchanta at mariko.sanchanta@wsj.com 