WASHINGTON—The U.S. will need to make a "significant adjustment" to its fiscal policies if the government intends to meet the goal of halving the deficit by 2013, the International Monetary Fund said Thursday. 

The fund was critical of the decision by U.S. lawmakers late last year to extend a package of tax cuts—"its stimulative impact will be small, relative to its fiscal cost"—and noted that the U.S. is the only major advanced economy implementing procyclical policies this year. The decision by policy makers in the U.S., and to an extent Japan, to delay efforts to strengthen their fiscal position needs to be addressed, the report said. 

"For these two countries I think there is now a more urgent need to fix their fiscal adjustment credentials by identifying in more detail the fiscal measures that will be taken...to reduce deficits," said Carlo Cottarelli, director of the IMF's fiscal affairs department. 

Leaders of the Group of 20 industrialized nations reached an agreement at a meeting last year to address their fiscal positions, including a commitment for the U.S. to cut its deficit in half by 2013. IMF Deputy Managing Director John Lipsky, appearing on CNBC from the World Economic Forum in Switzerland on Thursday, expressed doubts about Washington's ability to meet that goal. 

He's skeptical "because this year the U.S. deficit is probably going to go up slightly, not go down as was planned previously," Mr. Lipsky said. 

"The United States and Japan...need in particular to strengthen their adjustment credentials by detailing the measures they intend to adopt to honor their commitments to reduce deficits and debt," the IMF said. 

The White House and lawmakers from both parties on Capitol Hill have frequently acknowledged the concerns surrounding the deficit. President Barack Obama, speaking Tuesday during the State of the Union address, called for a five-year freeze in domestic spending; such a change would reduce the deficit by more than $400 billion over 10 years. 

"Now that the worst of the recession is over, we have to confront the fact that our government spends more than it takes in. That is not sustainable," Mr. Obama said. 

Mr. Cottarelli said the IMF welcomed Mr. Obama's focus on dealing with discretionary spending, but said the U.S. needs to go further to find ways to increase tax revenue and cut costs in even politically popular programs. 

"On Social Security, and here I will include all entitlement spending...for the U.S. there will be a need for actions in this area," he told reporters at a press conference in Washington. 

He offered a similar prescription for Japan, suggesting it was not a surprise that Standard and Poor's lowered its rating on the nation's sovereign debt. Japan's problems are "well known," Mr. Cottarelli said, and suggested an increase in the country's value-added tax could help reduce its deficit. 

"I think what is particularly important for Japan is tax reform is being discussed currently. I think it's good because tax reform and action on the revenue side is going to be very important," Mr. Cottarelli said, suggesting there is "definite room to raise" the country's consumption tax. 

More broadly, the IMF said the world's economies are expected to reduce their deficits at a slower-than-expected pace in 2011, while the overall debt ratio is expected to climb to more than 100% of gross domestic product. Debt concerns in Europe, combined with the risk that some emerging market economies may be "overheating," are cause for worry, the fund said. 

"Altogether, sovereign risks remain elevated and in some cases have increased since November, underlining the need for more robust and specific medium-term consolidation plans," the report said. 

The IMF sounded a note of caution to the emerging market economies that have grown rapidly in the last several years, warning against any push to increase spending in the current environment. 

"Many emerging economies need to rebuild fiscal buffers more rapidly to address overheating concerns; create scope to respond to any growth slowdown; or avoid relapsing into procyclical policies that would undermine credibility," the IMF said. 

 Write to  Michael R. Crittenden at michael.crittenden@dowjones.com 