If "Fast Five" had been rated by the EPA instead of the MPAA—the Motion Picture Association of America gave it a PG, notwithstanding rampant road rage—the average MPG would have been abysmal, what with vroom-vrooming muscle cars, screeching exotics and an armor-plated monster that makes the Hummer look demure. Yet this fifth edition of the "Fast and the Furious" franchise gets lots of mileage from a combination of high spirits, scorn for the laws of physics, readily renewable energy and an emphasis on family values—not those of the nuclear family, but of hell-raising, drag-racing outlaws who genuinely care for one another.

When the series made its debut in 2001 I called it "top-drawer trash that knows its place—on thousands of multiplex screens, where it will be holding young audiences enthralled for weeks to come." That proved to be true, but subsequent installments dropped to ever lower drawers, which makes it all the more surprising that the franchise has renewed its lease on life. This time the plot involves an elaborate heist in Rio de Janeiro, where Vin Diesel's Dominic Toretto and his crew either travel the city's streets at insane speeds or make preposterous leaps of faith across favela rooftops while being chased by a phalanx of U.S. federal cops under the command of Dwayne Johnson's bemuscled and bemineral-oiled Hobbs. (Every once in a while the director, Justin Lin, inserts a helicopter shot of Rio's landmark Christ the Redeemer statue to underscore the story's gravitas.)

Someone describes Hobbs as "Old Testament—guns, bullets, wrath of God." That's one way of putting it. Another way is Old School—unsmiling, monosyllabic, The Rock in Early Terminator mode. Mr. Johnson, once a superstar of professional wrestling, hides his usual charm—at least for a while—under the bushel of a single-minded character, a lawman determined to capture his quarry at any cost. Hobbs becomes a worthy antagonist to Dominic and a great asset to the film, although a face-off between the two men is photographed oddly—they seem to be looking past each other, like bull mastiffs keeping sight of their offstage trainers—and a subsequent fight to the almost finish is much less interesting, because it's much more familiar, than the climactic spectacle of cars and trucks chasing a pair of cars that happen to be dragging a room-size bank vault.

"Fast Five" starts with a train robbery that sets a new standard for implausibility, then tops it by using the vault and the cables dragging it as a giant sling that lays waste to whatever happens to be in its way. The overlong sequence is coarsely conceived and devoid of physical logic—it's as if digital technology, which makes everything possible though not necessarily plausible, had been used to expunge any remaining cultural memory of the elegantly constructed movie chases pioneered by Buster Keaton and Harold Lloyd. Still, geniality carries the day. It's the additive that boosts everyone's octane. 

Werner Herzog is the Robert Burton of contemporary filmmaking. Like the 17th-century author of "The Anatomy of Melancholy," which was anything but melancholic, Mr. Herzog seems to be intrigued by every aspect of being human, and has turned out a remarkably long string of intriguing films that include "Grizzly Man," "Aguirre: The Wrath of God" and, back in 1974, a wonderful documentary with an off-putting title, "The Great Ecstasy of the Sculptor Steiner." Now he has gone to the south of France to investigate—in 3-D, yet—the Chauvet cave, where Paleolithic artists covered the walls with paintings of animals some 30,000 years ago.

They are the oldest known cave paintings, and they're astonishing for the beauty and economy of their style—surging lines that summon up the dynamic essence of the rhinos, lions, bisons, bears, leopards, ibex and wolves that filled the forests of the epoch. Speaking of the art that followed, unto our day, the filmmaker-narrator says, "It never got better," and he indulges his penchant for endearing grandiosity by declaring, "It is as if the modern human soul erupted here." (He also takes a swipe at Picasso, an overrated painter in his book, and offers a chillingly fanciful critique of nuclear power that involves mutant albino crocodiles.)

But were the Chauvet paintings really the product of artists consciously making what we now consider art? That's impossible to know, of course, and the unknowable or the mysteriously ambiguous in human behavior is what sets Mr. Herzog's synapses to firing with singular intensity. No one lived in these caves, he notes; they were kept for painting and possibly for ceremonies. He tries to imagine the painters' imaginings "across this abyss of time." He wonders if they dreamed, if they cried at night. And he illustrates Plato's Allegory of the Cave by way of Fred Astaire dancing with his shadows in "Bojangles of Harlem," the glorious tribute—now considered politically incorrect—to Bill Robinson in "Swing Time."

Another question, one that's easier to answer: Why use 3-D cameras to shoot 2-D paintings? Because the paintings are flat but the cave walls aren't. They curve and bulge voluptuously, and the artists, or whatever one chooses to call them, used the contours to lend depth to the paintings. The vast cave's stalactites and stalagmites are a spectacle too. Go underground with magic glasses on your nose and you won't regret it.

Right makes might in Takashi Miike's excellent—and exceedingly violent—remake of a 1966 Japanese classic by Eiichi Kudo. (The movie is also in the debt of another classic, Akira Kurosawa's "Seven Samurai.") In the waning years of the samurai era, 13 rusty warriors-for-hire—two more than in Kudo's original—take on hundreds of soldiers in the course of a suicide mission to kill Lord Naritsugu (Gorô Inagaki), the evil half-brother of a ruling shogun. Naritsugu isn't just a villain, but a sadist; he lops the limbs off innocent victims with great delight and an unshakable conviction that "punishment is a master's duty." And "13 Assassins" isn't just an action adventure with horror credentials, but a study in criminal pathology.

Preparations for the mission go rather slowly, since the group must be selected, man by man, in the consecrated style of "Ocean's 11." Nine assassins might have done nicely, or Kurosawa's seven, but the build-up is sustained by the movie's seriousness of purpose—it's about the blind devotion that tyrants can inspire—and the engaging heroism of the group's leader, Shinzaemon (Kôji Yakusho). When asked to take on the mission by the shogun's senior adviser, Shinzaemon says "I will accomplish your wish with magnificence." As things turn out, that's no idle promise.

 Write to  Joe Morgenstern at joe.morgenstern@wsj.com 

Car chases have come a long way since Steve McQueen's cop, in a spunky little Mustang coupe, pursued a couple of bad guys, in a hulking Dodge Charger, up and down the streets of San Francisco. This seminal chase put a premium on finesse. Both drivers tried to avoid banging into things, and mostly succeeded. At one point McQueen even stopped to make sure a downed motorcyclist was unhurt. Peter Yates directed from a screenplay by Alan Trustman and Harry Kleiner. The cast includes Jacqueline Bisset, Robert Vaughn and Robert Duvall.

Rather than a conventional remake, Werner Herzog's film is a whole new take on the 1992 cult classic "Bad Lieutenant," which was written and directed by Abel Ferrara. The original production is remarkable for Harvey Keitel's performance as a corrupt and brutal cop in search of redemption; otherwise it's punishingly grim. If the remake, with Nicolas Cage as a rogue cop named Terence McDonagh, commits the sin of entertainment, it's redeemed by a sense of life's contradictions and distinguished by surreal flourishes that include a pair of iguanas, slithery witnesses to Terence's mania.

Richard Widmark won an Oscar nomination for his debut performance as Tommy Udo, a peerless sadist who has a special way with wheelchairs. Don't confuse this with the inferior remake of the same name that stars Nicolas Cage in the Tommy Udo role (except that Tommy is called Little Junior Brown) and David Caruso as Jimmy Kilmartin, who follows in the footsteps of Victor Mature's Nick Bianco, an ex-con trying to go straight. The original is classic film noir, and Mr. Widmark's thug is the essence of cool. Henry Hathaway directed from a screenplay by Ben Hecht and Charles Lederer.