WASHINGTON—Fresh off his decision to skip the 2012 presidential race, former Arkansas Gov.  Mike Huckabee declined Sunday to endorse anyone else.

Read about the potential Republican presidential contenders.

His decision to skip a second White House bid opens the door for other Republicans who hope to court the Christian conservatives who helped the former Baptist minister place first in the Iowa caucuses in 2008. But Mr. Huckabee declined to say who he favors.

"There may be a point at which I endorse, but I'll see how the race unfolds," he said on Fox News Sunday.

Asked who might benefit from his decision to opt out, Mr. Huckabee mentioned several Republicans looking at the race: former Sen.  Rick Santorum, former Minnesota Gov. Tim Pawlenty, former House Speaker  Newt Gingrich, Rep.  Michele Bachmann and former Alaska Gov.  Sarah Palin. He noted their conservative views on social issues such as abortion and gay rights.

Noticeably missing from his list was former Massachusetts Gov.  Mitt Romney. He and Mr. Huckabee fought a fierce battle in 2008, particularly in Iowa, with Mr. Huckabee highly critical of Mr. Romney's earlier more liberal social positions.

Asked about Mr. Romney, who leads many polls, Mr. Huckabee said he got a "wonderful voice mail" from him after his announcement on Saturday and said only that he would support him if he winds up the Republican nominee.

Mr. Huckabee made his announcement to a live television audience on Saturday night, saying he didn't have the conviction to wage another bid for the Republican nomination.

"All the factors say go, but my heart says no," Mr. Huckabee told the audience of his weekly talk show, "Huckabee," on Fox News Channel Saturday night. "I can't know or predict the future, but I know for now my answer is clear and firm. I will not seek the Republican nomination for president this year."

The decision, which was delivered with his characteristic showmanship, provoked a wave of congratulations from the Republicans Mr. Huckabee would have faced if he had jumped into the race.

"It is unfortunate that we will not have his voice—or his bass guitar—in the presidential debate, as our party would have benefited from his involvement," said former Utah Gov.  Jon Huntsman in a statement.

Mr. Gingrich said: "Had Governor Huckabee decided to run, there is no question he would have been a frontrunner in the 2012 campaign for president."

Mr. Pawlenty, who is already courting the evangelical voters who helped Mr. Huckabee win Iowa in 2008, issued his own statement to say, "I plan to work hard to earn the support of the millions of Americans who have supported him."

New York real-estate mogul  Donald Trump, appearing on Fox News right after Mr. Huckabee made the announcement, said, "A lot of people are very happy that he will not be running, especially other candidates." Mr. Huckabee said Sunday that Mr. Trump had taped two versions of the video—one if Mr. Huckabee were running and one if he weren't—and did not know which would air.

The former Arkansas governor's decision to forgo another presidential bid will make it easier for other Republicans to gain a foothold with the Christian conservatives who play an influential role in Iowa and elsewhere.

By bowing out of the race, Mr. Huckabee could play the role of kingmaker as the Iowa caucuses approach. His endorsement would be a major score for any of the candidates who remain.

In making his Saturday announcement, Mr. Huckabee brushed aside questions about whether he could raise the money necessary to compete or appeal to Republican voters beyond the evangelicals who made him so successful. He also made a point of telling the audience that his family was supportive of another run.

"For me the discussion and the decision is ultimately not a political one, or a financial one," he said. "It is a spiritual one."

In 2008, despite spending far less money than his rivals, the former Arkansas governor surged to a win in the Iowa caucuses, garnering 34% of the vote. He owed the win, in large part, to support from Christian conservatives who called friends and knocked on doors to drum up support.

His campaign sputtered in the weeks after the Iowa win because he lacked the money and infrastructure to compete in most of the later primary states. He placed first in seven other caucuses or primaries but was eventually forced to cede the nomination to Arizona Sen. John McCain.

Fund-raising was a challenge for the former governor in the last election. His campaign raised $16 million in 2008, much of it after his win in Iowa, according to the Center for Responsive Politics. By comparison, Mr. Romney raised $107 million. But he told viewers on Saturday and again on Sunday that the early support he has received led him to believe he could raise needed dollars this time.

Mr. Huckabee has made no secret of his fondness for the money he has made since leaving politics for good. In addition to the Fox News show, he hosts a regular radio show and has written several books. Fox News is owned by News Corp., as is the Wall Street Journal.

The media contracts and outside ventures have generated more money for the former governor than he has ever made in his life. Running would have meant severing those ties, at least temporarily, as he pursues the presidency.

"Mike, enjoy the show," Mr. Trump said. "Your ratings are terrific. You're making a lot of money. You're building a beautiful house in Florida. Good luck."