Former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin, in a video posted on the Internet Wednesday, defended her campaign rhetoric and called it "irresponsible'' and a "blood libel'' to fault political language for the shootings in Arizona.

It was Ms. Palin's first substantial entry into a national debate, touched off by Saturday's rampage, about whether heated political rhetoric plays any role in inciting violence, a claim most often put forward by people on the political left.

Ms. Palin had been drawn into the debate because of a map posted during last year's campaign on her political action committee's website that used cross-hairs, as if from a gun sight, to identify congressional districts where she wanted to defeat Democratic incumbents. They included the district of Rep. Gabrielle Giffords (D., Ariz.), who was gravely injured in Saturday's shootings. Ms. Palin had also issued the call to unhappy citizens: "Don't retreat, instead reload.''

Democrats at times have used a "bull's eye'' motif as well, and talked of "targeting'' opponents' districts. And signs are that the suspect in the shooting was mentally troubled; he hasn't been linked to any ideological faction. But Ms. Palin's rhetoric had been cited so often that some analysts said she needed to respond in order to protect her credibility as a potential 2012 presidential candidate.

In the seven-minute video, Ms. Palin rejected connections between political language and violence. 

"Acts of monstrous criminality stand on their own,'' Ms. Palin said. "They begin and end with the criminals who commit them, not collectively with all the citizens of a state, not with those who listen to talk radio, not with maps of swing districts used by both sides of the aisle, not with law-abiding citizens who respectfully exercise their First Amendment rights at campaign rallies, not with those who proudly voted in the last election."

Some Jewish leaders criticized Ms. Palin's choice of words when she said that "journalists and pundits should not manufacture a blood libel that serves only to incite the very hatred and violence they purport to condemn."

The term "blood libel" was coined to refer to the anti-Semitic belief that Jews used the blood of Christian children to make ritual bread called matzo. The blood libel was a pretext for countless Jewish deaths over centuries.

An opinion writer in The Wall Street Journal, Glenn Harland Reynolds of the University of Tennessee law school, had used the phrase Monday to refer to efforts to link conservative political rhetoric to the shootings. But Ms. Palin's adoption of the phrase touched off a heated debate Wednesday. 

Abraham Foxman, head of the Anti-Defamation League, said Ms. Palin "has every right to defend herself" from those seeking to link her to the crimes in Tucson. But, he added, "We wish that Palin had used another phrase, instead of one so fraught with pain in Jewish history."

Jeremy Ben-Ami, president of J Street, a liberal Jewish political action committee, released a statement saying, "When Gov. Palin learns that many Jews are pained by and take offense at the use of the term, we are sure that she will choose to retract her comment, apologize and make a less inflammatory choice of words."

Ms. Giffords is Jewish, although there is no evidence Ms. Palin's use of the term was connected to that fact.

Ms. Palin used the term as part of a longer critique in which she challenged the idea that political rhetoric has gotten more heated recently.

Some political figures have called for a cooling off of political language, among them former Minnesota Gov. Tim Pawlenty, also mulling a run for the Republican presidential nomination in 2012. Mr. Pawlenty on Wednesday told MSNBC: "We could all benefit … from a more thoughtful discourse."

Ms. Palin defended robust debate. "In an ideal world, all discourse would be civil and all disagreements cordial," she said. "But our Founding Fathers knew they weren't designing a system for perfect men and women. If men and women were angels, there would be no need for government."

Rep. Mike Pence (R. Ind.), another possible 2012 presidential candidate, said Wednesday, "Sarah Palin has every right to defend herself and defend our freedoms."

Ari Fleischer, once press secretary to former President George W. Bush, said it was understandable that Ms. Palin would defend herself. Still, he said, "She would have done better if she had gotten above the day-to-day politics, and focused entirely on healing, unity, suffering and coming together. Three quarters of her remarks were on that. It would have been better if 100% were on that."

 Write to  Jonathan Weisman at jonathan.weisman@wsj.com 