Gov. Chris Christie took New Jersey by storm in his first year as governor, thrilling Republicans by taking on entrenched Democratic power centers in the name of fiscal responsibility.

But with the state still slogging through the dregs of the recession and finances as precarious as ever, Mr. Christie says not to expect radical shifts this year, and he plans to "stay the course."

In his first State of the State speech on Tuesday, Mr. Christie will focus on three issues: education, public pensions and benefits, and fiscal discipline.

"I don't think there's going to be any new ground broken, in terms of proposals," he said. "We've done well, we've made great progress in the first year, let's continue to push and tackle the really big issues."

Mr. Christie's blunt, unapologetic style marked his first year in office. He loudly bashed those who stood in his way, notably the state teachers union. In November he called a superintendent and school board members greedy and arrogant, and last week he went after a mayor who complained about the state's response to the blizzard.

The governor sees himself continuing to focus on the education system and cost-cutting in the coming year, then shifting his emphasis in the final two years of his term. "If we deal with the big issues in the first two years, that's going to free us up then—economically and substantively—to be able to expand and grow our ability to be able to improve the state in the second two years."

Though Mr. Christie and his aides have been foreshadowing tax cuts, they won't be announced in his Tuesday speech, he said. Any tax cuts would have to be matched by spending cuts, he said. "We are not the federal government." 

 The state's budget, funded mostly by income and sales taxes, will be about the same size or slightly smaller than this year's $29.4 billion spending plan, Mr. Christie said.

A particular challenge will be a $1.4 billion deficit in Medicaid, blown open by the disappearance of $900 million in federal stimulus funds, he said. "Our Medicaid spending is growing out of control," he said. "We have to figure out a way to be more efficient and effective."