Rep. Mike Pence is officially out of the presidential race, and this leaves conservatives scrambling for a candidate to rally behind. The Indiana Republican is very popular with values voters especially and was viewed as someone who could appeal to social and economic conservatives alike.

Mr. Pence will run for governor of Indiana instead and is favored to succeed Republican Mitch Daniels. Mr. Daniels himself is a potential first tier candidate for the White House and has attracted the support of several key operatives from the George W. Bush campaigns in 2000 and 2004.

In private conversations, Mr. Pence had expressed reservations about the ability to run for president from the U.S. House. He also worried about raising the funds to compete with former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney's money machine. Perhaps his biggest concern was that Sarah Palin, if she runs, would knock down conservative contenders like a bowling ball.

Mr. Pence's departure may now turn up the volume on calls for Ms. Palin to enter the 2012 race. It also creates an opening for former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, another social conservative, to run again. Two other wild cards are former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, George W. Bush's younger brother; and New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie. Mr. Christie has insisted repeatedly that won't run, but if he did he'd be an instant front-runner.

Former Reagan official Ralph Benko, who ran a website that urged Mr. Pence to seek higher office, tells me: "Mike has qualities that inspired unprecedented across-the-board enthusiasm among movement conservatives. I hope that he would accept an offer of the vice presidency from the eventual Republican nominee if called."

Other conservative leaders I contacted all reacted with dismay to the Pence news and feared that it moves Mr. Romney one step closer to the GOP nomination. For the past several months, an anybody-but-Romney coalition had been pushing Mr. Pence to run as an alternative to the man who gave Massachusetts his version of ObamaCare. With Mr. Pence out, it's back to the drawing board.

To read more stories like this one, please subscribe to Political Diary. 