SYDNEY—Australian consumer prices rose at a slower-than-expected pace in the fourth quarter despite the nation's mining-fueled economic boon, a development that could keep its central bank from raising interest rates until the second half of the year.

But the figures don't include the January devastation from continued flooding, which has raised worries that reconstruction efforts could further bolster prices for labor and goods. 

The consumer-price index gained 0.4% in the fourth quarter from the previous three-month period and rose 2.7% from a year earlier, the Australian Bureau of Statistics said Tuesday. Economists surveyed by Dow Jones Newswires had expected the measure to rise as much as 0.7% in the quarter.

Core inflation rose by 2.3%, its slowest year-to-year pace since the start of the past decade, reducing the urgency for higher interest rates, economists said. Analysts cited previous interest-rate increases by the Reserve Bank of Australia and the stronger Australian dollar, which makes imports cheaper for Australians. 

"The economy is clearly responding to tighter monetary conditions," said Riki Polygenis, senior economist at Australia & New Zealand Banking Group Ltd, or ANZ, adding that it will be difficult for the board of the reserve bank to justify adding to rate increases when it meets for its policy gathering next week. 

A spokeswoman for the central bank declined to comment. 

The easing of inflation will be a relief to some parts of the economy, such as tourism and housing, after interest-rate increases helped push the Australian dollar beyond parity with the U.S. greenback and increased the cost of borrowing for homeowners. But the figures come as Australians begin to calculate the cost of the devastating floods that wrecked large areas of Queensland state. The flooding is expected to hurt growth and could cost an estimated 20 billion Australian dollars (US$19.9 billion) in repairs, according to ANZ. 

At least 20,000 homes were affected by the flooding, which reached the Brisbane township and leveled farm land. Economists say the floods could reduce gross domestic product by about one percentage point. Domestic airline Virgin Blue Holdings Ltd. on Tuesday added to concerns over the wider impact of the floods on the economy by forecasting a sharp fall in first-half profit, partly blamed on the deluge in Queensland. 

The respite in inflationary pressure could be short-lived, as reconstruction work increases demand for a range of goods and services. Treasurer Wayne Swan, who described the flooding as Australia's worst natural disaster, warned Tuesday that inflation growth could soon pick up because of the floods. 

"We do know that the March quarter will see a spike, particularly in vegetable and fruit prices," Mr. Swan told reporters. 

Markets reacted quickly to the restrained inflation figures and the perception that the RBA wouldn't raise rates soon, as the prospect of a rate increase often makes a country's currency rise in value. In late Asian trading, the Australian dollar was at US$0.9959, compared with US$0.9985 late Monday. Bond prices rallied with the three-year benchmark futures contract gaining eight points to close at 94.86. Futures markets late Tuesday were implying the RBA will be on hold until November. 

The release of a closely watched survey of house prices Tuesday also showed signs of weakness in an industry that has been a key driver for growth in recent years. A National Australia Bank survey showed the rise in house prices will be reversed this year, with falls of 0.5% estimated. 

"The Reserve Bank will be very comfortable with the direction of house prices for now," said Alan Oster, chief economist at National Australia Bank, adding that once the effect of the floods is understood, the downward pull on house prices in Brisbane—Australia's third-largest city—will likely increase. 

—Rachel Pannett in Canberra contributed to this article.

 Write to  James Glynn at james.glynn@dowjones.com 