Incumbent Yankee backup catcher Francisco Cervelli has a broken bone in his left foot, putting him out of action for more than a month, and likely handing the backup catcher job to top prospect Jesus Montero.

Cervelli fouled a ball off his foot Wednesday, and the Yankees had hoped it was just a bruise. Further examinations showed that Cervelli has a fracture on the top of the foot. "He's in the boot for four weeks minimum. How long it takes after that, we don't know," Yankees manager Joe Girardi said. 

The injury makes a murky catching situation clearer by default; Cervelli and Montero had been in a neck-and-neck competition to claim the backup's job behind Russell Martin. Montero is New York's top prospect, and has a powerful bat, but there have been questions regarding his defense. It's now likely that Montero will claim the backup job to start the season, though Girardi said that the competition remains open, and minor leaguer Austin Romine and journeyman Gustavo Molina will get extended looks alongside Montero. 

"We still have plenty of guys here who could earn that spot. We have Montero here. We have Romine here, and we brought in Molina," Girardi said. 

The wild card is Jorge Posada, the Yankee catcher for the past 15 years who has been relegated to designated hitter status. Girardi said that Posada will not catch during spring training, 

"We're still planning on him being a DH. Now, I can't 100 percent tell you what's going to happen over the next four weeks. I can't, just like I wouldn't have predicted this," Girardi said. "Right now, I don't plan on having him catch in a game, so we'll see what the other guys can do.''

General Manager Brian Cashman was decidedly less firm regarding Posada's status, saying Posada could catch if the team needed it. "At the end of the day, Jorge's our DH, and he is available to catch if we need him to." 

With that group, the Yankees feel they have enough depth that they don't need to go outside the organization for extra catching help. "We're—knock on wood— catching deep. We're covered," Cashman said. 

For Montero, the moment is now. The 21-year-old seems to know that the job is likely his, and said it's now on him to prove himself. "I've got a big opportunity to be on the team now. I'm going to do my best. I know Cervelli's a great catcher. He did a great job last year, but I've got an opportunity now, and I'm going to do something good about it," Montero said. 

Though he is young, he believes he has made such significant strides defensively that he is now prepared to run the pitching staff when needed. 

"I think I'm ready, I'm working on it every single day with my coaches here. My goal here is to be in the big leagues, be on the team, help the pitchers, help the regular catcher, help everybody on the team to win," Montero said. 

Cashman agreed, saying that the scouts who once doubted Montero's defensive skills are now singing a different tune. 

"It's nice to see that people are recognizing it now, but this guy, we felt, was better than some major league defensive catchers in the game last year. I said that this winter, but I think people rely on their unnamed scouts, who I guarantee are changing their scouting reports now," Cashman said. 

Romine and Molina are on the fringes of this discussion as well, but Molina has never hit at the major league level, and Romine has never played above Double-A. 

Cashman and Girardi maintained that Romine's inexperience wouldn't stop them from promoting him, and Romine said he felt the same way. 

"Double-A, it's good ball down there. A lot of guys that I played with during the season got called up at the end, from Double-A. The jump isn't as far as it used to be," Romine said. 

It would take a surprisingly poor spring from Montero for anyone else to claim the job. The Venezuelan is ranked as the third-best prospect in baseball by Baseball America and he should now get a chance to establish himself as the backup short-term, and as Posada's replacement in the long term. 

For Cervelli, it's another disappointment for a player who is an accident waiting to happen in spring training—he's suffered injuries in three of the past four springs. "He's had pneumonia. He's had a concussion. He's had a broken [wrist]—yeah, he's had a rough go in spring training," Girardi said. 

Wednesday, when he thought it was just a bruise, Cervelli said he had become accustomed to being injured in spring training and shrugged it off. "Every spring training something happens. But it's OK. It's part of the game," he said.

He then ran through the litany of his injuries—the broken wrist, collisions at home plate, damaging hit-by-pitches—and now the foot. Only 2009 was injury free. "'09, nothing, thank God. One year's rest, that's it," Cervelli said. 