For years, a set of hand-colored engravings that artist Marc Chagall made for his second wife, Vava, have been out of public view, in the hands of a private collector in France. Now the engravings are on display for the first time as part of an exhibit at Paris's Museum of Jewish Art and History called "Chagall and the Bible," presenting 105 engravings by Chagall to illustrate his famed 1956 edition of the Bible.

The story begins in 1931 when Chagall, a Jewish painter living as an exile from Russia in Paris, began an illustrated version of the Old Testament. Ten years later, with World War II under way, he fled to the U.S. It would take him 25 years to complete the book, which consisted of the entire text of the Old Testament in French, along with the engravings. 

The first edition of his Bible, with Chagall's black and white engravings, consisted of 275 copies. Chagall then hand-colored a second edition of 100 copies. The museum's curator, Laurence Sigal, says the coloring was done "very fast and very lightly." But the copy of that second edition that went to Vava was the exception, she states, "outstanding because of the time he devoted to it." 

The exhibit, which runs until June 5 and won't travel, includes half of the 40 gouaches Chagall produced as preliminary sketches for the book's engravings. The museum is also displaying 25 large Chagall oil paintings of biblical scenes, coming from museums in Europe and private collections. There are also watercolors and gouaches that served as a draft for many of Chagall's glassworks. One of the best-known paintings is called "Jacob's Dream," combining two biblical themes with the image of a Jew clutching a Torah, trying to protect it.

This second part of the exhibit pays major attention, says Ms. Sigal, to Chagall's attempt to reconcile Jews and Christians, a preoccupation that proved controversial in the Jewish community. Three of the exhibit's paintings depict Jesus. In one of them, Jews are fleeing their Nazi persecutors and above them is a huge image of Jesus on the cross, trying to protect them.

"Chagall painted more than 100 scenes of Jesus and the crucifixion in his life," says Susan Goodman, senior curator of New York's Jewish Museum. "It was a way of asserting an ideological challenge to the dominant Christian culture. He was asserting the Jewishness of Christ."

—Stan Sesser