 Baltimore 

The Oxford English Dictionary defines "relic" as "an object (as a part of the body or clothing, an article of personal use, or the like) which remains as a memorial of a departed saint, martyr, or other holy person, and as such is carefully preserved and venerated." The history of relics and reliquaries—the special containers made to hold holy remains—is the subject of "Treasures of Heaven: Saints, Relics and Devotion in Medieval Europe," at the Walters Art Museum here. The first major show of its kind in the U.S., jointly organized by the Walters, the Cleveland Museum of Art and the British Museum, it assembles a fascinating array of objects tracing the evolution and permutations of reliquaries from late antiquity to the Renaissance, via Byzantium, plus a section on postmedieval versions of the impulse to preserve and venerate.

Relics—such as bone fragments and teeth—were revered as earthly manifestations of the saintly personage once associated with the meager remains; there were obviously no physical relics of the body of the resurrected Christ, hence the enthusiasm for thorns (from the crown of thorns) and splinters of wood (from the true cross), although the exhibition catalog includes a reference to a reliquary for a piece of the Christ Child's umbilical cord. 

Reliquaries, unlike their modest contents, were spectacular—beautifully made, opulent and elaborate—whether public or private. Precious materials, the finest craftsmanship and remarkable formal invention were lavished on the containers made for the precious bits and pieces. In part, this reflected the enormous spiritual and financial value of relics, but the material richness of reliquaries also symbolized the heavenly. Art mediated between the otherworldly and the quotidian. There's even evidence, according to one of the exhibition's curators, the Walters's Martina Bagnoli, that the beauty of the reliquaries was meant to make their often unappetizing contents attractive, to encourage meditation on the life of the honored saint or martyr.

At the intimate end of the exhibition's spectrum is a bejeweled 14th-century French reliquary pendant that opens to reveal multiple leaves with gorgeously colored enamel scenes from the life of Christ, for contemplation by the magnificent object's wealthy owner. Equally remarkable, among many splendid examples intended for public display, is a French 12th-century gilded bust of St. Baudime, who confronts us, inlaid enamel eyes staring, long-fingered hands raised. The gleaming surface evokes the divine, just as the gold grounds of icons and early Renaissance altarpieces evoke heavenly space, countering the incipient naturalism of elegantly rendered curls, a delicately stippled beard, and carefully detailed vestments, once studded with jewels. 

Walters Art Museum

Through May 15

Reliquaries took many forms. Houselike structures—little chests with gables—are at once sarcophagi, architecture and metaphors for the church as an enormous reliquary protecting the obligatory relics within its consecrated altar. An extreme example is a Byzantine multipart example, c. 350-450, from Bulgaria; a jewel-studded, richly worked golden box for the relic fits inside a much simpler silver gabled box, which in turn fits inside a marble church/tomb box. "Speaking reliquaries" announce the body part they contained. A couple of painted wooden busts of early 16th-century South Netherlandish fashion plates—probably some of St. Ursula's martyred companions—conceal skull fragments under complicated hairstyles and modish clothing. An upraised arm, from 14th-century Naples, displays an arm bone of St. Luke in rock crystal, beneath a gilded hand holding a pen, as befits an evangelist who wrote one of the Gospels and drew the Madonna's portrait. By contrast, a tooth of St. John the Baptist, in a late 14th-century German reliquary, is framed by architectural towers. 

"Treasures of Heaven" is a visual feast, but it also raises provocative questions about the nature of devotion. Pilgrim flasks document the collection of oil or water from a sacred site, as a portable "souvenir" with lasting spiritual power, while reliquary jewels and crosses, meant to be worn, suggest that relics were regarded as protective amulets. (That's the kind of thing that enraged Martin Luther.) Other objects bespeak long use, most notably a Byzantine micromosaic of the Man of Sorrows, set within an Italian 14th-century "triptych" of tiny pigeon holes stuffed with silk-wrapped, neatly labeled relics, in a Renaissance frame. 

Don't miss: battered seventh- and eighth-century Irish bells, carefully embellished because they once belonged to saints; an astonishing sixth-century box of stones from sites in the Holy Land—once in the pope's private chapel—its beautifully preserved cover painted with scenes from the life of Christ almost identical in style to those in one of the most celebrated early Gospel books; and the golden dice, thrown by the soldiers who cast lots for Christ's clothing, in a small, very theatrical 14th-century Bohemian reliquary figure of the Man of Sorrows with Signs of the Passion.

 Ms. Wilkin writes about art for the Journal.  