HONG KONG— Hong Kong Exchanges & Clearing Ltd.
0388


-2.40
%




 hopes to introduce a framework this year to enable business trusts to list in the city, which would diversify listing avenues and help Hong Kong cement its position as one of the world's largest fund-raising venues. 

The bourse operator's plan comes as Hong Kong-listed companies are increasingly seeking business trusts as an alternative to conventional listings, with regional competitor Singapore already allowing business trusts to list. 

"HKEx is discussing with the Securities and Futures Commission the possible introduction of a framework for the listing of business trusts that are set up and operated in a manner that fully preserves all of HKEx's current investor protection, disclosure and corporate governance requirements for listed issuers," HK Exchanges Chief Executive  Charles Li told reporters on Thursday. 

Mr. Li said some issues remained in the bourse operator's discussions with the securities regulator and the government, but he wouldn't elaborate. 

"The remaining issues are highly technical but we hope they can be resolved within this year." 

Hong Kong allows only real-estate investment trusts to list on its bourse, unlike Singapore, which also allows other types of business trusts to list in the city. 

Mr. Li said the controlling trustee of a business trust should be required to hold more than 25% of the units in the trust to protect independent investors. 

Under Singapore's business trust laws, the controlling trustee is required to hold only 25% of units in the trust. 

HKEx's move comes as Hong Kong-based  Hutchison Whampoa Ltd. listed its ports unit in Singapore last week in the form of a business trust. 

Hutchison, which is controlled by tycoon  Li Ka-shing, said earlier it chose Singapore as the venue for Hutchison Port Holdings Trust's US$6 billion listing partly because Hong Kong doesn't allow listings of business trusts. 

The city's dominant fixed-line operator  PCCW Ltd.
PCCWY


0.70
%




, controlled by Li's younger son,  Richard Li, said last week it was exploring a separate listing of its telecommunications operations, also in the form of a business trust, and has been in talks with Hong Kong regulators over the plan. The firm declined to say whether it wants to list in Hong Kong or Singapore.