Mineta San Jose International Airport, which has been losing traffic to its San Francisco counterpart, wants to win back fliers such as Kimberly Woodward.

Ms. Woodward lives in Menlo Park and works in Santa Clara, just 10 minutes from the San Jose airport. But when she goes on her twice-monthly business trips, she always flies out of San Francisco International Airport, even though it is farther away.

"I absolutely refuse to take connecting flights, and SFO has better options," said Ms. Woodward, marketing vice president at software maker Citrix Systems Inc.

San Jose's airport faces a paradoxical situation. Four million people live closer to San Jose than San Francisco or Oakland International Airport, and Mineta is next door to big tech companies such as  Google Inc. and  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.91
%




 Yet it has been losing passengers while San Francisco's airport, to the north on congested Highway 101, has been bustling.

San Jose had 8.2 million passenger departures and arrivals in the year ended June 2010. That was down 24% from four years earlier, when it had 10.9 million. Meanwhile, San Francisco's airport had 39.4 million passengers in calendar year 2010, up 17% from 33.6 million in 2006.

San Jose's big drawback: It has far fewer major routes than San Francisco's airport. For example, San Jose has only one daily flight each to New York and Boston, and both are redeyes.

The troubles at San Jose started a decade ago with the dot-com crash, when carriers cut back service there. Then, in 2007, Virgin America started flying out of San Francisco, prompting other low-price airlines such as  JetBlue Airways
JBLU


-0.85
%




 and  Southwest Airlines
LUV


-0.77
%




 to increase service there to compete. That gave the northern airport more and better routes, said Bill Sherry, Mineta's aviation director.

Mark Raggio, an analyst at Airport Strategy and Marketing, a U.K. consultancy, said Mineta faces another disadvantage in attracting domestic carriers because it doesn't have the international reach of SFO. "Airlines are going to preserve as much connecting traffic to long-haul international routes as they can, at the expense of airports like SJC," he said.

Now, Mr. Sherry said, the San Jose airport is trying to recruit carriers and persuade the airlines already there to increase service. Mineta has an incentive program that will waive fees for airlines that fly underserved routes, such as New York, Boston, Tokyo or Vancouver. Alaska Airlines and Southwest have signed on, flying new routes to Hawaii and Austin, Texas, respectively.

The airport also revamped its terminals in a project that was finished last year. It built a new rental-car center and improved the design of its security checkpoints to decrease wait times, Mr. Sherry said. He added that it now offers free WiFi and plenty of power outlets. San Jose officials also are considering adding "Silicon Valley" to the airport's name to attract more airlines, but some are concerned the new name would be too long.

San Jose's mayor, Chuck Reed, is also asking local CEOs to help lobby airlines to boost flights at the airport. Nearly 30 companies, including  eBay Inc.
EBAY


0.52
%




 and  Cisco Systems Inc.,
CSCO


0.37
%




 signed a letter to support efforts to woo Japan's All Nippon Airways to San Jose.

 Write to  Stu Woo at stu.woo@wsj.com 