Portugal's political leaders were setting the ground for new elections and scrambling to avoid a financial rescue from the European Union, at least until a new government could be formed.

Portuguese President Anibal Cavaco Silva is holding meetings with leaders of major political parties Friday, and he is expected to announce next week the date for new elections after Prime Minister José Sócrates submitted his resignation Wednesday. Mr. Sócrates quit after losing a key vote in parliament on a package of budget cuts that European policy makers had urged him to make earlier this month.

Meanwhile, in Brussels, the outgoing prime minister said after meeting EU leaders on Friday that Portugal is still able to finance itself from the markets, and reaffirmed the country will meet budget goals regardless of who will form the next government.

But time is running out for Portugal, as its funding costs continue to rise, making it unclear whether the country will be able to survive alone until April, when it must repay €4.23 billion ($5.95 billion) in debt. Currently it has cash reserves of about €4 billion.

The ratings firms Standard & Poor's and Fitch Ratings both cut Portugal's debt two notches Thursday.

A bailout would make the country the third among the 17 nations that use the euro to apply for help from other members of the EU and the International Monetary Fund, after Greece and Ireland.

Portugal's constitution requires the president to meet with the leaders of the parties represented in parliament to see if they can form a new government without calling elections. 

Pedro Passos Coelho, the leader of the biggest opposition party, the Social Democrats, said that he told President Cavaco Silva that new elections are necessary and suggested May 29 as the date for voting.

"The only way to resolve this political crisis, begun by the resignation of the prime minister, is to hold early elections, and in that way give the Portuguese people the possibility to choose their government," he said. 

If the president determines during Friday's meetings that new elections need to be held, he must first meet with the Council of State, a consultative body made up of the current and former presidents, the prime minister, other politicians, and various judicial and appointed advisers. No date for a meeting with the council has been set yet.

After a meeting with the council, Mr. Cavaco Silva can dissolve parliament and call elections, which would be held no sooner than 55 days after the announcement. If an election is announced next week, the earliest it could be held would be the end of May.

Once President Cavaco Silva officially accepts Mr. Sócrates's resignation, Mr. Sócrates will become a caretaker prime minister, with limited powers, until a new government can be sworn in.

 Write to  Alex MacDonald at alex.macdonald@dowjones.com and Patricia Kowsmann at patricia.kowsmann@dowjones.com 