LONDON—There is a risk that the euro zone's fiscal crisis could damage the economic recovery in eastern Europe, although it has yet to have a negative impact on the region, the head of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development said Friday. 

EBRD President  Thomas Mirow said he favors bringing investors together with policy makers to try to work out a resolution to the crisis, which the euro zone's leaders have yet to produce. 

Portugal is set to become the third euro-zone member to receive a bailout from other members of the bloc and the International Monetary Fund. But despite efforts to reassure creditors that they will be repaid, bond yields on government bonds issued by the Portuguese, Greek and Irish governments remain high, as do yields on bonds from some other members of the currency area. 

Speaking ahead of the EBRD's annual meeting in Astana, Kazakhstan next week, Mr. Mirow said there are a number of ways in which the crisis could affect eastern Europe. 

The EBRD was established in 1991 to help countries in eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union make the transition from centrally planned to market economies. In 2010, the EBRD invested €9 billion ($12.82 billion) in the 29 countries in which it operates. 

"I see the potential risk through a weakening of growth in the euro zone, which is of key importance to eastern Europe," Mr. Mirow said. "I see a potential risk in turmoil in the financial markets. And I see a potential risk with respect to the role that subsidiaries of Greek banks play in Bulgaria, Romania and Serbia. I need to underline the word potential—so far, these risks have been contained."

The euro zone is the main export market for a number of eastern European economies. However, figures released by the European Union's official statistics agency Friday showed that the euro-zone economy grew by 0.8% in the first quarter of 2011, driven by a 1.5% rate of expansion in Germany and a 1.0% rate of expansion in France. 

"There is no doubt that the two biggest euro-zone economies have done very well," Mr. Mirow said. "The overall feeling is that things have gone quite well up to now. But there is no room for complacency—we need to look at the potential risks." 

The International Monetary Fund on Thursday said it expects the economies of eastern Europe to grow by 4.5% this year and next, and Mr. Mirow said the EBRD shares that view. 

Eurostat on Friday said the Hungarian economy grew by 0.7% in the first quarter, while Romania's economy grew by 0.6% and the Bulgarian economy by 0.4%. 

Prior to the onset of the fiscal crisis in the euro zone, policy makers had been concerned that the financial crisis that followed the collapse of Lehman Brothers would lead to a flight of capital from eastern Europe. 

That threat was contained, in part because of the Vienna Initiative, which saw the EBRD, the IMF and the EU agreeing to provide loans to some eastern European nations, but on the condition that international banks maintained their lending to those countries. 

That hasn't been an approach that the euro zone has chosen to emulate in confronting its crisis, and banks and other creditors have been allowed to withdraw funds from the affected countries as the euro zone and the IMF is lending to them. 

Mr. Mirow said circumstances in the euro zone are different, but said contact with investors is needed to help bring an end to the crisis. 

"I am still very much in favor of trying to bring together all market participants and the authorities to work out a solution that convinces the markets and politicians," he said. "That's failed so far." 

 Write to  Paul Hannon at paul.hannon@dowjones.com 