TUCSON, Ariz.-- The parents of the man suspected of killing six people and seriously wounding U.S. Congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords said they couldn't understand what motivated their son and expressed their condolences for the victims and their families.



"We are so very sorry for their loss," Randy and Amy Loughner said in a written statement released Tuesday afternoon. "There are no words that can possibly express how we feel."

Mr. and Mrs. Loughner are the parents of Jared Lee Loughner, who was subdued at the scene of the shooting by attendees of Ms. Giffords's constituent event on Saturday at a supermarket here. Jared Lee Loughner, age 22, has been charged with two counts of murder, two counts of attempted murder and a count of assassination of a member of Congress, in relation to federal employees who were killed or injured at the scene. In all, six people were killed and 14 injured.

The Loughners' statement comes as questions mount as to why the suspect allegedly opened fire on Ms. Giffords and the surrounding crowd. Ms. Giffords was shot in the head and remains in critical condition at a local hospital, though doctors indicate she is improving and will live.

The family's statement, delivered to a crowd of reporters who had been waiting for hours outside the family's ranch-style house, offered little insight into their son's alleged actions. The statement, delivered by two men who didn't identify themselves, asked the media to respect the family's privacy. The statement was signed, "The Loughner Family."

"We don't understand why this happened," the statement read. "It may not make any difference but we wish we could change the heinous events of Saturday."

Since the shooting, Mr. and Mrs. Loughner have remained out of sight. Neighbors say the family has a reputation for being reclusive and few people have entered the house, which stands in a subdivision north of Tucson that is surrounded by strip malls, except for law enforcement officials. 

Monday night, a neighbor, Wayne Smith, said Mr. Loughner was considering releasing a statement he had written but wasn't sure when he would. Mr. Smith described the Loughners as being "devastated." 

On Monday, federal prosecutors portrayed Jared Lee Loughner as having psychological problems but competent enough to plot an assassination attempt on Ms. Giffords.

Officials say Jared Lee Loughner was deliberate and meticulous in planning his attack on Ms. Giffords. Officials say he bought a Glock 9mm semiautomatic pistol in November and ammunition on the morning of the shooting. He wrote notes that suggested a grudge against Ms. Giffords over a perceived slight during a 2007 public event.

The parents of the suspect told investigators they were unaware of the severity of their son's mental problems, according to people familiar with the matter. Police at Pima Community College, where Jared Lee Loughner had attended class, had been notified of his disruptive behavior during classes. He was expelled in October.

Jared Lee Loughner has a petty criminal record. Investigators have found no evidence he was ever treated for mental-health problems.

"This is a very difficult time for us. We ask the media to respect our privacy. There are no words that can possibly express how we feel. We wish that there were, so we could make you feel better. We don't understand why this happened. It may not make any difference but we wish we could change the heinous events of Saturday. We care very deeply about the victims and their families. We are so very sorry for their loss." -- The Loughner Family