When a dog gets anxious, the result is a lot of stress for owners. Companies that sell snug dog garments called pressure wraps say wearing them helps calm dogs. Published scientific studies on the wraps is scant, but scientists say they are likely to take the edge off the anxiety in some dogs.

Anxiety in a dog can be triggered by strangers in the house, other animals, fear of separation from the owner and by loud noises and thunderstorms. The result can be excessive barking, growling and destructive chewing. Some dogs run and hide.

Pressure wraps are like a "therapeutic hug" for the dog, and create a calming effect similar to swaddling a baby, says  Susan Sharpe, a dog trainer who invented the Anxiety Wrap, which sells for $36 from Animals Plus LLC, Huntingon, Ind. Competitors include Thundershirt LLC, of Durham, N.C., $36, and Storm Defender LLC, of Fairfield Ohio, a $45 metal-fabric-lined cape the company says will help prevent static charges that some dogs experience prior to a storm. A new version of the cape now also provides a gentle calming pressure, the company says.

Pressure wraps should fit snugly but shouldn't be restrictive, according to the companies. Anxiety Wrap has 11 sizes to ensure a good fit, and Storm Defender and Thundershirt have seven each. 

When the Thundershirt fits properly, you can easily slide your fingers under it, says Thundershirt co-owner  Phil Blizzard. The Thundershirt and the Storm Defender drape over the body and are secured with quick fasteners. The Anxiety Wrap pulls over the head and is made snug with a quick fastener. Animals Plus says its wrap has several acupuncture points and includes "awareness straps" around the back legs that the company says has an additional calming effect.

The concept of pressure to calm humans and animals has been explored by  Temple Grandin, a professor of animal science at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, Colo. Pigs relax when placed in a padded trough with sideways pressure, according to a study by Dr. Grandin. As for humans, her study on autistic children found that sideways pressure in a "hug machine" helped reduce tension and anxiety.

Dog garments will likely be helpful sometimes, depending on the individual dog, Dr. Grandin says. 

"It's not going to be totally magic. We should not overstate the case," she says. The effect of the garments likely wears off after a little while, so they will probably work best if removed and re-applied, she adds. 

Dr. Grandin thinks pressure wraps are a good strategy to try for thunderstorms and other noise stresses. But she is skeptical of their benefit in separation anxiety—a use marketed by Anxiety Wrap and Thundershirt. Separation anxiety should be treated through training and giving a dog an active life, including socialization with other dogs, she says.

So far there are few published scientific studies on pressure wraps for dogs. Anxiety Wrap and Thundershirt say they have studies under way. 

A study on the Storm Defender, published last year in Applied Animal Behavior Science, compared a metal-lined cape to a placebo cape with no metal lining. The study, which asked 23 dog owners to record their dogs' reactions during four thunderstorms, found the metal-lined cape decreased anxiety progressively over the course of the study; the score on a 12-question anxiety survey was 63% lower in dogs who wore metal-lined capes during the final storm than it was in the same dogs prior to the study. The final-storm scores for the dogs wearing the placebo capes were 36% lower than their pre-study scores. 

The difference between the metal-lined and placebo capes wasn't statistically significant given the small number of dogs in the study—meaning in scientific terms that no benefit was proven. 

Study co-author Nicholas H. Dodman, director of the animal behavior program at Tufts Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine in North Grafton, Mass., says he believes the wraps likely worked but the study was too small to show a benefit. Dr. Dodman says he doesn't believe pressure played a positive role in calming the dogs in either cape, since the version of the metal-lined cape used in the study fit loosely.

Storm Defender provided capes for the study but didn't fund it. Dr. Dodman is currently performing a study sponsored by Anxiety Wrap.

Depending on the dog and the situation, you may need to incorporate training with the cape to show an effect. The Anxiety Wrap recommends an 11-step treatment program for separation anxiety that includes using the wrap and leaving toys filled with favorite food treats for the dog to enjoy while you are gone. Ms. Sharpe also recommends ignoring the dog prior to leaving and when returning because attempts to reassure the dog can actually increase anxiety.

— Email aches@wsj.com 

 Write to  Laura Johannes at laura.johannes@wsj.com 