BEIRUT—Former Lebanese Prime Minister Najib Mikati, a billionaire Sunni businessman, was poised to take the lead of Lebanon's new government after winning the backing of a Hezbollah-led majority in parliament.

An independent bloc in the legislature said Monday it would support Mr. Mikati, a parliamentarian representing the northern city of Tripoli. The move delivered Hezbollah and its allies enough votes for a victory in an election scheduled to conclude on Tuesday, in what would be the final blow to the party of Saad Hariri, the U.S.-backed former prime minister.

Hezbollah drove the collapse of Mr. Hariri's government by leading the withdrawal of ministers from his cabinet nearly two weeks ago.

While the rules of Lebanon's political system will keep Hezbollah from taking control of the government, its apparent victory in the contest for the premiership showed it has enough allies to increasingly dictate policy.

The events Monday aroused sectarian rivalries and increased the risk of sectarian violence. In many Sunni neighborhoods of the capital and in cities inhabited mostly by Sunnis, small groups of pro-Hariri demonstrators burned tires and blocked roads on Monday evening. The army dispersed the protesters peacefully.

Mr. Hariri's bloc called for peaceful demonstrations Tuesday in Martyrs Square, facing the grave of his father, former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri, who was assassinated in 2005.

Many Sunnis said they resented that Shiite supporters of Hezbollah and their allies had pushed out Saad Hariri, calling it a "soft coup." In Lebanon, the prime minister is always a Sunni.

Hezbollah, the Iranian- and Syrian-backed militant political party, has stressed that it forced the change in government through democratic means, not violence. 

The Obama administration Monday warned Lebanon's political leaders that continuing U.S. support for their country will be difficult if Hezbollah takes a dominant role in government.

The larger the role for Hezbollah, the "more problematic" for relations with Washington, State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley said. The U.S. considers Hezbollah to be a terrorist organization.

Mr. Hariri and the opposition broke ranks over a United Nations-led tribunal investigating his father's assassination, after reports the court would likely indict members of Hezbollah.

Hezbollah's leader, Seyed Hassan Nasrallah, demanded that Lebanon end its cooperation with the tribunal and that Mr. Hariri discredit the process. Mr. Hariri's refusal led to the withdrawal of Hezbollah ministers and their allies, and the collapse of the government.

Mr. Hariri has said his political party won't participate in a government led and chosen by the opposition, which could further delay the formation of a new government.

Mr. Mikati was an staunch ally of Mr. Hariri during 2009 parliamentary elections. His change of position has puzzled some Sunnis.

"In this time of crisis and amid political struggles occurring on the ground, I decided that there must be a project to save the country," he said at a news conference Monday. 

Mr. Mikati, 55 years old, is a Harvard graduate who built a family empire in telecommunications, oil and gas and real estate. He briefly served as prime minister in 2005.

It appeared unlikely that Hezbollah would support Mr. Mikati's election without a guarantee that he would discredit the tribunal. He dodged a question on the issue on Monday.

A parliamentarian from Mr. Hariri's bloc, Ahmad Fatfat, said Mr. Mikati's nomination was viewed by Sunnis as "backstabbing of the political establishment."

—Nada Raad contributed to this article.

 Write to  Farnaz Fassihi at farnaz.fassihi@wsj.com 