Lee Alexander McQueen's influential designs, which will be celebrated in a new exhibition beginning Wednesday at the Metropolitan Museum of Art's Costume Institute, are known for their sense of extravagance—exaggerated silhouettes and rich materials evoking moody romance and drama, all carefully honed by the late designer's Savile Row-trained tailoring. The workmanship and flair for the dramatic trickle down from his elaborate runway shows to his ready-to-wear. 

"Savage Beauty," organized by the Costume Institute and curated by Andrew Bolton, will include about 100 garments and 70 accessories shown thematically, showcasing Mr. McQueen's range, from ornate frock coats to ultra low-cut trousers to "armadillo" shoes to, of course, his meticulously worked gowns.

The designer's clientele, and that of the label since longtime deputy Sarah Burton took over following Mr. McQueen's suicide last year, is also diverse—a fact that is evident if one looks around New York. 

In the Betts family, mother Lois and daughters Maggie and Jessica Betts are all devoted McQueen customers despite disparate personal styles. 

"I can't think of another designer where we can all be outfitted," said Maggie Betts. "He's probably the only designer—with the three of us being different ages and going to different kinds of events and different personalities."

Maggie and Jessica, both in their mid-30s, described their styles as "minimalist" and "more girly," respectively; Lois, in her late 60s, described hers as "old-lady tailored." Since mother and daughters began visiting the Alexander McQueen boutique in the Meatpacking District about 10 years ago, Lois estimates that she has bought 10 gowns for events over the years, plus other garments. Since her husband, Roland Betts, is an old friend and fraternity brother of George W. Bush, Lois said, "McQueen was seen a lot in the White House" via her choice of dress at events.

Stylist Tiina Laakkonen has been a McQueen fan from the start. Not just a client, Ms. Laakkonen modeled in two of the designer's early runway shows, and she lent two frock coats from Mr. McQueen's spring/summer 1994 collection to the Met exhibition. The treasured McQueen pieces in her closet, all one-offs and hand-finished, are all from those early days. "I loved them for their 'humble couture' quality," Ms. Laakkonen said.

After moving to London from Paris in 1993 to work at Vogue, friend and colleague Isabella Blow introduced Ms. Laakkonen, who now lives in New York, to "an amazing new designer she had discovered." After meeting at Ms. Blow's house—then also home to milliner Philip Treacy's workshop—Ms. Laakkonen ordered "quite a few" pieces from Mr. McQueen, mostly suits.

"With Alexander you didn't order a specific shape or fabric—it was more about what he wanted to make for you," she said via email, recalling fittings that were done "in secret" during lunch in the office's fashion closet. "Issy and I would smuggle Alexander in, lock ourselves into the tiny space filled with racks and clothes, strip to our underwear and Manolo Blahnik heels and try on the clothes that Alexander pulled out of an old plastic bag. Alexander had his giant proper cloth scissors and he would cut into things fearlessly. I remember putting on a dress and Alexander recutting it on me into a top!"

Allison Sarofim, a New Yorker best known for her elaborate Halloween parties, is also loyal to Mr. McQueen's designs, saying they "have the ability to transport and evoke emotion. They are fantastical. When I wear his clothes, I feel like I've fallen down Alice's rabbit hole."

Ms. Sarofim, who often adds McQueen shoes to her elaborate Halloween costumes, recalled that, like Ms. Laakkonen, her first meeting with Mr. McQueen was through a friend. "When Plum [Sykes] took me to his atelier in London for her wedding dress fitting, I remember meeting a humble Lee in sneakers, nonchalantly smoking a cigarette," she recalled. "Then I saw his team carry in the most beautiful and intricate dress I have ever seen. I was literally in awe, transfixed. The hand-quilted train had hundreds of tiny little pleats on the edge. The design had the precision of an engineer."

Are their other, innate reasons for McQueen's appeal in New York and elsewhere stateside? Mr. Bolton, the curator of "Savage Beauty," noted that American women are often attracted to designers who balance practicality and fantasy—perhaps more than their continental counterparts.

"I think that American women responded very much to his tailoring, and his very soft and romantic evening wear," he said. "It's part of the sportswear tradition. The idea is functionality and practicality. And I think that American women, often their wardrobes are composed of garments for particular engagements. So I think that tailoring very much appeals to practical day wear and the romantic evening wear very much responds to occasions that American women often wear dresses to—the opera, dinners ... It's very much based on their lifestyle."

 Write to  Kimberly Chou at kimberly.chou@wsj.com 